
1. Cancer Sci. 2016 Mar;107(3):369-71. doi: 10.1111/cas.12889.

Report of the Japan diabetes society/Japanese cancer association joint committee 
on diabetes and cancer, Second report.

Goto A(1), Noto H(2), Noda M(3), Ueki K(4), Kasuga M(5), Tajima N(6), Ohashi
K(7), Sakai R(8), Tsugane S(9), Hamajima N(10), Tajima K(11), Imai K(12),
Nakagama H(13).

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan. (2)St. Luke's International
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Saitama
Medical University, Saitama, Japan. (4)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic
Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Jikei
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of General Internal
Medicine, Dentistry and Oncologic Emergencies, National Cancer Center Hospital,
Tokyo, Japan. (8)Department of Biochemistry, Kitasato University School of
Medicine, Sagamihara, Japan. (9)National Cancer Center Research Center for Cancer
Prevention and Screening, Tokyo, Japan. (10)Department of Healthcare
Administration, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.
(11)Department of Public Health and Occupational Medicine, Mie University
Graduate School of Medicine, Tsu, Japan. (12)Center for Antibody and Vaccine
Therapy, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(13)National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

The Japan Diabetes Society/Japanese Cancer Association Joint Committee on
Diabetes and Cancer published its first report in July 2013 on the
epidemiological assessment of the associations of diabetes with cancer
risk/prognosis, the common risk factors for diabetes and cancer, and cancer risk 
associated with diabetes treatment. The Joint Committee continued its work to
assess the role of glycemic control in the development of cancer in patients with
diabetes. This review shows that high-quality evidence examining the association 
between glycemic control and cancer risk is lacking. In 2014, the Japan Diabetes 
Society (JDS) and the Japanese Cancer Association (JCA) restarted the JDS/JCA
Joint Committee on Diabetes and Cancer, which published the second committee
report in Japanese [1]. This is the English version of that report. This article 
has been jointly published in Diabetology International
(doi:10.1007/s13340-016-0257-z) and Cancer Science by the Japan Diabetes Society 
and the Japanese Cancer Association. Members of the JDS/JCA Joint Committee on
Diabetes and Cancer. JDS: Mitsuhiko Noda, Kohjiro Ueki, Masato Kasuga, Naoko
Tajima, and Ken Ohashi; Editorial collaborators: Atsushi Goto and Hiroshi Noto;
JCA: Ryuichi Sakai, Shoichiro Tsugane, Nobuyuki Hamajima, Kazuo Tajima, Kohzoh
Imai, and Hitoshi Nakagama.

© 2016 The Japanese Cancer Association and the Japan Diabetes Society. Cancer
Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Japanese
Cancer Association.

PMID: 27027540  [PubMed - in process]


2. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 24;6:23550. doi: 10.1038/srep23550.

Residual matrix from different separation techniques impacts exosome biological
activity.

Paolini L(1), Zendrini A(1), Noto GD(1), Busatto S(1), Lottini E(2), Radeghieri
A(1), Dossi A(1), Caneschi A(2), Ricotta D(1), Bergese P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine and INSTM, University of
Brescia, Brescia, Italy. (2)Department of Chemistry and INSTM, Laboratory of
Molecular Magnetism, University of Firenze, Sesto Fiorentino (Firenze), Italy.

Exosomes are gaining a prominent role in research due to their intriguing biology
and several therapeutic opportunities. However, their accurate purification from 
body fluids and detailed physicochemical characterization remain open issues. We 
isolated exosomes from serum of patients with Multiple Myeloma by four of the
most popular purification methods and assessed the presence of residual
contaminants in the preparations through an ad hoc combination of biochemical and
biophysical techniques - including Western Blot, colloidal nanoplasmonics, atomic
force microscopy (AFM) and scanning helium ion microscopy (HIM). The preparations
obtained by iodixanol and sucrose gradients were highly pure. To the contrary,
those achieved with limited processing (serial centrifugation or one step
precipitation kit) resulted contaminated by a residual matrix, embedding the
exosomes. The contaminated preparations showed lower ability to induce NfkB
nuclear translocation in endothelial cells with respect to the pure ones,
probably because the matrix prevents the interaction and fusion of the exosomes
with the cell membrane. These findings suggest that exosome preparation purity
must be carefully assessed since it may interfere with exosome biological
activity. Contaminants can be reliably probed only by an integrated
characterization approach aimed at both the molecular and the colloidal length
scales.

PMCID: PMC4806376
PMID: 27009329  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Med Chem. 2016 Mar 29. [Epub ahead of print]

Discovery of a Novel, Orally Efficacious Liver X Receptor (LXR) ß Agonist.

Zheng Y(1), Zhuang L(1), Fan KY(1), Tice CM(1), Zhao W(1), Dong C(1), Lotesta
SD(1), Leftheris K(1), Lindblom PR(1), Liu Z(1), Shimada J(1), Noto PB(1), Meng
S(1), Hardy A(1), Howard L(1), Krosky P(1), Guo J(1), Lipinski K(1), Kandpal
G(1), Bukhtiyarov Y(1), Zhao Y(1), Lala D(1), Van Orden R(1), Zhou J(1), Chen
G(1), Wu Z(1), McKeever BM(1), McGeehan GM(1), Gregg RE(1), Claremon DA(1), Singh
SB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vitae Pharmaceuticals, Inc. , 502 W. Office Center Drive, Fort Washington,
Pennsylvania 19034, United States.

This article describes the application of Contour to the design and discovery of 
a novel, potent, orally efficacious liver X receptor ß (LXRß) agonist (17).
Contour technology is a structure-based drug design platform that generates
molecules using a context perceptive growth algorithm guided by a contact
sensitive scoring function. The growth engine uses binding site perception and
programmable growth capability to create drug-like molecules by assembling
fragments that naturally complement hydrophilic and hydrophobic features of the
protein binding site. Starting with a crystal structure of LXRß and a docked
2-(methylsulfonyl)benzyl alcohol fragment (6), Contour was used to design
agonists containing a piperazine core. Compound 17 binds to LXRß with high
affinity and to LXRa to a lesser extent, and induces the expression of LXR target
genes in vitro and in vivo. This molecule served as a starting point for further 
optimization and generation of a candidate which is currently in human clinical
trials for treating atopic dermatitis.

PMID: 26990539  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2016 Mar 14. pii: S1052-3057(16)00079-3. doi:
10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2016.01.048. [Epub ahead of print]

High Nutritional-Related Risk on Admission Predicts Less Improvement of
Functional Independence Measure in Geriatric Stroke Patients: A Retrospective
Cohort Study.

Kokura Y(1), Maeda K(2), Wakabayashi H(3), Nishioka S(4), Higashi S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Nutrition, Keiju Medical Center, Nanao City, Ishikawa, 
Japan; Noto Liaison Council for Cerebral Stroke, Nanao City, Ishikawa, Japan.
Electronic address: yojikokura@hotmail.com. (2)Department of Nutrition and
Dysphagia Rehabilitation, Tamana Regional Health Medical Center, Tamana, Japan.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Yokohama City University Medical
Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa Prefecture, Japan. (4)Department of Clinical Nutrition
and Food Services, Nagasaki Rehabilitation Hospital, Nagasaki, Nagasaki
Prefecture, Japan. (5)Noto Liaison Council for Cerebral Stroke, Nanao City,
Ishikawa, Japan; Department of Neurosurgery, Keiju Medical Center, Nanao City,
Ishikawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The aim of the present study was to establish whether high
nutritional-related risk on admission predicts less improvement of Functional
Independence Measure (FIM) in geriatric stroke patients.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective cohort study of patients admitted for
stroke at 5 major hospitals in the Noto district of Japan from July 2009 to June 
2013. Patients were divided into 2 groups according to Geriatric Nutritional Risk
Index (GNRI) at admission. Patient characteristics were compared between the low 
GNRI (<92) and high GNRI (=92) groups. We assessed nutritional status using GNRI 
and activities of daily living using the FIM.
RESULTS: A total of 540 participants (mean age, 80 years; interquartile range,
75-85 years) were included in the present study. Patients were admitted because
of cerebral infarction (394 patients), intracerebral hemorrhage (123 patients),
and subarachnoid hemorrhage (23 patients). Univariate analysis of FIM gain
demonstrated significant differences between groups. Multivariate analysis of FIM
gain adjusting for confounding factors demonstrated age (ß<U+2009>=<U+2009>-.139; 95%
confidence interval [CI]<U+2009>=<U+2009>-.629 to -.140), cerebral infarction (ß<U+2009>=<U+2009>-.264; 95%
CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>-12.956 to -6.729), National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (ß<U+2009>=<U+2009>-.180;
95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>-.688 to -.248), and GNRI score (ß<U+2009>=<U+2009>.089; 95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>.010-.347) as
independent factors associated with FIM gain (P<U+2009><<U+2009>.05 for all).
CONCLUSIONS: GNRI at admission may independently predict FIM gain. Poor
nutritional status is a predictor of lower FIM improvement in geriatric stroke
patients.

Copyright © 2016 National Stroke Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 26987486  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Intern Med. 2016;55(6):699-702. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.55.5727. Epub 2016 
Mar 15.

An Adult Case of Anti-Myelin Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein (MOG)
Antibody-associated Multiphasic Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis at 33-year
Intervals.

Numa S(1), Kasai T, Kondo T, Kushimura Y, Kimura A, Takahashi H, Morita K, Tanaka
A, Noto Y, Ohara T, Nakagawa M, Mizuno T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Japan.

Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) followed by optic neuritis (ON) has
been reported as a distinct phenotype associated with anti-myelin oligodendrocyte
protein (MOG) antibody. We herein report the case of a 37-year-old woman who was 
diagnosed with ADEM at 4 years old of age and who subsequently developed ON
followed by recurrent ADEM 33 years after the initial onset. A serum analysis
showed anti-MOG antibody positivity. This phenotype has only previously been
reported in pediatric cases. Neurologists thus need to be aware that the
phenotype may occur in adult patients, in whom it may be assumed to be atypical
multiple sclerosis.

PMID: 26984094  [PubMed - in process]


6. Clin Neurophysiol. 2016 Apr;127(4):1921-2. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2016.01.009.
Epub 2016 Jan 28.

Does hand dominance affect peripheral nerve excitability?

Tsuji Y(1), Noto Y(2), Shiga K(3), Yokota I(4), Nakagawa M(5), Mizuno T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Department of Neurology, Graduate School
of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
Electronic address: y-noto@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp. (3)Department of Medical Education
and Primary Care, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (4)Department of Biostatistics, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (5)North Medical Center, Kyoto Prefectural 
University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

PMID: 26971471  [PubMed - in process]


7. Appl Health Econ Health Policy. 2016 Mar 3. [Epub ahead of print]

Societal Preferences for Interventions with the Same Efficiency: Assessment and
Application to Decision Making.

Shiroiwa T(1), Saito S(2), Shimozuma K(3), Kodama S(4), Noto S(5), Fukuda T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Welfare Service, National Institute of Public Health,
2-3-6 Minami, Wako, Saitama, 351-0197, Japan. t.shiroiwa@gmail.com. (2)Graduate
School of Health Sciences, Okayama University, Okayama, Japan. (3)Department of
Biomedical Sciences, College of Life Sciences, Ritsumeikan University, Kusatsu,
Japan. (4)Department of Ethics, Graduate School of Letters, Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan. (5)Department of Health Sciences, Niigata University of Health and 
Welfare, Niigata, Japan. (6)Department of Health and Welfare Service, National
Institute of Public Health, 2-3-6 Minami, Wako, Saitama, 351-0197, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Although quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) may not
completely reflect the value of a healthcare technology, it remains unclear how
to adjust the cost per QALY threshold. First, the present study compares two
survey methods of measuring people's preferences for a specific healthcare
technology when each choice has the same efficiency. The second objective was to 
consider how this information regarding preferences could be used in decision
making.
METHODS: We conducted single-attribute (budget allocation) and multi-attribute
(discrete-choice) experiments to survey public medical care preferences.
Approximately 1000 respondents were sampled for each experiment. Six questions
were prepared to address the attributes included in the study: (a) age; (b)
objective of care; (c) disease severity; (d) prior medical care; (e) cause of
disease; and (f) disease frequency. For the discrete-choice experiment (a) age,
(b) objective of care, (c) disease severity, and (d) prior medical care were
orthogonally combined. All assumed medical care had the same costs and
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER; cost per life-year or QALY). We also 
calculated the preference-adjusted threshold (PAT) to reflect people's
preferences in a threshold range.
RESULTS: The results of both experiments revealed similar preferences:
intervention for younger patients was strongly preferred, followed by
interventions for treatment and severe disease states being preferred, despite
the same cost per life-year or QALY. The single-attribute experiment revealed
that many people prefer an option in which resources are equally allocated
between two interventions. Marginal PATs were calculated for age, objective of
care, disease severity, and prior medical care.
CONCLUSION: The single- and multi-attribute experiments revealed similar
preferences. PAT can reflect people's preferences within the decision-maker's
threshold range in a numerical manner.

PMID: 26940671  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Biol Pharm Bull. 2016;39(3):301-7. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b15-00359.

An Approach to Improve Intestinal Absorption of Poorly Absorbed Water-Insoluble
Components via Niemann-Pick C1-Like 1.

Takekawa Y(1), Sato Y, Yamaki Y, Imai M, Noto K, Sumi M, Takekuma Y, Iseki K,
Sugawara M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University.

Dietary and biliary cholesterol absorption contributes to the maintenance of
tight control of cholesterol homeostasis. Cholesterol is present as mixed
micelles formed by bile salts and phospholipids in the intestinal lumen.
Recently, Niemann-Pick C1-Like 1 (NPC1L1) transporter was identified as being
critical for cholesterol absorption. However, the uptake mechanism of an
enveloped substrate of NPC1L1 in whole lipid emulsion particles remains unclear. 
In this study, we investigated the uptake mechanism of a substrate of NPC1L1 in
lipid emulsion particles. We also investigated whether these particles containing
cholesterol can improve the intestinal absorption of other lipophilic components 
via NPC1L1. The uptake of lysophosphatidylcholine
(LPC)-4,4-difluoro-5-(4-phenyl-1,3-butadienyl)-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene-3-pr
opionic acid saccinimidyl ester (BODIPY), a fluorescently labeled phospholipid,
in lipid emulsion particles containing cholesterol (1<U+2009>µM) was significantly
increased compared to that without cholesterol in Caco-2 cells. On the other
hand, its increased uptake was significantly inhibited by ezetimibe, a selective 
inhibitor of NPC1L1. These results suggested that not only cholesterol but also
some components in lipid emulsion particles are taken up into enterocytes via
NPC1L1. We also examined an approach to improve intestinal absorption of a poorly
absorbed water-insoluble component, coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10), by this mechanism. The 
uptake of CoQ10 in lipid emulsion particles containing cholesterol was
significantly increased compared to that without cholesterol. Its increased
uptake was significantly inhibited by ezetimibe. Though it is still not clear
whether CoQ10 is a substrate of NPC1L1, there is a potential for improvement of
the absorption of poorly absorbed components by lipid emulsion particles
containing cholesterol.

PMID: 26934923  [PubMed - in process]


9. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 2;11(3):e0150476. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150476.
eCollection 2016.

Can Urine Metabolomics Be Helpful in Differentiating Neuropathic and Nociceptive 
Pain? A Proof-of-Concept Study.

Finco G(1), Locci E(2), Mura P(1), Massa R(2), Noto A(3), Musu M(1), Landoni
G(4), d'Aloja E(2), De-Giorgio F(5), Scano P(6), Evangelista M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences "M. Aresu", University of Cagliari, Cagliari,
Italy. (2)Department of Public Health, Clinical and Molecular Medicine,
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. (3)Department of Surgery, University of 
Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. (4)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care,
Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy. (5)Public Health Institute,
Catholic University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (6)Department of Chemical and
Geological Sciences, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. (7)Department of
Emergency, Catholic University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

The diagnosis of pain nature is a troublesome task and a wrong attribution often 
leads to an increase of costs and to avoidable pharmaceutical adverse reactions. 
An objective and specific approach to achieve this diagnosis is highly desirable.
The aim of this work was to investigate urine samples collected from patients
suffering from pain of different nature by a metabolomics approach based on 1H
NMR spectroscopy and multivariate statistical analysis. We performed a
prospective study on 74 subjects: 37 suffering from pain (12 with nociceptive and
25 with neuropathic pain), and 37 controls not suffering from any kind of chronic
pain. The application of discriminant analysis on the urine spectral profiles
allowed us to classify these two types of pain with high sensibility and
specificity. Although the classification relies on the global urine metabolic
profile, the individual contribution in discriminating neuropathic pain patients 
of metabolites such as choline and phosphocholine, taurine and alanine, suggests 
potential lesions to the nervous system. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first time that a urine metabolomics profile is used to classify these two
kinds of pain. This methodology, although based on a limited sample, may
constitute the basis for a new helpful tool in the clinical diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC4775074
PMID: 26934501  [PubMed - in process]


10. J Transl Med. 2016 Feb 29;14(1):61. doi: 10.1186/s12967-016-0816-x.

Human lung adenocarcinoma cell cultures derived from malignant pleural effusions 
as model system to predict patients chemosensitivity.

Roscilli G(1,)(2), De Vitis C(3,)(4), Ferrara FF(5), Noto A(6,)(7), Cherubini
E(8), Ricci A(9,)(10), Mariotta S(11,)(12), Giarnieri E(13,)(14), Giovagnoli
MR(15,)(16), Torrisi MR(17,)(18), Bergantino F(19), Costantini S(20), Fenizia
F(21), Lambiase M(22), Aurisicchio L(23), Normanno N(24), Ciliberto G(25),
Mancini R(26,)(27).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome,
Rome, Italy. giuseppe.roscilli@uniroma1.it. (2)Takis srl, Rome, Italy.
giuseppe.roscilli@uniroma1.it. (3)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, 
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. claudia.devitis@uniroma1.it.
(4)Laboratory of Research and Diagnostics, Department of Surgery "P.Valdoni",
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. claudia.devitis@uniroma1.it. (5)Takis
srl, Rome, Italy. ferrara@takisbiotech.it. (6)Department of Clinical and
Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
alessia.noto@uniroma1.it. (7)Laboratory of Research and Diagnostics, Department
of Surgery "P.Valdoni", Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
alessia.noto@uniroma1.it. (8)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine,
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. emanuela.cherubini@uniroma1.it.
(9)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome,
Rome, Italy. alberto.ricci@uniroma1.it. (10)Azienda Ospedaliera S. Andrea, Rome, 
Italy. alberto.ricci@uniroma1.it. (11)Department of Clinical and Molecular
Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
salvatore.mariotta@uniroma1.it. (12)Azienda Ospedaliera S. Andrea, Rome, Italy.
salvatore.mariotta@uniroma1.it. (13)Department of Clinical and Molecular
Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. enrico.giarnieri@uniroma1.it.
(14)Azienda Ospedaliera S. Andrea, Rome, Italy. enrico.giarnieri@uniroma1.it.
(15)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome,
Rome, Italy. mariarosaria.giovagnoli@uniroma1.it. (16)Azienda Ospedaliera S.
Andrea, Rome, Italy. mariarosaria.giovagnoli@uniroma1.it. (17)Department of
Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
mariarosaria.torrisi@uniroma1.it. (18)Azienda Ospedaliera S. Andrea, Rome, Italy.
mariarosaria.torrisi@uniroma1.it. (19)IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Fondazione
"G. Pascale", Naples, Italy. fbergantino@yahoo.it. (20)IRCCS Istituto Nazionale
Tumori, Fondazione "G. Pascale", Naples, Italy.
s.costantini@istitutotumori.na.it. (21)IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori,
Fondazione "G. Pascale", Naples, Italy. francesca.fenizia@hotmail.it. (22)IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Fondazione "G. Pascale", Naples, Italy.
matilde.lambiase@libero.it. (23)Takis srl, Rome, Italy.
aurisicchio@takisbiotech.it. (24)IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Fondazione "G. 
Pascale", Naples, Italy. n.normanno@istitutotumori.na.it. (25)IRCCS Istituto
Nazionale Tumori, Fondazione "G. Pascale", Naples, Italy.
g.ciliberto@istitutotumori.na.it. (26)Department of Clinical and Molecular
Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. rita.mancini@uniroma1.it.
(27)Laboratory of Research and Diagnostics, Department of Surgery "P.Valdoni",
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. rita.mancini@uniroma1.it.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer related deaths and
Malignant Pleural Effusion (MPE) is a frequent complication. Current therapies
suffer from lack of efficacy in a great percentage of cases, especially when
cancer is diagnosed at a late stage. Moreover patients' responses vary and the
outcome is unpredictable. Therefore, the identification of patients who will
benefit most of chemotherapy treatment is important for accurate prognostication 
and better outcome. In this study, using malignant pleural effusions (MPE) from
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, we established a collection of
patient-derived Adenocarcinoma cultures which were characterized for their
sensitivity to chemotherapeutic drugs used in the clinical practice.
METHODS: Tumor cells present in MPEs of patients with NSCLC were isolated by
density gradient centrifugation, placed in culture and genotyped by next
generation sequencing. In a subset of cases patient derived xenografts (PDX) were
obtained upon tumor cell inoculation in rag2/IL2 knock-out mice. Isolated primary
cultures were characterized and tested for drug sensitivity by in vitro
proliferation assays. Additivity, antagonism or synergy for combinatorial
treatments were determined by analysis with the Calcusyn software.
RESULTS: We have optimized isolation procedures and culture conditions to expand 
in vitro primary cultures from Malignant Pleural Effusions (MPEs) of patients
affected by lung adenocarcinomas, the most frequent form of non small cell lung
cancer. Using this approach we have been able to establish 16 primary cultures
from MPEs. Cells were banked at low passages and were characterized for their
mutational pattern by next generation sequencing for most common driver mutations
in lung cancer. Moreover, amplified cultures were shown to engraft with high
efficiency when injected in immunocompromised mice. Cancer cell sensitivity to
drugs used in standard chemotherapy regimens was assessed either individually or 
in combination. Differential chemosensitivity and different mutation profiles
were observed which suggests that this isolation method could provide a platform 
for predicting the efficacy of chemotherapy in the clinical setting. Most
importantly for six patients it was possible to establish a correlation between
drug response in vitro and response to therapy in the clinic.
CONCLUSIONS: Results obtained using primary cultured cells from MPEs underscore
the heterogeneity of NSCLC in advanced stage as indicated by drug response and
mutation profile. Comparison of data obtained from in vitro assays with patients'
responses to therapy leads to the conclusion that this strategy may provide a
potentially useful approach for evaluating individual chemosensitivity profile
and tailor the therapy accordingly. Furthermore, combining MPE-derived primary
cultures with their genomic testing allows to identify patients eligible to
trials with novel targeted agents.

PMCID: PMC4772534
PMID: 26928703  [PubMed - in process]


11. Eur J Emerg Med. 2016 Feb 26. [Epub ahead of print]

Usefulness of a multiplying factor in predicting the final number of victims
during a mass casualty incident.

Maurin O(1), Bignand M, Jost D, Travers S, Raclot S, Trichereau J, Bon O,
Frattini B, Loeb T, Lecarpentier E, Noto R, Poncelin de Raucourt G, Tourtier JP.

Author information: 
(1)aEmergency Department bOperational Planning Office, Fire Brigade of Paris,
Paris cAP-HP, EMS (Samu92), University Poincare Hospital, Garches dCHU H Mondor, 
AP-HP, Créteil, France.

OBJECTIVE: Whenever a mass casualty incident (MCI) occurs, it is essential to
anticipate the final number of victims to dispatch the adequate number of
ambulances. In France, the custom is to multiply the initial number of
prehospital victims by 2-4 to predict the final number. However, no one has yet
validated this multiplying factor (MF) as a predictive tool. We aimed to build a 
statistical model to predict the final number of victims from their initial
count.
METHODS: We observed retrospectively over 30 years of MCIs triggered in a large
urban area. We considered three types of events: explosions, fires, and road
traffic accidents. We collected the initial and final numbers of victims, with
distinction between deaths, critical victims (T1), and delayed or minimal victims
(T2-T3). The MF was calculated for each category of victims according to each
type of event. Using a Poisson multivariate regression, we calculated the
incidence risk ratio (IRR) of the final number of T1 as a function of the initial
deaths and the initial T2-T3 counts, while controlling for potential confounding 
variables.
RESULTS: Sixty-eight MCIs were included. The final number of T1 increased with
the initial incidence of deaths [IRR: 1.8 (1.4-2.2)], the initial number of T2-T3
being greater than 12 [IRR: 1.6 (1.3-2.1)], and the presence of one or more
explosion [IRR: 1.4 (1.1-1.8)].
CONCLUSION: The MF seems to be an appealing decision-making tool to anticipate
the need for ambulance resources. In explosive MCIs, we recommend multiplying T1 
by 1.4 to estimate final count and the need for supplementary advanced life
support teams.

PMID: 26928295  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2016 Feb 23. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.32435.
[Epub ahead of print]

Discovery of biochemical biomarkers for aggression: A role for metabolomics in
psychiatry.

Hagenbeek FA(1,)(2), Kluft C(3), Hankemeier T(4,)(5), Bartels M(1,)(2,)(6),
Draisma HH(1,)(2,)(6), Middeldorp CM(1,)(6,)(7), Berger R(4,)(5), Noto A(8),
Lussu M(9), Pool R(1,)(2,)(10), Fanos V(8), Boomsma DI(1,)(2,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Psychology, VU Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)EMGO+ Institute for Health and Care Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Good Biomarker Sciences Leiden, Leiden, The Netherlands. (4)Division of
Analytical Biosciences, Leiden Academic Center for Drug Research, Leiden
University, Leiden, The Netherlands. (5)The Netherlands Metabolomics Centre,
Leiden, The Netherlands. (6)Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (7)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, GGZ inGeest/VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (8)Neonatal Intensive Care
Unit, Department of Surgical Sciences, Puericultura Institute and Neonatal
Section, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. (9)Department of Biomedical
Sciences, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. (10)BBMRINL: Infrastructure
for the Application of Metabolomics Technology in Epidemiology, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Human aggression encompasses a wide range of behaviors and is related to many
psychiatric disorders. We introduce the different classification systems of
aggression and related disorders as a basis for discussing biochemical biomarkers
and then present an overview of studies in humans (published between 1990 and
2015) that reported statistically significant associations of biochemical
biomarkers with aggression, DSM-IV disorders involving aggression, and their
subtypes. The markers are of different types, including inflammation markers,
neurotransmitters, lipoproteins, and hormones from various classes. Most studies 
focused on only a limited portfolio of biomarkers, frequently a specific class
only. When integrating the data, it is clear that compounds from several
biological pathways have been found to be associated with aggressive behavior,
indicating complexity and the need for a broad approach. In the second part of
the paper, using examples from the aggression literature and psychiatric
metabolomics studies, we argue that a better understanding of aggression would
benefit from a more holistic approach such as provided by metabolomics. © 2016
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26913573  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Biomarkers. 2016 Feb 22:1-8. [Epub ahead of print]

Delayed graft function and chronic allograft nephropathy: diagnostic and
prognostic role of neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin.

Lacquaniti A(1), Caccamo C(2), Salis P(2), Chirico V(3), Buemi A(4), Cernaro
V(1), Noto A(5), Pettinato G(1), Santoro D(1), Bertani T(1), Buemi M(1), David
A(5).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Internal Medicine , University Hospital of Messina , Messina ,
Italy . (2)b Department of Internal Medicine , Mediterranean Institute for
Transplantation and Advanced Specialized Therapies, ISMETT, University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center , Palermo , Italy . (3)c Department of Pediatric
Science , University Hospital of Messina , Messina , Italy . (4)d Surgery and
Abdominal Transplantation Division, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc,
Université Catholique De Louvain , Brussels , Belgium , and. (5)e Department of
Neuroscience , University Hospital of Messina , Messina , Italy.

CONTEXT: Available markers are not reliable parameters to early detect kidney
injury in transplanted patients.
OBJECTIVE: Examine neutrophil gelatinase associated lipocalin (NGAL) in early
detection of delayed graft function (DGF) and as a long-term predictor of graft
outcome.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: NGAL was evaluated in 124 transplanted patients.
RESULTS: Urinary NGAL levels were associated to a 10% (HR: 1.10; 95% CI:
1.04-1.25; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) and 15% (HR: 1.15; 95% CI: 1.09-1.26; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) increased 
risk of DGF and allograft nephropathy progression, respectively.
CONCLUSION: NGAL reflects the entity of renal impairment in transplanted
patients, representing a biomarker and an independent risk factor for DGF and
chronic allograft nephropathy progression.

PMID: 26900638  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Bioorg Med Chem. 2016 Mar 15;24(6):1384-91. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2016.02.014. Epub 
2016 Feb 9.

Identification of spirooxindole and dibenzoxazepine motifs as potent
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists.

Lotesta SD(1), Marcus AP(2), Zheng Y(2), Leftheris K(2), Noto PB(2), Meng S(2),
Kandpal G(2), Chen G(2), Zhou J(2), McKeever B(2), Bukhtiyarov Y(2), Zhao Y(2),
Lala DS(2), Singh SB(2), McGeehan GM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vitae Pharmaceuticals, 502 West Office Center Drive, Fort Washington, PA
19034, United States. Electronic address: slotesta@vitaerx.com. (2)Vitae
Pharmaceuticals, 502 West Office Center Drive, Fort Washington, PA 19034, United 
States.

Mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) antagonists continue to be a prevalent area of
research in the pharmaceutical industry. Herein we report the discovery of
various spirooxindole and dibenzoxazepine constructs as potent MR antagonists.
SAR analysis of our spirooxindole hit led to highly potent compounds containing
polar solubilizing groups, which interact with the helix-11 region of the MR
ligand binding domain (LBD). Various dibenzoxazepine moieties were also prepared 
in an effort to replace a known dibenzoxepane system which interacts with the
hydrophobic region of the MR LBD. In addition, an X-ray crystal structure was
obtained from a highly potent compound which was shown to exhibit both partial
agonist and antagonist modes of action against MR.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26897089  [PubMed - in process]


15. J Diabetes Complications. 2016 Jan 22. pii: S1056-8727(16)00017-9. doi:
10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2016.01.015. [Epub ahead of print]

Accelerated decline of renal function in type 2 diabetes following severe
hypoglycemia.

Tsujimoto T(1), Yamamoto-Honda R(2), Kajio H(3), Kishimoto M(2), Noto H(2),
Hachiya R(3), Kimura A(4), Kakei M(5), Noda M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Center Hospital,
National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Division of General
Medicine, Jichi Medical University Graduate School of Medicine, Shimotsuke,
Japan. Electronic address: ttsujimoto@hosp.ncgm.go.jp. (2)Department of Diabetes,
Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Center Hospital, National Center for Global Health
and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Diabetes Research, Diabetes Research
Center, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Center Hospital,
National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of
Emergency Medicine and Critical Care, Center Hospital, National Center for Global
Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Division of General Medicine, Jichi Medical
University Graduate School of Medicine, Shimotsuke, Japan; First Department of
Comprehensive Medicine, Saitama Medical Center, Jichi Medical University School
of Medicine, Saitama, Japan. (6)Department of Diabetes Research, Diabetes
Research Center, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan;
Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Saitama Medical University, Saitama,
Japan.

AIMS: This study aimed to evaluate whether the pronounced elevation in blood
pressure during severe hypoglycemia is associated with subsequent renal
insufficiency.
METHODS: We conducted a 3-year cohort study to assess the clinical course of
renal function in type 2 diabetes patients with or without blood pressure surge
during severe hypoglycemia.
RESULTS: Of 111 type 2 diabetes patients with severe hypoglycemia, 76 exhibited
an extremely high systolic blood pressure before treatment, whereas 35
demonstrated no such increase (179.1±27.7mmHg vs. 131.1±20.2mmHg, P<0.001). At
12h after treatment, systolic blood pressure did not differ significantly
(131.5±30.7mmHg vs. 123.5±20.7mmHg; P=0.39). The estimated glomerular filtration 
rate (GFR) before and at the time of severe hypoglycemia did not significantly
differ between both groups. A multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression
analysis revealed that blood pressure surge during severe hypoglycemia was
independently associated with a composite outcome of a more than
15mL/min/1.73m(2) decrease in the estimated GFR and initiation of chronic
dialysis (hazard ratio, 2.68; 95% confidence interval, 1.12-6.38; P=0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Renal function after severe hypoglycemia was significantly worse in 
type 2 diabetes patients with blood pressure surge during severe hypoglycemia
than those without blood pressure surge.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26896334  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2016 Mar;408(9):2373. Epub 2016 Feb 19.

Erratum to: FragClust and TestClust, two informatics tools for chemical structure
hierarchical clustering analysis applied to lipidomics. The example of
Alzheimer's disease.

Di Gaudio F(1), Indelicato S(1), Monastero R(2), Altieri GI(3), Fayer F(3),
Palesano O(3), Fontana M(1), Cefalu AB(1), Greco M(3), Bongiorno D(4), Indelicato
S(4), Aronica A(2), Noto D(3), Averna MR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Mass Spectrometry Laboratory for Clinical Risk and Quality Control, A.O.U.P.
"P. Giaccone", University of Palermo, Via del Vespro 129, 90127, Palermo, Italy. 
(2)Department of Experimental Biomedicine and Clinical Neurosciences, University 
of Palermo, Via del Vespro 129, 90127, Palermo, Italy. (3)Department of
Biomedicine Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, Division of Internal
Medicine and Genetic Dyslipidemias, University of Palermo, Via del Vespro 141,
90127, Palermo, Italy. (4)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biologiche
Chimiche e Farmaceutiche(STEBICEF), University of Palermo, Viale delle Scienze,
Ed. 16, 90128, Palermo, Italy. (5)Department of Biomedicine Internal Medicine and
Medical Specialties, Division of Internal Medicine and Genetic Dyslipidemias,
University of Palermo, Via del Vespro 141, 90127, Palermo, Italy.
maurizio.averna@unipa.it.

Erratum for
    Anal Bioanal Chem. 2016 Mar;408(9):2215-2226. Epub 2016 Jan 11..

PMID: 26894761  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Intern Med. 2016;55(4):399-403. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.55.5042. Epub 2016 
Feb 15.

Gamma Heavy Chain Disease with T-cell Large Granular Lymphocytic Leukemia: A Case
Report and Review of the Literature.

Iijima M(1), Sekiguchi N, Nagata A, Wagatsuma M, Midorikawa K, Kurimoto M, Noto
S, Yamada K, Takezako N.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, National Hospital Organization Disaster Medical Center,
Japan.

Gamma heavy chain disease (gHCD) is a rare lymphoproliferative disorder
characterized by the production of a truncated immunoglobulin heavy chain.
Although some cases of gHCD are concurrent with other lymphoid neoplasms, few
have been reported. We herein present the case of a 73-year-old woman with gHCD
and T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia. A multiparameter flow cytometry
analysis revealed neoplastic cells that were positive for CD28, a marker of
T-cell activation, the anti-apoptotic antigen of neoplastic plasma cells, CD38
and CD45. The results of this multiparameter flow cytometry analysis may
contribute to furthering the understanding of the clinicopathological features of
gHCD.

PMID: 26875967  [PubMed - in process]


18. Radiol Phys Technol. 2016 Feb 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Impact of pitch angle setup error and setup error correction on dose distribution
in volumetric modulated arc therapy for prostate cancer.

Takemura A(1), Togawa K(2), Yokoi T(3), Ueda S(4), Noto K(4), Kojima H(4),
Isomura N(4), Kumano T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health
Sciences, Kanazawa University, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, 920-0942, Japan.
at@mhs.mp.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Radiology, Seirei Hamamatsu General 
Hospital, 2-12-12 Sumiyoshi, Naka-ku, Hamamatsu, 430-8558, Japan. (3)Department
of Radiology, Ishikawa Prefectural Central Hospital, 2-1 Kuratsuki-Higashi,
Kanazawa, 920-8530, Japan. (4)Department of Radiological Technology, Kanazawa
University Hospital, 13-1 Takaramachi, Kanazawa, 920-8641, Japan. (5)Department
of Radiology, Kanazawa University Hospital, 13-1 Takaramachi, Kanazawa, 920-8641,
Japan.

In volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT) for prostate cancer, a positional and 
rotational error correction is performed according to the position and angle of
the prostate. The correction often involves body leaning, and there is concern
regarding variation in the dose distribution. Our purpose in this study was to
evaluate the impact of body pitch rotation on the dose distribution regarding
VMAT. Treatment plans were obtained retrospectively from eight patients with
prostate cancer. The body in the computed tomography images for the original VMAT
plan was shifted to create VMAT plans with virtual pitch angle errors of ±1.5°
and ±3°. Dose distributions for the tilted plans were recalculated with use of
the same beam arrangement as that used for the original VMAT plan. The mean value
of the maximum dose differences in the dose distributions between the original
VMAT plan and the tilted plans was 2.98 ± 0.96 %. The value of the homogeneity
index for the planning target volume (PTV) had an increasing trend according to
the pitch angle error, and the values of the D 95 for the PTV and D 2ml, V 50, V 
60, and V 70 for the rectum had decreasing trends (p < 0.05). However, there was 
no correlation between differences in these indexes and the maximum dose
difference. The pitch angle error caused by body leaning had little effect on the
dose distribution; in contrast, the pitch angle correction reduced the effects of
organ displacement and improved these indexes. Thus, the pitch angle setup error 
in VMAT for prostate cancer should be corrected.

PMID: 26873139  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Cad Saude Publica. 2015 Dec;31(12):2514-2522.

Parenting styles as a tobacco-use protective factor among Brazilian adolescents.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Tondowski CS(1), Bedendo A(1), Zuquetto C(1), Locatelli DP(1), Opaleye ES(1),
Noto AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brasil.

The objective was to evaluate the relationship between tobacco use (previous
month and frequent use), parenting styles and parental smoking behavior in a
sample of high school students. Participants were recruited from public and
private high schools from 27 Brazilian state capitals (N = 17,246). The overall
prevalence of tobacco use in life was 25.2%; 15.3% in the previous year; 8.6% in 
the previous month; and 3.2% for frequent use. Tobacco use by the parents was
reported by 28.6% of the students. Regarding parenting styles, 39.2% were
classified as negligent, 33.3% authoritative, 15.6% as indulgent and 11.9%
authoritarian. Compared to adolescents with authoritative parents, those with
negligent or indulgent parents were more prone to report tobacco use during the
last month or frequent use. This study showed an association between parenting
styles and tobacco use by high school students. Authoritative parents were
associated with protection from frequent and previous month tobacco use among
adolescents.

PMID: 26872228  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. J Affect Disord. 2016 May;195:57-62. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2016.02.002. Epub 2016
Feb 4.

Impaired glucose metabolism moderates the course of illness in bipolar disorder.

Mansur RB(1), Rizzo LB(2), Santos CM(3), Asevedo E(3), Cunha GR(3), Noto MN(4),
Pedrini M(3), Zeni M(3), Cordeiro Q(5), McIntyre RS(6), Brietzke E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LINC), Department of
Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil; Mood 
Disorders Psychopharmacology Unit (MDPU), University Health Network, University
of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. Electronic address: rodrigomansur71@uol.com.br.
(2)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LINC), Department of
Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil;
Department of Psychiatry, Clinic for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (3)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences (LINC), Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo
(UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences (LINC), Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo
(UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil; Vila Maria Outpatient Clinic in São Paulo, Brazil. 
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Irmandade da Santa Casa de Misericórdia de São Paulo
(ISCMSP), Brazil. (6)Mood Disorders Psychopharmacology Unit (MDPU), University
Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The longitudinal course of bipolar disorder (BD) is highly
heterogeneous, and is moderated by the presence of general medical comorbidities.
This study aimed to investigate the moderating effects of impaired glucose
metabolism (IGM) on variables of illness course and severity in a BD population.
METHODS: Fifty-five patients with BD were evaluated. All subjects were evaluated 
with respect to current and past psychiatric and medical disorders, as well as
lifetime use of any medication. Body mass index (BMI) and metabolic parameters
were obtained. IGM was operationalized as pre-diabetes or type 2 diabetes
mellitus.
RESULTS: Thirty (54.5%) individuals had IGM. After adjustment for age, gender,
ethnicity, alcohol use, smoking, BMI and past and current exposure to
psychotropic medications, individuals with IGM, when compared to euglycemic
participants, had an earlier age of onset (RR: 0.835, p=0.024), longer illness
duration (RR: 1.754, p=0.007), a higher number of previous manic/hypomanic
episodes (RR: 1.483, p=0.002) and a higher ratio of manic/hypomanic to depressive
episodes (RR: 1.753, p=0.028). Moreover, we observed a moderating effect of IGM
on the association between number of mood episodes and other variables of illness
course, with the correlation between lifetime mood episodes and frequency of
episodes being significantly greater in the IGM subgroup (RR: 1.027, p=0.029).
All associations observed herein remained significant after adjusting for
relevant confounding factors (e.g. age, alcohol and tobacco use, exposure to
psychotropic agents, BMI).
LIMITATIONS: Cross-sectional design, small sample size.
CONCLUSIONS: Comorbid IGM may be a key moderator of illness progression in BD.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26866976  [PubMed - in process]


21. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 4. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7195. [Epub ahead of print]

Synergistic antitumor activity of histone deacetylase inhibitors and anti-ErbB3
antibody in NSCLC primary cultures via modulation of ErbB receptors expression.

Ciardiello C(1), Roca MS(1), Noto A(1), Bruzzese F(1), Moccia T(1), Vitagliano
C(1), Di Gennaro E(1), Ciliberto G(2), Roscilli G(3), Aurisicchio L(3), Marra
E(3), Mancini R(4), Budillon A(1), Leone A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Pharmacology Unit, Istituto Nazionale Tumori Fondazione G.
Pascale - IRCCS, 80131 Naples, Italy. (2)Scientific Direction, Istituto Nazionale
Tumori Fondazione G. Pascale - IRCCS, 80131 Naples, Italy. (3)Takis s.r.l.,
University, 00161 Rome, Italy. (4)Department of Surgery "P.Valdoni, and
Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, "La Sapienza" University, 00161
Rome, Italy.

ErbB3, a member of the ErbB family receptors, has a key role in the development
and progression of several cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
and in the establishment of resistance to therapies, leading to the development
of anti-ErbB3 therapies.In this study we demonstrated, in a set of malignant
pleural effusion-derived cultures of NSCLC, the synergistic antitumor effect of a
histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), such as vorinostat or valproic acid (VPA),
in combination with the anti-ErbB3 monoclonal antibody (MoAb) A3. Synergistic
interaction was observed in 2D and in 3D cultures conditions, both in fully
epithelial cells expressing all ErbB receptors, and in cells that had undergone
epithelial to mesenchymal transition and expressed low levels of ErbB3. We
provided evidences suggesting that differential modulation of ErbB receptors by
vorinostat or VPA, also at low doses corresponding to plasma levels easily
reached in treated patients, is responsible for the observed synergism. In
details, we showed in epithelial cells that both vorinostat and VPA induced time-
and dose-dependent down-regulation of all three ErbB receptors and of downstream 
signaling. On the contrary, in A3-resistant mesenchymal cells, we observed time- 
and dose-dependent increase of mRNA and protein levels as well as surface
expression of ErbB3, paralleled by down-regulation of EGFR and ErbB2. Our results
suggest that the combination of a HDACi plus an anti-ErbB3 MoAb represents a
viable strategy that warrants further evaluation for the treatment of NSCLC
patients.

PMID: 26862736  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2016 May;195:26-31. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpa.2016.01.022. Epub 2016 Feb 2.

Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound induces apoptosis in osteoclasts: Fish scales are
a suitable model for the analysis of bone metabolism by ultrasound.

Suzuki N(1), Hanmoto T(2), Yano S(3), Furusawa Y(4), Ikegame M(5), Tabuchi Y(6), 
Kondo T(7), Kitamura K(8), Endo M(9), Yamamoto T(5), Sekiguchi T(2), Urata M(10),
Mikuni-Takagaki Y(11), Hattori A(12).

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Division of Marine Environmental Studies, Institute of
Nature and Environmental Technology, Kanazawa University, Noto, Ishikawa
927-0553, Japan. Electronic address: nobuos@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (2)Noto
Marine Laboratory, Division of Marine Environmental Studies, Institute of Nature 
and Environmental Technology, Kanazawa University, Noto, Ishikawa 927-0553,
Japan. (3)Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8505, Japan.
(4)Liberal Arts and Sciences, Faculty of Engineering, Toyama Prefectural
University, Kurokawa, Toyama 939-0398, Japan. (5)Department of Oral Morphology,
Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama
University, Okayama, Okayama 700-8525, Japan. (6)Division of Molecular Genetics
Research, Life Science Research Center, University of Toyama, Sugitani, Toyama
930-0194, Japan. (7)Department of Radiological Sciences, Graduate School of
Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Sugitani, Toyama
930-0194, Japan. (8)Department of Clinical Laboratory Science, Division of Health
Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa University, Kodatsuno,
Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan. (9)Department of Marine Biosciences, Division of Marine
Science, Tokyo University of Marine Science and Technology, Konan, Minato, Tokyo 
108-8477, Japan. (10)Noto Marine Laboratory, Division of Marine Environmental
Studies, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology, Kanazawa University,
Noto, Ishikawa 927-0553, Japan; Institute of Noto SATOUMI Education Research,
Noto, Ishikawa 927-0553, Japan. (11)Kanagawa Dental University Graduate School of
Dentistry, Inaoka, Kanagawa 238-8580, Japan. (12)Department of Biology, College
of Liberal Arts and Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Ichikawa,
Chiba 272-0827, Japan.

Using fish scales in which osteoclasts and osteoblasts coexist on the calcified
bone matrix, we examined the effects of low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS)
on both osteoclasts and osteoblasts. At 3h of incubation after LIPUS treatment,
osteoclastic markers such as tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) and
cathepsin K mRNA expressions decreased significantly while mRNA expressions of
osteoblastic markers, osteocalcin, distal-less homeobox 5, runt-related
transcription factor 2a, and runt-related transcription factor 2b, increased
significantly. At 6 and 18h of incubation, however, both osteoclastic and
osteoblastic marker mRNA expression did not change at least present conditions.
Using GeneChip analysis of zebrafish scales treated with LIPUS, we found that
cell death-related genes were upregulated with LIPUS treatment. Real-time PCR
analysis indicated that the expression of apoptosis-related genes also increased 
significantly. To confirm the involvement of apoptosis in osteoclasts with LIPUS,
osteoclasts were induced by autotransplanting scales in goldfish. Thereafter, the
DNA fragmentation associated with apoptosis was detected in osteoclasts using the
TUNEL (TdT-mediated dUTP nick end labeling) method. The multi-nuclei of
TRAP-stained osteoclasts in the scales were labeled with TUNEL. TUNEL staining
showed that the number of apoptotic osteoclasts in goldfish scales was
significantly elevated by treatment with LIPUS at 3h of incubation. Thus, we are 
the first to demonstrate that LIPUS directly functions to osteoclasts and to
conclude that LIPUS directly causes apoptosis in osteoclasts shortly after
exposure.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26850473  [PubMed - in process]


23. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2016;64(2):83-94. doi: 10.1248/cpb.c15-00801.

Environmental Behaviors and Toxicities of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons and
Nitropolycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons.

Hayakawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health
Sciences/Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology, Kanazawa University.

Airborne particulate matter (PM) has been collected at four cities in Japan
starting in the late 1990s, at five or more major cities in China, Korea and
Russia starting in 2001 and at the Noto Peninsula starting in 2004. Nine
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and eleven nitropolycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (NPAHs) were determined by HPLC with fluorescence and
chemiluminescence detections, respectively. Annual concentrations of PAHs and
NPAHs were in the order, China>Russia»Korea=Japan, with seasonal change
(winter>summer). During the observation period, concentrations of PAHs and NPAHs 
in Japanese cities significantly decreased but the increases in the PAH
concentration were observed in Chinese and Russian cities. Concentrations of PAHs
and NPAHs were higher in the Northern China than those in the Southern China. At 
the Noto peninsula, which is in the main path of winter northwest winds and a
year-round jet stream that blow from the Asian continent to Japan, the
concentrations were high in winter and low in summer every year. A cluster
analysis and back trajectory analysis indicated that PAHs and NPAHs were
long-range transported from Northeastern China, where coal burning systems such
as coal-heating boilers are considered to be the major contributors of PAHs and
NPAHs. A dramatic change in atmospheric concentrations of PAHs and NPAHs in East 
Asia suggests the rapid and large change of PM2.5 pollution in East Asia.
Considering the adverse health effects of PM2.5, continuous monitoring of
atmospheric PAHs and NPAHs is necessary in this area.

PMID: 26833435  [PubMed - in process]


24. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Apr;1864(4):371-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2016.01.014. 
Epub 2016 Jan 26.

Characterization of a mutant form of human apolipoprotein B (Thr26_Tyr27del)
associated with familial hypobetalipoproteinemia.

Magnolo L(1), Noto D(2), Cefalù AB(2), Averna M(2), Calandra S(3), Yao Z(4),
Tarugi P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena,
Italy. (2)Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialities, University of
Palermo, Palermo, Italy. (3)Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. (4)Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology & Immunology, Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.

We have previously identified a deletion mutant of human apoB [apoB
(Thr26_Tyr27del)] in a subject with primary hypobetalipoproteinemia. The present 
study determined the effect of Thr26_Tyr27del mutation on apoB secretion using
transfected McA-RH7777 cells. Transient or stable transfection of apoB-48
containing the Thr26_Tyr27del mutation showed drastically reduced secretion of
the mutant as compared to wild-type apoB-48. No lipoproteins containing the
mutant apoB-48 were secreted into the medium. Incubation of transfected cells in 
a lipid-rich medium in the presence of cycloheximide showed rapid turnover of
cell-associated mutant apoB-48 as compared to that of wild-type apoB-48.
Immunofluorescence experiments showed that the mutant apoB-48 was mostly
localized in the endoplasmic reticulum. Treatment with the proteasomal inhibitor 
MG132 markedly attenuated the turnover of cell-associated mutant apoB-48, whereas
treatment with inhibitors of autophagosomal/lysosomal function (e.g. 3-MA or
ammonium chloride) had no effect. Taken together, these results indicated that
the defective secretion of the Thr26_Tyr27del mutant was associated with
increased intracellular degradation of apoB through the proteasome-dependent
pathway.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26825690  [PubMed - in process]


25. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 29;11(1):e0148470. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148470.

Correction: Zonisamide Enhances Neurite Elongation of Primary Motor Neurons and
Facilitates Peripheral Nerve Regeneration In Vitro and in a Mouse Model.

Yagi H, Ohkawara B, Nakashima H, Ito K, Tsushima M, Ishii H, Noto K, Ohta K,
Masuda A, Imagama S, Ishiguro N, Ohno K.

Erratum for
    PLoS One. 2015 Nov 16;10(11):e0142786. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142786.
eCollection 2015..

[This corrects the article DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142786.].

PMCID: PMC4732597
PMID: 26824762  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


26. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Feb 19;470(4):894-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.01.138. Epub 2016 Jan 26.

Inhibitory effects of two G protein-coupled receptor kinases on the cell surface 
expression and signaling of the human adrenomedullin receptor.

Kuwasako K(1), Sekiguchi T(2), Nagata S(3), Jiang D(4), Hayashi H(4), Murakami
M(5), Hattori Y(6), Kitamura K(3), Kato J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Frontier Science Research Center, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, 889-1692, 
Japan. Electronic address: kuwasako@med.miyazaki-u.ac.jp. (2)Noto Marine
Laboratory, Division of Marine Environmental Studies, Institute of Nature and
Environmental Technology, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, 927-0553, Japan.
(3)Division of Circulatory and Body Fluid Regulation, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, 889-1692, Japan. (4)Frontier Science Research
Center, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, 889-1692, Japan. (5)Department of
Pharmacology, Hirosaki University, Graduate School of Medicine, Hirosaki,
036-8562, Japan. (6)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Graduate
School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama,
930-0194, Japan.

Receptor activity-modifying protein 2 (RAMP2) enables the calcitonin
receptor-like receptor (CLR, a family B GPCR) to form the type 1 adrenomedullin
receptor (AM1 receptor). Here, we investigated the effects of the five non-visual
GPCR kinases (GRKs 2 through 6) on the cell surface expression of the human
(h)AM1 receptor by cotransfecting each of these GRKs into HEK-293 cells that
stably expressed hRAMP2. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that when coexpressed 
with GRK4 or GRK5, the cell surface expression of the AM1 receptor was markedly
decreased prior to stimulation with AM, thereby attenuating both the specific
[(125)I]AM binding and AM-induced cAMP production. These inhibitory effects of
both GRKs were abolished by the replacement of the cytoplasmic C-terminal tail
(C-tail) of CLR with that of the calcitonin receptor (a family B GPCR) or
ß2-adrenergic receptor (a family A GPCR). Among the sequentially truncated CLR
C-tail mutants, those lacking the five residues 449-453 (Ser-Phe-Ser-Asn-Ser)
abolished the inhibition of the cell surface expression of CLR via the
overexpression of GRK4 or GRK5. Thus, we provided new insight into the function
of GRKs in agonist-unstimulated GPCR trafficking using a recombinant AM1 receptor
and further determined the region of the CLR C-tail responsible for this GRK
function.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26820533  [PubMed - in process]


27. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2016 Jan 26. pii: S1516-44462016005002101. [Epub ahead of
print]

Hair cortisol in drug-naïve first-episode individuals with psychosis.

Andrade EH(1), Rizzo LB(1), Noto C(1), Ota VK(1), Gadelha A(1), Daruy-Filho L(2),
Tasso BC(3), Mansur RB(1), Cordeiro Q(3), Belangero SI(1), Bressan RA(1),
Grassi-Oliveira R(2), Brietzke E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório Interdisciplinar de Neurociências Clínicas (LINC), Universidade
Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (2)Instituto de Pesquisas 
Biomédicas (IPB), Grupo de Neurociência Cognitiva do Desenvolvimento (GNCD),
Núcleo de Estudos e Pesquisa em Trauma e Estresse (NEPTE), Pontifícia
Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. (3)Programa
Primeiro Episódio Psicótico, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da Santa Casa de São
Paulo (FCMSCSP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: To compare hair cortisol concentrations (HCC) in drug-naïve
first-episode psychosis (FEP) patients and healthy controls and to investigate
the correlations between HCC and psychopathology.
METHODS: Twenty-four drug-naïve FEP patients and 27 gender- and age-matched
healthy control subjects were recruited. The Structured Clinical Interview for
DSM-IV (SCID-1) was used to confirm/rule out diagnoses, and the Positive and
Negative Symptoms Scale (PANSS) was used to assess symptom severity. Hair samples
(2-3 cm long) obtained from the posterior vertex region of the scalp were
processed in 1-cm segments considering a hair growth rate of 1 cm per month. The 
1-cm segments were classified according to their proximity to the scalp: segment 
A was the closest to the scalp and referred to the month prior to inclusion in
the study. Segments B and C referred to the 2nd and 3rd months prior to the time 
of evaluation respectively. Hair steroid extraction was performed using a known
protocol.
RESULTS: Two-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with gender and age as
covariates revealed a group effect (F1.106 = 4.899, p = 0.029) on HCC.
Between-segment differences correlated with total PANSS score and with PANSS
General Psychopathology subscale and total score.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis,
as assessed by long-term (3-month) cortisol concentration, is abnormal in the
early stages of psychosis. The magnitude of changes in HCC over time prior to the
FEP correlates to psychopathology. HPA axis abnormalities might begin prior to
full-blown clinical presentation requiring hospital admission.

PMID: 26814837  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


28. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces. 2016 Apr 1;140:505-13. doi:
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2016.01.025. Epub 2016 Jan 18.

Direct chemical grafted curcumin on halloysite nanotubes as dual-responsive
prodrug for pharmacological applications.

Massaro M(1), Amorati R(2), Cavallaro G(3), Guernelli S(2), Lazzara G(4), Milioto
S(3), Noto R(1), Poma P(5), Riela S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento STEBICEF, Sez. Chimica, Università degli Studi di Palermo, Viale 
delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, Ed. 17, 90128 Palermo, Italy. (2)Dipartimento 
di Chimica "Giacomo Ciamician", Via S.Giacomo 11, Bologna, Italy. (3)Dipartimento
di Fisica e Chimica, Università degli Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze,
Parco d'Orleans II, Ed. 17, 90128 Palermo, Italy. (4)Dipartimento di Fisica e
Chimica, Università degli Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans 
II, Ed. 17, 90128 Palermo, Italy. Electronic address: giuseppe.lazzara@unipa.it. 
(5)Dipartimento di Scienze per la Promozione della Salute e Materno Infantile "G.
D'Alessandro", Area Funzionale di Farmacologia, Università di Palermo, Via del
Vespro 129, 90127 Palermo, Italy. (6)Dipartimento STEBICEF, Sez. Chimica,
Università degli Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, Ed.
17, 90128 Palermo, Italy. Electronic address: serena.riela@unipa.it.

Covalently functionalized halloysite nanotubes (HNTs) were successfully employed 
as dual-responsive nanocarriers for curcumin (Cur). Particularly, we synthesized 
HNT-Cur prodrug with a controlled curcumin release on dependence of both
intracellular glutathione (GSH) and pH conditions. In order to obtain HNT-Cur
produgs, halloysite was firstly functionalized with cysteamine through disulphide
linkage. Afterwards, curcumin molecules were chemically conjugated to the amino
end groups of halloysite via Schiff's base formation. The successful
functionalization of halloysite was proved by thermogravimetric analysis, FT-IR
spectroscopy, dynamic light scattering and scanning electron microscopy.
Experimental data confirmed the presence of curcumin on HNT external surface.
Moreover, we investigated the kinetics of curcumin release by UV-vis
spectroscopy, which highlighted that HNT-Cur prodrug possesses dual
stimuli-responsive ability upon exposure to GSH-rich or acidic environment. In
vitro antiproliferative and antioxidant properties of HNT-Cur prodrug were
studied with the aim to explore their potential applications in pharmaceutics.
This work puts forward an efficient strategy to prepare halloysite based
nanocarriers with controlled drug delivery capacity through direct chemical
grafting with stimuli-responsive linkage.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26812638  [PubMed - in process]


29. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2016 Jan 5. pii: S0901-5027(15)01469-1. doi:
10.1016/j.ijom.2015.12.005. [Epub ahead of print]

Dyskeratosis congenita associated with leukoplakia of the tongue.

Noto Z(1), Tomihara K(2), Furukawa K(2), Noguchi M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Kurobe City Hospital, Kurobe,
Toyama, Japan; Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Graduate School of
Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences for Research, University of Toyama, Toyama, 
Japan. Electronic address: z.noto@med.kurobe.toyama.jp. (2)Department of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences
for Research, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan.

Dyskeratosis congenita (DC) is an inherited disease characterized by the triad of
skin pigmentation, nail dystrophy, and oral leukoplakia. Among other
abnormalities, bone marrow failure and a predisposition to cancer are recognized 
as the major causes of premature mortality in patients with DC. This disease is
associated with short telomeres and mutations in 10 genes associated with
telomerase and telomere components. The case of a 35-year-old male patient
diagnosed with DC, who presented with leukoplakia of the tongue and had a high
degree of hypoplastic marrow, but no haematological abnormalities, is reported
here. The diagnosis of DC was confirmed by detection of short telomeres in the
blood cells and mutations in the DKC1 gene. This encounter with the case
presented suggests that an awareness of the classical forms of DC is important
for oral clinicians so that an early diagnosis can be made and the patient can be
managed appropriately. Furthermore, genetic analysis is necessary to establish
the diagnosis of DC.

Copyright © 2015 International Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26778687  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


30. Clin Dermatol. 2016 Jan-Feb;34(1):24-31. doi: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2015.11.001.
Epub 2015 Nov 4.

Epidemiologic trends of leprosy for the 21st century.

Schreuder PA(1), Noto S(2), Richardus JH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Maastricht, The Netherlands. Electronic address: impieter@hotmail.com.
(2)Bergamo, Italy. (3)Department of Public Health, Erasmus MC, University Medical
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Major gaps still exist in the knowledge about leprosy, particularly with regard
to how it spreads. Leprosy epidemiology remains complicated due to the specific
characteristics of Mycobacterium leprae. To describe epidemiologic trends for the
21st century, the first part of this paper gives an overview of the epidemiology 
of leprosy, followed by past trends and the present situation of new-case
detection as a proxy of the incidence. The third part, regarding predicted
epidemiologic trends for the 21st century, elaborates on the main topic of this
paper. With limited diagnostic tools to detect infection with M leprae, other
methods are necessary to estimate trends in incidence and transmission. A
computer program has been developed for modeling the transmission and control of 
leprosy (SIMLEP). The effect of failure to sustain early case detection beyond
2005 on leprosy incidence and case detection is shown. Important unanswered
questions are whether the incubation period is contagious and how rapid close
contacts of leprosy patients are infected. As long as such key questions remain
unanswered, it will be difficult to estimate the impact of control strategies on 
the transmission of M leprae on resulting disease incidence. In the meantime we
can expect that the global new-case detection trends will stay more or less
stable or only decrease slightly for many years to come. There is a need of new
preventive interventions to change this situation and reduce the incidence of
leprosy in the 21st century.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26773620  [PubMed - in process]


31. Neuroscience. 2016 Mar 24;318:58-83. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.12.060.
Epub 2016 Jan 7.

An analysis of nonlinear dynamics underlying neural activity related to auditory 
induction in the rat auditory cortex.

Noto M(1), Nishikawa J(1), Tateno T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering and Bioinformatics, Graduate School of Information Science and 
Technology, Hokkaido University, Kita 14, Nishi 9, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0814,
Japan. (2)Bioengineering and Bioinformatics, Graduate School of Information
Science and Technology, Hokkaido University, Kita 14, Nishi 9, Kita-ku, Sapporo
060-0814, Japan; Special Research Promotion Group, Graduate School of Frontier
Biosciences, Osaka University, 1-3 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, Japan. Electronic
address: tateno@ist.hokudai.ac.jp.

A sound interrupted by silence is perceived as discontinuous. However, when
high-intensity noise is inserted during the silence, the missing sound may be
perceptually restored and be heard as uninterrupted. This illusory phenomenon is 
called auditory induction. Recent electrophysiological studies have revealed that
auditory induction is associated with the primary auditory cortex (A1). Although 
experimental evidence has been accumulating, the neural mechanisms underlying
auditory induction in A1 neurons are poorly understood. To elucidate this, we
used both experimental and computational approaches. First, using an optical
imaging method, we characterized population responses across auditory cortical
fields to sound and identified five subfields in rats. Next, we examined neural
population activity related to auditory induction with high temporal and spatial 
resolution in the rat auditory cortex (AC), including the A1 and several other AC
subfields. Our imaging results showed that tone-burst stimuli interrupted by a
silent gap elicited early phasic responses to the first tone and similar or
smaller responses to the second tone following the gap. In contrast, tone stimuli
interrupted by broadband noise (BN), considered to cause auditory induction,
considerably suppressed or eliminated responses to the tone following the noise. 
Additionally, tone-burst stimuli that were interrupted by notched noise centered 
at the tone frequency, which is considered to decrease the strength of auditory
induction, partially restored the second responses from the suppression caused by
BN. To phenomenologically mimic the neural population activity in the A1 and thus
investigate the mechanisms underlying auditory induction, we constructed a
computational model from the periphery through the AC, including a nonlinear
dynamical system. The computational model successively reproduced some of the
above-mentioned experimental results. Therefore, our results suggest that a
nonlinear, self-exciting system is a key element for qualitatively reproducing A1
population activity and to understand the underlying mechanisms.

Copyright © 2016 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26772432  [PubMed - in process]


32. Blood. 2016 Mar 24;127(12):1559-63. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-10-673145. Epub 2016 
Jan 13.

Postibrutinib outcomes in patients with mantle cell lymphoma.

Martin P(1), Maddocks K(2), Leonard JP(1), Ruan J(1), Goy A(3), Wagner-Johnston
N(4), Rule S(5), Advani R(6), Iberri D(6), Phillips T(7), Spurgeon S(8), Kozin
E(8), Noto K(1), Chen Z(9), Jurczak W(10), Auer R(11), Chmielowska E(12),
Stilgenbauer S(13), Bloehdorn J(13), Portell C(14), Williams ME(14), Dreyling
M(15), Barr PM(16), Chen-Kiang S(17), DiLiberto M(17), Furman RR(1), Blum KA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY; (2)Ohio
State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH; (3)Hackensack
University Medical Center, Hackensack, NJ; (4)Division of Oncology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO; (5)Department of Haematology,
Plymouth University Peninsula Schools of Medicine and Dentistry and Derriford
Hospital, Plymouth, United Kingdom; (6)Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford, CA;
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI;
(8)Center for Hematologic Malignancies, Oregon Health and Science University,
Portland, OR; (9)Department of Healthcare Policy and Research, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY; (10)Department of Hematology, Jagiellonian
University, Krakow, Poland; (11)St. Bartholomew's Hospital, London, United
Kingdom; (12)Oddzial Kliniczny Onkologii, Bydgoszcz, Poland;
(13)Universitätsklinikum Ulm, Ulm, Germany; (14)University of Virginia Cancer
Center, Charlottesville, VA; (15)Klinikum der Universität München, Munich,
Germany; (16)Department of Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, NY; and. (17)Department of Pathology, Weill Cornell Medical College,
New York, NY.

Despite unprecedented clinical activity in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), primary
and acquired resistance to ibrutinib is common. The outcomes and ideal management
of patients who experience ibrutinib failure are unclear. We performed a
retrospective cohort study of all patients with MCL who experienced disease
progression while receiving ibrutinib across 15 international sites. Medical
records were evaluated for clinical characteristics, pathological and
radiological data, and therapies used pre- and postibrutinib. A total of 114
subjects met eligibility criteria. The median number of prior therapies was 3
(range, 0-10). The Mantle Cell Lymphoma International Prognostic Index (MIPI)
scores at the start of ibrutinib were low, intermediate, and high in 46%, 31%,
and 23% of patients, respectively. Of patients with available data prior to
ibrutinib and postibrutinib, 34 of 47 and 11 of 12 had a Ki67 >30%. The median
time on ibrutinib was 4.7 months (range 0.7-43.6). The median overall survival
(OS) following cessation of ibrutinib was 2.9 months (95% confidence interval
[CI], 1.6-4.9). Of the 104 patients with data available, 73 underwent subsequent 
treatment an average of 0.3 months after stopping ibrutinib with a median OS of
5.8 months (95% CI, 3.7-10.4). Multivariate Cox regression analysis of MIPI
before postibrutinib treatment, and subsequent treatment with bendamustine,
cytarabine, or lenalidomide failed to reveal any association with OS. Poor
clinical outcomes were noted in the majority of patients with primary or
secondary ibrutinib resistance. We could not identify treatments that clearly
improved outcomes. Future trials should focus on understanding the mechanisms of 
ibrutinib resistance and on treatment after ibrutinib.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26764355  [PubMed - in process]


33. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2016 Apr;16(4):473-86. doi: 10.1586/14737159.2016.1139456. 
Epub 2016 Feb 2.

The choice of amniotic fluid in metabolomics for the monitoring of fetus health.

Palmas F(1), Fattuoni C(1), Noto A(2,)(3), Barberini L(4), Dessì A(2,)(3), Fanos 
V(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Chemical and Geological Sciences , University of Cagliari ,
Cagliari , Italy. (2)b Department of Surgical Sciences , University of Cagliari
and Neonatal Intensive Care Unit , Cagliari , Italy. (3)c Puericulture Institute 
and Neonatal Section , Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria , Cagliari , Italy. (4)d
Department of Public Health Clinical and Molecular Medicine , University of
Cagliari , Cagliari , Italy.

Amniotic fluid (AF) is a biological fluid in which metabolite transport is
regulated by the placenta, the permeable skin, fetal lung egress and gastric
fluid. During pregnancy, the composition of AF changes from similar to the
interstitial fluid of the mother, to a more complex system, influenced by the
fetus's urine. Since AF reflects the mother's and the fetus's health status at
the same time, it may be an important diagnostic tool for a wider spectrum of
clinical conditions. Indeed, the metabolic characterization of AF in relation to 
pathological occurrences may lead to the discovery of new biomarkers for a better
clinical practice. For this reason, metabolomics may be the most suitable
strategy for this task. In this review, research works on metabolomic AF analysis
are discussed according to the morbidity of interest, being preterm birth/labor, 
gestational age and diabetes and fetal malformations, along with a number of
other important studies.

PMID: 26760526  [PubMed - in process]


34. Atherosclerosis. 2016 Mar;246:50-6. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2015.12.036.
Epub 2015 Dec 28.

Myristic acid is associated to low plasma HDL cholesterol levels in a
Mediterranean population and increases HDL catabolism by enhancing HDL particles 
trapping to cell surface proteoglycans in a liver hepatoma cell model.

Noto D(1), Fayer F(1), Cefalù AB(1), Altieri I(1), Palesano O(1), Spina R(1),
Valenti V(1), Pitrone M(1), Pizzolanti G(1), Barbagallo CM(1), Giordano C(1),
Averna MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties
(DIBIMIS), University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. (2)Department of Biomedicine,
Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties (DIBIMIS), University of Palermo,
Palermo, Italy. Electronic address: avernam@mbox.unipa.it.

BACKGROUND: HDL-C plasma levels are modulated by dietary fatty acid (FA), but
studies investigating dietary supplementation in FA gave contrasting results.
Saturated FA increased HDL-C levels only in some studies. Mono-unsaturated FA
exerted a slight effect while poly-unsaturated FA mostly increased plasma HDL-C.
AIMS: This study presents two aims: i) to investigate the relationship between
HDL-C levels and plasma FA composition in a Sicilian population following a
"Mediterranean diet", ii) to investigate if FA that resulted correlated with
plasma HDL-C levels in the population study and/or very abundant in the plasma
were able to affect HDL catabolism in an "in vitro" model of cultured hepatoma
cells (HepG2).
RESULTS: plasma HDL-C levels in the population correlated negatively with
myristic acid (C14:0, ß = -0.24, p < 0.01), oleic acid (C18:1n9, ß = -0.22,
p < 0.01) and cis-11-Eicosenoic (C20:1n9, ß = -0.19, p = 0.01) and positively
with palmitoleic acid (C16:1, ß = +0.19, p = 0.03). HepG2 cells were conditioned 
with FA before evaluating HDL binding kinetics, and only C14:0 increased HDL
binding by a non-saturable pathway. After removal of heparan sulphate
proteoglycans (HSPG) by heparinases HDL binding dropped by 29% only in C14:0
conditioned cells (p < 0.05). C14:0 showed also the highest internalization of
HDL-derived cholesteryl esters (CE, +32% p = 0.01 vs. non-conditioned cells).
CONCLUSIONS: C14:0 was correlated with decreased plasma HDL-C levels in a
Mediterranean population. C14:0 might reduce HDL-C levels by increasing HDL
trapping to cell surface HSPG and CE stripping from bound HDL. Other mechanisms
are to be investigated to explain the effects of other FA on HDL metabolism.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26756970  [PubMed - in process]


35. Ann Occup Hyg. 2016 May;60(4):453-66. doi: 10.1093/annhyg/mev093. Epub 2016 Jan
10.

Relationships between Personal Measurements of 'Total' Dust, Respirable,
Thoracic, and Inhalable Aerosol Fractions in the Cement Production Industry.

Notø HP(1), Nordby KC(2), Eduard W(3).

Author information: 
(1)1.Department of Chemical and Biological Work Environment, National Institute
of Occupational Health (STAMI), PO Box 8149 Dep. N-0033, Oslo, Norway;
hno@stami.no. (2)2.Department of Occupational Medicine and Epidemiology, National
Institute of Occupational Health (STAMI), PO Box 8149 Dep. N-0033, Oslo, Norway. 
(3)1.Department of Chemical and Biological Work Environment, National Institute
of Occupational Health (STAMI), PO Box 8149 Dep. N-0033, Oslo, Norway;

AIMS: The aims of this study were to examine the relationships and establish
conversion factors between 'total' dust, respirable, thoracic, and inhalable
aerosol fractions measured by parallel personal sampling on workers from the
production departments of cement plants. 'Total' dust in this study refers to
aerosol sampled by the closed face 37-mm Millipore filter cassette.
METHODS: Side-by-side personal measurements of 'total' dust and respirable,
thoracic, and inhalable aerosol fractions were performed on workers in 17
European and Turkish cement plants. Simple linear and mixed model regressions
were used to model the associations between the samplers.
RESULTS: The total number of personal samples collected on 141 workers was 512.
Of these 8.4% were excluded leaving 469 for statistical analysis. The different
aerosol fractions contained from 90 to 130 measurements and-side-by side
measurements of all four aerosol fractions were collected on 72 workers.The
median ratios between observed results of the respirable, 'total' dust, and
inhalable fractions relative to the thoracic aerosol fractions were 0.51, 2.4,
and 5.9 respectively. The ratios between the samplers were not constant over the 
measured concentration range and were best described by regression models. Job
type, position of samplers on left or right shoulder and plant had no substantial
effect on the ratios.
CONCLUSIONS: The ratios between aerosol fractions changed with different air
concentrations. Conversion models for estimation of the fractions were
established. These models explained a high proportion of the variance (74-91%)
indicating that they are useful for the estimation of concentrations based on
measurements of a different aerosol fraction. The calculated uncertainties at
most observed concentrations were below 30% which is acceptable for comparison
with limit values (EN 482, 2012). The cement industry will therefore be able to
predict the health related aerosol fractions from their former or future
measurements of one of the fractions.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Occupational Hygiene Society.

PMID: 26755796  [PubMed - in process]


36. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2016 Mar;408(9):2215-26. doi: 10.1007/s00216-015-9229-6. Epub 
2016 Jan 11.

FragClust and TestClust, two informatics tools for chemical structure
hierarchical clustering analysis applied to lipidomics. The example of
Alzheimer's disease.

Di Gaudio F(1), Indelicato S(2), Monastero R(3), Altieri GI(4), Fayer F(4),
Palesano O(4), Fontana M(2), Cefalù AB(4), Greco M(4), Bongiorno D(5), Indelicato
S(5), Aronica A(3), Noto D(4), Averna MR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopatologia e Biotecnologie Mediche e Forensi (DiBiMEF), AOUP
''Paolo Giaccone'' University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. (2)Mass Spectrometry
Laboratory for Clinical Risk and Quality Control, A.O.U.P. "P. Giaccone",
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. (3)Department of Experimental Biomedicine 
and Clinical Neurosciences, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. (4)Department 
of Biomedicine Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, Division of Internal
Medicine and Genetic Dyslipidemias, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(5)Department of Scienze e Tecnologie Biologiche Chimiche e Farmaceutiche
(STEBICEF), University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. (6)Department of Biomedicine
Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, Division of Internal Medicine and
Genetic Dyslipidemias, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
maurizio.averna@unipa.it.

Erratum in
    Anal Bioanal Chem. 2016 Mar;408(9):2373.

Lipidomic analysis is able to measure simultaneously thousands of compounds
belonging to a few lipid classes. In each lipid class, compounds differ only by
the acyl radical, ranging between C10:0 (capric acid) and C24:0 (lignoceric
acid). Although some metabolites have a peculiar pathological role, more often
compounds belonging to a single lipid class exert the same biological effect.
Here, we present a lipidomics workflow that extracts the tandem mass spectrometry
data from individual files and uses them to group compounds into structurally
homogeneous clusters by chemical structure hierarchical clustering analysis
(CHCA). The case-to-control peak area ratios of the metabolites are then analyzed
within clusters. We created two freely available applications to assist the
workflow: FragClust to generate the tables to be subjected to CHCA, and TestClust
to perform statistical analysis on clustered data. We used the lipidomics data
from the plasma of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients in comparison with healthy
controls to test the workflow. To date, the search for plasma biomarkers in AD
has not provided reliable results. This article shows that the workflow is
helpful to understand the behavior of whole lipid classes in plasma of AD
patients. Graphical Abstract Chemical Hierarchical Cluster Analysis applied to
Lipidomics. Software assisted workflow.

PMID: 26753967  [PubMed - in process]


37. J Psychiatr Res. 2016 Mar;74:63-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2015.12.003. Epub
2015 Dec 12.

Adipokines, metabolic dysfunction and illness course in bipolar disorder.

Mansur RB(1), Rizzo LB(2), Santos CM(3), Asevedo E(3), Cunha GR(3), Noto MN(4),
Pedrini M(3), Zeni M(3), Cordeiro Q(5), McIntyre RS(6), Brietzke E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LINC), Department of
Psychiatry, Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil; Mood
Disorders Psychopharmacology Unit (MDPU), University Health Network, University
of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. Electronic address: rodrigomansur71@uol.com.br.
(2)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LINC), Department of
Psychiatry, Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil;
Department of Psychiatry, Clinic for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (3)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences (LINC), Department of Psychiatry, Federal University of São Paulo
(UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences (LINC), Department of Psychiatry, Federal University of São Paulo
(UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil; Vila Maria Outpatient Clinic in São Paulo, Brazil. 
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Irmandade da Santa Casa de Misericórdia de São Paulo
(ISCMSP), Brazil. (6)Mood Disorders Psychopharmacology Unit (MDPU), University
Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Replicated evidence indicates that individuals with BD are differentially
affected by metabolic comorbidities and that its occurrence is a critical
mediator and/or moderator of BD outcomes. This study aimed to explore the role of
adipokines on bipolar disorder (BD) course and its relationship with metabolic
comorbidities (i.e. type 2 diabetes mellitus, obesity). We measured plasma levels
of adiponectin and leptin, as well as anthropometric and metabolic parameters of 
59 patients with BD and 28 healthy volunteers. Our results showed that, in female
participants, adiponectin was lower in individuals with BD, relative to healthy
controls (p = 0.017). In the BD population, adiponectin levels were correlated
with fasting glucose (r = -0.291, p = 0.047), fasting insulin (r = -0.332,
p = 0.023), C-peptide (r = 0.040, p = 0.040), homeostatic model
assessment-insulin resistance (r = -0.411, p = 0.004), HDL (r = 0.508,
p < 0.001), VLDL (r = -0.395, p = 0.005) and triglycerides (r = -0.310,
p = 0.030). After adjustment for age, gender and BMI, individuals with BD and low
adiponectin levels (i.e. < 7.5 µg/ml), had a higher number of mood episodes
(p < 0.001), lower number of psychiatric hospitalizations (p = 0.007), higher
depressive symptoms (p < 0.001) and lower levels of functioning (p = 0.020). In
conclusion, adiponectin levels, either directly or as a proxy of metabolic
dysfunction, is independently associated with an unfavorable course of illness in
BD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26748249  [PubMed - in process]


38. COPD. 2016 Jan 8:1-8. [Epub ahead of print]

Domiciliary Non-invasive Ventilation in COPD: An International Survey of
Indications and Practices.

Crimi C(1), Noto A(2), Princi P(3), Cuvelier A(4), Masa JF(5), Simonds A(6),
Elliott MW(7), Wijkstra P(8), Windisch W(9), Nava S(10).

Author information: 
(1)a Respiratory Intensive Care Unit , Azienda Ospedaliera per l'Emergenza
Cannizzaro , Catania , Italy. (2)b Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care ,
Policlinico G. Martino , Messina , Italy. (3)c National Research Council ,
Messina , Italy. (4)d Department of Pulmonary and Intensive Care , Rouen
University Hospital , Rouen , France. (5)e Pulmonary Division, San Pedro de
Alcantara Hospital, Caceres, Spain and CIBERES, National Research Network. ISCIII
. Madrid , Spain. (6)f Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Foundation Trust,
National Institute of Health Research, Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit,
London, United Kingdom and Imperial College London, Respiratory Medicine , London
, United Kingdom. (7)g Department of Respiratory Medicine , St James's University
Hospital , Leeds , United Kingdom. (8)h Department of Pulmonary Diseases/Home
Mechanical Ventilation , University Medical Center of Groningen , Groningen ,
Netherlands. (9)i Lung Clinic, Cologne Merheim Hospital , Faculty of
Health/School of Medicine , Cologne , Germany. (10)j Alma Mater University,
Department of Clinical, Integrated and Experimental Medicine (DIMES) ,
Respiratory and Critical Care Unit , S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna ,
Italy.

Despite the fact that metanalyses and clinical guidelines do not recommend the
routine use of domiciliary non-invasive ventilation (NIV) for patients diagnosed 
with severe stable Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) and with chronic 
respiratory failure, it is common practice in some countries. We conducted an
international web-survey of physicians involved in provision of long-term NIV to 
examine patterns of domiciliary NIV use in patients diagnosed with COPD. The
response rate was 41.6%. A reduction of hospital admissions, improvements in
quality of life and dyspnea relief were considered as the main expected benefits 
for patients. Nocturnal oxygen saturation assessment was the principal procedure 
performed before NIV prescription. Recurrent exacerbations (>3) requiring NIV and
failed weaning from in hospital NIV were the most important reasons for starting 
domiciliary NIV. Pressure support ventilation (PSV) was the most common mode,
with "low" intensity settings (PSV-low) the most popular (44.4 ± 30.1%) compared 
with "high" intensity (PSV-high) strategies (26.9 ± 25.9%), with different
geographical preferences. COPD is confirmed to be a common indication for
domiciliary NIV. Recurrent exacerbations and failed weaning from in-hospital NIV 
were the main reasons for its prescription.

PMID: 26744042  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


39. Meat Sci. 2016 Apr;114:58-68. doi: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2015.12.014. Epub 2015 Dec
19.

Valorization of indigenous dairy cattle breed through salami production.

Gaglio R(1), Francesca N(2), Maniaci G(1), Corona O(1), Alfonzo A(1), Giosuè
C(1), Di Noto A(3), Cardamone C(3), Sardina MT(1), Portolano B(1), Alabiso M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento Scienze Agrarie e Forestali, Università degli Studi di Palermo,
Viale delle Scienze 4, 90128 Palermo, Italy. (2)Dipartimento Scienze Agrarie e
Forestali, Università degli Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze 4, 90128
Palermo, Italy. Electronic address: nicola.francesca@unipa.it. (3)Istituto
Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Sicilia "Adelmo Mirri", via G. Marinuzzi 3,
90129 Palermo, Italy.

The aim of the research was to produce salami manufactured with meat of three
different commercial categories of bovine breed: cow on retirement, beef and
young bull. A total of six experimental productions, at small-scale plant, were
carried out with and without starter culture inoculums. The evolution of
physico-chemical parameters in all trials followed the trend already registered
for other fermented meat products. Several LAB species were found during process 
with different levels of species diversity and frequency of isolation among
inoculated (mainly Pediococcus pentosaceus and Staphylococcus xylosus) and
uninoculated (mainly Enterococcus devriesei, Lactobacillus curvatus and
Lactobacillus sakei) trials. Enterobacteriaceae were found at very low levels
during the entire ripening period and no pathogenic bacteria were found in any
samples. The multivariate analysis showed that starter inoculums and meat
affected significantly the physico-chemical and the microbiological composition
of salami. The sensory analysis evidenced the highest overall acceptability was
displayed by salami produced with meat from cow on retirement.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26735574  [PubMed - in process]


40. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 6;6:18769. doi: 10.1038/srep18769.

Embelin binds to human neuroserpin and impairs its polymerisation.

Saga G(1), Sessa F(1), Barbiroli A(2), Santambrogio C(3), Russo R(4), Sala M(3), 
Raccosta S(5), Martorana V(5), Caccia S(6), Noto R(5), Moriconi C(7), Miranda
E(7), Grandori R(3), Manno M(5), Bolognesi M(1,)(8), Ricagno S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Bioscienze and CIMAINA, Università degli Studi di Milano,
Milan, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Scienze per gli Alimenti, la Nutrizione e
l'Ambiente, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di
Biotecnologie e Bioscienze, Università Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy.
(4)Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia Medico-Chirurgica e dei Trapianti, Università
degli Studi di Milano Italy. (5)Istituto di Biofisica, National Research Council 
of Italy, Palermo, Italy. (6)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina
traslazionale, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy. (7)Dipartimento di
Biologia e Biotecnologie Charles Darwin, and Istituto Pasteur - Fondazione
Cenci-Bolognetti, Sapienza Università di Roma, Rome, Italy. (8)Istituto di
Biofisica, National Research Council of Italy, c/o Dipartimento di Bioscienze,
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.

Neuroserpin (NS) is a serpin inhibitor of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) in
the brain. The polymerisation of NS pathologic mutants is responsible for a
genetic dementia known as familial encephalopathy with neuroserpin inclusion
bodies (FENIB). So far, a pharmacological treatment of FENIB, i.e. an inhibitor
of NS polymerisation, remains an unmet challenge. Here, we present a biophysical 
characterisation of the effects caused by embelin (EMB a small natural compound) 
on NS conformers and NS polymerisation. EMB destabilises all known NS conformers,
specifically binding to NS molecules with a 1:1 NS:EMB molar ratio without
unfolding the NS fold. In particular, NS polymers disaggregate in the presence of
EMB, and their formation is prevented. The NS/EMB complex does not inhibit tPA
proteolytic activity. Both effects are pharmacologically relevant: firstly by
inhibiting the NS polymerisation associated to FENIB, and secondly by potentially
antagonizing metastatic processes facilitated by NS activity in the brain.

PMCID: PMC4702122
PMID: 26732982  [PubMed - in process]


41. Gut Microbes. 2015 Nov 2;6(6):377-81. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2015.1105426.

Helicobacter pylori and CagA under conditions of iron deficiency.

Noto JM(1), Peek RM Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine ; V anderbilt
University Medical Center ; Nashville , TN USA.

Iron deficiency is the most common nutritional deficiency worldwide and
compelling evidence has demonstrated that this condition heightens the risk of
gastric cancer. Infection with Helicobacter pylori is the strongest known risk
factor for the development of gastric adenocarcinoma. Recent work has
demonstrated that, under conditions of iron deficiency, H. pylori-induced gastric
carcinogenesis is augmented through increased formation of the strain-specific
cag type IV secretion system and enhanced delivery of the bacterial oncoprotein
CagA into host cells. Although CagA is a potent virulence factor that promotes
oncogenic responses, additional studies have now demonstrated that CagA modulates
host cell iron homeostasis in vitro and fundamental metabolic functions of the
bacterial cell in vivo. Here we discuss these findings and describe working
models by which CagA exerts its effects on gastric epithelial cells, with
particular emphasis on its potential role in modulation of host iron homeostasis.

PMID: 26727420  [PubMed - in process]


42. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2015 Dec;56(12):2467-71. doi: 10.11406/rinketsu.56.2467.

[Achievement of deep molecular response in an elderly chronic myeloid leukemia
patient intolerant to imatinib and nilotinib].

[Article in Japanese]

Kurimoto M(1), Nagata A, Sekiguchi N, Noto S, Takezako N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, National Hospital Organization Disaster Medical
Center.

A 90-year-old woman was diagnosed with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) of the high
risk type (Sokal score 1.5), and was administered imatinib (400 mg/day). However,
imatinib had to be switched to nilotinib because she suffered persistent vomiting
and nausea. Although a cytogenetic response was achieved, the nilotinib
administration also had to be stopped because the patient developed QTc
prolongation and heart failure. After she had recovered from heart failure, the
patient was given dasatinib (50 mg/day). No non-hematological adverse events
occurred and she achieved a molecular response with administration of dasatinib. 
A molecular response can be achieved through appropriate supportive care and
careful selection of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, with adjustments in the doses of
these drugs administered to patients with the high-risk form of CML who are
intolerant to imatinib.

PMID: 26725357  [PubMed - in process]


43. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Apr;1860(4):661-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2015.12.024. 
Epub 2015 Dec 23.

A new potential spreading factor: Streptomyces koganeiensis hyaluronidase. A
comparative study with bovine testes hyaluronidase and recombinant human
hyaluronidase of the HA degradation in ECM.

Pavan M(1), Beninatto R(1), Galesso D(1), Panfilo S(1), Vaccaro S(2), Messina
L(2), Guarise C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Fidia Farmaceutici S.p.A., via Ponte della Fabbrica 3/A, 35031 Abano Terme,
(PD), Italy. (2)Fidia Farmaceutici S.p.A., Contrada Pizzuta snc, 96017 Local Unit
Noto, (SR), Italy. (3)Fidia Farmaceutici S.p.A., via Ponte della Fabbrica 3/A,
35031 Abano Terme, (PD), Italy. Electronic address: cguarise@fidiapharma.it.

BACKGROUND: Recombinant human hyaluronidase has been used in the interstitial
matrix to promote the dispersion of therapeutics. The production and isolation of
an extracellular hyaluronidase from Streptomyces koganeiensis (rHyal_Sk) has
recently been described.
METHODS: The specificity of rHyal_Sk has been assessed against heparan sulfate,
chondroitin sulfates and sulfated HAs. The oligomers generated by HA degradation 
have been investigated by MALDI-TOF MS analysis. rHyal_Sk has been compared with 
BTH and PH20 in vitro, against cross-linked HA (ACP) and HA-aggrecan complex, and
in vivo, by means of a diffusion assay in nude mice.
RESULTS: Depolymerization of HA by rHyal_Sk gave tetra-, hexa- and
octasaccharides in high yields. The reaction mechanism and the high HA
specificity were demonstrated. The in vivo diffusion assay, supported by the in
vitro tests, evidenced an initially enhanced enzymatic activity of rHyal_Sk
compared to BTH and PH20.
CONCLUSIONS: rHyal_Sk, compared to BTH and PH20, showed higher substrate
specificity and no inhibition from GAGs sulfate, together with a superior
performance for HA depolymerization in ECM. As better predictive tests for the in
vivo activity of hyaluronidase we developed two assays based on the degradation
of ACP or of the HA-aggrecan complex.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: rHyal_Sk is a new potential spreading factor for
intradermal drug administration. Hyaluronidases of distinct classes, that show
equivalent activities in a common turbidimetric assay, could have different
potencies and dose-efficacies in vivo which influences the therapeutic effect.
The new proposed in vitro tests are designed to obtain a predictive
characterization of the enzyme activity in vivo.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26723173  [PubMed - in process]


44. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2016 Jan 20;18(4):2369-78. doi: 10.1039/c5cp04090f.

Dielectric relaxations of polyether-based polyurethanes containing ionic liquids 
as antistatic agents.

Tsurumaki A(1), Bertasi F(2), Vezzù K(3), Negro E(3), Di Noto V(2), Ohno H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Global Innovation Research Organization, Tokyo University of Agriculture and
Technology, 2-24-16 Naka-cho, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan. ohnoh@cc.tuat.ac.jp
and Department of Biotechnology, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, 
Japan. (2)Section of Chemistry for Technology, Department of Industrial
Engineering, University of Padua, Via Marzolo 1, in Department of Chemical
Sciences, I-35131 Padova (PD), Italy and IENI-CNR, via Marzolo 1, Padova, Italy. 
(3)Section of Chemistry for Technology, Department of Industrial Engineering,
University of Padua, Via Marzolo 1, in Department of Chemical Sciences, I-35131
Padova (PD), Italy.

Dielectric properties of polyurethanes containing poly(propylene oxide) (PO) and 
poly(ethylene oxide) (EO) units are discussed, along with the results of direct
current (DC) measurements and broadband electrical spectroscopy (BES) studies.
The dielectric properties of polyether-containing polyurethanes (PUs) are
compared to those of PUs containing 1000 ppm of ionic liquids (ILs) as antistatic
agents. The effects of the chemical environment of these ILs, including
anion-fixed polymers (PU-AF), cation-fixed polymers (PU-CF), and a simple mixture
of IL with the PUs (PU-IL), are compared and discussed on the basis of ion
mobility. DC measurements suggest that the charge current is attributed not only 
to the electrode polarization but also to continuous dielectric relaxation. BES
studies elucidate that both fast and slow relaxations are taking place in EO-rich
domains in pristine PU and PU-AF. The activation energies of the slow relaxation 
and of the ionic conductivity are similar, suggesting that the ionic conductivity
of these materials is attributed to the ion exchange reaction in EO/ion
complexes. In contrast, only fast relaxations are observed in the domains mostly 
comprised of ion-depleted EO in the PUs containing "free" anions, i.e., PU-CF and
PU-IL. This suggests that [Tf2N](-) ligands are weakly interacting with the EO
chains and contribute effectively to the ion conduction. Thus, enhanced ionic
conductivity is observed in PU-CF and PU-IL, yielding sufficient antistatic
effects. Taking into account its long shelf life, arising from the lack of IL
bleed-out, PU-CF is concluded to be the most promising candidate.

PMID: 26700822  [PubMed - in process]


45. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2015 Dec;37(4):343-9. doi: 10.1590/1516-4446-2014-1620.

Early stages of bipolar disorder: characterization and strategies for early
intervention.

Rios AC(1), Noto MN(1), Rizzo LB(2), Mansur R(1), Martins FE Jr(1),
Grassi-Oliveira R(3), Correll CU(4), Brietzke E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program for Recognition and Intervention in Individuals in At-Risk Mental
States (PRISMA), Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São
Paulo, SP, Brazil. (2)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences
(LINC), Department of Psychiatry, UNIFESP, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(3)Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience Research Group (GNCD), Centre of Studies 
and Research in Traumatic Stress (NEPTE), Biomedical Research Institute,
Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. 
(4)The Zucker Hillside Hospital, Psychiatry Research, North Shore - Long Island
Jewish Health System, Glen Oaks, New York, NY, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the early stages of bipolar disorder (BD), defined as 
the clinical prodrome/subsyndromal stage and first-episode phase, and strategies 
for their respective treatment.
METHODS: A selective literature search of the PubMed, Embase, PsycINFO, and ISI
databases from inception until March 2014 was performed. Included in this review 
were articles that a) characterized prodromal and first-episode stages of BD or
b) detailed efficacy and safety/tolerability of interventions in patients
considered prodromal for BD or those with only one episode of mania/hypomania.
RESULTS: As research has only recently focused on characterization of the early
phase of BD, there is little evidence for the effectiveness of any treatment
option in the early phase of BD. Case management; individual, group, and family
therapy; supportive therapy; and group psychoeducation programs have been
proposed. Most evidence-based treatment guidelines for BD do not address
treatment specifically in the context of the early stages of illness. Evidence
for pharmacotherapy is usually presented in relation to illness polarity (i.e.,
manic/mixed or depressed) or treatment phase.
CONCLUSIONS: Although early recognition and treatment are critical to preventing 
unfavorable outcomes, there is currently little evidence for interventions in
these stages of BD.

PMID: 26692432  [PubMed - in process]


46. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2015 Dec;37(4):280-8. doi: 10.1590/1516-4446-2014-1641.

Clinical characteristics and influence of childhood trauma on the prodrome of
bipolar disorder.

Noto MN(1), Noto C(1), Caribé AC(2), Miranda-Scippa Â(2), Nunes SO(3), Chaves
AC(4), Amino D(5), Grassi-Oliveira R(6), Correll CU(7), Brietzke E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program for Recognition and Intervention in Individuals in At-Risk Mental
States (PRISMA), Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo
(UNIFESP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (2)Program of Mood and Anxiety Disorders
(CETHA), Universidade Federal da Bahia (UFBA), Salvador, BA, Brazil.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine, Health Sciences Center, Universidade Estadual
de Londrina (UEL), Londrina, PR, Brazil. (4)First Psychotic Episode Program,
Department of Psychiatry, UNIFESP, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (5)Ambulatório Médico
de Especialidades (AME) Dra. Jandira Masur, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(6)Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience Research Group (GNCD), Center of Studies 
and Research in Trauma and Stress (NEPTE), Biomedical Research Institute (IPB),
Pontificia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Porto Alegre, RS, 
Brazil. (7)The Zucker Hillside Hospital, Psychiatry Research, North Shore - Long 
Island Jewish Health System, Glen Oaks, NY, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To describe the onset pattern, frequency, and severity of the signs
and symptoms of the prodrome of the first hypomanic/manic episode and first
depressive episode of bipolar disorder (BD) and to investigate the influence of a
history of childhood maltreatment on the expression of prodromal symptoms.
METHODS: Using a semi-structured interview, the Bipolar Prodrome Symptom
Scale-Retrospective (BPSS-R), information regarding prodromal symptoms was
assessed from patients with a DSM-IV diagnosis of BD. History of childhood
maltreatment was evaluated using the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ).
RESULTS: Forty-three individuals with stable BD were included. On average, the
prodrome of mania lasted 35.8±68.7 months and was predominantly subacute or
insidious, with rare acute presentations. The prodrome of depression lasted
16.6±23.3 months and was also predominantly subacute or insidious, with few acute
presentations. The prodromal symptoms most frequently reported prior to the first
hypomanic or manic episode were mood lability, depressive mood, and impatience. A
history of childhood abuse and neglect was reported by 81.4% of participants.
Presence of childhood maltreatment was positively associated with prodromal
symptoms, including social withdrawal, decreased functioning, and anhedonia.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence of a long-lasting, symptomatic prodrome
prior to first hypomanic/manic and depressive episode in BD and suggests that a
history of childhood maltreatment influences the manifestations of this prodrome.

PMID: 26692427  [PubMed - in process]


47. Phys Rev Lett. 2015 Dec 4;115(23):231802. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.115.231802.
Epub 2015 Dec 3.

Test of Electric Charge Conservation with Borexino.

Agostini M(1,)(2), Appel S(1), Bellini G(3), Benziger J(4), Bick D(5), Bonfini
G(6), Bravo D(7), Caccianiga B(3), Calaprice F(8,)(2), Caminata A(9), Cavalcante 
P(6), Chepurnov A(10), D'Angelo D(3), Davini S(2), Derbin A(11), Di Noto L(9),
Drachnev I(2), Empl A(12), Etenko A(13), Fomenko K(14), Franco D(15), Gabriele
F(6), Galbiati C(3,)(8), Ghiano C(9), Giammarchi M(3), Goeger-Neff M(1), Goretti 
A(6,)(8), Gromov M(10,)(16), Hagner C(5), Hungerford E(12), Ianni A(6,)(17),
Ianni A(6,)(8), Jedrzejczak K(18), Kaiser M(5), Kobychev V(19), Korablev D(14),
Korga G(6), Kryn D(15), Laubenstein M(6), Lehnert B(20), Litvinovich E(13,)(21), 
Lombardi F(6), Lombardi P(3), Ludhova L(3), Lukyanchenko G(13), Machulin
I(13,)(21), Manecki S(7), Maneschg W(22), Marcocci S(2), Meroni E(3), Meyer M(5),
Miramonti L(3), Misiaszek M(18,)(6), Montuschi M(23), Mosteiro P(8), Muratova
V(11), Neumair B(1), Oberauer L(1), Obolensky M(15), Ortica F(24), Otis K(25),
Pallavicini M(9), Papp L(1), Perasso L(9), Pocar A(25), Ranucci G(3), Razeto
A(6), Re A(3), Romani A(24), Roncin R(15,)(6), Rossi N(6), Schönert S(1), Semenov
D(11), Simgen H(22), Skorokhvatov M(13,)(21), Smirnov O(14), Sotnikov A(14),
Sukhotin S(13), Suvorov Y(26), Tartaglia R(6), Testera G(9), Thurn J(20),
Toropova M(13), Unzhakov E(11), Vishneva A(14), Vogelaar RB(7), von Feilitzsch
F(1), Wang H(26), Weinz S(27), Winter J(27), Wojcik M(18), Wurm M(27), Yokley
Z(7), Zaimidoroga O(14), Zavatarelli S(9), Zuber K(20), Zuzel G(18); Borexino
Collaboration.

Author information: 
(1)Physik-Department and Excellence Cluster Universe, Technische Universität
München, 85748 Garching, Germany. (2)Gran Sasso Science Institute (INFN), 67100
L'Aquila, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Fisica, Università degli Studi e INFN, 20133 
Milano, Italy. (4)Chemical Engineering Department, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA. (5)Institut für Experimentalphysik, Universität
Hamburg, 22761 Hamburg, Germany. (6)INFN Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso,
67010 Assergi (AQ), Italy. (7)Physics Department, Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061, USA. (8)Physics Department,
Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA. (9)Dipartimento di
Fisica, Università degli Studi e INFN, 16146 Genova, Italy. (10)Lomonosov Moscow 
State University Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics, 119234 Moscow, Russia. 
(11)St. Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute NRC Kurchatov Institute, 188350
Gatchina, Russia. (12)Department of Physics, University of Houston, Houston,
Texas 77204, USA. (13)NRC Kurchatov Institute, 123182 Moscow, Russia. (14)Joint
Institute for Nuclear Research, 141980 Dubna, Russia. (15)AstroParticule et
Cosmologie, Université Paris Diderot, CNRS/IN2P3, CEA/IRFU, Observatoire de
Paris, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75205 Paris Cedex 13, France. (16)Lomonosov Moscow
State University Faculty of Physics, 119234 Moscow, Russia. (17)Laboratorio
Subterráneo de Canfranc, Paseo de los Ayerbe S/N, 22880 Canfranc, Estacion
Huesca, Spain. (18)M. Smoluchowski Institute of Physics, Jagiellonian University,
30348 Krakow, Poland. (19)Kiev Institute for Nuclear Research, 03680 Kiev,
Ukraine. (20)Department of Physics, Technische Universität Dresden, 01062
Dresden, Germany. (21)National Research Nuclear University MEPhI (Moscow
Engineering Physics Institute), 115409 Moscow, Russia. (22)Max-Planck-Institut
für Kernphysik, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany. (23)Dipartimento di Fisica e Scienze
della Terra Università degli Studi di Ferrara e INFN, 44122 Ferrara, Italy.
(24)Dipartimento di Chimica, Biologia e Biotecnologie, Università e INFN, 06123
Perugia, Italy. (25)Amherst Center for Fundamental Interactions and Physics
Department, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts 01003, USA.
(26)Physics and Astronomy Department, University of California Los Angeles
(UCLA), Los Angeles, California 90095, USA. (27)Institute of Physics and
Excellence Cluster PRISMA, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, 55099 Mainz,
Germany.

Borexino is a liquid scintillation detector located deep underground at the
Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso (LNGS, Italy). Thanks to the unmatched radio 
purity of the scintillator, and to the well understood detector response at low
energy, a new limit on the stability of the electron for decay into a neutrino
and a single monoenergetic photon was obtained. This new bound, t=6.6×10^{28}<U+2009><U+2009>yr
at 90% C.L., is 2 orders of magnitude better than the previous limit.

PMID: 26684111  [PubMed - in process]


48. Sci Total Environ. 2016 Feb 15;544:515-24. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.12.004. 
Epub 2015 Dec 8.

Co-evolution of hydrological components under climate change scenarios in the
Mediterranean area.

Viola F(1), Francipane A(2), Caracciolo D(2), Pumo D(2), La Loggia G(2), Noto
LV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Ingegneria Civile, Ambientale, Aerospaziale, dei Materiali,
Università degli Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Edificio 8, 90128
Palermo, Italy. Electronic address: francesco.viola77@unipa.it. (2)Dipartimento
di Ingegneria Civile, Ambientale, Aerospaziale, dei Materiali, Università degli
Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Edificio 8, 90128 Palermo, Italy.

The Mediterranean area is historically characterized by high human pressure on
water resources. Today, while climate is projected to be modified in the future, 
through precipitation decrease and temperature increase, that jointly and
non-linearly may affect runoff, concerns about water availability are increasing.
For these reasons, quantitative assessment of future modifications in the mean
annual water availability are important; likewise, the description of the future 
interannual variability of some hydrological components such as runoff and
evapotranspiration are highly wished for water management and ecosystems dynamics
analyses. This study investigates at basin spatial scale future runoff and
evapotranspiration, exploring their probability density functions and their
interdependence as functions of climatic changes. In order to do that, a
parsimonious conceptual lumped model is here used. The model is forced by
different future climate scenarios, generated through a weather generator based
on a stochastic downscaling of an ensemble of General Circulation Models (GCMs)
realizations. The use of the adopted hydrological model, under reliable
stochastic future climate scenarios, allows to project future values of
evapotranspiration and runoff in a probabilistic framework and, at the same time,
the evaluation of their bivariate frequency distributions for changes through the
Multivariate Kernel Density Estimation method. As a case study, a benchmark
Mediterranean watershed has been proposed (Imera Meridionale, Italy). Results
suggest a radical shift and shape modification of the annual runoff and
evapotranspiration probability density functions. Possible implications and
impacts on water resources management are here addressed and discussed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26674680  [PubMed - in process]


49. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2015 May 11;2:22. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2015.00022. eCollection
2015.

Role of Nutraceuticals in Hypolipidemic Therapy.

Barbagallo CM(1), Cefalù AB(1), Noto D(1), Averna MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Department of Internal Medicine and Specialistics (DIBIMIS),
University of Palermo , Palermo , Italy.

Nutraceuticals are food components or active ingredients present in foods and
used in therapy. This article analyzes the characteristics of the molecules with 
a lipid-lowering effect. The different nutraceuticals may have different
mechanisms of action: inhibition of cholesterol synthesis primarily through
action on the enzyme HMG-CoA reductase (policosanol, polyphenols, garlic and,
above all, red yeast rice), increase in LDL receptor activity (berberine),
reduction of intestinal cholesterol absorption (garlic, plant sterols,
probiotics), and also the ability to interfere with bile metabolism (probiotics, 
guggul). Based on the different mechanisms of action, some nutraceuticals are
then able to enhance the action of statins. Nutraceuticals are often used without
relevant evidence: mechanisms of action are not clearly confirmed; most of
clinical data are derived from small, uncontrolled studies, and finally, except
for fermented red rice, there are no clinical trials which may document the
relationship between these interventions and the reduction of clinical events.
Therefore, among all nutraceuticals, it is necessary to extrapolate those having 
a really documentable efficacy. However, these kinds of treatments are usually
well-tolerated by patients. Overall, subjects with a middle or low cardiovascular
risk are the best indication of nutraceuticals, but they may also be useful for
patients experiencing side effects during classical therapies. Finally, in
consideration of the additive effect of some nutraceuticals, a combination
therapy with classical drugs may improve the achievement of clinical targets.
Thus, nutraceuticals may be a helpful alternative in hypolipidemic treatment and,
if properly used, might represent a valid strategy of cardiovascular prevention.

PMCID: PMC4671351
PMID: 26664894  [PubMed]


50. J Biol Chem. 2016 Jan 29;291(5):2345-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.664003. Epub 2015 
Dec 7.

Evidence for Conservation of the Calcitonin Superfamily and Activity-regulating
Mechanisms in the Basal Chordate Branchiostoma floridae: INSIGHTS INTO THE
MOLECULAR AND FUNCTIONAL EVOLUTION IN CHORDATES.

Sekiguchi T(1), Kuwasako K(2), Ogasawara M(3), Takahashi H(4), Matsubara S(5),
Osugi T(5), Muramatsu I(6), Sasayama Y(7), Suzuki N(7), Satake H(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Noto Marine Laboratory, Division of Marine Environmental Studies,
Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology, Kanazawa University, Housu-gun,
Ishikawa 927-0553, Japan, t-sekiguchi@se.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (2)the Frontier
Science Research Center, University of Miyazaki, 5200 Kihara, Kiyotake, Miyazaki,
Miyazaki 889-1692, Japan. (3)the Department of Nanobiology, Graduate School of
Advanced Integration Science, Chiba University, 1-33 Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba
263-8522, Japan. (4)the Laboratory of Morphogenesis, National Institute for Basic
Biology, 38 Nishigonaka Myodaiji, Okazaki 444-8585, Japan. (5)the Bioorganic
Research Institute, Suntory Foundation for Life Sciences, 8-1-1, Seikadai,
Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto 619-0284, Japan, and. (6)the Department of
Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Kanazawa Medical University, Uchinada, Ishikawa
920-0293, Japan. (7)From the Noto Marine Laboratory, Division of Marine
Environmental Studies, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology, Kanazawa
University, Housu-gun, Ishikawa 927-0553, Japan.

The calcitonin (CT)/CT gene-related peptide (CGRP) family is conserved in
vertebrates. The activities of this peptide family are regulated by a combination
of two receptors, namely the calcitonin receptor (CTR) and the CTR-like receptor 
(CLR), and three receptor activity-modifying proteins (RAMPs). Furthermore, RAMPs
act as escort proteins by translocating CLR to the cell membrane. Recently,
CT/CGRP family peptides have been identified or inferred in several
invertebrates. However, the molecular characteristics and relevant functions of
the CTR/CLR and RAMPs in invertebrates remain unclear. In this study, we
identified three CT/CGRP family peptides (Bf-CTFPs), one CTR/CLR-like receptor
(Bf-CTFP-R), and three RAMP-like proteins (Bf-RAMP-LPs) in the basal chordate
amphioxus (Branchiostoma floridae). The Bf-CTFPs were shown to possess an
N-terminal circular region typical of the CT/CGRP family and a C-terminal
Pro-NH2. The Bf-CTFP genes were expressed in the central nervous system and in
endocrine cells of the midgut, indicating that Bf-CTFPs serve as brain and/or gut
peptides. Cell surface expression of the Bf-CTFP-R was enhanced by co-expression 
with each Bf-RAMP-LP. Furthermore, Bf-CTFPs activated Bf-CTFP-R·Bf-RAMP-LP
complexes, resulting in cAMP accumulation. These results confirmed that
Bf-RAMP-LPs, like vertebrate RAMPs, are prerequisites for the function and
translocation of the Bf-CTFP-R. The relative potencies of the three peptides at
each receptor were similar. Bf-CTFP2 was a potent ligand at all receptors in cAMP
assays. Bf-RAMP-LP effects on ligand potency order were distinct to vertebrate
CGRP/adrenomedullin/amylin receptors. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first molecular and functional characterization of an authentic invertebrate
CT/CGRP family receptor and RAMPs.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4732217 [Available on 2017-01-29]
PMID: 26644465  [PubMed - in process]


51. Zootaxa. 2015 Nov 11;4040(3):359-70. doi: 10.11646/zootaxa.4040.3.7.

Three new species of Dysponetus Levinsen, 1879 (Polychaeta: Chrysopetalidae) from
the South Atlantic and Southern Ocean, with a re-description of Dysponetus
bulbosus Hartmann-Schröder, 1982.

Darbyshire T(1), Brewin PE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Natural Sciences, Amgueddfa Cymru-National Museum Wales, Cathays
Park, Cardiff CF10 3NP, Wales, U.K.; Email: Teresa.Darbyshire@museumwales.ac.uk. 
(2)Shallow Marine Surveys Group, 2 Philomel Pl, Stanley, Falkland Islands, FIQQ
1ZZ, South Atlantic Government of South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands,
Government House, Stanley, Falkland Islands, FIQQ 1ZZ, South Atlantic; Email:
unknown.

Three new species of Dysponetus (Polychaeta: Chrysopetalidae) are described from 
the South Atlantic and Southern Ocean: Dysponetus ovalisetosus n. sp. from the
Falkland Islands, Dysponetus bricklei n. sp. from South Georgia and Dysponetus
antarcticus n. sp. from Antarctica are all characterized by having notochaetae
that are oval in cross-section in contrast to the D-shape described for seven of 
the other species of Dysponetus. Dysponetus antarcticus n. sp. is the most
distinct due to the combination of both a ventral cirrus on segment 3 and four
eyes. Formerly mis-identified as Dysponetus bulbosus Hartmann-Schröder, 1982, it 
was discovered while clarifying the contradictory descriptions of that species
published by Hartmann-Schröder in 1982 and 1986. Dysponetus bulbosus is
re-described and newly figured. Dysponetus bricklei n. sp. and Dysponetus
ovalisetosus n. sp. can be determined by comparing several characters including
position of the median antenna, shape of the palps and cirri, and the number and 
shape of both the noto- and neurochaetae.

PMID: 26624671  [PubMed - in process]


52. Zootaxa. 2015 Nov 6;4039(4):501-15. doi: 10.11646/zootaxa.4039.4.1.

Redescription of Tharyx killariensis (Southern) from Ireland and description of
two new species of Tharyx from the Kattegat, Sweden (Polychaeta, Cirratulidae).

Blake JA(1), Göransson P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Aquatic Research & Consulting, 24 Hitty Tom Road, Duxbury, MA 02232 USA.;
Email: jablake9@gmail.com. (2)Kustgatan 40 B, 252 70 Råå, Sweden; Email: unknown.

Two new species of the cirratulid genus Tharyx are reported from shallow waters
in the Kattegat inshore Sweden. In addition, the lectotype of Tharyx killariensis
(Southern, 1914) is redescribed resulting in a revised concept of the noto- and
neuropodial acicular spines of posterior parapodia for that species. These spines
were originally reported as bidentate crotchets with sharply pointed teeth; in
reality the spines have blunt, knob-shaped tips, typical of several other species
of Tharyx. Both of the new species are atypical for the genus Tharyx. T. maryae
n. sp. has an expanded posterior end more typical of the genus Aphelochaeta, but 
otherwise shares characters of Tharyx. T. robustus n. sp. has a body shape that
is consistently broad and dorsoventrally flattened throughout, rather than
elongate and narrow as in other species of the genus. Both of the new species,
however, have short, blunt-tipped spines in far posterior parapodia. With the
addition of the two new species, the genus Tharyx now includes 11 species that
are compared and contrasted. Morphology that defines and characterizes species of
Tharyx is reviewed.

PMID: 26624637  [PubMed - in process]


53. Zootaxa. 2015 Oct 21;4033(1):57-93. doi: 10.11646/zootaxa.4033.1.3.

New species of Scalibregmatidae (Annelida, Polychaeta) from the East Antarctic
Peninsula including a description of the ecology and post-larval development of
species of Scalibregma and Oligobregma.

Blake JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aquatic Research & Consulting, 24 Hitty Tom Road, Duxbury, MA 02332 USA.
University of Massachusetts, Boston, 100 Morrissey Blvd., Boston, MA 02125 USA.; 
Email: jablake9@gmail.com.

A large collection of scalibregmatid polychaetes from the east Antarctic
Peninsula in May 2000 has yielded specimens of three new species of Scalibregma, 
Pseudoscalibregma, and Oligobregma. The new species of Scalibregma is represented
by more than 400 specimens that include post-larval and juvenile forms which, for
the first time, provide data on the sequence of development of key characters of 
a scalibregmatid. These data demonstrate that taxonomic characters including the 
form of the prostomium and presence of branchiae develop late in ontogeny and
that small specimens cannot be reliably referred to a species or genus without a 
growth sequence. Juvenile morphology is also presented for the new species of
Oligobregma. The new species of Scalibregma is compared with five northern
hemisphere species and differs in details of the peristomium, upper and lower
lips of the mouth, dorsal and ventral cirri, and nature of the short spinous
setae of setiger 1. The new species of Pseudoscalibregma is unique in the nature 
of asymmetrical ventral cirri of posterior setigers. The new species of
Oligobregma has large acicular spines in both noto- and neuropodia and these are 
present in juveniles. However, the final adult configuration of the prostomium is
not evident until late in development. The taxonomic significance of the timing
of development of post-larval and juvenile morphology elucidated in this study is
discussed in relation to the validity of certain taxa and the current system of
genera used in the family.

PMID: 26624392  [PubMed - in process]


54. Trends Cancer. 2015 Oct 1;1(2):136-144.

Micronutrients: A double-edged sword in microbial-induced gastric carcinogenesis.

Noto JM(1), Peek RM Jr(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, 2215 Garland Avenue, MRB IV 1030C, Nashville, TN 37232-0252, , , 
jennifer.noto@vanderbilt.edu. (2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of
Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 2215 Garland Avenue MRB IV 1030C,
Nashville, TN 37232-0252, , , richard.peek@vanderbilt.edu.

Epidemiologic studies throughout the world have uniformly demonstrated
significant relationships between the intake of dietary micronutrients and
gastric cancer risk. An exciting concept that has gained considerable traction
recently is that micronutrients modulate gene expression within Helicobacter
pylori, the strongest identified risk factor for gastric carcinogenesis. We
present evidence here that essential micronutrients have a direct effect on H.
pylori virulence, which subsequently affects interactions at the host-pathogen
interface, thereby facilitating the development of premalignant and malignant
lesions in the stomach. Further, these fundamental concepts provide a framework
for understanding mechanisms driving the development of other malignancies that
arise from foci of gastrointestinal inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4662415 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26623443  [PubMed]


55. Mol Med. 2015 Nov 16. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2015.00177. [Epub ahead of print]

Erythropoietin for the treatment of subarachnoid hemorrhage: A feasible
ingredient for a successful medical recipe.

Grasso G(1), Tomasello G(2), Noto M(3), Alafaci C(4), Cappello F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Neurosurgical Clinic, Department of Experimental Biomedicine and Clinical
Neurosciences, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. (2)Section of Anatomy,
Department of Experimental Biomedicine and Clinical Neurosciences, University of 
Palermo, Palermo, Italy. (3)AOU Policlinico of Palermo, University of Palermo,
Palermo, Italy. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Messina, Italy.

Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) following aneurysm bleeding accounts for 6% to 8%
of all cerebrovascular accidents. Although an aneurysm can be effectively managed
by surgery or endovascular therapy, delayed cerebral ischemia is diagnosed in a
high percentage of patients resulting in significant morbidity and mortality.
Cerebral vasospasm occurs in more than half of all patients after aneurysm
rupture and is recognized as the leading cause of delayed cerebral ischemia after
SAH. Hemodynamic strategies and endovascular procedures may be considered for the
treatment of cerebral vasospasm.In recent years, the mechanisms contributing to
the development of vasospasm, abnormal reactivity of cerebral arteries and
cerebral ischemia following SAH, have been intensively investigated. A number of 
pathological processes have been identified in the pathogenesis of vasospasm
including endothelial injury, smooth muscle cell contraction from spasmogenic
substances produced by the subarachnoid blood clots, changes in vascular
responsiveness and inflammatory response of the vascular endothelium. To date,
the current therapeutic interventions remain ineffective being limited to the
manipulation of systemic blood pressure, variation of blood volume and viscosity,
and control of arterial carbon dioxide tension.In this scenario, the hormone
erythropoietin (EPO), has been found to exert neuroprotective action during
experimental SAH when its recombinant form (rHuEPO) is systemically administered.
However, recent translation of experimental data into clinical trials has
suggested an unclear role of recombinant human EPO in the setting of SAH.In this 
context, the aim of the current review is to present current evidence on the
potential role of EPO in cerebrovascular dysfunction following aneurysmal
subarachnoid hemorrhage.

PMID: 26581085  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


56. Int Urol Nephrol. 2016 Feb;48(2):169-74. doi: 10.1007/s11255-015-1162-2. Epub
2015 Nov 17.

Bladder recovery relates with increased mid-cingulate perfusion after shunt
surgery in idiopathic normal-pressure hydrocephalus: a single-photon emission
tomography study.

Sakakibara R(1,)(2), Uchida Y(3), Ishii K(4), Hashimoto M(5), Ishikawa M(6),
Kazui H(7), Yamamoto T(8), Uchiyama T(9), Tateno F(10), Kishi M(10), Tsuyusaki
Y(10), Aiba Y(10), Tateno H(10), Nagao T(11), Terada H(12), Inaoka T(12); Members
of SINPHONI (Study of Idiopathic Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus On Neurological
Improvement).

Author information: 
(1)Neurology Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Sakura Medical Center,
Toho University, 564-1 Shimoshizu, Sakura, 285-8741, Japan.
sakakibara@sakura.med.toho-u.ac.jp. (2)Neurology, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.
sakakibara@sakura.med.toho-u.ac.jp. (3)Radiology, Sanno Hospital, Chiba, Japan.
(4)Center for Early Diagnosis of Dementia, Kinki University, Sayama, Japan.
(5)Neurosurgery, Kohritsu Noto Hospital, Ishikawa, Japan. (6)Neurosurgery, Kitano
Hospital, Kyoto, Japan. (7)Psychiatry, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(8)Neurology, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan. (9)Continence Center, Dokkyo
Medical College, Tochigi, Japan. (10)Neurology Division, Department of Internal
Medicine, Sakura Medical Center, Toho University, 564-1 Shimoshizu, Sakura,
285-8741, Japan. (11)Neurosurgery, Sakura Medical Center, Toho University,
Sakura, Japan. (12)Radiology, Sakura Medical Center, Toho University, Sakura,
Japan.

AIMS OF STUDY: It is reported that severe bladder disorder in idiopathic
normal-pressure hydrocephalus (iNPH) is predicted by right frontal hypoperfusion.
However, it is not known whether bladder recovery is predicted by brain perfusion
change after shunt surgery. To address this issue, we compared bladder and brain 
function before and after shunt surgery in iNPH.
METHODS: We enrolled 75 patients in the study. Before and 12 months after shunt
surgery, we analyzed brain perfusion by SPECT and bladder disorder by a
specialized grading scale. The scale consisted of grade 0, none; grade 1, urinary
urgency and frequency; grade 2, urinary incontinence 1-3 times a week; grade 3,
urinary incontinence >daily; and grade 4, loss of bladder control. More than one 
grade improvement is defined as improvement, and more than one grade decrement as
worsening; otherwise no changes.
RESULTS: Comparing before and after surgery, in the bladder-no-change group (32
cases) there was an increase in blood flow which is regarded as reversal of
enlargement in the Sylvian fissure and lateral ventricles (served as control). In
contrast, in the bladder-improved group (32 cases) there was an increase in
bilateral mid-cingulate, parietal, and left frontal blood flow (p < 0.05). In the
bladder-worsened group (11 cases) no significant blood flow change was observed.
CONCLUSION: The present study showed that after shunt surgery, bladder recovery
is related with mid-cingulate perfusion increase in patients with iNPH. The
underlying mechanism might be functional restoration of the mid-cingulate that
normally inhibits the micturition reflex.

PMID: 26578001  [PubMed - in process]


57. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 16;10(11):e0142786. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142786.
eCollection 2015.

Zonisamide Enhances Neurite Elongation of Primary Motor Neurons and Facilitates
Peripheral Nerve Regeneration In Vitro and in a Mouse Model.

Yagi H(1,)(2), Ohkawara B(1), Nakashima H(1,)(2), Ito K(1,)(2), Tsushima
M(1,)(2), Ishii H(1,)(3), Noto K(1,)(3), Ohta K(1,)(2), Masuda A(1), Imagama
S(2), Ishiguro N(2), Ohno K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurogenetics, Center for Neurological Diseases and Cancer, Nagoya
University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. (2)Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.
(3)Department of Hand Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016;11(1):e0148470.

No clinically applicable drug is currently available to enhance neurite
elongation after nerve injury. To identify a clinically applicable drug, we
screened pre-approved drugs for neurite elongation in the motor neuron-like NSC34
cells. We found that zonisamide, an anti-epileptic and anti-Parkinson's disease
drug, promoted neurite elongation in cultured primary motor neurons and NSC34
cells in a concentration-dependent manner. The neurite-scratch assay revealed
that zonisamide enhanced neurite regeneration. Zonisamide was also protective
against oxidative stress-induced cell death of primary motor neurons. Zonisamide 
induced mRNA expression of nerve growth factors (BDNF, NGF, and
neurotrophin-4/5), and their receptors (tropomyosin receptor kinase A and B). In 
a mouse model of sciatic nerve autograft, intragastric administration of
zonisamide for 1 week increased the size of axons distal to the transected site
3.9-fold. Zonisamide also improved the sciatic function index, a marker for motor
function of hindlimbs after sciatic nerve autograft, from 6 weeks after surgery. 
At 8 weeks after surgery, zonisamide was protective against denervation-induced
muscle degeneration in tibialis anterior, and increased gene expression of Chrne,
Colq, and Rapsn, which are specifically expressed at the neuromuscular junction. 
We propose that zonisamide is a potential therapeutic agent for peripheral nerve 
injuries as well as for neuropathies due to other etiologies.

PMCID: PMC4646494
PMID: 26571146  [PubMed - in process]


58. J Stud Alcohol Drugs. 2015 Nov;76(6):981.

The Hidden Role of the Alcohol Industry in Youth Drinking in Brazil.

Noto AR(1), Botéquio MC(2), Lucas Dos Santos E(2), Bedendo A(2), Pinsky I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal de São Paulo Departamento de Psicobiologia Rua Botucatu, 
862 1° andar Ed. Ciências Médicas. CEP 04023-062 - São Paulo, Brasil
arnpsicobio@gmail.com. (2)NEPSIS (Núcleo de Pesquisa em Saúde e Uso
desubstãncias) Department of Psychobiology Universidade Federal de São Paulo São 
Paulo, Brasil. (3)Department of Psychiatry Universidade Federal de São Paulo São 
Paulo, Brasil.

PMID: 26562608  [PubMed - in process]


59. Addiction. 2016 Feb;111(2):373-4. doi: 10.1111/add.13171. Epub 2015 Nov 11.

Studying an unreal world: incentives on internet-based interventions for alcohol 
use.

Bedendo A(1), Noto AR(2).

Author information: 
(1)NEPSIS, Department of Psychobiology, Universidade Federal de São
Paulo-UNIFESP, São Paulo, Brazil. andrebedendo@gmail.com. (2)NEPSIS, Department
of Psychobiology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo-UNIFESP, São Paulo, Brazil.

PMID: 26558743  [PubMed - in process]


60. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2015 Dec 14;17(46):31125-39. doi: 10.1039/c5cp05545h.

Interplay between solid state transitions, conductivity mechanisms, and
electrical relaxations in a [PVBTMA] [Br]-b-PMB diblock copolymer membrane for
electrochemical applications.

Di Noto V(1), Giffin GA(2), Vezzù K(1), Nawn G(1), Bertasi F(1), Tsai TH(3), Maes
AM(4), Seifert S(5), Coughlin EB(3), Herring AM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial Engineering, Section of Chemistry for Technology and 
Energy & Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Padova, Via Marzolo 1,
I-35131 Padova, Italy. vito.dinoto@unipd.it. (2)Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU),
Electrochemistry I, Helmholtzstrasse 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany & Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology (KIT), P. O. Box 3640, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany. (3)Department of
Polymer Science and Engineering, University of Massachusetts Amherst, 120
Governors Drive, Amherst, MA 01003, USA. (4)Department of Chemical and Biological
Engineering, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, CO 80401, USA. aherring@mines.edu.
(5)X-Ray Sciences, Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, 
Illinois 60439, USA.

Understanding the structure-property relationships and the phenomena responsible 
for ion conduction is one of the keys in the design of novel ionomers with
improved properties. In this report, the morphology and the mechanism of ion
exchange in a model anion exchange membrane (AEM), poly(vinyl benzyl trimethyl
ammonium bromide)-block-poly(methylbutylene) ([PVBTMA][Br]-b-PMB), is
investigated with small angle X-ray scattering, high-resolution thermogravimetry,
modulated differential scanning calorimetry, dynamic mechanical analysis, and
broadband electrical spectroscopy. The hyper-morphology of the material consists 
of hydrophilic domains characterized by stacked sides of [PVBTMA][Br] which are
sandwiched between "spaghetti-like" hydrophobic cylindrical parallel domains of
the PMB block. The most important interactions in the hydrophilic domains occur
between the dipoles of ammonium bromide ion pairs in the side chains of adjacent 
chains. A reordering of the ion pair dipoles is responsible for a disorder-order 
transition (Td) at high temperature, observed here for the first time in AEMs,
which results in a dramatic decrease of the ionic conductivity. The overall
mechanism of long range charge transfer, deduced from a congruent picture of all 
of the results, involves two distinct ion conduction pathways. In these pathways,
hydration and the motion of the ionic side groups are crucial to the conductivity
of the AEM. Unlike the typical perfluorinated sulfonated proton-conducting
polymer, the segmental motion of the backbone is negligible.

PMID: 26538312  [PubMed]


61. Value Health. 2015 Nov;18(7):A738. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2015.09.2830. Epub 2015
Oct 20.

Japanese Population Norms for Preference-Based Measures: Eq-5d-3l, Eq-5d-5l, And 
Sf-6d.

Shiroiwa T(1), Fukuda T(1), Ikeda S(2), Igarashi A(3), Noto S(4), Saito S(5),
Shimozuma K(6).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Public Health, Wako, Japan. (2)International University 
of Health and Welfare, Otawara, Japan. (3)University of Tokyo, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Niigata University of Health and
Welfare, Niigata, Japan. (5)Okayama University, Okayama, Japan. (6)Ritsumeikan
University, Kusatsu, Japan.

PMID: 26534136  [PubMed]


62. Value Health. 2015 Nov;18(7):A698. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2015.09.2606. Epub 2015
Oct 20.

Validation of Fracture Risk Model In Japanese Women Compared With Frax.

Moriwaki K(1), Noto S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Kobe Pharmaceutical University, Kobe, Japan. (2)Niigata University of Health
and Welfare, Niigata, Japan.

PMID: 26533911  [PubMed]


63. Value Health. 2015 Nov;18(7):A397. doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2015.09.903. Epub 2015 Oct
20.

Comparison Between The Interim Eq-5d-5l Score And The New Japanese Scoring In
Stroke Patients.

Noto S(1), Izumi R(1), Shiroiwa T(2), Igarashi A(3), Ikeda S(4), Fukuda T(5),
Saito S(6), Shimozuma K(7), Kobayashi M(8), Moriwaki K(9), Ishida H(10).

Author information: 
(1)Niigata University of Health and Welfare, Niigata, Japan. (2)National
Institute of Public Health, Wako, Japan. (3)University of Tokyo, Graduate School 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokyo, Japan. (4)International University of Health
and Welfare, Otawara, Japan. (5)National Institute of Public Health, Wako,
Saitama, Japan. (6)Okayama University, Okayama, Japan. (7)Ritsumeikan University,
Kusatsu, Japan. (8)CRECON Medical Assessment Inc., Tokyo, Japan. (9)Kobe
Pharmaceutical University, Kobe, Japan. (10)Yamaguchi University, Ube, Japan.

PMID: 26532238  [PubMed]


64. Sci Total Environ. 2016 Jan 15;542(Pt A):76-92. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.10.109. Epub 2015 Oct 27.

Climate change effects on the hydrological regime of small non-perennial river
basins.

Pumo D(1), Caracciolo D(2), Viola F(3), Noto LV(4).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Ingegneria Civile, Ambientale, Aerospaziale, dei Materiali -
Università degli Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Ed. 8, 90128, Palermo,
Italy. Electronic address: dario.pumo@unipa.it. (2)Dipartimento di Ingegneria
Civile, Ambientale, Aerospaziale, dei Materiali - Università degli Studi di
Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Ed. 8, 90128, Palermo, Italy. Electronic address:
domenico.caracciolo@unipa.it. (3)Dipartimento di Ingegneria Civile, Ambientale,
Aerospaziale, dei Materiali - Università degli Studi di Palermo, Viale delle
Scienze, Ed. 8, 90128, Palermo, Italy. Electronic address:
francesco.viola77@unipa.it. (4)Dipartimento di Ingegneria Civile, Ambientale,
Aerospaziale, dei Materiali - Università degli Studi di Palermo, Viale delle
Scienze, Ed. 8, 90128, Palermo, Italy. Electronic address:
leonardo.noto@unipa.it.

Recent years have been witnessing an increasing interest on global climate change
and, although we are only at the first stage of the projected trends, some
signals of climate alteration are already visible. Climate change encompasses
modifications in the characteristics of several interrelated climate variables,
and unavoidably produces relevant effects on almost all the natural processes
related to the hydrological cycle. This study focuses on potential impacts of
climate variations on the streamflow regime of small river basins in
Mediterranean, seasonally dry, regions. The paper provides a quantitative
evaluation of potential modifications in the flow duration curves (FDCs) and in
the partitioning between surface and subsurface contributions to streamflow,
induced by climate changes projected over the next century in different basins,
also exploring the role exerted by different soilvegetation compositions. To
this aim, it is used a recent hydrological model, which is calibrated at five
Sicilian (Italy) basins using a past period with available streamflow
observations. The model is then forced by daily precipitation and reference
evapotranspiration series representative of the current climatic conditions and
two future temporal horizons, referring to the time windows 20452065 and
20812100. Future climatic series are generated by a weather generator, based on 
a stochastic downscaling of an ensemble of General Circulation Models. The
results show how the projected climatic modifications are differently reflected
in the hydrological response of the selected basins, implying, in general, a
sensible downshift of the FDCs, with a significant reduction in the mean annual
streamflow, and substantial alterations in streamflow seasonality and in the
relative importance of the surface and subsurface components. The projected
climate change impact on the hydrological regime of ephemeral rivers could have
important implications for the water resource management and for the
sustainability of many riparian Mediterranean ecosystems.

PMID: 26519569  [PubMed - in process]


65. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2015 Dec 15;309(12):G955-64. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00261.2015. Epub 2015 Oct 29.

Identification of alanyl aminopeptidase (CD13) as a surface marker for isolation 
of mature gastric zymogenic chief cells.

Moore BD(1), Jin RU(1), Osaki L(1), Romero-Gallo J(2), Noto J(2), Peek RM Jr(2), 
Mills JC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Departments of Medicine, Pathology, and
Immunology, and Developmental Biology, Washington University, St. Louis,
Missouri; (2)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee. (3)Division of
Gastroenterology, Departments of Medicine, Pathology, and Immunology, and
Developmental Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri;
jmills@wustl.edu.

Injury and inflammation in the gastric epithelium can cause disruption of the
pathways that guide the differentiation of cell lineages, which in turn can cause
persistent alterations in differentiation patterns, known as metaplasia.
Metaplasia that occurs in the stomach is associated with increased risk for
cancer. Methods for isolating distinct gastric epithelial cell populations would 
facilitate dissection of the molecular and cellular pathways that guide normal
and metaplastic differentiation. Here, we identify alanyl aminopeptidase (CD13)
as a specific surface marker of zymogenic chief cells (ZCs) in the gastric
epithelium. We show that 1) among gastric epithelial cells alanyl aminopeptidase 
expression is confined to mature ZCs, and 2) its expression is lost en route to
metaplasia in both mouse and human stomachs. With this new marker coupled with
new techniques that we introduce for dissociating gastric epithelial cells and
overcoming their constitutive autofluorescence, we are able to reliably isolate
enriched populations of ZCs for both molecular analysis and for the establishment
of ZC-derived ex vivo gastroid cultures.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4683299 [Available on 2016-12-15]
PMID: 26514774  [PubMed - in process]


66. Am J Emerg Med. 2015 Dec;33(12):1826-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2015.09.006. Epub
2015 Sep 25.

Identifying the role of cytochrome c in post-resuscitation pathophysiology.

Chalkias A(1), Kuzovlev A(2), Noto A(3), d'Aloja E(3), Xanthos T(4).

Author information: 
(1)National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Medical School, MSc
"Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation", Athens, Greece; Hellenic Society of
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation, Athens, Greece. Electronic address:
thanoschalkias@yahoo.gr. (2)V.A. Negovsky Research Institute of General
Reanimatology, Moscow, Russian Federation. (3)Department of Public Health,
Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Forensic Science Unit, University of Cagliari,
Cagliari, Italy. (4)Hellenic Society of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation, Athens,
Greece; European University of Cyprus, School of Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus.

Cytochrome c, an electron carrier that normally resides in the mitochondrial
intermembrane space, may translocate to the cytosol under ischemic and hypoxic
conditions and contribute to mitochondrial permeability transition pore opening. 
In addition, reperfusion of brain tissue following ischemia initiates a cell
death cascade that includes cytochrome c-mediated induction of apoptosis. Further
studies are needed to determine the contribution of cytochrome c in the
regulation of cell death, as well as its value as an in vivo prognostic marker
after cardiac arrest and resuscitation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26494628  [PubMed - in process]


67. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Oct 12;10:2177-83. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S89098. eCollection 2015.

A randomized multicenter Phase II study of perioperative tiotropium intervention 
in gastric cancer patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Fushida S(1), Oyama K(1), Kaji M(2), Hirono Y(2), Kinoshita J(1), Tsukada T(1),
Nezuka H(2), Nakano T(2), Noto M(2), Nishijima K(2), Fujimura T(2), Ohta T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Kanazawa University Hospital,
Kanazawa, Japan ; Digestive Disease Support Organization (DDSO), Kanazawa, Japan.
(2)Digestive Disease Support Organization (DDSO), Kanazawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Tiotropium, a long-acting inhaled anticholinergic drug, has been
widely used in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
However, the issue of whether perioperative tiotropium improves postoperative
outcomes for gastric cancer patients with COPD remains unclear. Thus, the aim of 
this study was to determine the efficacy of perioperative tiotropium intervention
for gastric cancer patients with COPD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eighty-four gastric cancer patients with mild-to-moderate
COPD were randomly assigned to receive perioperative pulmonary rehabilitation
alone (control group) or pulmonary rehabilitation with 18 µg of tiotropium once
daily (tiotropium group). The patients in the tiotropium group received
tiotropium for more than 1 week before surgery and for 2 weeks after surgery.
Spirometry was performed prior to group assignment and at 2 weeks after surgery. 
Postoperative complications, forced expiratory volume in 1 second, forced vital
capacity, and the ratio of forced expiratory volume in second to forced vital
capacity (%) were compared between the two groups.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences between the two groups in terms of
age, body mass index, smoking, gastrectomy incision, operation time, and bleeding
volume (all P>0.05). Postoperative complications and pulmonary functions did not 
differ significantly between the control and tiotropium groups. A subgroup
analysis of gastric cancer patients with moderate COPD showed that perioperative 
tiotropium intervention significantly decreased the rate of postoperative
complications compared with the control group (P=0.046). However, even after
gastrectomy, many patients with mild COPD in both the control and tiotropium
groups showed improved pulmonary function.
CONCLUSION: Although perioperative tiotropium intervention had no significant
effects in gastric cancer patients with mild COPD, it may be beneficial in those 
with moderate COPD. Therefore, the next prospective study should further evaluate
perioperative tiotropium intervention for gastric cancer patients with
moderate-to-severe COPD.

PMCID: PMC4608619
PMID: 26491284  [PubMed - in process]


68. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Oct 22. [Epub ahead of print]

Depression, Cytokine, and Cytokine by Treatment Interactions Modulate Gene
Expression in Antipsychotic Naïve First Episode Psychosis.

Noto C(1,)(2), Ota VK(3,)(4), Santoro ML(4), Gouvea ES(5,)(4), Silva PN(4),
Spindola LM(4), Cordeiro Q(3,)(5), Bressan RA(3), Gadelha A(3), Brietzke E(3),
Belangero SI(4), Maes M(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua
Pedro de Toledo, 669, 3 andar, CEP 04039-032, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.
csnoto@gmail.com. (2)First Episode Psychosis Program, Faculdade de Ciências
Médicas da Santa Casa de São Paulo (FCMSCSP), Sao Paulo, Brazil.
csnoto@gmail.com. (3)Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo 
(UNIFESP), Rua Pedro de Toledo, 669, 3 andar, CEP 04039-032, Sao Paulo, SP,
Brazil. (4)Genetics Division, Department of Morphology and Genetics, Universidade
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Brazil. (5)First Episode Psychosis
Program, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da Santa Casa de São Paulo (FCMSCSP), Sao 
Paulo, Brazil. (6)Health Sciences Graduate Program, Health Sciences Center, State
University of Londrina (UEL), Londrina, Brazil. (7)Department of Psychiatry,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.

In schizophrenia, genetic and environmental factors affect neurodevelopment and
neuroprogressive trajectory. Altered expression of neuro-immune genes and
increased levels of cytokines are observed, especially in patients with comorbid 
depression. However, it remains unclear whether circulating levels of cytokines
and expression of these genes are associated, and how antipsychotic treatments
impact this association. Relationships between messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of
11 schizophrenia-related genes and circulating levels of cytokines (interleukin
(IL)-6, IL-10, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a) were analyzed in 174
antipsychotic naïve first episode psychosis (FEP) and in 77 healthy controls. A
subgroup of 72 patients was reassessed after treatment with risperidone. FEP
patients were divided into those with and without depression. FEP patients with
depression showed increased COMT expression and decreased NDEL1 expression.
Increased IL-6 was associated with lowered AKT1 and DROSHA expression, while
increased IL-10 was associated with increased NDEL1, DISC1, and MBP expression.
IL-6 levels significantly increased the risperidone-induced expression of AKT1,
DICER1, DROSHA, and COMT mRNA. The differential mRNA gene expression in FEP is
largely associated with increased cytokine levels. While increased IL-6 may
downregulate AKT-mediated cellular functions and dysregulate genes involved in
microRNA (miRNA) machinery, increased IL-10 has neuroprotective properties.
Increased IL-6 levels may prime the expression of genes (AKT1, DICER1, DROSHA,
and COMT) in response to risperidone, suggesting that cytokine<U+2009>×<U+2009>treatment<U+2009>×<U+2009>gene
interactions may improve cell function profiles. FEP patients with depression
show a different gene expression profile reinforcing the theory that depression
in FEP is a different phenotype.

PMID: 26491028  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


69. Oecologia. 2015 Oct 19. [Epub ahead of print]

Population variation affects interactions between two California salt marsh plant
species more than precipitation.

Noto AE(1), Shurin JB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Ecology, Behavior and Evolution, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. anoto@ucsd.edu. (2)Section of Ecology, Behavior and
Evolution, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

Species that occur along broad environmental gradients often vary in phenotypic
traits that make them better adapted to local conditions. Variation in species
interactions across gradients could therefore be due to either phenotypic
differences among populations or environmental conditions that shift the balance 
between competition and facilitation. To understand how the environment
(precipitation) and variation among populations affect species interactions, we
conducted a common garden experiment using two common salt marsh plant species,
Salicornia pacifica and Jaumea carnosa, from six salt marshes along the
California coast encompassing a large precipitation gradient. Plants were grown
alone or with an individual of the opposite species from the same site and
exposed to one of three precipitation regimes. J. carnosa was negatively affected
in the presence of S. pacifica, while S. pacifica was facilitated by J. carnosa. 
The strength of these interactions varied by site of origin but not by
precipitation treatment. These results suggest that phenotypic variation among
populations can affect interaction strength more than environment, despite a
threefold difference in precipitation. Geographic intraspecific variation may
therefore play an important role in determining the strength of interactions in
communities.

PMID: 26481794  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


70. Nihon Rinsho. 2015 Sep;73 Suppl 7:23-32.

[Innate immunity and neuroimmune disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto D, Miyake S.

PMID: 26480677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2015 Dec;25(12):2416-25. doi:
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2015.09.013. Epub 2015 Oct 9.

Increased expression of NDEL1 and MBP genes in the peripheral blood of
antipsychotic-naïve patients with first-episode psychosis.

Ota VK(1), Noto C(2), Santoro ML(3), Spindola LM(1), Gouvea ES(4), Carvalho
CM(3), Santos CM(5), Xavier G(3), Higuchi CH(5), Yonamine C(6), Moretti PN(1),
Abílio VC(7), Hayashi MA(6), Brietzke E(5), Gadelha A(5), Cordeiro Q(4), Bressan 
RA(5), Belangero SI(8).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division of Department of Morphology and Genetics of Universidade
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Brazil; LiNC - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of
Clinical Neurosciences of UNIFESP, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry of UNIFESP,
Brazil. (2)LiNC - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences of
UNIFESP, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry of UNIFESP, Brazil; Department of
Psychiatry of Irmandade da Santa Casa de Misericórdia de São Paulo (ISCMSP),
Brazil. (3)Genetics Division of Department of Morphology and Genetics of
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Brazil; LiNC - Interdisciplinary
Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences of UNIFESP, Brazil. (4)Department of
Psychiatry of UNIFESP, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry of Irmandade da Santa
Casa de Misericórdia de São Paulo (ISCMSP), Brazil. (5)LiNC - Interdisciplinary
Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences of UNIFESP, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry
of UNIFESP, Brazil. (6)LiNC - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences of UNIFESP, Brazil; Department of Pharmacology of UNIFESP, Brazil. 
(7)LiNC - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences of UNIFESP,
Brazil; Department of Psychiatry of UNIFESP, Brazil; Department of Pharmacology
of UNIFESP, Brazil. (8)Genetics Division of Department of Morphology and Genetics
of Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Brazil; LiNC - Interdisciplinary 
Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences of UNIFESP, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry
of UNIFESP, Brazil. Electronic address: sinbelangero@gmail.com.

Schizophrenia is a multifactorial neurodevelopmental disorder with high
heritability. First-episode psychosis (FEP) is a critical period for determining 
the disease prognosis and is especially helpful for identifying potential
biomarkers associated with the onset and progression of the disorder. We
investigated the mRNA expression of 12 schizophrenia-related genes in the blood
of antipsychotic-naïve FEP patients (N=73) and healthy controls (N=73). To
evaluate the influences of antipsychotic treatment and progression of the
disorder, we compared the gene expression within patients before and after two
months of treatment with risperidone (N=64). We observed a significantly
increased myelin basic protein (MBP) and nuclear distribution protein nudE-like 1
(NDEL1) mRNA levels in FEP patients compared with controls. Comparing FEP before 
and after risperidone treatment, no significant differences were identified;
however; a trend of relatively low NDEL1 expression was observed after
risperidone treatment. Animals chronically treated with saline or risperidone
exhibited no significant change in Ndel1 expression levels in the blood or the
prefrontal cortex (PFC), suggesting that the trend of low NDEL1 expression
observed in FEP patients after treatment is likely due to factors other than
risperidone treatment (i.e., disease progression). In addition to the recognized 
association with schizophrenia, MBP and NDEL1 gene products also play an
essential role in the functions that are deregulated in schizophrenia, such as
neurodevelopment. Our data strengthen the importance of these biological
processes in psychotic disorders, indicating that these changes can be detected
peripherally and potentially represent putative novel blood biomarkers of
susceptibility and disorder progression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. and ECNP. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26476704  [PubMed - in process]


72. Biosens Bioelectron. 2016 Mar 15;77:518-24. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2015.09.061. Epub
2015 Oct 3.

Merging colloidal nanoplasmonics and surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy for
enhanced profiling of multiple myeloma-derived exosomes.

Di Noto G(1), Bugatti A(2), Zendrini A(2), Mazzoldi EL(2), Montanelli A(3), Caimi
L(2), Rusnati M(2), Ricotta D(2), Bergese P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine and INSTM, University of
Brescia, Viale Europa, 11, 25132 Brescia, Italy. Electronic address:
gdinoto87@gmail.com. (2)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine and
INSTM, University of Brescia, Viale Europa, 11, 25132 Brescia, Italy. (3)Spedali 
Civili of Brescia, Clinical Chemistry Laboratory, P.le Spedali Civili 1, 25123
Brescia, Italy. (4)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine and INSTM, 
University of Brescia, Viale Europa, 11, 25132 Brescia, Italy. Electronic
address: paolo.bergese@unibs.it.

A novel approach for sorting exosomes from multiple myeloma (MM), monoclonal
gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) and healthy individuals is
presented. The method is based on the combination of colloidal gold
nanoplasmonics and surface plasmon resonance (SPR) biosensing and probes
distinctive colloidal properties of MM-derived exosomes, such as molar
concentration and cell membrane binding preferences. It allowed to discover that 
MM patients produce about four folds more exosomes than MGUS and healthy
individuals. In addition, it showed that among the analyzed exosomes, only the
MM-derived ones bind heparin - a structural analog of heparan sulfate
proteoglycans known to mediate exosome endocytosis - with an apparent
dissociation constant (Kd) equal to about 1 nM, indicating a high affinity
binding. This plasmonic method complements the classical biochemical profiling
approach to exosomes, expanding the MM biomarker panel and adding biosensors to
the toolbox to diagnose MM. It may find applications for other diseases and has
wider interest for fundamental and translational research involving exosomes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26469728  [PubMed - in process]


73. J Psychiatr Res. 2015 Dec;71:89-96. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2015.09.018. Epub
2015 Oct 22.

Structural covariance in schizophrenia and first-episode psychosis: An approach
based on graph analysis.

Zugman A(1), Assunção I(2), Vieira G(3), Gadelha A(2), White TP(4), Oliveira
PP(3), Noto C(2), Crossley N(4), Mcguire P(4), Cordeiro Q(5), Belangero SI(6),
Bressan RA(2), Jackowski AP(2), Sato JR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LiNC), Department of
Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Pedro de Toledo, 669 - 3°
andar, fundos, Vila Clementino, São Paulo 04039-032, SP, Brazil; Department of
Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neurosciences, King's 
College London, 16 De Crespigny Park, London SE5 8AF, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: andre.zugman@unifesp.br. (2)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences (LiNC), Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São
Paulo, Rua Pedro de Toledo, 669 - 3° andar, fundos, Vila Clementino, São Paulo
04039-032, SP, Brazil. (3)Institute of Radiology, Medicine School, Universidade
de São Paulo, Av. Dr. Enéas de Carvalho Aguiar, s/n° - Rua 1 - Cerqueira César,
São Paulo 05403-900, SP, Brazil. (4)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neurosciences, King's College London, 16 De Crespigny 
Park, London SE5 8AF, United Kingdom. (5)Department of Psychiatry, Santa Casa de 
São Paulo Medical School, R. Dr. Cesário Mota Júnior, 61, Vila Buarque, São Paulo
01221-020, SP, Brazil. (6)Department of Morphology and Genetics, Universidade
Federal de São Paulo, Rua Botucatu, 740, Vila Clementino, São Paulo 04023-062,
SP, Brazil. (7)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LiNC),
Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Pedro de Toledo,
669 - 3° andar, fundos, Vila Clementino, São Paulo 04039-032, SP, Brazil;
Institute of Radiology, Medicine School, Universidade de São Paulo, Av. Dr. Enéas
de Carvalho Aguiar, s/n° - Rua 1 - Cerqueira César, São Paulo 05403-900, SP,
Brazil; Center of Mathematics, Computation and Cognition, Universidade Federal do
ABC, Rua Santa Adélia, 166, Bairro Bangu, Santo André CEP 09.210-170, SP, Brazil.

Schizophrenia is a neurodevelopmental disorder that produces abnormalities across
different brain regions. Measuring structural covariance with MRI is a
well-established approach to investigate common changes in distinct systems. We
investigated structural covariance in schizophrenia in a large Brazilian sample
of individuals with chronic schizophrenia (n = 143), First Episode Psychosis (n =
32), and matched healthy controls (n = 82) using a combination of graph analysis 
and computational neuroanatomy. Firstly, we proposed the connectivity-closeness
and integrity-closeness centrality measures and them compared healthy controls
with chronic schizophrenia regarding these metrics. We then conducted a second
analysis on the mapped regions comparing the pairwise difference between the
three groups. Our results show that compared with controls, both patient groups
(in pairwise comparisons) had a reduced integrity-closeness in pars orbitalis and
insula, suggesting that the relationship between these areas and other brain
regions is increased in schizophrenia. No differences were found between the
First Episode Psychosis and Schizophrenia groups. Since in schizophrenia the
brain is affected as a whole, this may mirror that these regions may be related
to the generalized structural alteration seen in schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26458012  [PubMed - in process]


74. Brain Nerve. 2015 Oct;67(10):1241-6. doi: 10.11477/mf.1416200289.

[Ascorbic Acid and Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A (CMT1A) is a disease for which no drug
treatments are available. Passage et al. reported that ascorbic acid reduced the 
mRNA level of PMP22, improved motor function and increased the numbers of
myelinated peripheral nerve axons in a mouse model of CMT1A. Based on these
results, five clinical trials were undertaken at different centers worldwide.
However, none of them demonstrated significant effectiveness. Although these
outcomes were disappointing, these studies have provided many useful insights for
conducting the next randomised controlled trial for CMT1A.

PMID: 26450076  [PubMed - in process]


75. Theriogenology. 2016 Jan 15;85(2):345-50. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2015.09.006. Epub 2015 Sep 11.

Characteristics of frozen epididymal spermatozoa from stallions that died 12 to
36 hours after colic surgery.

Gloria A(1), Carluccio A(2), Petrizzi L(2), Noto F(2), Contri A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Teramo, Teramo, Italy.
Electronic address: gloriaalessia@libero.it. (2)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Teramo, Teramo, Italy.

Equine spermatozoa from the cauda epididymis were previously collected and
frozen, and the fertility was assessed. Most studies were performed on healthy
stallions that had undergone routine castration or on the epididymis collected at
the abattoir, but there are no studies on the quality of epididymal semen in
subjects which have died from colic or which underwent intensive care. The
present study was designed to verify whether a severe illness could affect
epididymal semen quality and freezability in the stallion. Therefore, epididymal 
semen characteristics during the freezing process in stallions which had died
from colic and in healthy stallions submitted to elective castration were
compared. Five stallions that had died from colic (ill stallions [ISs]) and seven
stallions that had undergone elective castration (healthy stallions) were
castrated, and cauda epididymis spermatozoa were collected and processed. Sperm
quality was tested after collection, after washing procedures, at the end of the 
equilibration (5 °C for 75 minutes), and after freezing/thawing. Sperm quality
was measured by objective motility characteristics, membrane and acrosome
integrity, and mitochondrial activity. After collection, sperm in ISs showed low 
kinetic parameters (total motility: 17.3 ± 3%, progressive motility: 6 ± 1%,
average path velocity: 57.4 ± 35.4 µm/s, straightness: 74.2%) compared with
healthy stallions (total motility: 90.8 ± 3.7%, progressive motility: 70 ± 4%,
average path velocity: 118.1 ± 12.6 µm/s, straightness: 82.4%) but demonstrated
similar membrane and acrosome integrity (85 ± 2.8% vs. 87.6 ± 3.1%). Sperm
kinetic parameters increased after washing procedures and cooling in ISs,
reaching comparable values after equilibration (5 °C for 75 minutes) and
freezing/thawing. The data reported in this study suggest that the quality of the
equine epididymal spermatozoa cryopreserved in stallions that had died from colic
was similar to that reported in epididymal sperm after elective castration and
was also similar to the data reported in literature for cryopreserved equine
semen.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26443233  [PubMed - in process]


76. J Am Coll Radiol. 2015 Oct;12(10):1048-57.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.jacr.2015.07.005.

ACR Appropriateness Criteria Crohn Disease.

Kim DH(1), Carucci LR(2), Baker ME(3), Cash BD(4), Dillman JR(5), Feig BW(6),
Fowler KJ(7), Gage KL(8), Noto RB(9), Smith MP(10), Yaghmai V(11), Yee J(12),
Lalani T(13).

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Hospital and Clinics, Madison, Wisconsin. Electronic
address: dkim@uwhealth.org. (2)Virginia Commonwealth University Medical Center,
Richmond, Virginia. (3)Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio. (4)University of South 
Alabama, Mobile, Alabama. (5)C.S. Mott Children's Hospital, Ann Arbor, Michigan. 
(6)University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (7)Mallinckrodt
Institute of Radiology, Saint Louis, Missouri. (8)Johns Hopkins Hospital,
Baltimore, Maryland. (9)Brown University Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, Rhode
Island. (10)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(11)Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois. (12)University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California. (13)Inland Imaging Associates and
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.

Crohn disease is a chronic inflammatory disorder involving the gastrointestinal
tract, characterized by episodic flares and times of remission. Underlying
structural damage occurs progressively, with recurrent bouts of inflammation. The
diagnosis and management of this disease process is dependent on several
clinical, laboratory, imaging, endoscopic, and histologic factors. In recent
years, with the maturation of CT enterography, and MR enterography, imaging has
played an increasingly important role in relation to Crohn Disease. In addition
to these specialized examination modalities, ultrasound and routine CT have
potential uses. Fluoroscopy, radiography, and nuclear medicine may be less
beneficial depending on the clinical scenario. The imaging modality best suited
to evaluating this disease may change, depending on the target population,
severity of presentation, and specific clinical situation. This document presents
seven clinical scenarios (variants) in both the adult and pediatric populations
and rates the appropriateness of the available imaging options. They are
summarized in a consolidated table, and the underlying rationale and supporting
literature are presented in the accompanying narrative. The ACR Appropriateness
Criteria are evidence-based guidelines for specific clinical conditions that are 
reviewed every three years by a multidisciplinary expert panel. The guideline
development and review include an extensive analysis of current medical
literature from peer-reviewed journals and the application of a well established 
consensus methodology (modified Delphi) to rate the appropriateness of imaging
and treatment procedures by the panel. In those instances in which evidence is
lacking or not definitive, expert opinion may be used to recommend imaging or
treatment.

Copyright © 2015 American College of Radiology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 26435118  [PubMed - in process]


77. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2015 Dec;35(12):2694-9. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.115.306170. Epub 2015 Oct 1.

Novel CREB3L3 Nonsense Mutation in a Family With Dominant Hypertriglyceridemia.

Cefalù AB(1), Spina R(1), Noto D(1), Valenti V(1), Ingrassia V(1), Giammanco
A(1), Panno MD(1), Ganci A(1), Barbagallo CM(1), Averna MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Dipartimento Biomedico di Medicina Interna e Specialistica (DIBIMIS),
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy (A.B.C., R.S., D.N., V.I., A. Giammanco,
M.D.P., A. Ganci, C.M.B., M.R.A.); and Molecular Biology Diagnostic Laboratory,
Central Laboratory of Advanced Diagnosis and Biomedical Research (CLADIBIOR),
AOUP "Paolo Giaccone", Palermo, Italy (A.B.C., R.S., D.N., V.V., V.I., M.R.A.).
(2)From the Dipartimento Biomedico di Medicina Interna e Specialistica (DIBIMIS),
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy (A.B.C., R.S., D.N., V.I., A. Giammanco,
M.D.P., A. Ganci, C.M.B., M.R.A.); and Molecular Biology Diagnostic Laboratory,
Central Laboratory of Advanced Diagnosis and Biomedical Research (CLADIBIOR),
AOUP "Paolo Giaccone", Palermo, Italy (A.B.C., R.S., D.N., V.V., V.I., M.R.A.).
maurizio.averna@unipa.it abaldassare.cefalu@unipa.it.

OBJECTIVE: Cyclic AMP responsive element-binding protein 3-like 3 (CREB3L3) is a 
novel candidate gene for dominant hypertriglyceridemia. To date, only 4 kindred
with dominant hypertriglyceridemia have been found to be carriers of 2 nonsense
mutations in CREB3L3 gene (245fs and W46X). We investigated a family in which
hypertriglyceridemia displayed an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: The proband was a 49-year-old woman with high plasma
triglycerides (=1300 mg/dL; 14.68 mmol/L). Her father had a history of moderate
hypertriglyceridemia, and her 51-year-old brother had triglycerides levels as
high as 1600 mg/dL (18.06 mmol/L). To identify the causal mutation in this
family, we analyzed the candidate genes of recessive and dominant forms of
primary hypertriglyceridemia by direct sequencing. The sequencing of CREB3L3 gene
led to the discovery of a novel minute frame shift mutation in exon 3 of CREB3L3 
gene, predicted to result in the formation of a truncated protein devoid of
function (c.359delG-p.K120fsX20). Heterozygosity for the c.359delG mutation
resulted in a severe phenotype occurring later in life in the proband and her
brother and a good response to diet and a hypotriglyceridemic treatment. The same
mutation was detected in a 13-year-old daughter who to date is
normotriglyceridemic.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a novel pathogenic mutation in CREB3L3 gene in a 
family with dominant hypertriglyceridemia with a variable pattern of penetrance.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 26427795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Sep;94(39):e1629. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001629.

Effectiveness of Prior Use of Beta-Blockers for Preventing Adverse Influences of 
Severe Hypoglycemia in Patients With Diabetes: An Observational Study.

Tsujimoto T(1), Yamamoto-Honda R, Kajio H, Kishimoto M, Noto H, Hachiya R, Kimura
A, Kakei M, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Center
Hospital, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo (TT, RYH, HK, MK,
HN, RH); Division of General Medicine, Jichi Medical University Graduate School
of Medicine, Shimotsuke (TT, MK); Department of Diabetes Research, Diabetes
Research Center (RYH, MK, HN, MN); Department of Emergency Medicine and Critical 
Care, Center Hospital, National Center for Global Health and Medicine (AK); and
First Department of Comprehensive Medicine, Saitama Medical Center, Jichi Medical
University School of Medicine, Saitama, Japan (MK).

The study aimed to identify predictors of severe acute hypertension (= 180/110
mmHg) during severe hypoglycemia and to assess the efficacy of prior use of
catecholamine-blocking agents for preventing adverse influences in diabetic
patients with severe hypoglycemia. We performed a retrospective study between
January 2006 and March 2012 to assess diabetic patients with severe hypoglycemia 
at a single center in Japan. Severe hypoglycemia was defined as the presence of
any hypoglycemic symptoms that required the medical assistance of another person 
after visiting the emergency room by ambulance. Multivariate logistic regression 
analysis was performed to identify possible predictors of severe hypertension due
to severe hypoglycemia and to assess whether prior use of alpha- or beta-blockers
is beneficial for the prevention of severe hypertension in diabetic patients with
severe hypoglycemia. Multivariate adjustments were made for age, sex, preexisting
hypertension, history of ischemic heart disease, blood glucose level upon
arrival, estimated GFR, and prior use of alpha- or beta-blockers. A total of
59,602 patients who visited the emergency room were screened and 352 diabetic
patients with severe hypoglycemia were enrolled. Incidences of severe
hypertension before and at 3 and 6 hours after the initiation of antihypoglycemic
treatment were 21.3%, 6.7%, and 0% in patients with type 1 diabetes (n = 61) and 
38.8%, 18.2%, and 8.2% in patients with type 2 diabetes (n = 291), respectively. 
Aging was positively (odds ratio [OR], 1.02; 95% confidence interval [CI],
1.00-1.03; P = 0.02) and female sex was negatively (OR, 0.50; 95% CI, 0.29-0.86; 
P = 0.01) associated with occurrence of severe hypertension during severe
hypoglycemia. In addition, prior use of beta-blockers was negatively associated
with occurrence of severe hypertension during severe hypoglycemia using
multivariate logistic regression analysis (OR, 0.31; 95% CI, 0.11-0.83; P =
0.02). None of the patients with prior use of beta-blockers had hypokalemia (<3.0
mEq/L). Prior use of beta-blockers may prevent adverse influences such as severe 
hypertension and hypokalemia during severe hypoglycemia in diabetic patients.

PMCID: PMC4616818
PMID: 26426649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2016 Feb 1;193(3):273-80. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201507-1294OC.

Randomized Trial of Apneic Oxygenation during Endotracheal Intubation of the
Critically Ill.

Semler MW(1), Janz DR(2), Lentz RJ(1), Matthews DT(1), Norman BC(1), Assad TR(1),
Keriwala RD(1), Ferrell BA(1), Noto MJ(1), McKown AC(1), Kocurek EG(1), Warren
MA(1), Huerta LE(1), Rice TW(1); FELLOW Investigators and the Pragmatic Critical 
Care Research Group.

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee; and. (2)2 Section of
Pulmonary/Critical Care and Allergy/Immunology, Louisiana State University School
of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana.

RATIONALE: Hypoxemia is common during endotracheal intubation of critically ill
patients and may predispose to cardiac arrest and death. Administration of
supplemental oxygen during laryngoscopy (apneic oxygenation) may prevent
hypoxemia.
OBJECTIVES: To determine if apneic oxygenation increases the lowest arterial
oxygen saturation experienced by patients undergoing endotracheal intubation in
the intensive care unit.
METHODS: This was a randomized, open-label, pragmatic trial in which 150 adults
undergoing endotracheal intubation in a medical intensive care unit were
randomized to receive 15 L/min of 100% oxygen via high-flow nasal cannula during 
laryngoscopy (apneic oxygenation) or no supplemental oxygen during laryngoscopy
(usual care). The primary outcome was lowest arterial oxygen saturation between
induction and 2 minutes after completion of endotracheal intubation.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Median lowest arterial oxygen saturation was 92%
with apneic oxygenation versus 90% with usual care (95% confidence interval for
the difference, -1.6 to 7.4%; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.16). There was no difference between apneic
oxygenation and usual care in incidence of oxygen saturation less than 90% (44.7 
vs. 47.2%; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.87), oxygen saturation less than 80% (15.8 vs. 25.0%; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.22),
or decrease in oxygen saturation greater than 3% (53.9 vs. 55.6%; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.87).
Duration of mechanical ventilation, intensive care unit length of stay, and
in-hospital mortality were similar between study groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Apneic oxygenation does not seem to increase lowest arterial oxygen 
saturation during endotracheal intubation of critically ill patients compared
with usual care. These findings do not support routine use of apneic oxygenation 
during endotracheal intubation of critically ill adults. Clinical trial
registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT 02051816).

PMID: 26426458  [PubMed - in process]


80. BMC Womens Health. 2015 Sep 24;15:78. doi: 10.1186/s12905-015-0236-8.

Patterns of domestic violence and alcohol consumption among women and the
effectiveness of a brief intervention in a household setting: a protocol study.

Gebara CF(1), Ferri CP(2), Lourenço LM(3), Vieira Mde T(4), Bhona FM(5), Noto
AR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology, Research Center on Health and Substance Use
(NEPSIS), Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), Botucatu St., 862-First
floor, São Paulo, SP, 04023-062, Brazil. carla_gebara@yahoo.com.br. (2)Department
of Psychobiology, Research Center on Health and Substance Use (NEPSIS),
Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), Botucatu St., 862-First floor, São
Paulo, SP, 04023-062, Brazil. ferricleusa@gmail.com. (3)Department of Psychology,
Center for Studies on Violence and Social Anxiety (NEVAS), Universidade Federal
de Juiz de Fora (UFJF), Juiz de Fora, MG, Brazil. leliomlourenco@yahoo.com.br.
(4)Department of Statistics, Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora (UFJF), Juiz de
Fora, MG, Brazil. marcel.vieira@ice.ufjf.br. (5)Department of Psychology, Center 
for Studies on Violence and Social Anxiety (NEVAS), Universidade Federal de Juiz 
de Fora (UFJF), Juiz de Fora, MG, Brazil. fbhona@gmail.com. (6)Department of
Psychobiology, Research Center on Health and Substance Use (NEPSIS), Universidade
Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), Botucatu St., 862-First floor, São Paulo, SP,
04023-062, Brazil. anareginanoto@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Domestic violence and harmful alcohol consumption are considered
major public health problems worldwide. These phenomena often co-occur, and they 
share several risk factors. Nevertheless, few in-depth studies have supported
integrated interventions for both phenomena, in particular among Latin American
women. This project will study the consumption of alcoholic beverages among women
and its relationship with patterns of domestic violence; furthermore, it will
assess the effect of a brief intervention (BI) aimed at modifying these behaviors
using a community household sample.
METHODS/DESIGN: This project is divided into two studies. Study 1 will employ a
cross-sectional observational design and will be conducted using a household
sample of adult women (approximate sample size<U+2009>=<U+2009>1600) to assess harmful alcohol 
consumption and domestic violence patterns. Study 2, will be a randomized
clinical trial based on specific cases from Study 1, assessing the effect of a
brief intervention on women who exhibit harmful levels of alcohol consumption
(AUDIT<U+2009>=<U+2009>8). Approximately 73 women will be assigned to one of two groups, either
a treated group (TG) or a control group (CG). A sociodemographic questionnaire, a
questionnaire concerning general health and substance use, and four other
standardized instruments (i.e., the Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test
[AUDIT; used to investigate problems related to alcohol consumption], the Center 
for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale [CES-D; used to measure depressive
symptoms], and the Revised Conflict Tactics Scales and Parent-child Conflict
Tactics Scales [CTS2 and CTSPC; used to obtain information on violence among
couples and between parents and children, respectively]) will be used to collect 
data.
DISCUSSION: The study protocol will employ a household survey of a representative
sample from a neighborhood in a middle income country, where well-conducted
household surveys remain rare. The present work represents a step toward a better
understanding of violence in women's lives and its interaction with alcohol
consumption and expands the discussion on the potential strategies for public
health actions seeking to prevent both domestic violence and harmful alcohol
consumption.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Brazilian Clinical Trials Registry: RBR-7rjt4t. Registered 17
October 2013.

PMCID: PMC4582621
PMID: 26403827  [PubMed - in process]


81. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2015 Oct 28;17(40):26903-17. doi: 10.1039/c5cp03808a.

p-Conjugated diimidazolium salts: rigid structure to obtain organized materials.

Vitale P(1), D'Anna F, Ferrante F, Rizzo C, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Università degli Studi di Palermo, Dipartimento STEBICEF, Sezione di Chimica, 
Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
francesca.danna@unipa.it.

Phenylene ethynylene based diimidazolium salts differing in the alkyl chain
length borne on the imidazolium ion and anion nature were synthesized. Their
properties were studied both in solution and in the solid state. Salts obtained
were able to aggregate in organic solvent solution. Aggregate formation was
studied by performing concentration dependent measurements using UV-vis,
fluorescence and Resonance Light Scattering. Furthermore, features of the
aggregates were also investigated in the solid state by means of fluorescence and
Scanning Electron Microscopy measurements. Finally, Density Functional Theory
calculations were performed to obtain insights into the interaction geometry in
the salts investigated. Data collected evidence that aggregation processes are
affected by a combined action of different factors derived from the nature of the
salt and solvent. The above features also influence the morphology of the
aggregates as well as the ability of their thin films to give blue emission. On
the whole, information gained could represent a useful starting point for
applications of these salts in the optoelectronic field among others.

PMID: 26399623  [PubMed]


82. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Sep 17;11(9):e1005099. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005099.
eCollection 2015.

Microbial Regulation of p53 Tumor Suppressor.

Zaika AI(1), Wei J(2), Noto JM(3), Peek RM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America; Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America; Department of
Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee,
United States of America. (2)Department of Veterans Affairs, Tennessee Valley
Healthcare System, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America; Department of 
Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, United
States of America. (3)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Tennessee, United States of America.
(4)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America; Department of Medicine, Division of
Gastroenterology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Tennessee, United States 
of America.

p53 tumor suppressor has been identified as a protein interacting with the large 
T antigen produced by simian vacuolating virus 40 (SV40). Subsequent research on 
p53 inhibition by SV40 and other tumor viruses has not only helped to gain a
better understanding of viral biology, but also shaped our knowledge of human
tumorigenesis. Recent studies have found, however, that inhibition of p53 is not 
strictly in the realm of viruses. Some bacterial pathogens also actively inhibit 
p53 protein and induce its degradation, resulting in alteration of cellular
stress responses. This phenomenon was initially characterized in gastric
epithelial cells infected with Helicobacter pylori, a bacterial pathogen that
commonly infects the human stomach and is strongly linked to gastric cancer.
Besides H. pylori, a number of other bacterial species were recently discovered
to inhibit p53. These findings provide novel insights into host-bacteria
interactions and tumorigenesis associated with bacterial infections.

PMCID: PMC4574736
PMID: 26379246  [PubMed - in process]


83. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Sep 17;6:e1890. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.232.

SGK-1 protects kidney cells against apoptosis induced by ceramide and TNF-a.

Pastore D(1), Della-Morte D(1,)(2), Coppola A(1), Capuani B(1), Lombardo MF(1),
Pacifici F(1), Ferrelli F(1), Arriga R(1), Mammi C(3), Federici M(1,)(4), Bellia 
A(1,)(4), Di Daniele N(1,)(4), Tesauro M(1,)(4), Donadel G(1), Noto D(5),
Sbraccia P(1,)(4), Sconocchia G(6), Lauro D(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Department of Systems Medicine, University
of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. (2)IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Rome, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Endocrinology, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a
Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS), San Raffaele Pisana, Rome, Italy. (4)Department of
Medicine, University Hospital 'Fondazione Policlinico di Tor Vergata', Rome,
Italy. (5)Department of Internal Medicine and Biomedical Specialist (DIBIMIS),
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. (6)Department of Biomedicine, Institute of
Translational Pharmacology, National Research Council, Rome, Italy.

Ceramide regulates several different cellular responses including mechanisms
leading to apoptosis. Serum- and glucocorticoid-inducible protein kinase (SGK)-1 
is a serine threonine kinase, which activates survival pathways in response to
stress stimuli. Recently, we demonstrated an anti-apoptotic role of SGK-1 in
human umbilical endothelial cells treated with high glucose. In the present
study, since ceramide induces apoptosis by multiple mechanisms in diabetes and
its complication such as nephropathy, we aimed to investigate whether SGK-1 may
protect even against apoptosis induced by ceramide in kidney cells. Human
embryonic kidney (HEK)-293 cells stable transfected with SGK-1 wild type
(SGK-1wt) and its dominant negative gene (SGK-1dn) have been used in this study. 
Apoptotic stimuli were induced by C2-ceramide and TNF-a to increase endogenous
synthesis of ceramide. Upon activation with these stimuli, SGK-1wt transfected
cells have a statistically significant reduction of apoptosis compared with
SGK-1dn cells (P<0.001). This protection was dependent on activation of caspase-3
and Poly-ADP-ribose-polymerase-1 (PARP-1) cleavage. SGK-1 and AKT-1 two highly
homologous kinases differently reacted to ceramide treatment, since SGK-1
increases in response to apoptotic stimulus while AKT-1 decreases. This
enhancement of SGK-1 was dependent on p38-mitogen-activated-protein kinases
(p38MAPK), cyclic-adenosine-monophosphate/protein kinase A (cAMP/PKA) and
phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) pathways. Especially, by using selective
LY294002 inhibitor, we demonstrated that the most involved pathway in the SGK-1
mediated process of protection was PI3K. Treatment with inhibitor of SGK-1
(GSK650394) significantly enhanced TNF-a-dependent apoptosis in HEK-293 cells
overexpressing SGK-1wt. Caspase-3, -8 and -9 selective inhibitors confirmed that 
SGK-1 reduced the activation of caspase-dependent apoptosis, probably by both
intrinsic and extrinsic pathways. In conclusion, we demonstrated that in kidney
cells, overexpression of SGK-1 is protective against ceramide-induced apoptosis
and the role of SGK-1 can be potentially explored as a therapeutic target in
conditions like diabetes, where ceramide levels are increased.

PMCID: PMC4650437
PMID: 26379195  [PubMed - in process]


84. FEBS J. 2015 Dec;282(23):4565-79. doi: 10.1111/febs.13517. Epub 2015 Oct 3.

Interactions between N-linked glycosylation and polymerisation of neuroserpin
within the endoplasmic reticulum.

Moriconi C(1), Ordoñez A(2), Lupo G(3), Gooptu B(4), Irving JA(5), Noto R(6),
Martorana V(6), Manno M(6), Timpano V(1), Guadagno NA(1), Dalton L(2), Marciniak 
SJ(2), Lomas DA(5), Miranda E(1,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnologies 'Charles Darwin', Sapienza
University of Rome, Italy. (2)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, UK. (3)Department of Chemistry,
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy. (4)Division of Asthma, Allergy and Lung
Biology, King's College London, UK. (5)Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research,
University College London, UK. (6)National Research Council of Italy, Institute
of Biophysics, Palermo, Italy. (7)Pasteur Institute - Cenci Bolognetti
Foundation, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy.

The neuronal serpin neuroserpin undergoes polymerisation as a consequence of
point mutations that alter its conformational stability, leading to a
neurodegenerative dementia called familial encephalopathy with neuroserpin
inclusion bodies (FENIB). Neuroserpin is a glycoprotein with predicted
glycosylation sites at asparagines 157, 321 and 401. We used site-directed
mutagenesis, transient transfection, western blot, metabolic labelling and ELISA 
to probe the relationship between glycosylation, folding, polymerisation and
degradation of neuroserpin in validated cell models of health and disease. Our
data show that glycosylation at N157 and N321 plays an important role in
maintaining the monomeric state of neuroserpin, and we propose this is the result
of steric hindrance or effects on local conformational dynamics that can
contribute to polymerisation. Asparagine residue 401 is not glycosylated in wild 
type neuroserpin and in several polymerogenic variants that cause FENIB, but
partial glycosylation was observed in the G392E mutant of neuroserpin that causes
severe, early-onset dementia. Our findings indicate that N401 glycosylation
reports lability of the C-terminal end of neuroserpin in its native state. This
C-terminal lability is not required for neuroserpin polymerisation in the
endoplasmic reticulum, but the additional glycan facilitates degradation of the
mutant protein during proteasomal impairment. In summary, our results indicate
how normal and variant-specific N-linked glycosylation events relate to
intracellular folding, misfolding, degradation and polymerisation of neuroserpin.

© The Authors. The FEBS Journal published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of
Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

PMID: 26367528  [PubMed - in process]


85. Springerplus. 2015 Sep 4;4:479. doi: 10.1186/s40064-015-1275-1. eCollection 2015.

Reassessment of carotid intima-media thickness by standard deviation score in
children and adolescents after Kawasaki disease.

Noto N(1), Kato M(2), Abe Y(2), Kamiyama H(2), Karasawa K(2), Ayusawa M(2),
Takahashi S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Nihon University School of
Medicine, 30-1 Oyaguchikami-machi, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, 173-8610 Japan ; Noto
Children's Clinic, 4-12-6 Heiwadai, Nerima-ku, Tokyo, 179-0083 Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Nihon University School of
Medicine, 30-1 Oyaguchikami-machi, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, 173-8610 Japan.

Previous studies that used carotid ultrasound have been largely conflicting in
regards to whether or not patients after Kawasaki disease (KD) have a greater
carotid intima-media thickness (CIMT) than controls. To test the hypothesis that 
there are significant differences between the values of CIMT expressed as
absolute values and standard deviation scores (SDS) in children and adolescents
after KD and controls, we reviewed 12 published articles regarding CIMT on KD
patients and controls. The mean ± SD of absolute CIMT (mm) in the KD patients and
controls obtained from each article was transformed to SDS (CIMT-SDS) using
age-specific reference values established by Jourdan et al. (J: n = 247) and our 
own data (N: n = 175), and the results among these 12 articles were compared
between the two groups and the references for comparison of racial disparities.
There were no significant differences in mean absolute CIMT and mean CIMT-SDS for
J between KD patients and controls (0.46 ± 0.06 mm vs. 0.44 ± 0.04 mm, p = 0.133,
and 1.80 ± 0.84 vs. 1.25 ± 0.12, p = 0.159, respectively). However, there were
significant differences in mean CIMT-SDS for N between KD patients and controls
(0.60 ± 0.71 vs. 0.01 ± 0.65, p = 0.042). When we assessed the nine articles on
Asian subjects, the difference of CIMT-SDS between the two groups was invariably 
significant only for N (p = 0.015). Compared with the reference values, CIMT-SDS 
of controls was within the normal range at a rate of 41.6 % for J and 91.6 % for 
N. These results indicate that age- and race-specific reference values for CIMT
are mandatory for performing accurate assessment of the vascular status in
healthy children and adolescents, particularly in those after KD considered at
increased long-term cardiovascular risk.

PMCID: PMC4559555
PMID: 26361580  [PubMed]


86. J Nucl Med. 2015 Dec;56(12):1869-75. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.115.163360. Epub 2015
Sep 10.

Prognostic Value of Dual-Time-Point 18F-FDG PET for Idiopathic Pulmonary
Fibrosis.

Umeda Y(1), Demura Y(2), Morikawa M(3), Anzai M(3), Kadowaki M(3), Ameshima S(3),
Tsuchida T(4), Tsujikawa T(5), Kiyono Y(5), Okazawa H(5), Ishizaki T(6), Ishizuka
T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, University of Fukui, Yoshida-gun,
Fukui, Japan umeda@u-fukui.ac.jp. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Fukui
Red Cross Hospital, Fukui-shi, Fukui, Japan. (3)Third Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Fukui, Yoshida-gun, Fukui, Japan. (4)Department of
Radiology, University of Fukui, Yoshida-gun, Fukui, Japan. (5)Biomedical Imaging 
Research Center, University of Fukui, Yoshida-gun, Fukui, Japan; and.
(6)Respiratory Diseases Center of Northern Noto Area, Ishikawa Prefecture,
Anamizu-cho, Ishikawa, Japan.

The aim of this prospective study was to clarify whether dual-time-point
(18)F-FDG PET imaging results are useful to predict long-term survival of
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) patients.METHODS: Fifty IPF patients
underwent (18)F-FDG PET examinations at 2 time points: 60 min (early imaging) and
180 min (delayed imaging) after (18)F-FDG injection. The standardized uptake
value (SUV) at each point and retention index value (RI-SUV) calculated from
those were evaluated, and then the results were compared with overall and
progression-free survival.
RESULTS: A multivariate Cox proportional hazards model showed higher RI-SUV and
higher extent of fibrosis score as independent predictors of shorter
progression-free survival. The median progression-free survival for patients with
negative RI-SUV was better than that for those with positive RI-SUV (27.9 vs.
13.3 mo, P = 0.0002). On the other hand, multivariate Cox analysis showed higher 
RI-SUV and lower forced vital capacity to be independent predictors of shorter
overall survival. The 5-y survival rate for patients with negative RI-SUV was
better than that for those with positive RI-SUV (76.8% vs. 14.3%, P = 0.00001).
In addition, a univariate Cox model showed that positive RI-SUV as a binary
variable was a significant indicator of mortality (hazard ratio, 7.31; 95%
confidence interval, 2.64-20.3; P = 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that positive RI-SUV is strongly predictive
of earlier deterioration of pulmonary function and higher mortality in patients
with IPF.

© 2015 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, Inc.

PMID: 26359263  [PubMed - in process]


87. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2016 Feb 4;65:134-44. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.08.016. Epub 2015 Sep 6.

The role of oxidative and nitrosative stress in accelerated aging and major
depressive disorder.

Maurya PK(1), Noto C(2), Rizzo LB(3), Rios AC(2), Nunes SO(4), Barbosa DS(4),
Sethi S(2), Zeni M(2), Mansur RB(5), Maes M(6), Brietzke E(7).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LINC), Department of
Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil; Amity Institute
of Biotechnology, Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Noida, India.
(2)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LINC), Department of
Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LINC), Department of
Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil; Department of
Psychiatry, Clinic for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany. (4)Graduation Program in Health Sciences, Universidade
Estadual de Londrina, Londrina, PR, Brazil. (5)Mood Disorders Psychopharmacology 
Unit (MDPU), University Health Network (UHN), University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada. (6)Graduation Program in Health Sciences, Universidade Estadual de
Londrina, Londrina, PR, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, Thailand. (7)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences (LINC), Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: elisabrietzke@hotmail.com.

Major depressive disorder (MDD) affects millions of individuals and is highly
comorbid with many age associated diseases such as diabetes mellitus,
immune-inflammatory dysregulation and cardiovascular diseases.
Oxidative/nitrosative stress plays a fundamental role in aging, as well as in the
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative/neuropsychiatric disorders including MDD. In
this review, we critically review the evidence for an involvement of
oxidative/nitrosative stress in acceleration of aging process in MDD. There are
evidence of the association between MDD and changes in molecular mechanisms
involved in aging. There is a significant association between telomere length,
enzymatic antioxidant activities (SOD, CAT, GPx), glutathione (GSH), lipid
peroxidation (MDA), nuclear factor <U+03BA>B, inflammatory cytokines with MDD. Major
depression also is characterized by significantly lower concentration of
antioxidants (zinc, coenzyme Q10, PON1). Since, aging and MDD share a common
biological base in their pathophysiology, the potential therapeutic use of
antioxidants and anti-aging molecules in MDD could be promising.

PMID: 26348786  [PubMed - in process]


88. Chemistry. 2015 Oct 12;21(42):14780-90. doi: 10.1002/chem.201502240. Epub 2015
Sep 8.

Aggregation Processes of Perylene Bisimide Diimidazolium Salts.

D'Anna F(1), Marullo S(2), Lazzara G(3), Vitale P(4), Noto R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento STEBICEF-Sezione di Chimica, Università degli Studi di Palermo,
Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo (Italy).
francesca.danna@unipa.it. (2)Dipartimento STEBICEF-Sezione di Chimica, Università
degli Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo
(Italy). salvatore.marullo@unipa.it. (3)Dipartimento di Fisica e Chimica,
Università degli Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, 90128
Palermo (Italy). (4)Dipartimento STEBICEF-Sezione di Chimica, Università degli
Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo (Italy).

The supramolecular aggregation of three diimidazolium-functionalized perylene
bisimides, differing in the alkyl chain length was investigated. These salts form
aggregates in solvents like chloroform, dichloromethane, and glycerol. Solvent-, 
concentration-, and temperature-dependent spectroscopic studies were carried out,
evidencing the occurrence of an isodesmic, enthalpy-driven aggregation process,
underpinned by p-p stacking and hydrogen bonding. Moreover, dynamic light
scattering (DLS) measurements and SEM images revealed that these salts aggregate 
in chloroform into elongated structures.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26346043  [PubMed]


89. Psychiatry Res. 2015 Oct 30;234(1):84-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2015.08.009. 
Epub 2015 Aug 28.

Serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor and cortical thickness are differently
related in patients with schizophrenia and controls.

Zugman A(1), Pedrini M(2), Gadelha A(3), Kempton MJ(4), Noto CS(3), Mansur RB(2),
Santoro ML(2), Gama CS(5), Bressan RA(3), McGuire P(4), Jackowski AP(2), Brietzke
E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LINC), Universidade
Federal de São Paulo, Rua Pedro de Toledo, 669-3° andar fundos, Vila Clementino, 
São Paulo, SP, Brazil; Department of Psychosis Study, Institute of Psychiatry,
King's College London, 16 De Crespigny Park, SE5 8AF London, UK. Electronic
address: andre.zugman@unifesp.br. (2)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences (LINC), Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Pedro de Toledo,
669-3° andar fundos, Vila Clementino, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (3)Interdisciplinary
Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LINC), Universidade Federal de São Paulo,
Rua Pedro de Toledo, 669-3° andar fundos, Vila Clementino, São Paulo, SP, Brazil;
Schizophrenia Program, Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São
Paulo, Rua Machado Bitencourt, 222, Vila Clementino, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Department of Psychosis Study, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London,
16 De Crespigny Park, SE5 8AF London, UK. (5)Universidade Federal do Rio Grande
do Sul, Avenida Paulo Gama, 110, Porto Alegre, Brazil. (6)Schizophrenia Program, 
Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Machado
Bitencourt, 222, Vila Clementino, São Paulo, Brazil.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) has been implicated in neuronal
plasticity, a key process related to the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.
However, the relationship of peripheral levels of BDNF to cortical thickness and 
subcortical structures has not been extensively investigated. This study aims to 
investigate the relationship of peripheral serum BDNF levels to cortical
thickness and volumes of the hippocampus and amygdala. Twenty-nine patients with 
schizophrenia and 32 healthy controls were included in this study. Structural
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans obtained in a 1.5 T scanner were performed
in all subjects. Images were processed using Freesurfer software. Blood samples
were collected on the same day of the MRI scan for BDNF peripheral levels.
Vertex-wise analysis revealed significantly thinner cortex in patients compared
with controls. BDNF levels and cortical thickness showed different patterns of
correlation for patients and healthy controls in one cluster in the right
hemisphere distributed across the supramarginal, postcentral, and inferior
frontal cortices.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26341949  [PubMed - in process]


90. ChemSusChem. 2015 Sep 21;8(18):3069-76. doi: 10.1002/cssc.201500339. Epub 2015
Sep 2.

A Key concept in Magnesium Secondary Battery Electrolytes.

Bertasi F(1,)(2), Hettige C(3), Sepehr F(4), Bogle X(5), Pagot G(1,)(2), Vezzù
K(2,)(6), Negro E(1,)(2), Paddison SJ(4), Greenbaum SG(5), Vittadello M(3), Di
Noto V(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Padua, Via Marzolo 1, 35131
Padua (Italy). (2)Department of Industrial Engineering, Section of Chemistry for 
Technology, University of Padua, Via Gradenigo 6/a, 35131 Padua (Italy).
(3)Energy Nanotechnology and Materials Chemistry Lab, Medgar Evers College and
Graduate Center of the City University of New York, 1638 Bedford Avenue,
Brooklyn, NY 11225 (USA). (4)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering,
University of Tennessee, 419 Dougherty Engineering Bldg. Knoxville, TN 37996-2200
(USA). (5)Department of Physics, Hunter College and Graduate Center of the City
University of New York, 695 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10021 (USA). (6)Veneto
Nanotech S.C.p.a., Via San Crispino 106, I-35129 Padua (Italy). (7)Department of 
Chemical Sciences, University of Padua, Via Marzolo 1, 35131 Padua (Italy).
vito.dinoto@unipd.it. (8)Department of Industrial Engineering, Section of
Chemistry for Technology, University of Padua, Via Gradenigo 6/a, 35131 Padua
(Italy). vito.dinoto@unipd.it.

A critical roadblock toward practical Mg-based energy storage technologies is the
lack of reversible electrolytes that are safe and electrochemically stable. Here,
we report on high-performance electrolytes based on 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium
chloride (EMImCl) doped with AlCl3 and highly amorphous d-MgCl2 . The phase
diagram of the electrolytes reveals the presence of four thermal transitions that
strongly depend on salt content. High-level density functional theory (DFT)-based
electronic structure calculations substantiate the structural and vibrational
assignment of the coordination complexes. A 3D chloride-concatenated dynamic
network model accounts for the outstanding redox behaviour and the electric and
magnetic properties, providing insight into the conduction mechanism of the
electrolytes. Mg anode cells assembled using the electrolytes were cyclically
discharged at a high rate (35 mA<U+2009>g(-1) ), exhibiting an initial capacity of
80 mA<U+2009>h<U+2009>g(-1) and a steady-state voltage of 2.3 V.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26333149  [PubMed]


91. Sci Rep. 2015 Sep 2;5:13666. doi: 10.1038/srep13666.

The stability and activity of human neuroserpin are modulated by a salt bridge
that stabilises the reactive centre loop.

Noto R(1), Randazzo L(1), Raccosta S(1), Caccia S(2), Moriconi C(3), Miranda
E(3), Martorana V(1), Manno M(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Research Council of Italy, Institute of Biophysics, Palermo, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical Biotechnologies and Translational Medicine, University
of Milan, Milan, Italy. (3)Department of Biology and Biotechnologies "Charles
Darwin" and Pasteur Institute - Cenci Bolognetti Foundation, Sapienza University 
of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Neuroserpin (NS) is an inhibitory protein belonging to the serpin family and
involved in several pathologies, including the dementia Familial Encephalopathy
with Neuroserpin Inclusion Bodies (FENIB), a genetic neurodegenerative disease
caused by accumulation of NS polymers. Our Molecular Dynamics simulations
revealed the formation of a persistent salt bridge between Glu289 on strand s2C
and Arg362 on the Reactive Centre Loop (RCL), a region important for the
inhibitory activity of NS. Here, we validated this structural feature by
simulating the Glu289Ala mutant, where the salt bridge is not present. Further,
MD predictions were tested in vitro by purifying recombinant Glu289Ala NS from E.
coli. The thermal and chemical stability along with the polymerisation propensity
of both Wild Type and Glu289Ala NS were characterised by circular dichroism,
emission spectroscopy and non-denaturant gel electrophoresis, respectively. The
activity of both variants against the main target protease, tissue-type
plasminogen activator (tPA), was assessed by SDS-PAGE and chromogenic kinetic
assay. Our results showed that deletion of the salt bridge leads to a moderate
but clear reduction of the overall protein stability and activity.

PMCID: PMC4556959
PMID: 26329378  [PubMed - in process]


92. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Oct;53(10):866-74. doi: 10.5414/CP202388.

Lack of effect of favipiravir, a novel antiviral agent, on QT interval in healthy
Japanese adults.

Kumagai Y, Murakawa Y, Hasunuma T, Aso M, Yuji W, Sakurai T, Noto M, Oe T, Kaneko
A.

OBJECTIVE: A thorough QT study of favipiravir, a novel antiviral agent, was
conducted using a randomized, doubleblind, 4-group, 4-period crossover,
placebo-and positive-controlled (open-label moxifloxacin) design.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 56 healthy Japanese adults of both sexes received single
oral doses of favipiravir 1,200 and 2,400 mg (Avigan® Tablets, Toyama Chemical
Co., Ltd.), moxifloxacin 400 mg, and a placebo. QT intervals after these
treatments were measured under blinded conditions. The primary endpoint was the
time-matched, placebo-adjusted change in corrected QT intervals using the
Fridericia method (QTcF) from predose for favipiravir or moxifloxacin (<U+0394><U+0394>QTcF).
RESULTS: Lower bounds of the two-sided 90% confidence interval of <U+0394><U+0394>QTcF values
for moxifloxacin exceeded 3 msec at all time points, and the maximum value was
14.0 (11.8-16.1, 90% confidence interval) msec at 3 hours after administration.
Similarly, maximum <U+0394><U+0394>QTcF values for favipiravir were 0.833 (-1.33-3.00) msec at 
3 hours after administration of 1,200 mg, and 0.500 (-1.88-2.88) msec at 6 hours 
after administration of 2,400 mg. Calculation of the sample size using the <U+0394><U+0394>QTcF
value of moxifloxacin indicated that 25 subjects would be sufficient for
detection at a power of 90% or higher, which meets the criteria for assuring
assay sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: It is possible to use a smaller number of subjects in thorough QT
studies in Japan than in Europe and the US utilizing moxifloxacin as a positive
control. There were no detectable effects of favipiravir on the QT/QTc interval.

PMID: 26308176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Qual Life Res. 2016 Mar;25(3):707-19. doi: 10.1007/s11136-015-1108-2. Epub 2015
Aug 25.

Japanese population norms for preference-based measures: EQ-5D-3L, EQ-5D-5L, and 
SF-6D.

Shiroiwa T(1), Fukuda T(2), Ikeda S(3), Igarashi A(4), Noto S(5), Saito S(6),
Shimozuma K(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Welfare Services, National Institute of Public
Health, 2-3-6 Minami, Wako, Saitama, 351-0197, Japan. t.shiroiwa@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Health and Welfare Services, National Institute of Public
Health, 2-3-6 Minami, Wako, Saitama, 351-0197, Japan. (3)School of Pharmacy,
International University of Health and Welfare, Otawara, Japan. (4)Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Health Sciences, Niigata University of Health and Welfare,
Niigata, Japan. (6)Graduate School of Health Sciences, Okayama University,
Okayama, Japan. (7)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Life Sciences,
Ritsumeikan University, Kyoto, Japan.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to measure the population norms for the
Japanese versions of preference-based measures (EQ-5D-3L, EQ-5D-5L, and SF-6D).
We also considered the relations between QOL score in the general population and 
socio-demographic factors.
METHODS: A total of 1143 adult respondents (aged = 20 years) were randomly
sampled from across Japan using data from the Basic Resident Register. The health
status of each respondent was measured using the EQ-5D-3L, EQ-5D-5L, and SF-6D,
and responses regarding socio-demographic data as well as subjective diseases and
symptoms were obtained. The responses were converted to a QOL score using
Japanese value sets.
RESULTS: The percentages of respondents with full health scores were 68 %
(EQ-5D-3L), 55 % (EQ-5D-5L), and 4 % (SF-6D). The QOL score measured using the
SF-6D was significantly lower than those measured using either EQ-5D score. The
QOL score was significantly lower among respondents over the age of 60 years,
those who had a lower income, and those who had a shorter period of education.
Intraclass correlation coefficient showed a poor agreement between the EQ-5D and 
SF-6D scores. The differences in QOL scores between respondents with and those
without any disease were 0.064 for the EQ-5D-3L, 0.061 for the EQ-5D-5L, and
0.073 for the SF-6D; these differences are regarded as between-group minimal
important differences in the general population.
CONCLUSION: The Japanese population norms of three preference-based QOL measures 
were examined for the first time. Such information is useful for economic
evaluations and research examining QOL score.

PMCID: PMC4759213
PMID: 26303761  [PubMed - in process]


94. Psychiatry Res. 2015 Oct 30;229(3):702-7. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2015.08.018.
Epub 2015 Aug 12.

Angiotensin converting enzyme activity is positively associated with IL-17a
levels in patients with schizophrenia.

Gadelha A(1), Yonamine CM(2), Nering M(3), Rizzo LB(4), Noto C(5), Cogo-Moreira
H(4), Teixeira AL(6), Bressan R(5), Maes M(7), Brietzke E(4), Hayashi MA(8).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LiNC), Universidade
Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil; Schizophrenia Program
(ProEsq), Department of Psychiatry, UNIFESP, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic
address: aryararipe@yahoo.com.br. (2)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences (LiNC), Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo,
Brazil; Department of Pharmacology, UNIFESP, São Paulo, Brazil. (3)Department of 
Pharmacology, UNIFESP, São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of
Clinical Neurosciences (LiNC), Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São
Paulo, Brazil. (5)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LiNC), 
Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil; Schizophrenia
Program (ProEsq), Department of Psychiatry, UNIFESP, São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Translational Psychoneuroimmunology Group, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. (7)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand; IMPACT Research Center, Deakin
University, Geelong, Australia. (8)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences (LiNC), Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo,
Brazil; Department of Pharmacology, UNIFESP, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic
address: mhayashi@unifesp.br.

Previous studies of our group showed increased plasmatic Angiotensin-I Converting
Enzyme (ACE) activity in schizophrenia (SCZ) patients compared to healthy
controls, which was also associated to poor cognitive functioning. The ACE main
product angiotensin II (Ang-II) has pro-inflammatory properties. Activated
immune-inflammatory responses in SCZ and their association with disease
progression and cognitive impairments are also well-described. Therefore, we
examined here the association of plasma ACE activity and inflammatory mediators
in 33 SCZ patients and 92 healthy controls. Non-parametric correlations were used
to investigate the association of the enzyme activity and the peripheral levels
of immune inflammatory markers as interleukins, tumor necrosis factor (TNF-a),
and interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>). Although no significant correlations could be observed
for ACE activity and measured cytokines levels in healthy controls, a significant
positive correlation for ACE enzymatic activity and IL-17a levels was observed in
SCZ patients. Correcting for gender did not change these results. Moreover, a
significant association for ACE activity and IFN-<U+03B3> levels was also observed. To
our knowledge, this is the first study to show a significant association between 
higher ACE activity and the levels of cytokines, namely IL-17a and IFN-<U+03B3>, in
patients with SCZ.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26296754  [PubMed - in process]


95. Intern Med. 2015;54(16):2025-8. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.54.4087. Epub 2015 
Aug 15.

Acute Multiple Arteriovenous Thromboses in a Patient with Diabetic Ketoacidosis.

Wakabayashi S(1), Tsujimoto T, Kishimoto M, Ikeda N, Inoue K, Ihana N, Hamasaki
H, Noto H, Yamamoto-Honda R, Kajio H, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, National Center for
Global Health and Medicine, Japan.

Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is one of the most serious acute complications of
diabetes mellitus. An arterial thrombotic tendency from DKA is relatively common;
however, the occurrence of acute multiple arteriovenous thromboses is rare. We
herein report the case of a 49-year-old man with DKA complicated by multiple
thromboses. After transfer to our emergency room with DKA, the patient developed 
sudden abdominal pain. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed
near-complete occlusion of the superior mesenteric artery, superior mesenteric
vein, splenic artery, and right femoral artery. This occurrence highlights the
need for considering the risk of thrombosis during the initial treatment for DKA.

PMID: 26278296  [PubMed - in process]


96. Infect Immun. 2015 Oct;83(10):4134-41. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00410-15. Epub 2015 Aug
3.

Toll-Like Receptor 9 Contributes to Defense against Acinetobacter baumannii
Infection.

Noto MJ(1), Boyd KL(2), Burns WJ(3), Varga MG(4), Peek RM Jr(4), Skaar EP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs,
Nashville, Tennessee, USA Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy, Pulmonary,
and Critical Care Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (3)Tennessee
Valley Healthcare System, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (4)Department of
Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (5)Tennessee Valley
Healthcare System, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Nashville, Tennessee, USA
Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA eric.skaar@vanderbilt.edu.

Acinetobacter baumannii is a common nosocomial pathogen capable of causing severe
diseases associated with significant morbidity and mortality in impaired hosts.
Pattern recognition receptors, such as the Toll-like receptors (TLRs), play a key
role in pathogen detection and function to alert the immune system to infection. 
Here, we examine the role for TLR9 signaling in response to A. baumannii
infection. In a murine model of A. baumannii pneumonia, TLR9(-/-) mice exhibit
significantly increased bacterial burdens in the lungs, increased extrapulmonary 
bacterial dissemination, and more severe lung pathology compared with those in
wild-type mice. Following systemic A. baumannii infection, TLR9(-/-) mice have
significantly increased bacterial burdens in the lungs, as well as decreased
proinflammatory cytokine and chemokine production. These results demonstrate that
TLR9-mediated pathogen detection is important for host defense against the
opportunistic pathogen Acinetobacter baumannii.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4567622
PMID: 26238713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Intern Med. 2015;54(15):1919-22. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.54.4259. Epub 2015
Aug 1.

Parasympathetic Dominant Autonomic Dysfunction in Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease
Type 2J with the MPZ Thr124Met Mutation.

Tokuda N(1), Noto Y, Kitani-Morii F, Hamano A, Kasai T, Shiga K, Mizuta I, Niwa
F, Nakagawa M, Mizuno T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Graduate
School of Medicine, Japan.

We herein report the case of a 69-year-old woman with Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease
type 2J (CMT2J) who presented with Adie's pupil, deafness, and urinary
disturbance in addition to motor symptoms. On autonomic investigation, the
coefficient of variation of the R-R intervals was decreased, and a urodynamic
analysis showed a hypotonic bladder. A heart rate variability analysis revealed a
decreased high frequency component and low frequency/high frequency ratio.
Orthostatic hypotension was not present, and the sympathetic skin response and
cardiac scintigraphy using (123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine were normal. A gene
analysis showed a known heterozygous mutation associated with CMT2J in myelin
protein zero exon 3, resulting in the substitution of threonine to methionine at 
position 124. Our case suggests that mainly the parasympathetic autonomic
function is disturbed in CMT2J.

PMID: 26234237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Neurobiol Aging. 2015 Oct;36(10):2709-15. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.07.009. Epub 2015 Jul 10.

Disruption of cholinergic neurotransmission exacerbates Aß-related cognitive
impairment in preclinical Alzheimer's disease.

Lim YY(1), Maruff P(2), Schindler R(3), Ott BR(1), Salloway S(1), Yoo DC(4), Noto
RB(4), Santos CY(5), Snyder PJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University,
Providence, RI, USA. (2)Cogstate Ltd, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; The Florey 
Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (3)Pfizer Inc, New York, NY, USA. (4)Department
of Radiology, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI,
USA. (5)Interdisciplinary Neuroscience Program, University of Rhode Island,
Kingston, RI, USA. (6)Department of Neurology, Warren Alpert Medical School of
Brown University, Providence, RI, USA; Interdisciplinary Neuroscience Program,
University of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI, USA; Lifespan Clinical Research Center,
Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI, USA. Electronic address:
psnyder@lifespan.org.

Disruption in cholinergic neurotransmission is one of the earliest
neuropathological changes in preclinical Alzheimer's disease (AD) and may be
associated with abnormal beta-amyloid (Aß) accumulation. Therefore, disruption of
cholinergic neurotransmission with scopolamine may unmask otherwise undetectable 
cognitive deficits in preclinical AD. To compare the effects of low-dose (0.20 mg
s.c.) scopolamine on cognition between Aß+ and Aß- cognitively normal (CN) older 
adults using the Groton Maze Learning Test (GMLT). CN older adults completed the 
GMLT predose and then received scopolamine (0.20 mg) subcutaneously. Participants
were reassessed 1-, 3-, 5-, 7-, and 8-hours post dose. All participants underwent
positron emission tomography neuroimaging for Aß using (18)F-florbetapir within
6 weeks of their baseline visit. Rhode Island Hospital Clinical Research Center, 
Providence, USA. CN older adults (n = 63), with a family history of AD and
subjective memory complaints were enrolled (15 were classified as Aß+ and 48 were
classified as Aß-). Cognition was assessed using the computerized GMLT at all
predose and post-dose time points. At 5-hours post dose, the Aß+ group performed 
significantly worse than the Aß- group on all measures of learning efficiency and
working memory and/or executive function (Cohen's d = 1.13-1.56). When
participants were classified as having an abnormal response to scopolamine (based
on change score at 5-hours post dose >0), 100% were correctly classified as Aß+
and 67% as Aß-. The results of this study suggest that diminished cholinergic
tone likely occurs in preclinical AD, and as such, the use of a cholinergic
stress test to perturb an already compromised neurotransmitter system may be an
effective way of identifying CN older adults who are in this preclinical stage of
AD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26233262  [PubMed - in process]


99. J Psychiatr Res. 2015 Sep;68:210-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2015.07.003. Epub
2015 Jul 3.

Oxidative stress in drug naïve first episode psychosis and antioxidant effects of
risperidone.

Noto C(1), Ota VK(2), Gadelha A(3), Noto MN(1), Barbosa DS(4), Bonifácio KL(4),
Nunes SO(4), Cordeiro Q(1), Belangero SI(2), Bressan RA(3), Maes M(5), Brietzke
E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São
Paulo, Brazil; First Episode Psychosis Program, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da 
Santa Casa de São Paulo (FCMSCSP), São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Genetics Division,
Department of Morphology and Genetics, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo
(UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil. (3)Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal
de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Health Sciences Graduate Program,
Health Sciences Center, State University of Londrina (UEL), Brazil. (5)Health
Sciences Graduate Program, Health Sciences Center, State University of Londrina
(UEL), Brazil; Department of Psychiatry, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
Thailand. (6)Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo
(UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: elisabrietzke@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia is accompanied by increased lipid peroxidation and
nitric oxide (NO) levels and by lowered antioxidant levels. However, the effect
of antipsychotic agents on these processes remains unclear. The objective of this
study is to determine the oxidative stress (OS) status in drug naïve
first-episode psychotic patients (FEP) compared to healthy controls and to
delineate the effects of risperidone on these biomarkers.
METHODS: 51 drug naive FEP patients and 61 healthy controls were enrolled; FEP
patients were reassessed 11 weeks after risperidone treatment. Three OS
biomarkers, i.e. lipid hydroperoxides - LOOH, NO metabolites - NOx, and advanced 
oxidation protein products - AOPP, and two antioxidant biomarkers, i.e. total
radical-trapping antioxidant parameter - TRAP, and paraoxonase 1 - PON1, were
measured. The Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) and the Calgary
Depression Scale for Schizophrenia (CDSS) were used to measure symptoms severity.
RESULTS: Significantly lower PON1 activity and increased TRAP values were found
in FEP patients. There were no significant associations between any of the
OS/antioxidant biomarkers and clinical data. Risperidone treatment significantly 
increased PON1 activity and decreased LOOH levels. These effects of risperidone
were not significantly associated with the clinical response and risperidone
dosage.
DISCUSSION: Changes in antioxidant profile, but not in lipid or protein oxidation
or increased NO production, were found in drug-naive FEP. Risperidone may have
antioxidant effects by lowering lipid peroxidation and increasing the antioxidant
defenses against lipid peroxidation related to PON1. None of the biomarkers
predicted treatment outcome.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26228421  [PubMed - in process]


100. World J Biol Psychiatry. 2015 Jul 27:1-8. [Epub ahead of print]

High predictive value of immune-inflammatory biomarkers for schizophrenia
diagnosis and association with treatment resistance.

Noto C(1), Maes M, Ota VK, Teixeira AL, Bressan RA, Gadelha A, Brietzke E.

Author information: 
(1)LiNC-Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neuroscience, Universidade
Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP) , Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: Recent schizophrenia (SCZ) research aims to establish biomarkers with
high predictive value for the diagnosis, severity of illness or treatment
resistance. SCZ is accompanied by activated immune-inflammatory pathways,
including increased levels of cytokines and chemokines, but few studies tried to 
identify predictive properties of such measures.
METHODS: We included 54 medicated SCZ patients and 118 healthy controls and
examined 15 cytokines and chemokines. Possible associations between these
immune-inflammatory biomarkers and the diagnosis of SCZ, severity of illness and 
treatment resistance were investigated.
RESULTS: SCZ is associated with a specific cytokine - chemokine profile, i.e.,
increased CCL11, MIP-1a, sTNF-R1 and sTNF-R2 levels, and decreased levels of
IP-10, TNF-a, IL-2 and IL-4. The combination of five biomarkers (sTNF-R1,
sTNF-R2, CCL11, IP-10, IL-4) may predict the diagnosis of SCZ with a sensitivity 
of 70.0% and a specificity of 89.4%. There was a weak association between the
negative symptoms and biomarkers, i.e., IL-2 (inversely) and CCL11 (positively). 
Patients with treatment resistance showed increased levels of sTNF-R1, sTNF-R2
and MCP-1.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this study reinforce that SCZ is associated with a
pro-inflammatory profile and suggest that some immune mediators may be used as
reliable biomarkers for the diagnosis of SCZ and treatment resistance.

PMID: 26212792  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


101. Soft Matter. 2015 Sep 7;11(33):6652-62. doi: 10.1039/c5sm01243k.

Organic salts and aromatic substrates in two-component gel phase formation: the
study of properties and release processes.

Vitale P(1), D'Anna F, Marullo S, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento STEBICEF, Sezione di Chimica, Università degli Studi di Palermo, 
Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
francesca.danna@unipa.it renato.noto@unipa.it.

To identify gel phases able to act as confined reaction media or materials for
the removal of organic pollutants, we studied two-component gel phases formed by 
naphthalenedisulfonate diimidazolium salts in the presence of some organic
guests, in 1-propanol solution. Guests differing in p-surface area, bulkiness and
electronic properties were taken into account. Soft materials obtained were
investigated for their thermal stability, self-repairing ability and morphology. 
Furthermore, two-component gel phase formation was studied using resonance light 
scattering (RLS) measurements. Guest release processes from the gel phase were
also studied. These processes were monitored as a function of time using both
UV-vis and RLS measurements and considering important parameters such as the
gelator concentration, the nature of extraction solvent and the extension of
contact surface area between solvent and gel phase. Data collected shed light on 
the properties of the two-component gels and could represent a useful tool to
better plan the application of these soft materials.

PMID: 26212238  [PubMed - in process]


102. Neurology. 2015 Aug 25;85(8):692-700. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001877. Epub
2015 Jul 24.

Amyloid-ß 11C-PiB-PET imaging results from 2 randomized bapineuzumab phase 3 AD
trials.

Liu E(1), Schmidt ME(2), Margolin R(2), Sperling R(2), Koeppe R(2), Mason NS(2), 
Klunk WE(2), Mathis CA(2), Salloway S(2), Fox NC(2), Hill DL(2), Les AS(2),
Collins P(2), Gregg KM(2), Di J(2), Lu Y(2), Tudor IC(2), Wyman BT(2), Booth
K(2), Broome S(2), Yuen E(2), Grundman M(2), Brashear HR(2); Bapineuzumab 301 and
302 Clinical Trial Investigators.

Collaborators: Salloway S, Sperling R, Raskind M, Sabbagh M, Honig L,
Porsteinsson A, Ferris S, Weisman D, Harris L, Diamond B, Casher A, Thomas V,
Rhodes D, Olivia C, Years A, Rosenzweig A, Klein B, Arnold S, Boruta V,
Blue-Schaller A, McGowan J, Wurziger J, Yalkinoglu O, Wurziger J, Kirsch M,
Schindler C, Spirling A, Ohnesorge M, Kluge A, McCartney M, Stubbs T, Sweeney K, 
Johnson K, Santangelo R, Woo B, DiCarli M, Williams S, Passler J, Cheng D, Ingram
W, Jutras S, Shay M, McGlew A, Warner-Coviello S, Nandan R, Rees P, Mehra V,
Porras J, Bryant S, Bartolome E, Hoh C, Murphy J, Sharif S, Buchsbaum M, Kortman 
K, Kovacs I, Chini N, Brown L, Alva G, Alva A, Kellogg J, Lykke M, Rabe M, Shih
B, Wu J, Hoh C, Buchsbaum M, Tariot P, Yaari R, Small S, Chavira M, Reiman E,
Brand H, Cooper L, Dennis-Busier W, Bandy D, Seward J, Weir J, Monarrez C, Branch
D, Langbaum J, Mohammand A, Ross C, Mullen L, Goodwin S, Fleisher A, Burke A,
Jakimovich L, Costanzo D, Drimer-Kagan T, Holt C, High N, Wright K, Reeder S,
Saunders K, Richter N, Vadovicky S, Salomon E, Lopez R, Frantz M, Minero J,
Langlois C, Chana G, Hamilton E, Media-Rodriguez S, LeFranc D, Luk M, Martin A,
Weiler K, Baker M, Martinez-Lujan L, Sabbagh M, Jacobson S, Belden C, Holladay D,
Cottam R, Shill H, Edwards J, Connor D, Davis K, Allinich D, Sala J, Covert M,
Ceimo J, Molnar C, Malek-Ahmadi M, Schwartz E, Conrad P, Lopez J, Karoll E,
Rangel A, Delco C, Obradov Z, Kohl K, Montalvo B, Bandy D, Chong C, Stern R, Nair
A, Green R, Kopits I, Barest G, Nadgir R, Mandell A, Gokce N, Mwicigi J, Mian A, 
Wang J, Rossi C, Poon S, Callaghan J, Sakai O, Hong H, Raghavan S, Joshi P, Cook 
E, Johnson K, Steinberg E, McGowan T, DiCarli M, Johnson P, Qui W, Marshall G,
Rentz D, McGinnis S, Johnson K, Olson L, Frey M, Atri A, Searl M, Sperling R,
Mountz J, Frishe K, Vitolo O, Amariglio R, Di Carli M, Vliet MV, Horkey L, Larvie
M, Donovan N, Lorius N, Boot B, Sapir D, Roy K, Kim S, Salloway S, Lederer D,
Fennelly W, Blackham B, Primack J, Monast D, Kechichian C, Malloy P, Sofios V,
Weinman S, Santoro R, Mello K, Maxwell C, Gardner M, Rickler K, McLaughlin N,
Johnson K, Tirpaeck L, Jerue D, Piryatinsky I, Di Carli M, Cheng D, Marsland R,
Read P, Mikos A, Medeiros D, Kinney F, Dahl D, Thurstin A, May R, Reeves H,
Garner R, Steele T, Tolbert L, Lindbergh K, Redwine M, Hammel J, Savage R, White 
S, Kirby N, Wang X, Berg S, Rosenberg G, Campopiano M, Dobkin L, Richard-Aasen S,
Champ J, Dutka C, Celanovic M, Minkel J, Wilson J, Belt N, Flamm L, Kasdan R,
Katz D, Chandler L, Clegg R, Duncan H, Moutz J, Harris J, Gautier C, Champ L,
Reid V, Ravella C, Garg P, Jones C, Pulford K, DeSantis M, Annas T, Moore C,
Kunze J, Garg P, Lail J, Kirby K, Doherr C, Barker J 2nd, Wang X, Berg S,
Rosenberg G, Campopiano M, Dobkin L, Richard-Aasen S, Champ J, Dutka C, Celanovic
M, Minkel J, Wilson J, Belt N, Flamm L, Kasdan R, Katz D, Chandler L, Clegg R,
Duncan H, Moutz J, Harris J, Gautier C, Champ L, Reid V, Ravella C, Garg P, Jones
C, Pulford K, Omidvar O, Goenjian A, Patel N, Walling D, Cohen A, Harris A,
Stephens J, Mori C, Arceo F, Brand J, Segui C, Foster E, Cabral A, Iler R, Bonomo
G, Freinhar J, Huy M, Wu J, Kemp M, Issa C, Reynolds S, Bui D, Marlotte L,
Britton C, Lachica R, Webb C, Guinto A, Zaky C, Te S, Tanimura C, Fukuma A, Lloyd
C, Wise A, Lam P, Botros D, Rosas L, Boyd G, Gladding R, Becker S, Norris A,
Flores A, Parikh A, Baker L, Stephens D, Martinez M, Keenan C, Waight T, Ho T,
Lorine K, Ramezan-Arab N, Yang V, Yang C, Kashani S, Spoor K, Ayele E, Honig L,
Bell K, Janicki S, Dominguez-Rivera E, Tejeda R, Cheng D, Ichise M, Gordillo M,
Mules L, Rocha A, Steinerman J, Noble J, Nash M, Olson D, Miller J, Schindler K, 
Turknett J, Yarbrough G, Panter C, Thomas-Seaton L, Young K, Myers S,
Vedanarayanan L, Golson S, Previto-Craft L, Bruflodt A, Krendel D, Kennedy P,
Schiff A, Williamson M, Houssami Y, Rozin S, Townsend N, Brazeale A,
Mohajermilani Y, Cutsuries A, Micheli M, Meltzer C, Bruflodt S, Chandler S,
Flemister C, Whiting M, Gbadebo D, Mayo S, Jackson R, Caltabiano N, Hazelrig C,
Marks DS, Marks D, Corwin L, Cunio M, Ricks N, Brogna L, Schober G, Johnson K,
Cheng D, Ferraro J, Di Carli M, Madore M, Birbiglia V, Parsons L, Kearney E,
Pelissier S, Orzechowski C, Lippa C, Gliebus G, Rosso A, Silversteen J, Hepler M,
Irwin D, Koenigsberg R, Kulandaivel K, Kazmi K, Paylor T, Durmala L, Edwards C,
Arnold S, Kharkar S, Kalanuria A, Ambady P, Eppig J, Nieves C, Mbeo G,
Kabasakalian A, Edwards J, Spruill D, Levey A, Lah J, Tune L, Stout D, Cellar J, 
Meng S, Rogers S, Ollivierre M, Masterson M, Wingo T, Strozier L, Peterson-Hazan 
S, Jones M, Meltzer C, Hales C, Hu W, Stennett S, Zanders L, Kozarsky J, Huh J,
Perkins K, Edwards K, Rosenthal B, Gorman C, Button J, O'Connor J, Boorse E,
Button A, DePalma T, Senzon C, Staunton S, Goodman W, Rieben N, Higgins J, Turner
R, Reynolds B, Johnson K, Ward C, Kolawole O, Browning S, Brown A, Behan K,
Schultz A, Berokowitz F, Arnold S, Gebrou A, Lawrence R, Aisen P, Tornatore C,
Zhu J, Duarte D, Santos D, Janicic-Kahric N, Zielinska P, Sita F, Stevenson M,
Redington K, Watkins F, Williamson J, Mayer S, Davis B, Wittmer P, Gordon M,
Standfield J, Smith H, Garg P, Chamberlain D, Gordineer L, Matthews B, Hake A,
Rexroth D, Unverzagt F, Havison K, Fleming K, Donadio L, Miller B, Turchi K,
Fletcher J, Lim M, Van Hook E, Brewer C, Klank B, Ramos C, Cavanaugh K, Zauber S,
Liss J, Canedo J, Kaplan P, Sidhpura J, Madril G, Harris P, Ford M, Price N,
Meltzer C, Schwartz S, Stewart S, Appledorn K, Toffler E, Pitman A, Herbst K,
Frost L, Henderson C, Couturier N, Wolfe C, Graham O, Ellison J, Harper D,
Forester B, Olson D, Kim S, Wodward M, Johnson K, Di Carli M, Malloy M,
Jordan-Arthur B, Biber M, Gilpatrick M, Johnson K, Stein A, Di Carli M, Stanton
M, Scinto L, Scofield M, Bell R, Cheng D, Barrios V, Atkinson V, Sullivan H,
Oster M, Devine S, Shoukimas G, Rimmer D, Cincotta M, McMillian D, Tramontano G, 
Redling T, Wilder-Willis K, Sangama E, Hinrichs C, Tennyson K, Genkin I, Bonk R, 
Glassmoyer M, Mendez N, Capstraw E, Noye J, Taylor S, Bernardo D, Kelly M, Kudrow
D, Yarema V, Arreloa G, Latorre J, Newman T, Vasquez E, Valdez B, Hung E, Stevens
J, Lee K, Brown L, Wu J, Cabrera I, Gibbon G, Waldman S, Mossa S, Ciabarra A,
Moon J, Kang E, Slaven M, Armstrong P, Wu J, Fani S, Ornelas A, Kittur S, Cowley 
C, Chapman J, Graziano S, Poiesz B, Shrestha M, Sprague A, Stratton S, Ellis J,
Bashara B, Bednar L, Axt J, Hess B, Ciliberti K, Parise M, Willis T, Shreefter A,
Gallagher C, Macchi R, Noto K, Mansen R, Kleiner J, Kloman A, Lamoureaux R,
Clionsky M, Marshall S, Edwards K, Kittler J, Grandey E, Majchrowski H, Vittone
T, Ramsey-Rosenheim J, Johnson K, Cheng D, Kalinowsky E, Plager A, McCauley S,
Steinman S, Steinman J, Reynolds A, Leland H, Weslowski K, Nash M, Olson D,
Miller J, Schindler K, Turknett J, Yarbrough G, Panter C, Thomas-Seaton L, Young 
K, Myers S, Vedanarayanan L, Golson S, Bruflodt A, Craft LP, Townsend N, Houssami
Y, Brazeale M, Rozin S, Krendel D, Kennedy P, Schiff A, Williamson M,
Mohajermilani Y, Cutsuries A, Michelli M, Meltzer C, Brufoldt S, Chandler S,
Flemister C, Whiting M, Gbadebo D, Mayo S, Jackson R, Caltabiano N, Hazelrig C,
Mudd A, Itzcovich-Schuster J, Malamed M, Schreiber M, Ettlinger R, Brown M, Grosz
Y, Resille L, Smith W, Matsoyan N, Schuster R, Rose E, Hayes M, Wu J, Labunsky L,
Svidler D, Neal C, Ramirez V, Hosseini S, Ossinalde C, Haider J, Winston J,
Whitehead C, Simpson C, Eisenberg L, Walker D, McColl R, Plopper M, Ayers C,
Berkowitz A, Buchsbaum M, Buda M, Cary D, Coughlin J, Dang K, Dobrina M, Geriak
M, Hessling T, Highum J, Hoh C, LoCascio C, Morache C, Nicolas F, Pirlliman C,
Tecca D, Woods L, Kalafer M, Pressman P, Lyman M, Cummins A, Wilkening A,
Lombardo S, Dobi A, Geiger A, Levin A, Lombardo C, Arnold S, Lobatz M, Blumenfeld
A, Heinen J, Rosenberg J, Schim J, Sanchez G, Chippendale T, O'Neill-Conover C,
Sadoff M, Wang A, Soto E, Frishberg B, Sahagian G, Tenorio A, Hinkle L, Oh I, Hoh
C, Brower J, Banker L, Buchsbaum M, Brewer J, Lehmer M, Vanderswag H, Fontaine D,
Peavy G, Buchsbaum M, Jenkins C, Gigliotti C, Gonzales J, Espinoza S, Hoh C,
Pierce A, Sun J, Da Pena E, Espinoza R, Sherzai A, Caccavale T, Tam S, Wilson A, 
Preda A, Potkin S, Faziola L, Nguyen D, Kemp A, Wu J, Ramsey G, Pellicer R, Shah 
N, Plon L, Upton J, Hannaford D, Highurn D, Milne N, Barbas N, Heidebrink J, Shah
G, Giordani B, Lord J, Rothley J, Woon F, Votruba K, Cline C, Wilson S, Hammers
D, Powells D, Michalski L, Coulas T, Franti L, Ford A, McFadden M, Lopez O, Sweet
R, Macedonia L, Aizenstein H, Berman S, Baumgartner T, Sarles E, Rothfus W, Doyle
J, Mountz J, Simpson D, Heyman R, Zachariah W, Ruszhiewicz J, Klunk W, McDade E, 
Rickard C, Greenberg K, Wolk D, Asthana S, Gleason C, Carlsson C, Barczi S,
Johnson S, Johnston S, Sivesind P, Zugin Z, Markgraf T, Christian B, Mueller B,
Blazel H, Harding S, Sachs J, Wroblewski M, Gassman M, van Dyck C, Tampi R, Aziz 
R, Friedman G, Whang P, Reech K, Benincasa A, Wiemers S, MacAvoy M, Frye T, Vinci
M, Barcelos N, Hu J, Corsi M, Nishimura N, Oellette P, Ryan-Parsch C, Lopez J,
Mayeri S, Shamsi M, Taylor S, Ricitelli D, Azar B, Beltran C, Chivukulu R, Correa
P, Wiznia L, Cheng D, Vallabhaneni S, Patel S, Henry S, Werdiger N, Cleves-Bayon 
J, Wiechers I, Paturzo K, Nygaard H, Bowen G, Brisibe T, Laborde-Lahoz P, Wagner 
A, Nespoli M, De Asis S, Good S.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2015 Aug 25;85(8):698.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of bapineuzumab on brain ß-amyloid (Aß) burden
using (11)C-Pittsburgh compound B ((11)C-PiB)-PET.
METHODS: Two phase 3 clinical trials, 1 each in apolipoprotein APOE e4 carriers
and noncarriers, were conducted in patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer
disease dementia. Bapineuzumab, an anti-Aß monoclonal antibody, or placebo, was
administered by IV infusion every 13 weeks for 78 weeks. PET substudies assessed 
change in brain fibrillar Aß over 71 weeks using an (11)C-PiB-PET standardized
uptake value ratio (SUVr) global cortical average (GCA) comprising the average
SUVr from 5 cortical regions of interest with cerebellar gray matter as the
reference region.
RESULTS: A total of 115 carriers and 39 noncarriers were analyzed. The difference
(d) in mean baseline to 71 week change in (11)C-PiB-PET GCA between bapineuzumab 
and placebo was significant in carriers (0.5 mg/kg vs placebo d = -0.101; p =
0.004) and in pooled analyses of both carriers and noncarriers (0.5 mg/kg vs
placebo d = -0.068; p = 0.027; 1.0 mg/kg vs placebo d = -0.133; p = 0.028) but
not in the noncarrier trial separately. Analyses by individual region of interest
and in mild disease yielded findings similar to the main trial results.
CONCLUSIONS: The (11)C-PiB-PET imaging results demonstrated reduction of
fibrillar Aß accumulation in patients with Alzheimer disease treated with
bapineuzumab; however, as no clinical benefit was observed, the findings are
consistent with the hypotheses that bapineuzumab may not have been initiated
early enough in the disease course, the doses were insufficient, or the most
critical Aß species were inadequately targeted.

© 2015 American Academy of Neurology.

PMCID: PMC4553028
PMID: 26208959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 22;6(28):24823-41. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4485.

Combination of antibodies directed against different ErbB3 surface epitopes
prevents the establishment of resistance to BRAF/MEK inhibitors in melanoma.

Fattore L(1,)(2), Malpicci D(2,)(3), Marra E(4), Belleudi F(5,)(6), Noto
A(1,)(2), De Vitis C(2,)(5), Pisanu ME(2,)(3), Coluccia P(2), Camerlingo R(1),
Roscilli G(4,)(5), Ribas A(7), Di Napoli A(5,)(8), Torrisi MR(5,)(6,)(8),
Aurisicchio L(4), Ascierto PA(1), Mancini R(2,)(5), Ciliberto G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale per lo Studio e la Cura dei Tumori "Fondazione G. Pascale",
Naples, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Chirurgia "P. Valdoni", Sapienza Università di 
Roma, Rome, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica, Università
degli Studi di Catanzaro "Magna Graecia", Catanzaro, Italy. (4)Takis S.r.l.,
Rome, Italy. (5)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Molecolare, Sapienza
Università di Roma, Rome, Italy. (6)Istituto Pasteur Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti,
Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Molecolare, Sapienza Università di Roma, Rome,
Italy. (7)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of 
California Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA, USA. (8)Azienda Ospedaliera S.
Andrea, Rome, Italy.

Patients with metastatic melanoma bearing V600 mutations in BRAF oncogene
clinically benefit from the treatment with BRAF inhibitors alone or in
combination with MEK inhibitors. However, a limitation to such treatment is the
occurrence of resistance. Tackling the adaptive changes helping cells survive
from drug treatment may offer new therapeutic opportunities. Very recently the
ErbB3 receptor has been shown to act as a central node promoting survival of BRAF
mutated melanoma. In this paper we first demonstrate that ErbB3/AKT
hyperphosphorylation occurs in BRAF mutated melanoma cell lines following
exposure to BRAF and/or MEK inhibitors. This strongly correlates with increased
transcriptional activation of its ligand neuregulin. Anti-ErbB3 antibodies impair
the establishment of de novo cell resistance to BRAF inhibition in vitro. In
order to more potently ablate ErbB3 activity we used a combination of two
anti-ErbB3 antibodies directed against distinct epitopes of its extracellular
domain. These two antibodies in combo with BRAF/MEK inhibitors potently inhibit
in vitro cell growth and tumor regrowth after drug withdrawal in an in vivo
xenograft model. Importantly, residual tumor masses from mice treated by the
antibodies and BRAF/ERK inhibitors combo are characterized almost exclusively by 
large necrotic areas with limited residual areas of tumor growth. Taken together,
our findings support the concept that triple therapy directed against
BRAF/MEK/ErbB3 may be able to provide durable control of BRAF mutated metastatic 
melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4694796
PMID: 26208478  [PubMed - in process]


104. Nat Prod Commun. 2015 Jun;10(6):1051-3.

Terpenoids Preserved in Fossils from Miocene-aged Japanese Conifer Wood.

Ludwiczuk A, Asakawa Y.

The compositions of terpenoids from the solvent extracts of two silicified wood
samples were analyzed using a GC/MS method. Chromatographic analysis showed that 
several biomolecules were preserved unaltered in the Miocene-aged Japanese wood. 
These were a-terpineol, a-cedrene, thujopsene, widdrol and ferruginol, among
others. In addition to the bioterpenoids, the fossil woods contained a series of 
geoterpenoids that were generated from their biological precursors before and
after burial. These were cadalene, daucalene, pseudowiddrene and cuparene. The
chemical composition of both analyzed fossil samples suggest that the silicified 
woods collected in the Noto Peninsula belong to the Cupressaceae family; this was
confirmed by morphological analysis. Both samples were identified as Taxodioxylon
cunninghamioides, which is the most common Miocene wood in Japan.

PMID: 26197549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. RNA. 2015 Sep;21(9):1554-65. doi: 10.1261/rna.052944.115. Epub 2015 Jul 20.

Metazoan tRNA introns generate stable circular RNAs in vivo.

Lu Z(1), Filonov GS(2), Noto JJ(3), Schmidt CA(3), Hatkevich TL(3), Wen Y(4),
Jaffrey SR(2), Matera AG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York 10065, USA. (3)Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular
Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.
(4)Integrative Program for Biological and Genome Sciences, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA. (5)Department of Biology,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA Curriculum
in Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina 27599, USA Integrative Program for Biological and Genome Sciences,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599, USA Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

We report the discovery of a class of abundant circular noncoding RNAs that are
produced during metazoan tRNA splicing. These transcripts, termed tRNA intronic
circular (tric)RNAs, are conserved features of animal transcriptomes. Biogenesis 
of tricRNAs requires anciently conserved tRNA sequence motifs and processing
enzymes, and their expression is regulated in an age-dependent and
tissue-specific manner. Furthermore, we exploited this biogenesis pathway to
develop an in vivo expression system for generating "designer" circular RNAs in
human cells. Reporter constructs expressing RNA aptamers such as Spinach and
Broccoli can be used to follow the transcription and subcellular localization of 
tricRNAs in living cells. Owing to the superior stability of circular vs. linear 
RNA isoforms, this expression system has a wide range of potential applications, 
from basic research to pharmaceutical science.

© 2015 Lu et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the RNA
Society.

PMCID: PMC4536317 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26194134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Opt Express. 2015 Jul 13;23(14):17772-82. doi: 10.1364/OE.23.017772.

LiCHI - Liquid Crystal Hyperspectral Imager for simultaneous multispectral
imaging in aeronomy.

Goenka C, Semeter J, Noto J, Baumgardner J, Riccobono J, Migliozzi M, Dahlgren H,
Marshall R, Kapali S, Hirsch M, Hampton D, Akbari H.

A four channel hyperspectral imager using Liquid Crystal Fabry-Perot (LCFP)
etalons has been built and tested. This imager is capable of making measurements 
simultaneously in four wavelength ranges in the visible spectrum. The instrument 
was designed to make measurements of natural airglow and auroral emissions in the
upper atmosphere of the Earth and was installed and tested at the Poker Flat
Research Range in Fairbanks, Alaska from February to April 2014. The results
demonstrate the capabilities and challenges this instrument presents as a sensor 
for aeronomical studies.

PMID: 26191839  [PubMed]


107. Intensive Care Med. 2015 Sep;41(9):1736. doi: 10.1007/s00134-015-3982-z.

Erratum to: Circulating presepsin (soluble CD14 subtype) as a marker of host
response in patients with severe sepsis or septic shock: data from the
multicenter, randomized ALBIOS trial.

Masson S(1), Caironi P, Fanizza C, Thomae R, Bernasconi R, Noto A, Oggioni R,
Pasetti GS, Romero M, Tognoni G, Latini R, Gattinoni L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Research, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche
Farmacologiche ''Mario Negri'', Via Privata Giuseppe La Masa 19, 20156, Milan,
Italy, serge.masson@marionegri.it.

Erratum for
    Intensive Care Med. 2015 Jan;41(1):12-20.

PMID: 26183490  [PubMed]


108. Org Lett. 2015 Aug 7;17(15):3710-3. doi: 10.1021/acs.orglett.5b01694. Epub 2015
Jul 16.

Anti-Diastereoselective Synthesis of CF3-Containing Spirooxazolines and
Spirooxazines via Regiospecific Trifluoromethylative Spirocyclization by
Photoredox Catalysis.

Noto N(1), Miyazawa K(1), Koike T(1), Akita M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Resources Laboratory, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta, 
Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8503, Japan.

A novel synthesis of CF3-containing spirooxazolines and spirooxazines has been
developed. Regiospecific trifluoromethylative spirocyclization
(CF3-spirocyclization) of cyclic alkenes bearing an amide pendant mediated by
photoredox catalysis is a useful strategy for construction of a C(sp(3))-CF3 bond
and an spirooxazoline or spirooxazine ring onto C-C bonds via a single step. The 
key intermediate is a-CF3-substituted carbocationic species smoothly generated
from single-electron-transfer (SET) photoredox processes, which results in
diastereoselective spirocyclization. This is the first example of synthesis of
CF3-containing spirooxazolines and spirooxazines in anti-fashion with respect to 
the CF3 group and the oxygen atom of the spirocycles.

PMID: 26181341  [PubMed]


109. Hepatogastroenterology. 2014 Jun;61(132):958-65.

Evaluation of Preoperative Risk Factor for Converting Laparoscopic to Open
Cholecystectomy: A Meta-Analysis.

Yang TF, Guo L, Wang Q.

Background/Aims: Laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) has become the gold standard
for treating sy¬m¬ptomatic cholelithiasis. However, there are still some risk
factors will lead to conversion to o¬p¬en cholecystectomy. The main aim of this
meta-analysis is to evaluate preoperative risk fact¬o¬rs for converting
laparoscopic to open cholecystectomy (LOC).METHODOLOGY: Evaluated risk factors of
all clinical studies published from 1990 to 2012. All kinds of converting
laparoscopic to open cholecystectomies were searched in the the Med-line, Embase,
Science Citation Index, and PubMed databases. Random and fixed-effect models were
used to aggregate the study endpoints and assess heterogeneity. The RevMan 5.2
was used for pooled estimates.
RESULTS: Eleven NRCTs containing 14645 patients (940 in the LOC group and 13705
in the LC group) were included in the present meta-analysis. From the pooled
analyses, age > 65 years (OR = 1.83, 95% CI (1.31, 2.45), P < 0.0001), male
gender (OR = 2.23, 95% CI (1.59, 3.12), P < 0.00001), Diabetes Mellitus (OR =
1.89, 95% CI (1.30, 2.75), P = 0.0009), acute cholecystitis (OR = 3.37, 95% CI
(1.83, 6.20), P < 0.0001), thickened gallbladder wall (OR = 6.04, 95% CI (4.11,
8.88), P < 0.00001) and previous upper abdominal surgery (OR = 4.43, 95% CI
(2.17, 9.04), P < 0.00001) were independent predictive risk factors for
conversion. Previous lower abdominal surgery, preoperative endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and the gallstone pancreatitis were not
significantly associated with conversion (all P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Our meta-analysis indicates that age > 65 years, male gender, acute
cholecystitis, t¬hickened gallbladder wall, Diabetes Mellitus and previous upper 
abdominal surgery were sign¬i¬ficantly associated with increased risk of
conversion. Evaluating these factors was useful for t¬h¬e doctors to make
suitable operation scheme.

PMID: 26158149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2015 Jul;12(7):619-25. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2015.1936. Epub
2015 May 28.

Extended-Spectrum ß-Lactamase, AmpC-Producing, and Fluoroquinolone-Resistant
Escherichia coli in Retail Broiler Chicken Meat, Italy.

Ghodousi A(1,)(2), Bonura C(2), Di Noto AM(3), Mammina C(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 PhD Course in Molecular Medicine, University of Palermo , Palermo, Italy .
(2)2 Department of Sciences for Health Promotion and Mother-Child Care "G.
D'Alessandro," University of Palermo , Palermo, Italy . (3)3 Experimental
Zooprophylactic Institute of Sicily "A. Mirri," Palermo, Italy .

BACKGROUND: Globally, antimicrobial drug-resistant Escherichia coli is among the 
most common etiological agents of invasive disease in humans. In Europe,
increasing proportions of infections due to third-generation cephalosporins
and/or fluoroquinolone-resistant extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli (ExPEC)
strains are reported. E. coli from poultry are those more closely linked to human
E. coli, but lack of reliable data makes it difficult to assess the attributable 
risk of different food sources. In the present study, our objective was to
investigate the antimicrobial resistance profile, phylogenetic background, and
virulence factors of E. coli isolates from broiler chicken meat sold at retail in
Palermo, Italy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Isolation of multidrug resistant (MDR) E. coli was
performed during April-December 2013 on a total of 163 chicken meat samples.
Susceptibility to a panel of nine antimicrobial agents was determined. PCR assays
were carried out to detect extended-spectrum ß-lactamase (ESBL), plasmid-mediated
AmpC ß-lactamase, and plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance (PMQR) genes,
phylogenetic group, and ExPEC-associated traits. A single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) PCR was done to detect E. coli sequence type (ST)131.
RESULTS: One hundred thirty-four isolates from 109 meat samples were MDR. B1 was 
the most prevalent phylogenetic group (47.8%), followed by groups D (25.4%), A
(22.3%), and B2 (4.5%). ESBLs and AmpC ß-lactamases were detected by PCR in 132
(98.5%) and 15 (11.2%) isolates. PMQR determinants were detected in 122 (91%)
isolates. Twenty-two MDR isolates met the molecular definition of ExPEC. SNP-PCR 
results confirmed that four B2 isolates were ST131. Enterobacterial Repetitive
Intergenic Consensus sequence-PCR analysis showed a large heterogeneity with 55
unique profiles and 31 clusters including 2-4 isolates.
CONCLUSIONS: An alarmingly high prevalence of MDR E. coli from broiler chicken
meat is evident in our geographic area. The ongoing use of antimicrobial drugs in
livestock should be urgently restricted, particularly in the poultry sector.

PMID: 26135894  [PubMed - in process]


111. Schizophr Res. 2015 Aug;166(1-3):225-30. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2015.06.009. Epub 
2015 Jun 27.

Lowered paraoxonase 1 (PON1) activity is associated with increased cytokine
levels in drug naïve first episode psychosis.

Brinholi FF(1), Noto C(2), Maes M(3), Bonifácio KL(1), Brietzke E(4), Ota VK(4), 
Gadelha A(4), Cordeiro Q(5), Belangero SI(4), Bressan RA(4), Vargas HO(1),
Higachi L(1), de Farias CC(1), Moreira EG(1), Barbosa DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduation Program in Health Sciences, Universidade Estadual de Londrina,
Londrina, PR, Brazil. (2)LiNC-Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neuroscience, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil; First Episode
Psychosis Program, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da Santa Casa de São Paulo
(FCMSCSP), São Paulo, SP,Brazil. Electronic address: csnoto@gmail.com.
(3)Graduation Program in Health Sciences, Universidade Estadual de Londrina,
Londrina, PR, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand. (4)LiNC-Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neuroscience,
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil. (5)LiNC-Interdisciplinary
Laboratory of Clinical Neuroscience, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, SP,
Brazil; First Episode Psychosis Program, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da Santa
Casa de São Paulo (FCMSCSP), São Paulo, SP,Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Activated immune-inflammatory pathways play an important role in the 
pathophysiology of schizophrenia. Paraoxonase 1 (PON1) activity is inversely
associated with inflammatory responses in numerous clinical conditions. The aims 
of this study were to delineate serum arylesterase PON1 activity in drug-naïve
first episode psychosis (FEP) patients and a healthy control group, and to assess
whether there are inverse relationships between PON1 activity and cytokine
levels.
METHODS: A total of 51 drug-naïve FEP patients and 61 healthy controls were
enrolled in this study. Levels of interleukin (IL)-4, IL-10, IL-6, tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-a and activity of PON1 were quantified.
RESULTS: Compared to healthy controls, FEP patients showed lower serum PON1
activity and higher levels of IL-4, IL-10 and TNF-a. A significant inverse
relationship between PON1 activity and IL-4, IL-6 and IL-10 levels was detected, 
but not for TNF-a. Subjects with very low PON1 activity (25th quartile) presented
significantly higher levels of IL-6, IL-10 and IL-4 than those with higher PON1
activity (75th quartile).
CONCLUSION: The present study provides evidence that FEP is characterized by an
inverse relationship between lowered activity of the
anti-inflammatory/antioxidant enzyme PON1 and increased cytokine levels,
including IL-6, IL-4 and IL-10. It is hypothesized that lowered PON1 activity may
play a role in the immune-inflammatory response that accompanies FEP and that
increased cytokine levels may further modulate PON1 activity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26123170  [PubMed - in process]


112. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2015 Apr-Jun;29(2):265-72.

DYSMICROBISM, INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE AND THYROIDITIS: ANALYSIS OF THE
LITERATURE.

Tomasello G(1), Tralongo P(2), Amoroso F(3), Damiani P(4), Sinagra E(5), Noto
M(1), Arculeo VM(1), Jurjus Zein R(6), Saad W(7), Jurjus A(7), Gerbino A(8),
Leone A(8).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Surgery, University of Palermo, Italy. (2)Department of
Health Promotion, Tumor Immunology Laboratory, School of Medicine and Surgery,
Palermo University, Italy. (3)Student School of Medicine and Surgery, University 
of Palermo, Italy. (4)Geriatric School of Medicine, University of Palermo, Italy.
(5)IEMEST, Euro-Mediterranean Institute of Science and Technology, Palermo,
Italy. (6)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, George Washington University, Washington DC, USA. (7)Department 
of Anatomy, Cell Biology and Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Medicine,
American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon. (8)Department of Experimental
Biomedicine and Clinical Neuroscience, Section of Histology and Embryology,
School of Medicine and Surgery, Palermo, Italy.

The human body is colonized by a large number of microbes that are collectively
referred to as the microbiota. They interact with the hosting organism and some
do contribute to the physiological maintenance of the general good health thru
regulation of some metabolic processes while some others are essential for the
synthesis of vitamins and short-chain fatty acids. The abnormal variation, in the
quality and/or quantity of individual bacterial species residing in the
gastro-intestinal tract, is called <U+0093>dysmicrobism<U+0094>. The immune system of the host 
will respond to these changes at the intestinal mucosa level which could lead to 
Inflammatory Bowel Diseases (IBD). This inflammatory immune response could
subsequently extend to other organs and systems outside the digestive tract such 
as the thyroid, culminating in thyroiditis. The goal of the present study is to
review and analyze data reported in the literature about thyroiditis associated
with inflammatory bowel diseases such as Ulcerative Colitis (UC) and Crohn<U+0092>s
Disease (CD). It was reported that similarities of some molecular bacterial
components with molecular components of the host are considered among the factors
causing IBD through an autoimmune reaction which could involve other non-immune
cell types. The axis dysmicrobism-IBD-autoimmune reaction will be investigated as
a possible etiopathogenic mechanism to Autoimmune Thyroiditis. If such is the
case, then the employment of specific probiotic strains may represent a useful
approach to moderate the immune system.

PMID: 26122213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Int Immunopharmacol. 2015 Aug;27(2):232-7. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2015.06.016.
Epub 2015 Jun 26.

Effect of novel PKC<U+03B8> selective inhibitor AS2521780 on acute rejection in rat and 
non-human primate models of transplantation.

Fukahori H(1), Chida N(2), Maeda M(2), Tasaki M(2), Kawashima T(2), Noto T(3),
Tsujimoto S(2), Nakamura K(2), Oshima S(2), Hirose J(2), Higashi Y(2), Morokata
T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Portfolio & Science, Drug Discovery Research, Astellas Pharma Inc.,
21 Miyukigaoka, Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki 305-8585, Japan. Electronic address:
hidehiko.fukahori@astellas.com. (2)Research Portfolio & Science, Drug Discovery
Research, Astellas Pharma Inc., 21 Miyukigaoka, Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki 305-8585,
Japan. (3)Drug Safety Research Labs, Drug Discovery Research, Astellas Pharma
Inc., 2-1-6 Kashima, Yodogawa-ku, Osaka 532-8514, Japan.

Selective inhibition of protein kinase C<U+03B8> (PKC<U+03B8>) may be useful in inducing T
cell-specific immunosuppression with a reduced rate of side effects. To our
knowledge, however, no reports have been published regarding the selective
inhibition of PKC<U+03B8> by small-molecule compounds in animal models of allograft
rejection. Here, we investigated the effect of the newly synthesized PKC<U+03B8>
selective inhibitor AS2521780 in mono- and combination therapies on acute
rejection in ACI-to-Lewis rat cardiac and non-human primate (NHP) renal
transplantation models. In the rat cardiac transplantation model, AS2521780
significantly prolonged graft survival to 14days at 10mg/kg twice daily (b.i.d.) 
and to 20days at 30mg/kg b.i.d. In contrast, acute rejection occurred in all
recipients in the non-treated group by Days 5 or 6 post-transplantation.
Significant improvements (P<0.001) in graft survival were observed following
treatment with a combination of AS2521780 at 3mg/kg b.i.d. and a suboptimal dose 
of tacrolimus (0.02mg/kg) or mycophenolate mofetil (15mg/kg). In the NHP renal
transplantation model, AS2521780 at 3mg/kg b.i.d. and tacrolimus at 1mg/kg
(suboptimal dose) significantly improved graft survival compared to tacrolimus
alone (P<0.05). The present study of AS2521780 in rat cardiac and NHP renal
transplantation models demonstrates the potential of PKC<U+03B8> as a novel drug target 
for organ transplantation. As AS2521780 was well tolerated and the dose of
tacrolimus or mycophenolate mofetil can be reduced when used in combination with 
this drug, immunosuppressive regimens containing selective inhibitors of PKC<U+03B8>
might have good safety profiles.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26122135  [PubMed - in process]


114. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2015 Aug;3(8):624-37. doi:
10.1016/S2213-8587(15)00129-1. Epub 2015 Jun 21.

Effects of diabetes definition on global surveillance of diabetes prevalence and 
diagnosis: a pooled analysis of 96 population-based studies with 331,288
participants.

NCD Risk Factor Collaboration (NCD-RisC).

Collaborators: Danaei G, Fahimi S, Lu Y, Zhou B, Hajifathalian K, Di Cesare M, Lo
WC, Reis-Santos B, Cowan MJ, Shaw JE, Bentham J, Lin JK, Bixby H, Magliano D,
Bovet P, Miranda JJ, Khang YH, Stevens GA, Riley LM, Ali MK, Ezzati M, Abdeen ZA,
Kadir KA, Abu-Rmeileh M, Acosta-Cazares B, Aekplakorn W, Aguilar-Salinas CA,
Ahmadvand A, Al Nsour M, Alkerwi A, Amouyel P, Andersen LB, Anderssen SA, Andrade
DS, Anjana RM, Aounallah-Skhiri H, Aris T, Arlappa N, Arveiler D, Assah FK,
Avdicová M, Balakrishna N, Bandosz P, Barbagallo CM, Barceló A, Batieha AM, Baur 
LA, Ben Romdhane H, Bernabe-Ortiz A, Bhargava SK, Bi Y, Bjerregaard P, Björkelund
C, Blake M, Blokstra A, Bo S, Boehm BO, Boissonnet CP, Bovet P, Brajkovich I,
Breckenkamp J, Brewster LM, Brian GR, Bruno G, Bugge A, Cabrera de León A, Can G,
Cândido AP, Capuano V, Carvalho MJ, Casanueva FF, Caserta CA, Castetbon K,
Chamukuttan S, Chaturvedi N, Chen CJ, Chen F, Chen S, Cheng CY, Chetrit A, Chiou 
ST, Cho Y, Chudek J, Cifkova R, Claessens F, Concin H, Cooper C, Cooper R,
Costanzo S, Cottel D, Cowell C, Crujeiras AB, D'Arrigo G, Dallongeville J,
Dankner R, Dauchet L, de Gaetano G, De Henauw S, Deepa M, Dehghan A, Dhana K, Di 
Castelnuovo AF, Djalalinia S, Doua K, Drygas W, Du Y, Egbagbe EE, Eggertsen R, El
Ati J, Elosua R, Erasmus RT, Erem C, Ergor G, Eriksen L, Escobedo-de la Peña J,
Fall CH, Farzadfar F, Felix-Redondo FJ, Ferguson TS, Fernández-Bergés D, Ferrari 
M, Ferreccio C, Finn JD, Föger B, Foo LH, Fouad HM, Francis DK, Franco Mdo C,
Frontera G, Furusawa T, Gaciong Z, Galbarczyk A, Garnett SP, Gaspoz JM, Gasull M,
Gates L, Geleijnse JM, Ghasemain A, Giampaoli S, Gianfagna F, Giovannelli J,
Gonzalez Gross M, González Rivas JP, Gorbea MB, Gottrand F, Grant JF, Grodzicki
T, Grøntved A, Gruden G, Gu D, Guan OP, Guerrero R, Guessous I, Guimaraes AL,
Gutierrez L, Hardy R, Hari Kumar R, Heidemann C, Hihtaniemi IT, Ho SY, Ho SC,
Hofman A, Horimoto AR, Hormiga CM, Horta BL, Houti L, Hussieni AS, Huybrechts I, 
Hwalla N, Iacoviello L, Iannone AG, Ibrahim MM, Ikeda N, Ikram MA, Irazola VE,
Islam M, Iwasaki M, Jacobs JM, Jafar T, Jasienska G, Jiang CQ, Jonas JB, Joshi P,
Kafatos A, Kalter-Leibovici O, Kasaeian A, Katz J, Kaur P, Kavousi M, Kelishadi
R, Kengne AP, Kersting M, Khader YS, Khang YH, Kiechl S, Kim J, Kiyohara Y,
Kolsteren P, Korrovits P, Koskinen S, Kratzer W, Kromhout D, Kula K, Kurjata P,
Kyobutungi C, Lachat C, Laid Y, Lam TH, Lanska V, Lappas G, Laxmaiah A, Leclercq 
C, Lee J, Lee J, Lehtimäki T, Lekhraj R, León-Muñoz LM, Li Y, Lim WY, Lima-Costa 
MF, Lin HH, Lin X, Lissner L, Lorbeer R, Lozano JE, Lundqvist A, Lytsy P, Ma G,
Machado-Coelho GL, Machi S, Maggi S, Magliano D, Makdisse M, Mallikharjuna Rao K,
Manios Y, Manzato E, Margozzini P, Marques-Vidal P, Martorell R, Masoodi SR,
Matsha TE, Mbanya JC, McFarlane SR, McGarvey ST, McLachlan S, McNulty BA,
Mediene-Benchekor S, Meirhaeghe A, Menezes AM, Merat S, Meshram II, Mi J, Miquel 
JF, Miranda JJ, Mohamed MK, Mohammad K, Mohan V, Mohd Yusoff MF, Møller NC,
Molnar D, Mondo CK, Moreno LA, Morgan K, Moschonis G, Mossakowska M, Mostafa A,
Mota J, Muiesan ML, Müller-Nurasyid M, Mursu J, Nagel G, Námená J, Nang EE,
Nangia VB, Navarrete-Muñoz EM, Ndiaye NC, Nervi F, Nguyen ND, Nieto-Martínez RE, 
Alvarado L, Ning G, Ninomiya T, Noale M, Noto D, Ochoa-Avilés M, Oh K, Onat A,
Osmond C, Otero JA, Palmieri L, Panda-Jonas S, Panza F, Parsaeian M, Peixoto SV, 
Pereira AC, Peters A, Peykari N, Pilav A, Pitakaka F, Piwonska A, Piwonski J,
Plans-Rubió P, Porta M, Portegies ML, Poustchi H, Pradeepa R, Price JF, Punab M, 
Qasrawi RF, Qorbani M, Raitakari O, Ramachandra Rao S, Ramachandran A, Ramos R,
Rampal S, Rathmann W, Redon J, Reganit PF, Rigo F, Robinson SM, Robitaille C,
Rodríguez LA, Rodríguez-Artalejo F, del Cristo Rodriguez-Perez M, Rojas-Martinez 
R, Romaguera D, Rosengren A, Rubinstein A, Rui O, Ruiz-Betancourt BS, Rutkowski
M, Sabanayagam C, Sachdev HS, Saidi O, Sakarya S, Salanave B, Salonen JT,
Salvetti M, Sánchez-Abanto J, Santos RN, Santos R, Sardinha LB, Scazufca M,
Schargrodsky H, Scheidt-Nave C, Shaw JE, Shibuya K, Shin Y, Shiri R, Siantar R,
Sibai AM, Simon M, Simons J, Simons LA, Sjostrom M, Slowikowska-Hilczer J,
Slusarczyk P, Smeeth L, Snijder MB, Solfrizzi V, Sonestedt E, Soumare A, Staessen
JA, Steene-Johannessen J, Stehle P, Stein AD, Stessman J, Stöckl D, Stokwiszewski
J, Strufaldi MW, Sun CA, Sundström J, Suriyawongpaisal P, Sy RG, Tai ES, Tarawneh
M, Tarqui-Mamani CB, Thijs L, Tolstrup JS, Topbas M, Torrent M, Traissac P, Trinh
OT, Tulloch-Reid MK, Tuomainen TP, Turley ML, Tzourio C, Ueda P, Ukoli FM, Ulmer 
H, Valdivia G, van Valkengoed IG, Vanderschueren D, Vanuzzo D, Vega T,
Velasquez-Melendez G, Veronesi G, Verschuren M, Vioque J, Virtanen J,
Visvikis-Siest S, Viswanathan B, Vollenweider P, Voutilainen S, Wade AN, Wagner
A, Walton J, Mohamud WN, Wang MD, Wang YX, Wannamethee SG, Weerasekera D, Whincup
PH, Widhalm K, Wiecek A, Wilks RJ, Willeit J, Wojtyniak B, Wong TY, Woo J,
Woodward M, Wu AG, Wu FC, Wu SL, Xu H, Yang X, Ye X, Yoshihara A, Younger-Coleman
NO, Zambon S, Zargar AH, Zdrojewski T, Zhao W, Zheng Y.

Comment in
    Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2015 Aug;3(8):582-3.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes has been defined on the basis of different biomarkers,
including fasting plasma glucose (FPG), 2-h plasma glucose in an oral glucose
tolerance test (2hOGTT), and HbA1c. We assessed the effect of different
diagnostic definitions on both the population prevalence of diabetes and the
classification of previously undiagnosed individuals as having diabetes versus
not having diabetes in a pooled analysis of data from population-based health
examination surveys in different regions.
METHODS: We used data from 96 population-based health examination surveys that
had measured at least two of the biomarkers used for defining diabetes. Diabetes 
was defined using HbA1c (HbA1c =6·5% or history of diabetes diagnosis or using
insulin or oral hypoglycaemic drugs) compared with either FPG only or
FPG-or-2hOGTT definitions (FPG =7·0 mmol/L or 2hOGTT =11·1 mmol/L or history of
diabetes or using insulin or oral hypoglycaemic drugs). We calculated diabetes
prevalence, taking into account complex survey design and survey sample weights. 
We compared the prevalences of diabetes using different definitions graphically
and by regression analyses. We calculated sensitivity and specificity of diabetes
diagnosis based on HbA1c compared with diagnosis based on glucose among
previously undiagnosed individuals (ie, excluding those with history of diabetes 
or using insulin or oral hypoglycaemic drugs). We calculated sensitivity and
specificity in each survey, and then pooled results using a random-effects model.
We assessed the sources of heterogeneity of sensitivity by meta-regressions for
study characteristics selected a priori.
FINDINGS: Population prevalence of diabetes based on FPG-or-2hOGTT was correlated
with prevalence based on FPG alone (r=0·98), but was higher by 2-6 percentage
points at different prevalence levels. Prevalence based on HbA1c was lower than
prevalence based on FPG in 42·8% of age-sex-survey groups and higher in another
41·6%; in the other 15·6%, the two definitions provided similar prevalence
estimates. The variation across studies in the relation between glucose-based and
HbA1c-based prevalences was partly related to participants' age, followed by
natural logarithm of per person gross domestic product, the year of survey, mean 
BMI, and whether the survey population was national, subnational, or from
specific communities. Diabetes defined as HbA1c 6·5% or more had a pooled
sensitivity of 52·8% (95% CI 51·3-54·3%) and a pooled specificity of 99·74%
(99·71-99·78%) compared with FPG 7·0 mmol/L or more for diagnosing previously
undiagnosed participants; sensitivity compared with diabetes defined based on
FPG-or-2hOGTT was 30·5% (28·7-32·3%). None of the preselected study-level
characteristics explained the heterogeneity in the sensitivity of HbA1c versus
FPG.
INTERPRETATION: Different biomarkers and definitions for diabetes can provide
different estimates of population prevalence of diabetes, and differentially
identify people without previous diagnosis as having diabetes. Using an
HbA1c-based definition alone in health surveys will not identify a substantial
proportion of previously undiagnosed people who would be considered as having
diabetes using a glucose-based test.
FUNDING: Wellcome Trust, US National Institutes of Health.

Copyright © 2015 NCD Risk Factor Collaboration. Open Access article distributed
under the terms of CC BY. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4673089
PMID: 26109024  [PubMed - in process]


115. Mol Cell. 2015 Jul 16;59(2):229-42. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.05.024. Epub 2015 
Jun 18.

Small-RNA-Mediated Genome-wide trans-Recognition Network in Tetrahymena DNA
Elimination.

Noto T(1), Kataoka K(1), Suhren JH(1), Hayashi A(1), Woolcock KJ(1), Gorovsky
MA(2), Mochizuki K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
(IMBA), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria. (2)Department of Biology,
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627, USA. (3)Institute of Molecular
Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (IMBA), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 
Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: kazufumi.mochizuki@imba.oeaw.ac.at.

Small RNAs are used to silence transposable elements (TEs) in many eukaryotes,
which use diverse evolutionary solutions to identify TEs. In ciliated protozoans,
small-RNA-mediated comparison of the germline and somatic genomes underlies
identification of TE-related sequences, which are then eliminated from the soma. 
Here, we describe an additional mechanism of small-RNA-mediated identification of
TE-related sequences in the ciliate Tetrahymena. We show that a limited set of
internal eliminated sequences (IESs) containing potentially active TEs produces a
class of small RNAs that recognize not only the IESs from which they are derived,
but also other IESs in trans. This trans recognition triggers the expression of
yet another class of small RNAs that identify other IESs. Therefore, TE-related
sequences in Tetrahymena are robustly targeted for elimination by a genome-wide
trans-recognition network accompanied by a chain reaction of small RNA
production.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4518040
PMID: 26095658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. World J Biol Psychiatry. 2015 Jun 18:1-6. [Epub ahead of print]

Gene expression analysis in blood of ultra-high risk subjects compared to
first-episode of psychosis patients and controls.

Santoro ML(1), Gadelha A, Ota VK, Cunha GR, Asevedo E, Noto CS, Spindola LM, Pan 
PM, Talarico F, Mansur RB, Silva PN, Brietzke E, Cordeiro Q, Bressan RA,
Belangero SI.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division, Department of Morphology and Genetics, Universidade Federal
de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP) , São Paulo , Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to investigate peripheral blood gene expression in
ultra-high-risk subjects (UHR) compared to first-episode psychosis individuals
(FEP) and healthy controls (HC).
METHODS: We enrolled 22 UHR, 66 FEP and 67 HC and investigated the expression of 
12 genes using Taqman assays. We used the Univariate General Linear Model, as
well as Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.
RESULTS: We found that UFD1L (ubiquitin fusion degradation 1 like (yeast)) gene
was upregulated in UHR group compared to HC and FEP (P = 3.44 × 10(-6) ; P = 9.41
× 10(-6)). MBP (myelin basic protein) was downregulated in UHR compared to FEP (P
= 6.07 × 10(-6)). DISC1 (disrupted in schizophrenia 1) was also upregulated in
UHR compared to FEP but lost statistical significance when corrected for age.
CONCLUSIONS: These genes are directly related to neurodevelopmental processes and
have been associated to schizophrenia. Recent findings described that DISC1
overexpression can disrupt MBP expression, thus, we think that these alterations 
in UHR individuals could be associated with a common process. UFD1L showed a
different pattern of expression only for UHR group, suggesting that they can be
under an acute endoplasmatic reticulum stress, demanding elevated levels of Ufd1.
Further studies can improve knowledge on disease progression and putative targets
to preventive strategies.

PMID: 26089098  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


117. Intensive Care Med. 2015 Jul;41(7):1351-4. doi: 10.1007/s00134-015-3846-6. Epub
2015 Jun 19.

Understanding chlorhexidine decolonization strategies.

Noto MJ(1), Wheeler AP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Vanderbilt
University, 1161 21st Ave South, T-1223, MCN, Nashville, TN, 37232-2650, USA,
michael.j.noto@vanderbilt.edu.

PMID: 26088910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Cell Physiol. 2016 Feb;231(2):345-56. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25079.

Genetic and Functional Analysis of Polymorphisms in the Human Dopamine Receptor
and Transporter Genes in Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Cherubini E(1), Di Napoli A(1), Noto A(2,)(3), Osman GA(1), Esposito MC(1),
Mariotta S(1), Sellitri R(1), Ruco L(1), Cardillo G(4), Ciliberto G(3), Mancini
R(1,)(2), Ricci A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Molecolare, Sapienza Università di Roma,
Rome, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Chirurgia Pietro Valdoni, Sapienza Università di 
Roma, Rome, Italy. (3)IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Fondazione G. Pascale,
Napoli, Italy. (4)Chirurgia Toracica Ospedale San Camillo-Forlanini, Rome, Italy.

The regulatory role of dopamine (DA) in endocrine, cardiovascular and renal
functions has been extensively studied and used for clinical purposes. More
recently DA has been indicated as a regulatory molecule for immune cells and
malignant cell proliferation. We assessed the expression and the functional role 
DA, DA receptors, and transporters in primary small cell lung cancer (SCLC). By
HPLC DA plasma levels were more elevated in SCLC patients in comparison with
NSCLC patients and healthy controls. SCLC cell expressed DA D1- and D2-like
receptors and membrane and vesicular transporters at protein and mRNA levels. We 
also investigated the effects of independent D1- or D2-like receptor stimulation 
on SCLC cell cultures. DA D1 receptor agonist SKF38393 induced the increase of
cAMP levels and DARPP-32 protein expression without affecting SCLC growth rate.
Cell treatment with the DA D1 receptor antagonist SCH23390 inhibited SKF38393
effects. In contrast, the DA D2 receptor agonist quinpirole (10<U+2009>µM) counteracted,
in a dose and time dependent way, SCLC cell proliferation, it did not affect cAMP
levels and decreased phosphorylated AKT that was induced by DA D2 receptor
antagonist sulpiride. However, in only one SCLC line, stimulation of DA D2
receptor failed to inhibit cell proliferation in vitro. This effect was
associated to the existence of rs6275 and rs6277 polymorphisms in the D2 gene.
These results gave more insight into DA control of lung cancer cell behavior and 
suggested the existence of different SCLC phenotypes.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26081799  [PubMed - in process]


119. J Chromatogr A. 2015 Jul 10;1402:71-81. doi: 10.1016/j.chroma.2015.05.015. Epub
2015 May 18.

Simultaneous quantitation of five Panax notoginseng saponins by multi
heart-cutting two-dimensional liquid chromatography: Method development and
application to the quality control of eight Notoginseng containing Chinese patent
medicines.

Yao CL(1), Yang WZ(1), Wu WY(2), Da J(1), Hou JJ(1), Zhang JX(1), Zhang YH(3),
Jin Y(3), Yang M(1), Jiang BH(1), Liu X(1), Guo DA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Research Center for Modernization of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
National Engineering Laboratory for TCM Standardization Technology, Shanghai
Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Haike Road 501,
Shanghai 201203, China. (2)Shanghai Research Center for Modernization of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, National Engineering Laboratory for TCM
Standardization Technology, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Haike Road 501, Shanghai 201203, China. Electronic address:
wanyingwu@simm.ac.cn. (3)Thermo Fisher Scientific, Jinqiao Road 27, Shanghai
201206, China. (4)Shanghai Research Center for Modernization of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, National Engineering Laboratory for TCM Standardization
Technology, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Haike Road 501, Shanghai 201203, China. Electronic address: daguo@simm.ac.cn.

Current China Pharmacopoeia (ChP) standards employ diversified and case-dependent
assay methods to evaluate the quality of different Chinese patent medicines
(CPMs) that contain Panax notoginseng as the monarch drug. These conventional,
HPLC-based approaches, utilizing a complex sample preparation procedure, can
easily result in low analytical efficiency and possible component loss. Here, a
"monomethod-heterotrait matrix" (MHM) strategy is proposed, that is, developing a
universal multi heart-cutting two-dimensional liquid chromatography (MHC-2D-LC)
approach that facilitates the simultaneous quantitation of five P. notoginseng
saponins (noto-R1, Re, Rg1, Rb1, and Rd) in eight different CPMs. The MHC-2D-LC
system was constructed on a dual-gradient liquid chromatography instrument
equipped with a Poroshell SB C18 column and a Zorbax SB-Aq column for respective 
(1)D and (2)D separation. Method validation was performed in terms of
specificity, linearity (r(2) and F-test), intra-/inter-day precision (0.4-7.9%), 
stability (1.2-3.9%), and recovery (90.2-108.7%), and the LODs and LOQs (loaded
masses) of the five analytes varied between 4.0-11.0ng and 6.0-33.0ng,
respectively. The validated MHC-2D-LC approach was subsequently applied to
quantify the five saponins in thirty batches of different CPMs. The method
demonstrated superiority over the current ChP assay methods in respect of
specificity (avoiding co-elution), resolution (Rs>1.5), sample preparation
(easy-to-implement ultrasonic extraction without repeated re-extraction), and
transfer rate (minimum component loss). This is the first application of an
MHC-2D-LC method for the quantitative assessment of the constituents of CPMs. The
MHM approach represents a new, strategically significant methodology for the
quality control of CPMs that involve complex chemical matrix.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26022312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2015 Jul;32(7):458-70. doi: 10.1097/EJA.0000000000000223.

Development and validation of a score to predict postoperative respiratory
failure in a multicentre European cohort: A prospective, observational study.

Canet J(1), Sabaté S, Mazo V, Gallart L, de Abreu MG, Belda J, Langeron O, Hoeft 
A, Pelosi P; PERISCOPE group.

Collaborators: Canet J, Canet J, Sabaté S, Langeron O, Gama de Abreu M, Gallart
L, Belda F, Pelosi P, Hoeft A, Mazo V, Leva B, Burimi J, Halefi T, Hoxha A,
Pilika K, Selmani I, Daout V, Gauthier C, Kahn D, Momeni M, Watremez C, Straus S,
Djonovic-manovic D, Juros-Zovko M, Komen-Uljebrka H, Orlic V, Stuck I, Baláková 
L, Kosinová M, Krikava I, toudek R, tourac P, Zadrazilová K, Janvekar S,
Karjagin J, Rõivassepp K, Sõrmus A, Cuvillon P, Ibáñez-Esteve C, Langeron O, Raux
M, Nicolas-Robin A, Winter A, Brunier M, Engelhard K, Laufenberg Feldmann R,
Lindemann R, Mauff S, Sebastiani A, Zamperoni C, Hoeft A, Kessler F, Wittmann M, 
Bluth T, Gama de Abreu M, Güldner A, Kiss T, Bráz K, Ruszkai C, Micaglio M, Ori
C, Parotto M, Persona P, Giuseppe C, Carnesecchi P, Lazzeroni D, Lorenzi I,
Castellani G, Sances D, Spano G, Tredici S, Vezzoli D, Brunetti I, Di Noto A,
Gratarola A, Molin A, Montagnani L, Pellerano G, Pelosi P, Fusari M, Camici L,
Guzzetti L, Marangoni F, Severgnini P, Di Mauro P, Rapido F, Nemme I, Nemme J,
Blieka J, Borodiciene J, Budryte B, Karbonskiene A, Kiudulaite I, Miliekaite E, 
Rasimaviciute R, Sireviciene U, Staaityte R, Usas E, Zarskiene G,
Kontrimaviciute E, Sipylaite J, Tomkute G, Bardea P, Klop M, Koch M, Bozilow D,
Goch R, Bonifácio J, Marques S, Ralha TT, Alves D, Carvalho I, Parente JS, Tomé
S, Carmona C, Costa M, Lina M, Sierra S, Balcan A, Cindea I, Gherghina VI, Grasa 
C, Copotoiu R, Copotoiu SM, Kovacs J, Szederjesi J, Theil A, Filipescu D, Grytsan
A, Kapkan T, Rostovtsev S, Yushkova A, Calderón R, Cacho E, Marginet C, Monedero 
P, Yepes MJ, Esparza Miñana JM, Granell Gil M, Portolés GR, Lisi A, Perez G, Poch
N, Argañaraz Quinteros MR, Font Bosch C, Torrellardona Llobera J, Sabaté S,
Sierra P, de Vilanova A, Matute M, Dominguez AA, Arguis MJ, Belda I, Carrero E,
Moreno J, Rovira I, Ubre M, Castillo R, Herrero S, Ballester Luján MT, Belda FJ, 
Carbonell J, Gencheva G, Gutierrez A, Llorens J, Machado S, Llobell F, Martin DP,
García-Miguel FJ, García AP, Ahamdanech Idrissi A, del Fresno Cañaveras J,
Navarro Martinez JA, Paya Martinez E, Sanchez Garcia E, Vera Bella J, Aldana II, 
Campos J, Pelaez Vaamonde X, Torra M, Arroyo R, Cabrera JC, Carazo Cordobes J,
Gallart L, Rojo A, Santiveri FJ, Canet J, González M, Jiménez A, Jiménez Y, Martí
A, Mazo V, Moret E, Rodriguez Nuñez M, Velasco J, Calderón A, González M,
González O, Anchuelo AH, López E, Sánchez E, Aznárez Zango B, García Corral FJ,
Mata Mena E, Roca AP, Soto RF, Quintana B, Rabanal Llevot JM, Williams Camus MM, 
Palacios Blanco A, Largo Ruiz A, Feijoo JR, Castellano Garijo E, Cuenca JB, Bonet
Binimelis MJ, Grigorov I, Aguilar JL, De Nadal Clanchet M, Guerrero Viñas E,
Manrique Muñiz S, Martín Mora V, Munar Bauzà F, Núñez Aguado S, Olivé Vidal M,
Paños Gozalo Ml, Sánchez Marín M, Suescun López MC, Maino P, Yevstratov YE,
Kucukgoncu S, Sentürk NM, Ulke ZS.

Comment in
    Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2015 Jul;32(7):455-7.

BACKGROUND: Postoperative respiratory failure (PRF) is the most frequent
respiratory complication following surgery.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to build a clinically useful
predictive model for the development of PRF.
DESIGN: A prospective observational study of a multicentre cohort.
SETTING: Sixty-three hospitals across Europe.
PATIENTS: Patients undergoing any surgical procedure under general or regional
anaesthesia during 7-day recruitment periods.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Development of PRF within 5 days of surgery. PRF was
defined by a partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (PaO2) less than 8<U+200A>kPa 
or new onset oxyhaemoglobin saturation measured by pulse oximetry (SpO2) less
than 90% whilst breathing room air that required conventional oxygen therapy,
noninvasive or invasive mechanical ventilation.
RESULTS: PRF developed in 224 patients (4.2% of the 5384 patients studied).
In-hospital mortality [95% confidence interval (95% CI)] was higher in patients
who developed PRF [10.3% (6.3 to 14.3) vs. 0.4% (0.2 to 0.6)]. Regression
modelling identified a predictive PRF score that includes seven independent risk 
factors: low preoperative SpO2; at least one preoperative respiratory symptom;
preoperative chronic liver disease; history of congestive heart failure; open
intrathoracic or upper abdominal surgery; surgical procedure lasting at least
2<U+200A>h; and emergency surgery. The area under the receiver operating characteristic 
curve (c-statistic) was 0.82 (95% CI 0.79 to 0.85) and the Hosmer-Lemeshow
goodness-of-fit statistic was 7.08 (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.253).
CONCLUSION: A risk score based on seven objective, easily assessed factors was
able to predict which patients would develop PRF. The score could potentially
facilitate preoperative risk assessment and management and provide a basis for
testing interventions to improve outcomes.The study was registered at
ClinicalTrials.gov (identifier NCT01346709).

PMID: 26020123  [PubMed - in process]


121. Theriogenology. 2015 Sep 1;84(4):650-5. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2015.04.027. Epub 2015 May 4.

Factors affecting pregnancy length and phases of parturition in Martina Franca
jennies.

Carluccio A(1), Gloria A(2), Veronesi MC(3), De Amicis I(1), Noto F(1), Contri
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Teramo, Teramo, Italy.
(2)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Teramo, Teramo, Italy.
Electronic address: gloriaalessia@libero.it. (3)Department of Health, Animal
Science and Food Safety, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Università degli Studi
di Milano, Milan, Italy.

The knowledge of normal pregnancy length, duration of parturition stages, and
neonatal early adaptation is mandatory for a rationale management of birth,
especially in monotocous species with long gestations. This study reports data
obtained from a large number of Martina Franca jennies with normal healthy
pregnancies and spontaneous eutocic delivery of a mature, healthy, and viable
donkey foal. Pregnancy lasts, on average, 371 days, and only the fetal gender
significantly determines pregnancy length, with longer gestations observed in
jennies bearing male fetuses. Other factors such as the year of foaling, month of
ovulation, month of parturition, birth weight of the foal, and age of the jenny
did not influence pregnancy length. The first stage of foaling lasted on average 
65 minutes, the second stage 19 minutes, and the third stage 58 minutes. The
umbilical cord ruptured on average within 16 minutes after birth; the foal stood 
up in 61 minutes and suckled the colostrum for the first time within 10 minutes
after birth and again after 143 minutes of birth; meconium passage occurred, on
average, 86 minutes after birth. Although times reported for the process of
foaling are similar to data reported for the horse, the times for early neonatal 
donkey foal adaptation are longer as compared to the horse foal.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26007611  [PubMed - in process]


122. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2015 Jul;32(7):477-85. doi: 10.1097/EJA.0000000000000256.

Nonelective surgery at night and in-hospital mortality: Prospective observational
data from the European Surgical Outcomes Study.

van Zaane B(1), van Klei WA, Buhre WF, Bauer P, Boerma EC, Hoeft A, Metnitz P,
Moreno RP, Pearse R, Pelosi P, Sander M, Vallet B, Pettilä V, Vincent JL, Rhodes 
A; European Surgical Outcomes Study (EuSOS) group for the Trials groups of the
European Society of Intensive Care Medicine and the European Society of
Anaesthesiology.

Collaborators: Bauer P, Hoeft A, Metnitz P, Moreno R, Pearse R, Pelosi P, Rhodes 
A, Spies C, Vallet B, Vincent JL, Hoste E, Huyghens L, Jacobs R, Van Mossevelde
V, Opdenacker G, Poelaert J, Spapen H, Leleu K, Rijckaert D, De Decker K, Foubert
L, De Neve N, Biston P, Piagnerelli M, Collin V, den Blauwen N, Clauwaert C, De
Crop L, Hoste E, Verbeke A, Derumeaux P, Gardin C, Kindt S, Louage S, Verhamme B,
Druwé P, Lahaye I, Rosseel F, Rutsaert R, Vanlinthout L, De Kock M, Forget P,
Georges P, Grosu I, Kahn D, Lois F, Momeni M, Yemnga AP, Jadoul JL, Malbrain M,
Bosinceanu D, Collard E, Jorens P, Reyntiens D, Smitz C, Vercauteren M, Fagnoul
D, van Obbergh L, Goranovic T, Mazul-Sunko B, Toplice K, Oremu K, Belic G,
Duzel V, Hauptman A, Peremin S, ribar A, upcic M, Bencevic J, Brod S, Mirkovic 
I, aric Bauer Z, Belavic M, Blaanin B, Loncaric Katuin M, Brozovic Krijan A,
Mikovic P, imic-Korac N, Topic J, ilic A, unic J, Acan I, Adanic M, Ivanov N,
Pavicic aric J, Tomulic K, Viskovic N, Bonjak S, Haranji Drenjancevic I,
Kristek G, Kvolik S, Markic S, Stojanovic Rakipovic A, Tot OK, Venzera-Azenic D, 
Fabris LK, Bacak-Kocman I, Balenovic I, Bandic D, Deutsch PA, Divjak L, Grcic
Filipovic I, Guvinec Z, Krznaric Z, Loncaric Y, Maga JV, Mitrovic M, Okic M,
Pavlek M, Ramov E, Rezek K, Sekulic A, Tomasevic B, Miric M, Tomaevic A, Tomic
Mahecic T, Vrbanovic V, Bobinac M, Boic A, Debelic D, Frkovic V, Mladic Batinica
I, Baranovic S, Gavranovic , Kikec M, Maldini B, Maric S, Agnic I, Delic N,
Dropulic N, Kljakovic Gapic T, Ilic D, Ivancev B, Karanovic N, Kucevic D,
Marovic Z, Milic M, Nevecanin A, Petkovic T, Smoje M, Brozovic G, Goranovic T,
Jelisavac M, Matolic M, Mazul-Sunko B, Oberhofer D, Pavicic AM, akic K, Bozovic 
MD, Krecek ZK, Krobot R, Andabaka T, Bratanic M, Dzepina O, Kraljev M, eric J,
imurina T, Grujic R, Nacevski-Bulaja B, Barion M, Danira V, Draen B, Duanka
K, Baic Haluan M, Joko , Katica R, Labor M, Grgurevic Marinkovic T,
Mihovilcevic D, Marija B, Srecko M, Vrankovic S, Kyprianou T, Kyprianou T,
Neophytou K, Cerny V, Cvachovec K, Belikova B, Drab M, Hudacek K, Krikava I,
Stourac P, Zadrazilova K, Bicek V, Brabcová M, Klozová R, Vajter J, Vymazal T,
Toft P, Blichfeldt L, Hansen BD, Moller K, Nielsen JS, Frederiksen J, Dohn
Andersen J, Kühne JP, Leivdal S, Stendell L, Simonsen M, Zoltowski MK, Ali ZS,
Freundlich M, Pilypaite J, Clausen NG, Toft P, Thorup L, Hansen F, Bestle M,
Hansen CS, Afshari A, Bastholm Bille A, Lefort M, Secher EL, Liboriussen L,
Herodes V, Marvet K, Pool K, Kallas P, Mägi TK, Sütt J, Vijar K, Visk E, Vinnal
M, Ellermaa J, Liibusk L, Tikkerberi A, Falk I, Mällo E, Talving J, Pettila V,
Hovilehto S, Kirsi A, Mustola S, Tiainen P, Toivonen J, Dabnell S, Kaminski T,
Kaukonen M, Silvasti P, Vainio K, Lund V, Sjövall S, Saarinen K, Viitanen M,
Ahonen T, Alaspää A, Zittling R, Aarne S, Annette M, Bodo W, Laru-Sompa R, Elomaa
E, Lavonen L, Nevantaus J, Geier K, Kavasmaa T, Koorits U, Kubjas M, Lauritsalo
S, Ottelin L, Palve M, Pynnönen J, Raabis I, Saarelainen M, Heikkilä T, Kontula
T, Lehtimäki M, Liimatainen J, Moilanen-Oikarinen M, Pakarinen M, Palanne R,
Seppänen H, Pulkkinen A, Vääräniemi H, Kainuun Keskussairaala K, Paananen S,
Koskenkari J, Sälkiö S, Vakkala M, Koskue T, Loisa P, Ruut L, Hautamäki R,
Koivisto SP, Futier E, Lefrant JY, Leon A, Bonnet F, Marret E, Spielvogel C,
Papageorgiou C, Szymkiewicz O, Tounou-Akue F, Aubrun F, Bonnet A, Gazon M,
Guiraud M, Laurent V, Béclère A, Tachon G, Demars N, Dumenil AS, Mercier FJ,
Landais A, Mentec H, Bazin M, Futier E, Gonnu S, Petit A, Albaladejo P, Almeras
L, Bataillard A, Rossi-Blancher M, Lefrant JY, Barthel F, Hallel D, Sbai H,
Khalifeh P, Lidzborski L, Jully M, Platon E, Pottecher J, Baumgarten R, Schultz
C, ElMiloudi F, Lefebvre J, Waton K, Sprunck A, Steib A, Thibaud A, Thuet V,
Kieffer V, Dubois-Vallaud D, Jacob L, Becanne X, Cherfaoui S, Gauzit R, Godier A,
Lakhdari M, Samma CM, Bigeon JY, Burtin P, Halchini C, Lacroix M, Pinna F, Barbes
A, Just B, Mateu P, Benayoun L, Berger P, Granier N, Perrigault PF, Libert N, De 
Rudnicki S, Merat S, Bourdet B, Ferré F, Minville V, Piriou V, Rague P, Wallet F,
Lebuffe G, Desbordes J, Robin E, Ichai C, Orban JC, Marx G, Sander M, Gottschalk 
A, Piontek A, Unterberg M, Hilpert J, Kees M, Triltsch A, Wiegand-Löhnert C,
Glöckner C, Hohn A, Rose E, Schröder S, Wiese O, Awlakpui E, Hoeft A, Scheidemann
M, Wittmann M, Ramminger A, de Abreu MG, Heller AR, Marx C, Neidel J, Goldmann A,
von Heymann C, Laetsch B, Maahs E, Scholz L, Frenzel D, Massarat K, Lenhart FP,
Reichle F, Rudlof K, Borchers F, Buettner C, Schmutzler M, Burgard G, Lucht A,
Wagner J, Pilge S, Schneider G, Untergehrer G, Bis B, Krassler J, Dittmann J,
Haberkorn J, Eberitsch J, Eberitsch K, Nippraschk T, Wepler U, Engelen WC, Nau C,
Scholler A, Schüttler J, Wintzheimer S, Bloos F, Braune A, Fergen D, Ludewig K,
Paxian M, Reinhart K, Graf N, Schwarzkopf K, Berger K, Habicher M, Kasperiunaite 
R, Savelsberg S, Krep H, Reindl M, Weber M, Bauer W, Bingold F, Christ S,
Friederich P, Kaviani R, Auer P, Bonnländer G, Drescher J, Braun R, Eichenauer T,
Kerner J, Bierbaum K, Brünner H, Grond S, Perez-Platz U, Andresen B, Linstedt U, 
Stegmann N, Erkens U, Kopcke J, Meyer A, Brestrich H, Ernst S, Merkel S, Krieger 
L, Luers F, Weyland A, Noeldge-Schomburg G, Menckie T, Wasmund C, Bredtmann RD,
Erler I, Haumann C, Möllemann A, Oehmichen U, Sergejewa O, Lehning B, Czeslick E,
Geyer M, Malcharek M, Sablotzki A, Stier M, Feld F, Marx G, Rossaint R, Simon V, 
Armaganidis A, Koulenti D, Kotanidou A, Nanas S, Papastylianou A, Psevdi A,
Stathopoulos A, Voulas A, Kanna E, Koutsikou A, Moustaka A, Chovas A, Komnos A,
Zafiridis T, Franses J, Lavrentieva A, Koraki E, Katsenos C, Kasianidou MF,
Nasopoulou P, Spyropoulou E, Gousia C, Katsanoulas C, Lathyris D, Kyriazopoulos
G, Sfyras D, Tsirogianni A, Armaganidis A, Kostopanagiotou G, Koulenti D, Lignos 
M, Matsota P, Christopoulos C, Mouratidou A, Vrettou E, Boufidis S, Moka E,
Arnaoutoglou E, Koulouras V, Nakos G, Papathanakos G, Anthopoulos G, Choutas G,
Karapanos D, Tzani V, Gkiokas G, Nastos K, Nikolakopoulos F, Dragoumanis C,
Nikitidis N, Pneumatikos I, Theodorou V, Zacharouli D, Kandi S, Tasopoulos K,
Arvaniti K, Matamis D, Mplougoura E, Petropoulou P, Soumpasis I, Amaniti E,
Giannakou-Peftoulidou M, Gkeka E, Soultati I, Kokinou M, Papatheodorou L,
Stafylaraki M, Giasnetsova T, Gritsi-Gerogianni N, Kydona C, Kiskira O, Koulentis
I, Apsokardos A, Dimitropoulos K, Soldatou O, Nathanail C, Papazotos A, Kolotoura
A, Sartzi M, Papanikolaou S, Polakis P, Karatzas S, Kyparissi A, Papavasilopoulou
T, Koukoubani T, Mastora E, Spyropoulou K, Papaioannou A, Maragkou E, Spring A,
Ioakeimidou SE, Noulas N, Molnár Z, Molnár Z, Csüllög E, Elekes E, Katona Z,
Kremer I, Miko A, Csomos A, Galambos Z, Szucs A, Nyikos G, Szekeres G, Szabo E,
Kranitz K, Simon M, Szigeti J, Gaál E, Havas A, Ille A, Bráz K, Nagy G,
Sigurdsson G, Sigurbjörnsson FT, Sigurdsson GH, Sigurdardottir EE, Gunnarsson B, 
Westbrook A, Broderick A, Hafeez P, Hanumanthaiah D, Brohan J, O'Chroinin D,
Bailey K, Ramamoorthy KG, Doyle Y, Freir N, O'Rourke J, Jonson P, Saeed S, Hayes 
I, Loughrey J, Frohlich S, McCauley N, Ryan D, Fitzpatrick G, Kevin L, Thomas J, 
Warde B, Woolhead A, Duggan M, Egan C, Crowley S, Lebese S, Bergin A, Westbrook
A, Page R, Collins D, McKenny M, Della Rocca G, Grasso S, Bresciani A, Carmino L,
Ghelfi S, Lorenzelli L, Novelli MT, Pescarmona C, Roasio A, Gatta A, Nastasi M,
Sanseverino M, Tinti C, Bianchin A, Tormena MP, Franco A, Marini F, Rapido F,
Bellotti F, Boninsegna D, Castellani G, Sances D, Spano G, Tredici S, Vezzoli D, 
Fucecchio I, Bacci A, Coppini R, Dell'Unto S, Mori E, Stanzani MR, Tosi M,
Collareta M, Forfori F, Franchi M, Mancino G, Battistella M, Baricocchi E, Bona
F, Debernardi F, Giacoletto G, Iacobellis A, Massucco P, Moselli N, Muratore A,
Palomba G, Sardo E, De Simone M, Suita L, Zocca E, Bucci B, Corte FD, Piciucco T,
Viarengo V, Pugliese F, Ruberto F, Bettelli G, Cantarini E, Giampieri M, Tanfani 
A, Recchia E, Milano S, Bignami E, Bruno G, Costagliola R, Gandolfi A, Greco M,
Lembo R, Monti G, Nicelli E, Pasculli N, Turi S, Baroselli A, Brazzoni M,
Buttazzoni M, Buttera S, Centonze C, Serena G, Spagnesi L, Toretti I, Vilardi A, 
Zearo E, Arpino I, Baraldi S, Guarnerio C, Molene V, Monea MC, Vaccarisi E,
Vicari L, Albante A, Aversano M, Loiacono C, Marandola M, Fusari M, Petrucci N,
Galla A, Mascia A, Primieri P, Di Noto A, Gratarola A, Molin A, Pelosi P,
Spagnolo L, Spena C, Bussolengo O, Calligaro P, Marchiotto S, Merlini A,
Pedrazzoli E, Perina G, Visentin R, Fumagalli R, Garbagnati A, Manetti B, Snaier 
C, Somaini M, Farnia A, Nani R, Pierantonio N, De Michele M, Grasso S, Gazzanelli
S, Marandola M, Bergamini E, Tassinati T, Capuzzo M, Cirillo V, Tufano R, Oggioni
R, Parrini V, Brunori E, Capone M, Carbone L, Corradetti F, Elisei D, Fiorentino 
S, Francesconi M, Gattari D, Gorgoglione M, Iacobone E, Minnucci F, Montironi C, 
Riccioni G, Tappata G, Zompanti V, Verdenelli P, Cerutti E, Ranieri VM,
Golubovska I, Grigorjevs S, Rikmane M, Rozkalne D, Stepanovs J, Suba O,
Golubovska I, Kazune S, Miscuk A, Nemme J, Oss P, Sipylaite J, Macas A, Ragaisis 
V, Kontrimaviciute E, Tomkute G, Boerma E, Kramer IF, Poeze M, Ziekenhuis A,
Maria J, Pelzer G, Winsser LJ, Nijsten M, Schoorl M, Spanjersberg R, Buhre WF,
Dieleman S, van Klei WA, van Zaane B, Koopman-van Gemert AW, Bouw M, Pickkers P, 
van der A M, Capelle Z, Schreiner F, van den Berg R, De Wit E, Keijzer C,
Hollmann MW, Preckel B, van Acker GJ, Dennesen PJ, Ziekenhuis AS, Kuijpers-Visser
AG, Inan T, Ponssen HH, Boerma E, Brouwer T, Koopmans M, van Bommel J, van Duijn 
D, van der Hoven B, Ormskerk P, Beck O, Schiere S, Reidinga C, Venema A, Olthof
K, Flaatten H, Jammer I, Flaatten H, Jammer I, Dokka V, Monsen SA, Ytrebo LM,
Noursadeghi M, Shahzad A, Boksasp D, Roiss C, Strietzel HF, Berntsen AG, Haugland
H, Vingsnes SO, Axelsson P, Risom Olsen TC, Katre S, Aakeroey K, Mikstacki A,
Tamowicz B, Bozilow D, Goch R, Grabowski P, Kupisiak J, Mallek M, Szyca R,
Jankowski G, Koscielniak W, Pietraszek P, Szarowar B, Matos R, França C, Lacerda 
AP, Ormonde L, Rosa R, Pereira I, Vitor P, Valente P, Lopes Marques Carvalho MR, 
Faria M, Almeida E, Mealha R, Vicente R, Monte R, Rua F, Barros N, Esteves F,
Gouveia Pinheiro CM, Oliveira VM, Oliveira MF, Martins I, Saraiva JP, Assunção
JP, Bártolo A, Carvalho A, Correia C, Martins S, Milheiro R, Diaz A, Gonçalves
MI, Ribeiro R, Estilita J, Glória C, de Almeida J, Barros F, Ramos A, Camara M,
Maul ER, Nobrega J, Langner A, Maia DF, Afonso O, Faria F, Cabral C, Botelho MM, 
Ferreira P, Mourão L, Oliveira AV, Resende M, Aleman M, Fonseca J, Isidoro M, de 
Meneses H, Pêgas A, Pereira J, Pereira L, Ramos B, Matos F, Matos R, Martins A,
Ramos C, de Sousa M, Bento L, Botas C, Lopes V, Mendes R, Grigoras I, Blaj M,
Damian M, Lupusoru A, Ristescu I, Codreanu M, Diaconescu C, Nistor A, Stanescu
Stelian D, Streanga L, Berneanu M, Bordeianu C, Florenta C, Iacob A, Lupu MN,
Mocanu I, Moraru C, Meran C, Nicolae B, Sandu M, Turcanu R, Grigore M, Hotaranu
C, Popescu N, Baban O, Baciu M, Ciobanu A, Denciu CI, Gurau V, Maftei I,
Ungureanu L, Bogdan P, Corneci D, Dinu M, Madalina D, Silvius N, Tomescu D,
Gabriela D, Dinescu SA, Calin M, Ionescu D, Margarit S, Vasian H, Albu C, Balasa 
C, Cadrigati A, Dragulescu D, Gavra L, Hentia C, Macarie C, Manescu M, Nediglea
I, Ocica D, Ovidiu B, Papurica M, Plavat C, Popa C, Ramneantu M, Sandici Z,
Sarandan M, Belciu I, Tincu E, Ursu I, Aignatoaie M, Huzuneanu M, Cocu S, Hagau
N, Ciubotaru R, Copotoiu R, Ioana G, Kovacs J, Leonard A, Szederjesi I, Genoveva 
V, Mosnegutu S, Surbatovic M, Djordjevic D, Djordjevic B, Grujic K, Jovanovic D, 
Krstic I, Zeba S, Jevdjic J, Miletic M, Zunic F, Bulasevic A, Brko R, Gazibegovic
N, Kendrisic M, Vojinovic R, Firment J, Capková J, Firment J, Grochova M,
Trenkler S, Griger M, Bakosova E, Kvasnica M, Saniova B, Sulaj M, Zacharovska A, 
Simkova A, Cíková A, Gebhardtova A, Hanuljaková S, Koutun J, Martonová A,
ilincárová V, Galkova K, Krbila S, Sobona V, Ocenasova M, Novak-Jankovic V,
Novak-Jankovic V, Grynyuk A, Damjanovska M, Kostadinov I, Knezevic M, Malivojevic
M, Borovsak Z, Kamenik M, Meki D, Osojnik I, Kosec L, Kap SO, Aleksic D,
Gerjevic B, Kalan K, Ursic T, Aldecoa C, Montejo González JC, Artigas A, Garcia
A, Lisi A, Perez I, Perez G, Poch N, Vaquer S, Balciscueta G, Barrasa H, Cabanes 
S, Maynar J, Poveda Y, Rodero AQ, Garcia-Bunger B, Elvira MA, Lajara AM, Palencia
M, Ramos R, Fernandez AS, Tirapu León JP, López JI, Yoldi Murillo FJ, Ramirez ET,
Rico PU, Patricia M, Vizcaíno M, Bernat Álvarez MJ, Real KP, Aracil N, Menendez
Bodega B, Fernández García R, Álvarez García M, Gordon Q, Gutiérrez Jodrá A, De
Santos López A, Ros JJ, Soto RA, Sepúlveda I, Díez EP, Fernández Fernández L,
Gulina CS, Pérez Arviza L, Mouriz Fernandez L, Gómez AR, Alonso Martínez C,
Mouriz Rodríguez AB, Lopez Soto C, Aldecoa C, Garcia C, Lorenzo M, Pinilla E,
Rico J, Ruperez I, Alonso E, Leira F, Maseda DP, Royo C, Villagran J, Murillo
Candi G, Esteva GE, Folgado RM, Fornaguera NJ, Calonge Montse P, Prat AS, Sintes 
D, Arteta DA, García Delgado H, López-Cuervo JF, López MC, Ramírez A, Saldaña FJ,
Aliste P, Anchuelo AH, García Campos A, Catalán M, García Gómez M, Gonzalez
Gonzalaez O, López López E, Arlanzón de Quevedo S, Gonzalez Serrano M,
Perez-Cerdá Silvestre F, Martinez Torrente F, Arocas B, Soro M, Maroto F, Robledo
Algarra R, Aleixandre IS, Rodriguez Argente G, Broseta Lleó A, Rubio AV, Vicente 
Sánchez JL, Enríquez Valcárcel I, Balust C, Balust J, Borrat X, Carretero MJ,
Gracia I, Matute P, Mercadal J, Pujol R, Tena B, Ubre M, Albalad DD, Muñoz
Alcaide C, Caballero J, Montferrer Estruch N, Ferrer MB, Lacasta Fornells A,
Terrer Galera E, Garcia Martinez I, Manrique Muñoz S, Pelavski A, Perez PT,
Gonzalez Posada MA, Chocron de Prat I, Rello J, Garcia Serrano L, Naya Sieiro JM,
Silva L, Colomina Sole MJ, Biarnes Suñé A, Rochera Villach I, Gómez Herreras JI, 
Poves R, Martinez Rafael B, Martinez Almeida I, Fernandez Collates A, Bartolomé
MJ, Cimadevilla B, González González AM, Rabanal Llevot JM, de Terán Mira JC,
González Molina B, Pardo S, Sánchez CL, Williams M, Muñoz Corsini L, Rodríguez
Fraile JR, de la Lastra M, Sacramento MK, López Saña FJ, Trenado Ålvarez J,
Cantón Bulnes ML, Carrasco VG, Cubillos DN, Seisdedos ÁA, Torres BF, Ampuero MS, 
Llano MC, Munoz M, Orts M, Planas A, Ramasco F, Roman C, Durán MV, del Río
Fernandez S, Sanduende Otero Y, Lopez Pineiro S, Barreiro Pardal C, Fernández
Alcantud J, Antolinos MA, Barrios F, Casanova AC, Castro MR, Crespo BI, Felipe
UL, Fuster ML, García MS, Garrote BH, Gonzalez RM, Granero MJ, Lloreda de la Guia
C, López RC, de Frutos López S, Martinez JJ, Mostaza AG, Moreno AJ, Osado IR,
Pastor AB, Peña R, Pérez MR, Piña MA, Romero CA, Rodríguez ER, Sáez VP, Safatle
F, Salvan JH, Sampedro MG, de la Torre PA, Toro JP, Unzúe CL, Vargas MJ, Bernal
DG, Echevarria M, Iglesias AU, Loza A, Rodriguez Morillo A, Serrano PD,
Barrientos Sevilla FC, Cacho E, Calderón R, Dufur M, Marginet C, Monedero P,
Yepes MJ, Alvarez LR, Carballal FF, Castiñeiras AP, García PD, López LR, Maceiras
PR, Puente MS, Rilo MT, Alonso ET, Fernández SR, García RO, García AP, Puentes
RB, Aguado DN, Carballo CL, Fernandez RF, Presedo AT, de Rabago RB, Velasco AR,
Capel YJ, Cortés AF, García EM, Gimeno LM, Klamburg J, Omedas RC, Núñez MG,
Maristany CL, Ruiz EM, Artigas X, Castrillón S, Espinosa N, Gomez-Caro AM, Illa
S, Martín-Huerta B, Moreno M, Fernández CI, García VF, Hernández PP, Checa AH,
Diaz DS, Noguera ML, Varela IP, Gallego MA, García OM, Irujo JJ, Perrino CG,
Picazo JR, Timoneda FL, Arroyo MM, Blanco IA, Borja MM, Burcio SM, Castro NM,
Cerdeiriña AP, Cristina MV, Dorado Díaz T, Esteruelas JA, Ingelmo II, Insuga PD, 
Llamas EC, Lopez JJ, Martín MB, Martín EE, Mesa EU, Monterde ML, Montoiro PA,
Móstoles ML, Olarte EV, Pérez AM, Perez FD, Romero AS, Rous DP, Ruiz NM, Ruiz JA,
Saiz AR, Toha AC, Utrera FA, Alberdi F, Elósegui I, García J, Garde PM, Mintegui 
EI, Sáez IG, Salas E, Camil S, Diaz-Boladeras RM, Mora-Guevara E, Zamora JF,
Bonet A, Salo L, Salinas U, Zaballos JM, Alvarez AA, Garrido CJ, Roa JR, Vidal
FG, Garcia-Egea J, Elson MZ, Asensio MA, Simeón RG, Alameda LE, Angulo GO,
Aranzubia M, Arcas JJ, Arevalo J, Belvert BQ, Calvo CP, Cremades M, Crespo P,
Cuarental A, Fernández PT, Herrera E, Llorente MA, Rabes CM, de Maeyer AG,
Marquez MP, Mendoza DL, Muñoz JM, Martínez NA, Ferrandiz ST, Sanchez-Morcillo S, 
Sánchez ML, Parra AM, Vidal SG, Allué RM, Etayo BZ, Rodriguez RB, Villen LM,
Jimenez CM, de Zayas RS, Moreno CD, Pacheco FS, Pascual JL, Parla IC, Gude FT,
Riestra EM, Delgado FC, de Vilanova A, Barrios J, García-Sanz M, García V,
Sanmiguel G, Álvaro JL, Barrachima BB, Bermejo FJ, Garcia AG, Ramírez CN, Ramos
JG, Samaniego LA, Belenguer-Muncharaz A, Mateu-Campos ML, Domínguez D, Espinosa
E, León T, Betancor NO, Cortes JG, Díaz JJ, Canalechevarria AM, Novales BF, Peña 
JM, Delgado TR, Roquerio BS, Sainz JJ, Soto TT, Chew M, Dahm P, Odenstedt Hergès 
H, Lundborg C, Söndergaard S, Rylander C, Sari F, Oscarsson Tibblin A, Adolfsson 
A, Klarin B, Schrey S, Chew MS, Merisson E, Ryde J, Divander MB, Hedin A, Hedlund
D, Jawad M, Layous L, Brattström O, Olheden S, Oldner A, Sellden E, Walder B,
Wickboldt N, Wickboldt N, Rossi A, Steiner L, Djurdjevic M, Lussmann R, Geisen M,
Hofer C, Turina M, Grocott M, Goldhill D, Everett L, Harris K, Wright M, Adams D,
Alderson L, Baker J, Christie I, Ferguson C, Hill M, Holmes K, Hutton A, Minto G,
Moor P, Porter A, Struthers R, Akotia N, Belhaj A, Chang S, Collantes E, Eigener 
K, Husband M, Khan A, McAlees EJ, MacDonald N, Niebrzegowska E, Parnell W, Smith 
A, Chhatwal A, Jhingan S, Muswell R, Poon Y, Singh N, Stephens R, Vasan R, Waife 
N, Weda T, Clarke A, Szakmany T, Fletcher S, Rosbergen M, Prince L, Wong K,
Goldhill D, Kumar R, Stilwell S, Couper K, Crooks N, Gao-Smith F, Melody T,
Snaith C, Patel J, Parekh D, Yeung J, Loughnan B, Rope T, Dawson J, Hadfield D,
Hopkins P, McDonald L, Willars C, Campbell G, Craig J, Smith A, Ladipo K,
Lockwood G, Moreno J, Ballington R, Hamandishe S, Rogerson D, Cowman S, Hayden P,
Pinto N, Arawwawala D, Brotherston L, Mitchell-Inwang C, Walsh H, Alagarsamy F,
Goon S, Karcheva S, Krepska A, McKinney B, Patil V, Devon R, Batchelor N, Finch
L, Gibson C, Grayling M, Hubble S, Key W, Knight T, Loosley A, Margetts P,
Stewart H, Bewley J, Hurley K, Murphy R, Philpott C, Pollock K, Sweet K, Thomas
M, Tucker K, Windsor D, Conway D, Gold S, Quraishi T, Cupitt J, Baddeley S, Brown
JD, Mantle D, Carvalho P, Huddart S, Kirk-Bayley J, Smith RL, Milligan L, Poulose
S, Sarkar S, Nolan J, Pedley E, Padkin A, Pesian S, Rajamanickam S, Ramkumar K,
Thomas J, Crayford A, Turner A, Bottrill F, Webb S, Jhanji S, MacCallum N,
Wessels K, Wigmore T, Meikle A, Wilson S, White S, Bonnett A, Rushton A, Williams
C, Zuzan O, Hall A, Montgomery J, Piggot A, Read R, Stocker M, Tamm T, Agarwal B,
Ward S, Brown L, Joy M, Venkatesh S, Hughes T, Mitchell-Inwang C, Zsisku L, Roy
A, Hooper V, Mouland J, Nightingale J, Rose S, Chiam P, Chohan H, Dickson C, Gibb
S, Higham C, Harvey C, Janarthanan C, Jones L, Kapoor A, Moll M, Roberts L,
Saunders D, Arnold G, Gibbs C, Jhurgursing M, Pritchard F, Doyle P, Templeton M, 
Wilson R, Zantua K, Collyer T, Featherstone J, Worton R, Bruce J, McGuigan K,
Moreton S, Pulletz M, Anderson H, Baxter I, Beckingsale A, Callaghan M, Datta A, 
Dawson J, Gollogly J, Izod C, Lobaz S, MacFie C, Patel M, Payne H, Singh R, Timms
G, McLeod S, O'Brian P, Horner E, Joshi V, Stuart-Smith K, Seale T, Bolger C,
Collins H, Ekins E, Golder K, Hawkins L, Jonas M, Linford K, Wadams B,
Vizcaychipi M, Jewsbury W, Davies S, Kangaraj M, Pissay N, Smith N,
Gopalakrishnan S, MacKinnon J, Strandvik G, Francis R, Jennings A, Keating M,
Kumar S, Leese S, Magee C, Pilsbury J, Ralph J, Riddington D, Sachdeva R, Snelson
C, Vasanth S, Wilde J, Lavender B, Lyons R, Watters M, Adams T, Dyer S, Tindall
L, Claxton A, Netke M, Princess D, Akouds E, Bates D, Gallagher H, Hatton J,
Holroyd W, Mitra A, Nurse T, Reed D, Barber R, Childs S, O'Carroll-Kuehn B,
Wyldbore M, Al-Abdaly A, Amatya S, Bhaskaran S, Chandan G, Chaudhry S, Chikungwa 
M, Earnshaw G, Grewal M, Haque S, Hawkins J, Javaid A, Jackson C, Kamel M, Marla 
R, Mculloch DA, Parker T, Salib Y, Saravanmuthu R, Secker C, Sockalingam S,
Taylor A, Austine P, Kanade V, Paal D, Mok S, Burtenshaw A, Davis L, Ellahee P,
Freeman D, Pierson R, Wollaston J, Karmarkar A, Ball C, Calton E, Maxwell L,
Walker R, Bland M, Bullock L, Harrison-Briggs D, Hodge P, Krige A, Dempsey G,
Hammell C, Loveridge R, Parker R, Snell J, Wright C, Baker A, Barr K, Belcher A, 
Bonnington S, Bougeard AM, Fitzgerald E, Ford R, Gillard C, Griffiths L,
Greenberg L, Huber J, Mathieu S, Richardson N, Tompsett L, White N, Patel S,
Thomas R, Wilson J, Copley E, Flutter L, Hulme J, Susarla J, Thwaites A,
Infirmary AE, Jayasundera S, McAfee S, Chantler J, McKechnie S, Neely J, Mouton
R, Scarth E, Buss J, Currie V, Sange M, Kuttler A, Power F, Alexander D, Dunne K,
Shinner G, Black E, Haldane G, Kerr J, Saran T, Ward G, Jefferies F, Alexander P,
Royle A, Nahla F, Bowles T, Gregory M, Ahern R, Cartlidge D, Craker L, Thompson
C, Bidd H, Giles J, Manser A, Parry G, Chan P, Das D, Fahmy N, Higgins D, Khader 
AA, Stone A, Leonardi S, Rose O, Ercole A, Rafi MA, Ramasamy R, Sheshgiri B,
Merrill C, Page V, Walker E, Harris S, Hughes S, Morrison A, Razouk K, Ayman M,
Al-Subaie N, Arif F, Cashman J, Cecconi M, Edsell M, Fossati N, Hammond SJ,
Hamilton M, Lonsdale D, Moran C, Rhodes A, Siegmueller C, Velzeboer F, Wong P,
Jakeman A, Mowatt C, Tsakas P, Clouva-Molyvdas PM, Nyktari V, Malliotakis P,
Bekos V, Molnar T, Karason S, Blondal A, Di Mauro P, Tommasino C, Della Rocca G, 
Zandvliet R, in't Veld BA, Reidinga AC, Dagfinn Boksasp O, Kostryka W, Choma R,
de Sousa Pereira de Freitas AC, de la Quintana Gordon B, Serra S, Goncalves
Castro Mde L, Botas C, Maldovan I, Rely M, Sandesc D, Copotoiu SM, Obradovic J,
Zahorec R, Stecher A, Stivan F, Vallejo A, Mas Serra A, Real Navacerrada I,
Pastor Martinez E, Camps Cervantes A, de Nadal Clanchet M, Zaldibar E, Miguez
Crespo Mdel R, Laza Laza E, Heredia Perez Mdel P, India I, Moral V, Concostrina
Mde L, de la Vega Terol A, Zabarte M, Seron-Arbeloa C, Del Olmo M, Franqueza
Garcia Isabel Garcia Vega JL, Santos Oveido A, Inigo JA, de la Torre Prados MV,
Ferrandiz-Selles A, Seeman-Lodding H, Ryde'n J, Wernerman J, Bjorne H, Kong ML,
Blunt M, Moosajee V, Edger L, Sandhar T, Day C, Foo I, Pierro D, Price G, Desikan
S, Mok MU, Trodd D, Soar J, Bright E.

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that sleep deprivation associated with night-time
working may adversely affect performance resulting in a reduction in the safety
of surgery and anaesthesia.
OBJECTIVE: Our primary objective was to evaluate an association between
nonelective night-time surgery and in-hospital mortality. We hypothesised that
urgent surgery performed during the night was associated with higher in-hospital 
mortality and also an increase in the duration of hospital stay and the number of
admissions to critical care.
DESIGN: A prospective cohort study. This is a secondary analysis of a large
database related to perioperative care and outcome (European Surgical Outcome
Study).
SETTING: Four hundred and ninety-eight hospitals in 28 European countries.
PATIENTS: Men and women older than 16 years who underwent nonelective, noncardiac
surgery were included according to time of the procedure.
INTERVENTION: None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Primary outcome was in-hospital mortality; the secondary
outcome was the duration of hospital stay and critical care admission.
RESULTS: Eleven thousand two hundred and ninety patients undergoing urgent
surgery were included in the analysis with 636 in-hospital deaths (5.6%). Crude
mortality odds ratios (ORs) increased sequentially from daytime [426 deaths
(5.3%)] to evening [150 deaths (6.0%), OR 1.14; 95% confidence interval 0.94 to
1.38] to night-time [60 deaths (8.3%), OR 1.62; 95% confidence interval 1.22 to
2.14]. Following adjustment for confounding factors, surgery during the evening
(OR 1.09; 95% confidence interval 0.91 to 1.31) and night (OR 1.20; 95%
confidence interval 0.9 to 1.6) was not associated with an increased risk of
postoperative death. Admittance rate to an ICU increased sequentially from
daytime [891 (11.1%)], to evening [347 (13.8%)] to night time [149 (20.6%)].
CONCLUSION: In patients undergoing nonelective urgent noncardiac surgery,
in-hospital mortality was associated with well known risk factors related to
patients and surgery, but we did not identify any relationship with the time of
day at which the procedure was performed.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov identifier: NCT01203605.

PMID: 26001104  [PubMed - in process]


123. Recenti Prog Med. 2015 May;106(5):217-26. doi: 10.1701/1868.20406.

[Therapeutic decisions and treatment with sorafenib in hepatocellular carcinoma: 
final analysis of GIDEON study in Italy].

[Article in Italian]

D'Angelo S, Germano D, Zolfino T, Sansonno D, Giannitrapani L, Benedetti A,
Montesarchio V, Attili A, Buonadonna A, Barni S, Gasbarrini A, Burlone ME, Cillo 
U, Marenco S, Villa E, Giovanis P, Proserpio I, Saitta C, Magini G, Cengarle R,
Fava G, Cuttone F, Calvani N, Angelico M, Di Costanzo F, Noto A, Poggi G,
Marignani M, Cascinu S, Amoroso D, Palmieri V, Massa E, Crocè LS, Picardi A,
Tumulo S, Erminero C, Lencioni R, Lorusso V.

INTRODUCTION: Sorafenib, an oral multikinase inhibitor, is the only targeted
agent approved for the treatment of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 
after demonstration to increase overall survival compared to placebo in two
randomized phase III study. GIDEON (Global Investigation of therapeutic DEcisions
in HCC and Of its treatment with sorafeNib) is the largest, global,
non-interventional, prospective study of patients with uHCC (n>3200) treated with
sorafenib in real-life clinical practice conditions. Here we report the final
analysis of safety and efficacy in the Italian cohort of patients.
METHODS: Patients with unresectable HCC who are candidates for systemic therapy, 
and for whom a decision has been made to treat with sorafenib, are eligible for
inclusion. Patients demographics disease characteristics and treatment history
were recorded at baseline visit. Sorafenib dose, concomitant medications,
performance status, liver function, adverse events and efficacy (survival and
response rate) were collected throughout the study.
RESULTS: In the Italian cohort of the GIDEON study 278 patients were included in 
36 centers. The global rate of adverse events was 81%. Drug-related events
accounted for 67%, mostly of grade 1 and 2, and only 8% were classified as
serious. The most common were diarrhea (24%), fatigue (23%), dermatological
(14%), rash/exfoliation (10%), hypertension (9%), hemorrage/bleeding of
gastrointestinal tract (6%). Overall survival was 14.4 months and time to
progression 6.2 months. Objective responses were observed in 14 patients (5%)
with 3 complete responses (1%). Stable diseases of at least 6 weeks were observed
in 113 patients (41%) with a 30% of disease control rate.
DISCUSSION: The safety profile of sorafenib in terms of rate and type of adverse 
events is similar to that emerged in the global international GIDEON study as
well as in the pivotal registration studies.

PMID: 25994538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Biol Res (Thessalon). 2015 Feb 28;22(1):3. doi: 10.1186/s40709-015-0026-3.
eCollection 2015.

Assessment of the microbiological quality of fresh produce on sale in Sicily,
Italy: preliminary results.

Cardamone C(1), Aleo A(2), Mammina C(2), Oliveri G(1), Di Noto AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Sicilia "A. Mirri", via G.
Marinuzzi 3, 90129 Palermo, Italy. (2)Department of Science for Health Promotion 
and Mother-Child Care "G. D'Alessandro", University of Palermo, via del Vespro
133, 90127 Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Fresh produce occupies an increasingly important place in the human
food supply because of its health-promoting nutritional properties. Most fresh
produce is eaten raw or after minimal processing and, consequently, pathogen
contamination can represent a serious health risk. There has been an increase in 
foodborne outbreaks and cases associated with fresh produce, but literature data 
about the prevalence of pathogen contamination are inconsistent. This study was
undertaken to assess the hygienic quality and the prevalence of the most common
bacterial pathogens in fresh produce sold in retail markets in Sicily. A total of
125 samples of different types of vegetables were examined by standardized
microbiological methods.
RESULTS: The aerobic mesophilic count ranged between 2 log and 7 log cfu g(-1)
and the Enterobacteriaceae counts between<U+2009><<U+2009>1 log and 6 log cfu g(-1), with
statistically significant differences between unprocessed and minimally processed
products (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Escherichia coli was detected only in leaf vegetables at a
concentration of 2 log - 3 log cfu g(-1). Enterococci were found at a
concentration of 2 log - 4 log cfu g(-1). Coagulase positive Staphylococci and
sulphite-reducing Clostridia were not detected in any sample. Three samples
tested positive for Listeria monocytogenes, Yersinia enterocolitica and
Salmonella veneziana.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides updated data on the microbiological quality of
retail vegetables and confirms the need to implement strategies to increase
microbial safety of fresh produce.

PMCID: PMC4389663
PMID: 25984508  [PubMed]


125. J Toxicol Sci. 2015 Jun;40(3):413-25. doi: 10.2131/jts.40.413.

Altered gene expression profile in ovarian follicle in rats treated with
indomethacin and RU486.

Tsubota K(1), Kanki M, Noto T, Nakatsuji S, Oishi Y, Matsumoto M, Nakayama H.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Safety Research Laboratories, Astellas Pharma Inc.

It is well-known that indomethacin (the cyclooxygenase 1 & 2 inhibitor) and RU486
(or mifepristone, the progesterone receptor antagonist) block follicular rupture 
in rats. To characterize genetic alterations in unruptured follicles, gene
expression profiles in ovarian follicle were analyzed in indomethacin- and
RU486-treated female Sprague-Dawley rats. Ovaries are collected at 22:00 on the
proestrus day and 10:00 on the following estrus day after a single dose of
indomethacin and RU486. Histopathologically, changes depicting responses to LH
surge were observed in ovaries, uteri and vagina. Total RNA was extracted from
pre-ovulatory follicles or unruptured follicles collected by laser
microdissection and analyzed by Genechip(®). Among genes showing statistically
significant changes compared to control groups, following changes were considered
relevant to induction of unruptured follicles. In indomethacin-treated rats, Wnt4
was down-regulated, suggesting effect on tissue integrity and steroid genesis. In
RU486-treated rats, Adamts1, Adamts9, Edn2, Ednra, Lyve1, Plat, and Pparg were
down-regulated. These changes suggest effects on proteolysis for extra cellular
matrix or surrounding tissue (Adamts1 & 9, and Plat), constriction of smooth
muscle surrounding follicles (Edn2, Ednra, and Pparg), follicular fluid (Lyve1), 
and angiogenesis (Pparg). Down-regulation of angiogenesis related genes (Angpt2, 
Hmox1, and Vegfa) was observed in both treatment groups. Here, we clarify genetic
alterations induced by the inhibition of cyclooxygenase or progesterone receptor.

PMID: 25972201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Atherosclerosis. 2015 Jul;241(1):79-86. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2015.04.815. Epub 2015 May 1.

Spectrum of mutations of the LPL gene identified in Italy in patients with severe
hypertriglyceridemia.

Rabacchi C(1), Pisciotta L(2), Cefalù AB(3), Noto D(3), Fresa R(2), Tarugi P(1), 
Averna M(3), Bertolini S(4), Calandra S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genova, Italy. (3)Department of
Internal Medicine and Medical Specialities, University of Palermo, Italy.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genova, Italy. Electronic
address: stefbert@unige.it. (5)Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy. Electronic address:
sebcal@unimore.it.

BACKGROUND: Monogenic hypertriglyceridemia (HTG) may result from mutations in
some genes which impair the intravascular lipolysis of triglyceride (TG)-rich
lipoproteins mediated by the enzyme Lipoprotein lipase (LPL). Mutations in the
LPL gene are the most frequent cause of monogenic HTG (familial chylomicronemia) 
with recessive transmission.
METHODS: The LPL gene was resequenced in 149 patients with severe HTG
(TG > 10 mmol/L) and 106 patients with moderate HTG (TG > 4.5 and <10 mmol/L)
referred to tertiary Lipid Clinics in Italy.
RESULTS: In the group of severe HTG, 26 patients (17.4%) were homozygotes, 9
patients (6%) were compound heterozygotes and 15 patients (10%) were simple
heterozygotes for rare LPL gene variants. Single or multiple episodes of
pancreatitis were recorded in 24 (48%) of these patients. There was no difference
in plasma TG concentration between patients with or without a positive history of
pancreatitis. Among moderate HTG patients, six patients (5.6%) were heterozygotes
for rare LPL variants; two of them had suffered from pancreatitis. Overall 36
rare LPL variants were found, 15 of which not reported previously. Systematic
analysis of close relatives of mutation carriers led to the identification of 44 
simple heterozygotes (plasma TG 3.2 ± 4.1 mmol/L), none of whom had a positive
history of pancreatitis.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of rare LPL variants in patients with severe or
moderate HTG, referred to tertiary lipid clinics, was 50/149 (33.5%) and 6/106
(5.6%), respectively. Systematic analysis of relatives of mutation carriers is an
efficient way to identify heterozygotes who may develop severe HTG.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25966443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. JAMA. 2015 May 12;313(18):1863-4. doi: 10.1001/jama.2015.3539.

Chlorhexidine bathing and infections in critically ill patients--reply.

Noto MJ(1), Rice TW(1), Wheeler AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee.

Comment on
    JAMA. 2015 May 12;313(18):1862-3.
    JAMA. 2015 Jan 27;313(4):369-78.
    JAMA. 2015 May 12;313(18):1863.

PMID: 25965240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2015;16(5-6):353-8. doi:
10.3109/21678421.2015.1038277. Epub 2015 May 11.

A single blind randomized controlled clinical trial of mexiletine in amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis: Efficacy and safety of sodium channel blocker phase II trial.

Shibuya K(1), Misawa S(1), Kimura H(2), Noto Y(3), Sato Y(4), Sekiguchi Y(1),
Iwai Y(1), Mitsuma S(1), Beppu M(1), Watanabe K(1), Fujimaki Y(2), Tsuji Y(3),
Shimizu T(2), Mizuno T(3), Nakagawa M(3), Sawaguchi K(4), Hanaoka H(4), Kuwabara 
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Neurology , Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University ,
Chiba , Japan. (2)b Department of Neurology , Tokyo Metropolitan Neurological
Hospital , Fuchu , Tokyo, Japan. (3)c Department of Molecular Neurology and
Gerontology , Kyoto Prefectural University of Me1dicine , Kyoto , Japan. (4)d
Clinical Research Center, Chiba University Hospital , Chiba , Japan.

Fasciculations are characteristic features of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS), and suggest motor nerve hyperexcitability. Recent reports have shown that 
an increase in persistent nodal sodium current is associated with shorter
survival in ALS patients. This objective of this trial is to study the efficacy
and safety of mexiletine, a sodium channel blocker, for ALS. Sixty eligible
participants were randomly allocated (1:1) to riluzole 100 mg or riluzole plus
mexiletine 300 mg. The primary endpoint was change in the revised ALS functional 
rating scale (ALSFRS-R) scores during six months. We also monitored
strength-duration time constant (SDTC, a measure of persistent sodium current) in
median motor axons. Results showed that during six months of treatment, changes
in the ALSFRS-R score and SDTC were -7.0 ± 7.1 and -0.04 ± 0.1, respectively, in 
the riluzole group and -6.9 ± 6.4 and 0.04 ± 0.1, respectively, in the mexiletine
group (p = 0.96 and 0.049). Adverse events amounted 20% in the riluzole and 33%
in the mexiletine groups. In conclusion, the results suggest that daily 300 mg
mexiletine has no effects on axonal sodium current and ALSFRS-R deterioration in 
ALS. We have to attempt another trial using a higher dose of mexiletine or other 
agents to suppress sodium currents and ALS progression in the future.

PMID: 25960085  [PubMed - in process]


129. Acta Biomed. 2015 Apr 27;86(1):92-6.

Validation of a modified model of TNBS-induced colitis in rats. How to induce a
chemical colitis in rats.

Tomasello G(1), Sinagra E, Raimondo D, Palumbo VD, Puleio R, Cottone M, Damiani
P, Traina G, Abruzzo A, Damiani F, Buscemi S, Noto M, Lo Monte AI.

Author information: 
(1)SCHOOL OF MEDICINE AND SURGERY UNIVERSITY OF PALERMO - ITALY.
giovannitomasello@iemest.eu.

BACKGROUND: There is no standard practice in the induction of colitis by
2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic (TNBS) acid. Usually, the repeated administration 
of TNBS is preferred, because it will result in a local Th1 response that has the
characteristics of Crohn`s disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 30 rats were randomized into two groups,
consisting of a saline control group of ten rats and a TNBS groups of 20 rats.
After the animals were anesthetized, 0.5 ml of either 0.9% saline (controls) or
TNBS 50 mg/kg dissolved in 50% ethanol were instilled into the colon through a
rubber catheter. The experiment was repeated weekly for four weeks, then, the
rats were killed at day 40, and the distal colon removed.
RESULTS: At day 40, the bowel wall was basically normal in the control group. In 
the TNBS group, the bowel lumen became narrow with thickened wall, and the
mucosal surface presented adherent membrane with brown black, linear ulcers,
proliferous lymphocyte tissue, inflammatory granulomas and submucosal neutrophil 
infiltration. The median score of the severity of the colonic damage was 0 in the
control group, and 4,75 (range 4-5) in the TNBS group; the mean weight of the
rats was 180+35 g in the TNBS group, while it was 215+25 in the control group.
CONCLUSIONS: The presented experiment is a cost-effective and safe method to
induce Crohn-like colonic damage using a lower dose of TNBS, thus avoiding the
risk of a massive loss of rats. This model is rather suitable for the assessment 
of the effects of potential therapeutic agents. (www.actabiomedica.it).

PMID: 25948034  [PubMed - in process]


130. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2015 Apr-Jun;37(2):168-76. doi: 10.1590/1516-4446-2014-1539. 
Epub 2015 May 1.

Determinants of adherence to treatment in first-episode psychosis: a
comprehensive review.

Leclerc E(1), Noto C(1), Bressan RA(1), Brietzke E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program for Recognition and Intervention in Individuals in At-Risk Mental
States (PRISMA), Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São
Paulo, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To conduct a comprehensive review of current evidence on factors for
nonadherence to treatment in individuals with first-episode psychosis (FEP).
METHODS: MEDLINE, LILACS, PsycINFO, and SciELO databases were searched with the
keywords first episode psychosis, factor, adherence, nonadherence, engagement,
disengagement, compliance, and intervention. References of selected studies were 
consulted for relevant articles.
RESULTS: A total of 157 articles were screened, of which 33 articles were
retained for full review. The factors related to nonadherence were: a)
patient-related (e.g., lower education level, persistent substance use, forensic 
history, unemployment, history of physical abuse); b) environment-related (e.g., 
no family involved in treatment, social adjustment difficulties); c)
medication-related (e.g., rapid remission of negative symptoms when starting
treatment, therapeutic alliance); and d) illness-related (e.g., more positive
symptoms, more relapses). Treatment factors that improve adherence include a good
therapeutic alliance and a voluntary first admission when hospitalization occurs.
CONCLUSION: The results of this review suggest that nonadherence to treatment in 
FEP is multifactorial. Many of these factors are modifiable and can be
specifically targeted in early intervention programs. Very few studies have
assessed strategies to raise adherence in FEP.

PMID: 25946398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Thromb Res. 2015 Jul;136(1):20-3. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2015.03.029. Epub 2015 
Apr 10.

Recombinant human thrombomodulin in the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia
patients complicated by disseminated intravascular coagulation: retrospective
analysis of outcomes between patients treated with heparin and recombinant human 
thrombomodulin therapy.

Takezako N(1), Sekiguchi N(2), Nagata A(2), Homma C(2), Takezako Y(3), Noto S(2),
Natori K(4), Miwa A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, National Hospital Organization Disaster Medical
Center of Japan, 3256 Midori-cho, Tachikawa, Tokyo, 190-0014, Japan; Department
of Medical Informatics, National Hospital Organization Disaster Medical Center of
Japan, 3256 Midori-cho, Tachikawa, Tokyo, 190-0014, Japan. Electronic address:
ntakezak@tdmc.hosp.go.jp. (2)Department of Hematology, National Hospital
Organization Disaster Medical Center of Japan, 3256 Midori-cho, Tachikawa, Tokyo,
190-0014, Japan. (3)Department of General Internal Medicine, St. Luke's
International Hospital, 9-1 Akashi-cho, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, 104-8560, Japan; Division
of Community and Family Medicine, Center for Community Medicine, Jichi Medical
University, 3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke-shi, Tochigi-ken, 329-0498, Japan.
(4)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Toho University Medical Centre, 6-11-1 
Oomorinishi, Oota-ku, Tokyo, 143-8541, Japan. (5)Department of Hematology,
National Center for Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku, Tokyo,
162-8655, Japan.

Comment on
    Thromb Res. 2015 Jul;136(1):30-9.

BACKGROUND: Recombinant thrombomodulin (rTM) is a promising anticoagulant.
Improvements in disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and the amelioration
of bleeding complications in DIC patients were reported to be greater with rTM
therapy than with unfractionated heparin therapy. However, it remains unknown
whether rTM therapy affects the outcomes of patients with acute myeloblastic
leukemia (AML).
DESIGN AND METHOD: We retrospectively analyzed 103 patients with AML and compared
outcomes between patients treated with low molecular weight heparin therapy and
rTM. The diagnostic criteria for DIC were previously proposed by the Japanese
Ministry of Health and Welfare. Comparisons between qualitative variables were
carried out using the <U+03C7>(2) test. Survival probabilities were estimated by the
Kaplan-Meier method, and differences in survival distributions were evaluated
using the log-rank test.
RESULTS: Forty-seven patients developed DIC due to chemotherapy or their disease 
status. Fourteen patients were treated with rTM, while 33 patients were treated
with low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH). The log-rank test revealed that overall
survival was significantly worse in the DIC group than in the non-DIC group
(P=0.003), and was signfiacntly better in the rTM group than the LMWH group
(P=0.016).
CONCLUSION: rTM was more efficient than LMWH because of the improvements it
induced in overall survival.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25934464  [PubMed - in process]


132. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 May 2. [Epub ahead of print]

Toward Omics-Based, Systems Biomedicine, and Path and Drug Discovery
Methodologies for Depression-Inflammation Research.

Maes M(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Nowak G(5,)(6), Caso JR(7), Leza JC(7), Song C(8,)(9),
Kubera M(10), Klein H(11), Galecki P(12), Noto C(13), Glaab E(14), Balling R(14),
Berk M(15,)(16).

Author information: 
(1)IMPACT Research Center, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia.
dr.michaelmaes@hotmail.com. (2)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand. dr.michaelmaes@hotmail.com.
(3)Health Sciences Graduate Program, Health Sciences Center, State University of 
Londrina, Londrina, Brazil. dr.michaelmaes@hotmail.com. (4)IMPACT Strategic
Research Center, Barwon Health, Deakin University, Geelong, Vic, Australia.
dr.michaelmaes@hotmail.com. (5)Department of Pharmacobiology, Jagiellonian
University Medical College, Medyczna 9, 30-688, Kraków, Poland. (6)Department of 
Neurobiology, Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Kraków,
Poland. (7)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University
Complutense, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Salud Mental (CIBERSAM) &
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Canada. (9)Research Institute for Marine Nutrition and Drugs, Guangdong Ocean
University, Zhanjiang, China. (10)Department of Experimental Neuroendocrinology, 
Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Science, Krakow, Poland.
(11)Department of Psychiatry, University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands. (12)Department of Adult Psychiatry, Medial University of Lódz, Lódz,
Poland. (13)Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo
(UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Brazil. (14)Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine,
University of Luxemburg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg. (15)IMPACT Research
Center, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia. (16)Orygen, The National Centre of
Excellence in Youth Mental Health, Department of Psychiatry and The Florey
Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Australia.

Meta-analyses confirm that depression is accompanied by signs of inflammation
including increased levels of acute phase proteins, e.g., C-reactive protein, and
pro-inflammatory cytokines, e.g., interleukin-6. Supporting the translational
significance of this, a meta-analysis showed that anti-inflammatory drugs may
have antidepressant effects. Here, we argue that inflammation and depression
research needs to get onto a new track. Firstly, the choice of inflammatory
biomarkers in depression research was often too selective and did not consider
the broader pathways. Secondly, although mild inflammatory responses are present 
in depression, other immune-related pathways cannot be disregarded as new drug
targets, e.g., activation of cell-mediated immunity, oxidative and nitrosative
stress (O&NS) pathways, autoimmune responses, bacterial translocation, and
activation of the toll-like receptor and neuroprogressive pathways. Thirdly,
anti-inflammatory treatments are sometimes used without full understanding of
their effects on the broader pathways underpinning depression. Since many of the 
activated immune-inflammatory pathways in depression actually confer protection
against an overzealous inflammatory response, targeting these pathways may result
in unpredictable and unwanted results. Furthermore, this paper discusses the
required improvements in research strategy, i.e., path and drug discovery
processes, omics-based techniques, and systems biomedicine methodologies.
Firstly, novel methods should be employed to examine the intracellular networks
that control and modulate the immune, O&NS and neuroprogressive pathways using
omics-based assays, including genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics,
metabolomics, epigenomics, immunoproteomics and metagenomics. Secondly, systems
biomedicine analyses are essential to unravel the complex interactions between
these cellular networks, pathways, and the multifactorial trigger factors and to 
delineate new drug targets in the cellular networks or pathways. Drug discovery
processes should delineate new drugs targeting the intracellular networks and
immune-related pathways.

PMID: 25934103  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


133. Molecules. 2015 Apr 17;20(4):7000-16. doi: 10.3390/molecules20047000.

Perinatal asphyxia: a review from a metabolomics perspective.

Fattuoni C(1), Palmas F(2), Noto A(3), Fanos V(4), Barberini L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Geological Sciences, University of Cagliari,
Cagliari I-09042, Italy. cfattuon@unica.it. (2)Department of Chemical and
Geological Sciences, University of Cagliari, Cagliari I-09042, Italy.
francesco.palmas@unica.it. (3)Department of Surgical Sciences, University of
Cagliari and Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal
Section, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria, Cagliari I-09042, Italy.
antonotocagliari@gmail.com. (4)Department of Surgical Sciences, University of
Cagliari and Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal
Section, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria, Cagliari I-09042, Italy.
vafanos@tiscali.it. (5)Department of Public Health Clinical and Molecular
Medicine, University of Cagliari, Cagliari I-09042, Italy. barberini@unica.it.

Perinatal asphyxia is defined as an oxygen deprivation that occurs around the
time of birth, and may be caused by several perinatal events. This medical
condition affects some four million neonates worldwide per year, causing the
death of one million subjects. In most cases, infants successfully recover from
hypoxia episodes; however, some patients may develop HIE, leading to permanent
neurological conditions or impairment of different organs and systems. Given its 
multifactor dependency, the timing, severity and outcome of this disease, mainly 
assessed through Sarnat staging, are of difficult evaluation. Moreover, although 
the latest newborn resuscitation guideline suggests the use of a 21% oxygen
concentration or room air, such an approach is still under debate. Therefore, the
pathological mechanism is still not clear and a golden standard treatment has yet
to be defined. In this context, metabolomics, a new discipline that has described
important perinatal issues over the last years, proved to be a useful tool for
the monitoring, the assessment, and the identification of potential biomarkers
associated with asphyxia events. This review covers metabolomics research on
perinatal asphyxia condition, examining in detail the studies reported both on
animal and human models.

PMID: 25898414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Ann Med. 2015 May;47(3):238-44. doi: 10.3109/07853890.2015.1017528. Epub 2015 Apr
10.

High risk of abnormal QT prolongation in the early morning in diabetic and
non-diabetic patients with severe hypoglycemia.

Tsujimoto T(1), Yamamoto-Honda R, Kajio H, Kishimoto M, Noto H, Hachiya R, Kimura
A, Kakei M, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Center Hospital,
National Center for Global Health and Medicine , Tokyo , Japan.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have suggested that the occurrence of severe
hypoglycemia during sleep may be more dangerous for cardiac arrhythmia than that 
in the day-time.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective study between January 2006 and March 2012
to assess electrocardiograms during severe hypoglycemia in patients with or
without diabetes.
RESULTS: A total of 59,602 patients who visited the emergency room by ambulance
were screened, and 287 patients with severe hypoglycemia were enrolled. The
median blood glucose levels in patients with (DM, n = 192) and without diabetes
(non-DM, n = 95) were 30 and 45 mg/dL, respectively. During severe hypoglycemia, 
the incidence of abnormal QT prolongation was significantly higher in the early
morning (4-10 a.m.) than at other times (DM group, 74.3% versus 54.1%, P = 0.02; 
non-DM group, 78.3% versus 50.0%, P = 0.01). Multivariate logistic regression
analysis identified the occurrence of severe hypoglycemia in the early morning as
a strong factor for abnormal QT prolongation (DM group, odds ratio [OR] 2.80, 95%
confidence interval [CI] 1.15-6.80, P = 0.02; non-DM group, OR 4.53, 95% CI
1.30-15.74, P = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of abnormal QT prolongation during severe hypoglycemia
was significantly higher in the early morning than at all other times,
independent of the cause of severe hypoglycemia.

PMID: 25861830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Front Physiol. 2015 Mar 20;6:61. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2015.00061. eCollection 2015.

The pathophysiology of intestinal lipoprotein production.

Giammanco A(1), Cefalù AB(1), Noto D(1), Averna MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento Biomedico di Medicina Interna e Specialistica, Università degli
Studi di Palermo Palermo, Italy.

Intestinal lipoprotein production is a multistep process, essential for the
absorption of dietary fats and fat-soluble vitamins. Chylomicron assembly begins 
in the endoplasmic reticulum with the formation of primordial, phospholipids-rich
particles that are then transported to the Golgi for secretion. Several classes
of transporters play a role in the selective uptake and/or export of lipids
through the villus enterocytes. Once secreted in the lymph stream,
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins (TRLs) are metabolized by Lipoprotein lipase
(LPL), which catalyzes the hydrolysis of triacylglycerols of very low density
lipoproteins (VLDLs) and chylomicrons, thereby delivering free fatty acids to
various tissues. Genetic mutations in the genes codifying for these proteins are 
responsible of different inherited disorders affecting chylomicron metabolism.
This review focuses on the molecular pathways that modulate the uptake and the
transport of lipoproteins of intestinal origin and it will highlight recent
findings on TRLs assembly.

PMCID: PMC4367171
PMID: 25852563  [PubMed]


136. Acta Biomed. 2015 Mar 13;86 Suppl 1:40-5.

Correlation between quality of cardiopulmonary resuscitation and self-efficacy
measured during in-hospital cardiac arrest simulation; preliminary results.

Gonzi G(1), Sestigiani F, D'errico A, Vezzani A, Bonfanti L, Noto G, Artioli G.

Author information: 
(1)Unità Operativa Complessa di Cardiologia, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di
Parma;. ggonzi@ao.pr.it.

BACKGROUND: The concept of self-assess it's a central mechanism in human agency
for behavior change and should translate to desirable practice patterns. There
are no many studies that have investigated the relationship between the
perception of the ability to perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and the 
quality of the same. The aim of this work is to investigate the relation between 
physiological and psychosocial variables in cardiac resuscitation in order to
improve the involvement and motivation of professionals in training courses.
METHODS: During the year 2012, 322 medical staff of Ospedale-Universitario of
Parma were trained to basic life support defibrillation (BLSD). Before started
the course the partecipants were randomly selected among the staff working in the
same department to create a team of two persons and involved in a simulation that
reproduced the first five minutes that occurs for a cardiac arrest in a medical
or surgical department in our hospital before the intervention of the hospital
emergency team. Before and after simulation to each participant was asked to
answer a self-efficacy questionnaire on a 10-point scale on the management of
cardiac. During simulation were registered the activation time of the emergency
response system, hands-on time, defibrillation time, number of compression and
correct compression rate.
RESULTS: Activation time of the emergency response system was 70.52 ± 78.77
seconds. In 55 teams was not made the allert. The defibrillation time was 148.63 
± 58.43 seconds. In 44 teams the defibrillator were used within 120 seconds, in
36 (22.1%) it was not used. Hands-on time average was of 166.20 ± 62.9 seconds.
The mean number of compression was 216.22 ± 115.57. The percentage of
satisfactory compression was 9.97 ± 21.23 %. The level of self-efficacy was under
the average for the 35.6%, while the 26.8% of the participants had a medium level
of 5 and the 38.5% of the sample declared to feel an efficacy level included in
6-10. The sense of self efficacy after the simulation was constant in the 38.3%
of the sample, while increased in the 30.5% and decreased in the 31.2%. We found 
no significant correlations between self-efficacy levels and specific results in 
scenario acting before simulation, instead, after the simulation the skills
performances are much more correlated with self-efficacy.
CONCLUSIONS: The medical staff reported an individual's perception of good
efficacy in the management of simulation of cardiac arrest, but it does not
correspond to a high skills. An open question is if and how these psychosocial
variables may play a role in improving the quality of CPR and if knowledge of the
low capacity to manage a cardiac arrest can be translated into the need for the
medical staff to be regularly engaged in BLSD retraining.

PMID: 25835764  [PubMed - in process]


137. Clin Exp Nephrol. 2015 Dec;19(6):1179-83. doi: 10.1007/s10157-015-1110-6. Epub
2015 Apr 1.

Possible discrepancy of HbA1c values and its assessment among patients with
chronic renal failure, hemodialysis and other diseases.

Inoue K(1,)(2), Goto A(3,)(2), Kishimoto M(1), Tsujimoto T(1), Yamamoto-Honda
R(1), Noto H(1), Kajio H(1), Terauchi Y(2), Noda M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Center Hospital,
National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, 162-8655, Japan.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Yokohama City University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Yokohama, 236-0004, Japan. (3)Department of Diabetes
Research, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 162-8655, Japan. (4)Department of Diabetes Research, National
Center for Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo,
162-8655, Japan. mnoda@hosp.ncgm.go.jp.

BACKGROUND: Glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) and glycated albumin (GA) are frequently 
used as glycemic control markers. However, these markers are influenced by
alterations in hemoglobin and albumin metabolism. Thus, conditions such as
anemia, chronic renal failure, hypersplenism, chronic liver diseases,
hyperthyroidism, hypoalbuminemia, and pregnancy need to be considered when
interpreting HbA1c or GA values. Using data from patients with normal albumin and
hemoglobin metabolism, we previously established a linear regression equation
describing the GA value versus the HbA1c value to calculate an extrapolated HbA1c
(eHbA1c) value for the accurate evaluation of glycemic control. In this study, we
investigated the difference between the measured HbA1c and the eHbA1c values for 
patients with various conditions.
METHODS: Data sets for a total of 2461 occasions were obtained from 731 patients 
whose HbA1c and GA values were simultaneously measured. We excluded patients with
missing data or changeable HbA1c levels, and patients who had received
transfusions or steroids within the previous 3 months. Finally, we included 44
patients with chronic renal failure (CRF), 10 patients who were undergoing
hemodialysis (HD), 7 patients with hematological malignancies and a hemoglobin
level of less than 10 g/dL (HM), and 12 patients with chronic liver diseases
(CLD).
RESULTS: In all the groups, the eHbA1c values were significantly higher than the 
measured HbA1c values. The median difference was 0.75 % (95 % CI 0.40-1.10 %, P
for the difference is <0.001) in the CRF group, 0.80 % (95 % CI 0.30-1.65 %, P
for the difference is 0.041) in the HD group, 0.90 % (95 % CI 0.90-1.30 %, P for 
the difference is 0.028) in the HM group, and 0.85 % (95 % CI 0.40-1.50 %, P for 
the difference is 0.009) in the CLD group.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that the measured HbA1c values were lower than the eHbA1c
values in each of the groups.

PMCID: PMC4679780
PMID: 25824109  [PubMed - in process]


138. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2015 Mar;42(3):319-22.

[The present status of CapeOX as adjuvant chemotherapy for colorectal cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Ishii K(1), Kanamoto A, Miyanaga S, Noto M, Takeda T, Tani T, Yagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery, Public Central Hospital of Matto Ishikawa.

We report on treatment with capecitabine plus oxaliplatin (CapeOX) as adjuvant
therapy for patients with colorectal cancer. Twenty patients were treated. The
mean age was 69 years; 15 patients were male and 5 were female. Thirteen patients
with colon cancer and 7 patients with rectal cancer were enrolled after curative 
surgery. In total, 55% of patients completed the planned number of treatment
cycles. Dose modifications were required for oxaliplatin in 60% of patients and
for capecitabine in 67% of patients. The median relative dose intensities of
oxaliplatin and capecitabine were 86% and 88%, respectively. Treatment-related
Grade 3/4 neutropenia and Grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia were documented in 2 and 3
patients, respectively. Grade 3/4 hand-foot syndrome occurred in 1 patient.
Treatment with CapeOX as adjuvant therapy for patients with colorectal cancer
seems to be safe.

PMID: 25812500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2015 Jan-Mar;37(1):1-2. doi: 10.1590/1516-4446-2015-3609.

Omics-based depression and inflammation research.

Maes M(1), Noto C(2), Brietzke E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand. (2)Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo
(UNIFESP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

PMID: 25806550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. ChemSusChem. 2015 Apr 24;8(8):1381-93. doi: 10.1002/cssc.201403049. Epub 2015 Mar
20.

Nanocomposite membranes based on polybenzimidazole and ZrO2 for high-temperature 
proton exchange membrane fuel cells.

Nawn G(1), Pace G, Lavina S, Vezzù K, Negro E, Bertasi F, Polizzi S, Di Noto V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Universitá degli student di Padova, Via
Marzolo, 1, 35131, Padova (Italy).

Owing to the numerous benefits obtained when operating proton exchange membrane
fuel cells at elevated temperature (>100<U+2009>°C), the development of thermally stable
proton exchange membranes that demonstrate conductivity under anhydrous
conditions remains a significant goal for fuel cell technology. This paper
presents composite membranes consisting of
poly[2,2'-(m-phenylene)-5,5'-bibenzimidazole] (PBI4N) impregnated with a ZrO2
nanofiller of varying content (ranging from 0 to 22 wt<U+2009>%). The structure-property
relationships of the acid-doped and undoped composite membranes have been studied
using thermogravimetric analysis, differential scanning calorimetry, dynamic
mechanical analysis, wide-angle X-ray scattering, infrared spectroscopy, and
broadband electrical spectroscopy. Results indicate that the level of nanofiller 
has a significant effect on the membrane properties. From 0 to 8 wt<U+2009>%, the acid
uptake as well as the thermal and mechanical properties of the membrane increase.
As the nanofiller level is increased from 8 to 22 wt<U+2009>% the opposite effect is
observed. At 185<U+2009>°C, the ionic conductivity of [PBI4N(ZrO2 )0.231 ](H3 PO4 )13 is
found to be 1.04×10(-1)  S<U+2009>cm(-1) . This renders membranes of this type promising
candidates for use in high-temperature proton exchange membrane fuel cells.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25801848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Ultrasound Med Biol. 2015 Jun;41(6):1545-52. doi:
10.1016/j.ultrasmedbio.2015.01.020. Epub 2015 Mar 18.

Effects of steatosis on hepatic hemodynamics in patients with metabolic syndrome.

Soresi M(1), Giannitrapani L(2), Noto D(2), Terranova A(2), Campagna ME(2),
Cefalù AB(2), Giammanco A(2), Montalto G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, University
of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. Electronic address: maurizio.soresi@unipa.it.
(2)Biomedical Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, University
of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

The aim of our study was to assess the hemodynamic changes in hepatic and splenic
circulation using B-mode ultrasonography and color Doppler ultrasonography, in a 
population of patients with metabolic syndrome divided with respect to the
presence or absence of steatosis diagnosed by ultrasonography. One hundred
forty-one patients were included in the study. The severity of non-alcoholic
fatty liver disease was classified as mild, moderate or severe. Visceral fat
thickness, longitudinal diameter of the spleen, diameter of the portal vein, mean
maximum portal vein flow velocity, hepatic artery and splenic artery resistivity 
indexes and hepatic vein flow phasicity were measured. Non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease was detected in 114 of 141 patients, with a prevalence of 80.8%. Patients
with steatosis had significantly greater diameters of the portal vein,
longitudinal diameters of the spleen, visceral fat thickness and hepatic artery
and splenic artery resistivity indexes, whereas their portal vein flow velocities
were significantly lower. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease severity correlated
positively with diameter of the portal vein, longitudinal diameter of the spleen 
and visceral fat thickness and negatively with hepatic artery and splenic artery 
resistivity indexes and reduced hepatic vein flow phasicity. Our patients with
metabolic syndrome and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease had a flattened hepatic 
vein flow phasicity, greater portal vein diameter, reduction in portal vein flow 
velocity and intrahepatic arterial vasodilation. The vasodilation of the
intrahepatic arterial system was likely activated both by the effect of insulin
resistance and as a physiologic adaptation to restore hepatic flow. The increase 
in spleen volume might be related to the organomegaly typical of obese patients.

Copyright © 2015 World Federation for Ultrasound in Medicine & Biology. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25796415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Am J Dermatopathol. 2015 Apr;37(4):293-4, 341-2. doi:
10.1097/DAD.0b013e318261ea1d.

Enlarging ulcers in the mouth and on the back. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis.

Massone C(1), Felletti R, Noto S, Pelucco D, Bandelloni R, Barabino G.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Dermatology, Division of General Dermatology, Medical
University of Graz, Graz, Austria Department of Specialistic Medicine, Unit of
Pneumology, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria San Martino-IST Istituto
Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genoa, Italy Unit of Social Dermatology,
National Reference Center for Hansen's Disease, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliera
Universitaria San Martino-IST Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro,
Genoa, Italy §Department of Pathology, Galliera Hospital, Genoa, Italy.

PMID: 25794370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Resuscitation. 2015 Jun;91:122-30. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2015.02.033. Epub
2015 Mar 12.

Impact of bystander-performed ventilation on functional outcomes after cardiac
arrest and factors associated with ventilation-only cardiopulmonary
resuscitation: A large observational study.

Maeda T(1), Kamikura T(2), Tanaka Y(3), Yamashita A(4), Kubo M(5), Takei Y(6),
Inaba H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medical Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School
of Medicine, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8641, Japan. Electronic
address: tetsumae@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Emergency Medical
Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medicine, 13-1 Takara-machi,
Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8641, Japan. Electronic address: kamitaka911@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Emergency Medical Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School
of Medicine, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8641, Japan. Electronic
address: ytanaka.md@gmail.com. (4)Department of Cardiology, Noto General
Hospital, A64-6-4 Fijihashi-machi, Nanao, Ishikawa 926-0816, Japan. Electronic
address: yamashita@noto-hospital.jp. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Ishikawa
Prefectural Central Hospital, 2-1 Kuratsuki-Higashi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8201,
Japan. Electronic address: min-kubo3e@ipch.jp. (6)Department of Medical Science
and Technology, Hiroshima International University, 555-36 Kurose-gakuendai,
Higashi-hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-2695, Japan; Department of Emergency Medical
Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medicine, 13-1 Takara-machi,
Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8641, Japan. Electronic address:
y-takei@hs.hirokoku-u.ac.jp. (7)Department of Emergency Medical Science, Kanazawa
University Graduate School of Medicine, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa
920-8641, Japan. Electronic address: hidinaba@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

Comment in
    Resuscitation. 2015 Jun;91:A11-2.

AIM: To determine the effectiveness of ventilations in bystander cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation (BCPR) and to identify the factors associated with ventilation-only
BCPR.
METHODS: From out-of-hospital cardiac arrest (OHCA) data prospectively collected 
from 2005 to 2011 in Japan, we extracted data for 210,134 bystander-witnessed
OHCAs with complete datasets but no prehospital involvement of physician [no
BCPR, 115,733; ventilation-only, 2093; compression-only, 61,075; and conventional
(compressions+ventilations) BCPR, 31,233] and determined the factors associated
with 1-month neurologically favourable survival using simple and multivariable
logistic regression analyses. In 91,885 patients with known BCPR durations, we
determined the factors associated with ventilation-only BCPR.
RESULTS: The rate of survival in the no BCPR, ventilation-only, compression-only 
and conventional group was 2.8%, 3.9%, 4.5% and 5.0%, respectively. After
adjustment for other factors associated with outcomes, the survival rate in the
ventilation-only group was higher than that in the no BCPR group (adjusted OR;
95% CI, 1.29; 1.01-1.63), but lower than that in the compression-only (0.76;
0.59-0.96) or conventional groups (0.70; 0.55-0.89). Conventional CPR had the
highest OR for survival in almost all OHCA subgroups. The adjusted OR (95% CI)
for survival after dividing BCPR into ventilation and compression components was 
1.19 (1.11-1.27) and 1.60 (1.51-1.69), respectively. Older guidelines, female
sex, younger patient age, bystander-initiated CPR without instruction, early BCPR
and short BCPR duration were associated with ventilation-only BCPR.
CONCLUSIONS: Ventilation is a significant component of BCPR, but alone is less
effective than compression in improving neurologically favourable survival after 
OHCAs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25771501  [PubMed - in process]


144. Diabetes Care. 2015 May;38(5):940-2. doi: 10.2337/dc14-2787. Epub 2015 Mar 10.

The development and utility of a novel scale that quantifies the glycemic
progression toward type 1 diabetes over 6 months.

Sosenko JM(1), Skyler JS(2), Beam CA(3), Boulware D(4), Mahon JL(5), Krischer
JP(4), Greenbaum CJ(6), Rafkin LE(2), Matheson D(2), Herold KC(7), Palmer JP(8); 
Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet and Diabetes Prevention TrialType 1 Study Groups.

Collaborators: Skyler JS, Anderson M, Bourcier K, Becker D, Bingley P, Blum J,
Bosi E, Buckner J, Chase H, Clare-Salzler M, Colman P, DiMeglio L, Eisenbarth GS,
Fathman C, Gitelman S, Goland R, Gottlieb P, Davis B, Greenbaum C, Harrison L,
Herold K, Insel R, Krischer JP, Mahon J, Marks J, Moran A, Palmer JP, Peakman M, 
Pugliese A, Raskin P, Roncarolo MG, Russell W, Savage P, Schatz D, Sherwin R,
Siegelman M, Simell O, Thomas J, Trucco M, Wagner J, Wherrett D, Wilson DM,
Winter W, Fradkin J, Leschek E, Spain L, Benoist C, Bluestone J, Brown D, Cowie
C, Hering B, Jordan S, Kaufman FR, Lachin JM, Nanto-Salonen K, Nepom G, Orban T, 
Parkman R, Pescovitz M, Peyman J, Ridge J, Rodriguez H, Ziegler A, Skyler JS,
Bourcier K, Greenbaum CJ, Krischer JP, Leschek E, Rafkin L, Savage P, Skyler JS, 
Spain L, Bourcier K, Greenbaum CJ, Krischer JP, Leschek E, Rafkin L, Savage P,
Cowie C, Foulkes M, Krause H, Lachin JM, Malozowski S, Peyman J, Ridge J, Zafonte
SJ, Skyler JS, Greenbaum CJ, Kenyon NS, Rafkin L, Santiago I, Sosenko JM,
Krischer JP, Bundy B, Ritzie L, Abbondondolo M, Adams T, Alies P, Badias F, Beam 
C, Boonstra M, Boulware D, Cuthbertson D, Eberhard C, Ford J, Ginem J, Guillette 
H, Hays B, Henry M, Law P, Linton C, Liu S, Lloyd J, Muller S, O'Donnell R,
Parrimon Y, Paulus K, Pilger J, Ramiro J, Roberts A, Sadler K, Terry A, Wootten
M, Xu P, Young K, Bassi M, Freeman D, Granger M, Kieffer M, Nallamshetty L, Shor 
A, Lachin JM, Foulkes M, Harding P, Krause-Steinrauf H, McDonough S, McGee PF,
Hess KO, Phoebus D, Quinlan S, Raiden E, Fradkin J, Leschek E, Savage P, Spain L,
Blumberg E, Braun J, Laffel L, Naji A, Nerup J, Orchard T, Tsiatis A, Veatch R,
Wallace D, Lernmark A, Lo B, Mitchell H, Steffes M, Zinman B, Loechelt B, Baden
L, Green M, Weinberg A, Eisenbarth GS, Marcovina S, P J, Weinberg A, Winter W, Yu
L, Davis B, Babu S, Orban T, Gottlieb P, Greenbaum C, Krause H, Lachin JM,
Leschek E, Loechelt B, Parkman R, Rafkin L, Rigby A, Skyler JS, Spain L, Wagner
J, Greenbaum C, Bollyky J, Sanda S, Tridgell D, McCulloch-Olson M, Vendettuoli H,
Hefty D, Ramey M, Webber C, Kuhns K, Hilderman N, Dove A, Hammond M, Klein J,
Batts E, Monzavi R, Halvorson M, Bock M, Fisher L, Jeandron D, Wood J, Kaufman
FR, Goland R, Greenberg E, Gallagher MP, Trast J, Chan M, Rodriguez H, Pescovitz 
M, DiMeglio L, Christner L, Nicholson M, Mendez M, Orban T, Benoist C, Wolfsdorf 
J, Ricker A, Jalahej H, Conboy D, Farkas K, Kis J, Zhang H, Fay S, Wilson DM,
Buckingham BA, Aye T, Esrey T, Soto A, Perry J, Baker B, Rigby A, Berry B,
Gitelman SE, Rosenthal SM, Anderson M, Adi S, Breen K, Hamilton C, Gottlieb P,
Chase H, Michels A, Kastelic W, Weiner L, Schatz D, Haller M, Clare-Salzler M,
Cook R, Mancini D, Abraham A, Hicks E, Cole G, Marks JB, Pugliese A, Matheson D, 
Blaschke C, Arazo L, Cisneros M, Acosta B, Moran A, Nathan B, Wagner J, Ann M,
Gibson C, Finney L, Albright-Fischer T, Smith J, Becker D, Toledo F, Libman I,
Riley K, Delallo K, Smith K, Gwynn D, Wohlers G, Raskin P, White P, Dickson B,
Adhikari S, Siegelman M, Alford M, Torres N, Harden T, Pruneda L, Cordova E,
Davis R, Fernandez S, Arthur J, Wherrett D, Eisel LA, Ahenkorah B, Razack N,
Sriskandarajah M, Russell WE, Thomas JW, Moore DJ, Brown A, Black M, Pittel E,
Brendle F, Bosi E, Battaglia M, Belloni C, Bianconi E, Falqui L, Grogan P,
Martinenghi S, Lombardoni C, Grogan SM, Bingley P, Aitken R, Castleden H,
Farthing N, Matthews C, McGee J, Wheaton C, Harrison LC, Andaloro E, Breen C,
Colman P, Fourlanos S, Gellert S, Healy F, Wentworth J, Simell OG, Jokipuu S,
Kallio T, Mantymaki E, Nanto-Salonen K, Niininen T, Nurmi B, Romo M, Ruohonen E, 
Sarma M, Simell T, Suomenrinne S, Torma M, Skyler JS, Brown D, Chase H, Collier
E, Cowie C, Eisenbarth GS, Grave G, Davis B, Fradkin J, Greenbaum C, Jackson RA, 
Kaufman FR, Krischer JP, Marks JB, Palmer JP, Ricker A, Wolfsdorf J, Schatz DA,
Wilson D, Winter WE, Zeidler A, Dickler H, Eastman RC, Maclaren NK, Malone JI,
Robertson R, Skyler JS, Krischer JP, Wolfsdorf J, Cowie C, Palmer JP, Greenbaum
C, Cuthbertson D, Rafkin-Mervis LE, Chase H, Leschek E, Palmer JP, Chase H, Cowie
C, Fradkin J, Eisenbarth GS, Greenbaum C, Herold K, Kaufman FR, Krischer JP,
Marks JB, Rafkin-Mervis LE, Schatz DA, Skyler JS, Aneju B, Conboy D, Cook R,
Dennis MA, Finney L, Harris S, Matheson D, McCulloch-Olsen M, Smith T, Valenzuela
J, Vega N, Crofford OB, DeMets D, Lachin JM, Nerup J, Rossini A, Schiffrin A,
Steffes M, Tsiatis A, Zinman B, Haider A, Haas J, Busch R, Toleno K, Schade D,
Katz P, Hornbeck D, Foster S, Roberts W, Vercher M, Foster C, Shultz R, Sparks C,
Bower C, Counts D, Ostrowski D, Plotnick L, Hansen I, Bowden B, Burcell D,
Anderson S, Wray J, Goldman L, Holt R, Fechner P, Donnelly C, Bourgeios P,
Prosser P, Gunville F, McClave C, Heldt P, Ovalle F, Atchison J, Trull P,
Bottomlee A, Betting S, Davis T, Wetzstein J, Clinkingbeard C, Davis J, Roosevelt
T, Shamoon H, Duffy H, Anhalt H, Brussard L, Capotorto J, Sheehan P, Quyyumi S,
Cohen N, Recker B, Castells S, Bastian W, AvRuskin TW, Verdia V, Quattrin T,
Dwigun K, Cefalu W, Clark N, Tilton L, Corenblum B, Harries S, Whitty A, McInroy 
R, Smith S, Willi S, Rich B, Key L Jr, O'Rear D, Willi S, O'Rear D, Grubb SR,
Taylor K, Adams P, Reeves M, Reeves P, Marshall R, Tessmann E, Dwarakanathan A,
Beebe C, Weintraub-Yohay I, O'Donnell P, Rich B, Imperial J, Silverman B, Edidin 
D, Goodman S, Brodsky I, Brodsky L, Dolan L, Standiford D, Rogers D, Switzer C,
Goldstein DE, Eichelberger D, Smith A, Ganong C, Zipf W, Dyas M, Sotos JF, Young 
C, Riley W, Salai S, Raskin P, Marks J, Alford M, Sachson R, Lebowitz C, Cook J, 
Stedman J, Indra D, Gutai J, Vinuya B, Pacillas M, McGraw-Maly M, Feng W,
Williams C, Krygsman C, Pierce M, Freemark M, Litton J, Ryan E, Todd K, Aboud D, 
Hines J, Walczak A, Aparicio L, Harbaugh D, Nemery R, Bergeson M, Rozell M, Mahan
E, Brooks H, Ginier P, Hensley P, Heymann M, Johnson B, Tack J, Sondrol L, Hjelle
T, Perry D, Albert J, Flory L, Gerrity N, Naab C, Heck J, Weber S, Mulhall P,
Lansden B, Cummings E, Armour C, Ratzan S, Trahiotis M, Nemery R, Carney H,
Shorkey D, Fitz-Patrick D, Taniguchi A, Gunn S, Copeland K, McGirk S, Liljenquist
J, Fielding C, Richards S, Best V, Rodriguez H, Freidenberg G, Amstutz L, Weir C,
Tsalikian E, Hoffman R, Bayless M, Hare J, Hare K, Kyner J, Eaks G, Howard C,
Moore W, Woodford B, Salyer T, Wannarachue N, Meridith R, Squires D, Deubler D,
Bruschetta H, Nickels D, Dothard C, Courtney A, Marcus A, Beisswenger J, Kairys
S, Boyle W, Christiano A, O'Dell R, Touchette A, Thrailkill K, Karounos D, Webb
S, Moore L, Allweiss P, Anderson F, Mahon L, McCallum J, Raffel L, Rotter J,
Verne A, Davidson M, Keppler G, Banerjee S, Simon M, MacDonald M, Mokrohisky S,
Speiser P, Fort P, Corrigan J, Pelkola S, Kitabchi A, Murphy M, Lambeth H,
Burghen G, McGlendon P, Bondani J, LeNoye P, Alemzadeh R, Koppen M, Canas J,
Lamerson M, Spencer M, Etzwiler D, Reynolds K, Eyler N, Allen P, Warner B, Rettig
K, Levens KL, Davis M, Polychronakos C, Laforte D, Zeller W, McKernan J, Finn S, 
Powers A, Lipps J, Raghavan S, Broadstone V, Raake P, Weissberg K, Tamborlane W, 
Gatcomb P, Blonde L, Zimmerman T, Zimmerman R, Liebel C, Chalew S, Vargas A, Rao 
J, Ascani J, Compton T, Cerame B, Harbison M, Newfield R, New M, Wajnrajch M,
Vargas I, Herold K, Schachner H, Feberes G, Maclaren N, Golub D, Rappaport R,
McEvoy R, Thomas N, Pi-Sunyer X, Saltiel-Berzin R, Rappaport R, Koblish J,
Blackett P, Comp C, Beck J, Hassing J, Hahn L, Lane J, Corley K, Larson L,
Fiallo-Sharer R, Lee P, Cortez A, Varni N, Speer H, Crockett S, McDaniel W,
Roberts V, Weinzimer S, Cohen P, Baker L, De Paul D, Rebecca E, Dolinar R, Block 
M, Krametbauer P, Frazer T, Veray G, Ahmann A, LaFranchi S, Jennings P, Kelleher 
A, Kummer M, Hansen J, Hunter M, LaMorticella K, Rigdon M, Eckert K, Klaff L,
Brazg R, Springs J, Wilson B, Isaacson E, Kuhn H, Willis D, Kaplowitz P, Bourdony
C Jr, Rivera A, Basu R, Rizza R, Whannel P, Jospe N, Utzman A, Sheikholisham B,
Hiner C, Hardin D, Swinyard M, Rallison M, Jarrett L, Sirstins J, Pierson K,
Trevino S, Schwartz S, Dickens K, Clark S, Scroggin P, Greene G, Linarelli L,
Camuro E, Hermosillo S, Estrada R, Bailey W, Fuqua J, Gitelman SE, Fountaine M,
Colon G, de Pijem L, Nieves-Rivera F, Rivera A, Perez R, Jovanovic L, Vesterfelt 
S, Saenz C, Kletter G, Pihoker K, Kearns S, Keppen L, Johnson P, Krell E, Duck
SC, Noble M, Thompson S, Wilson K, Soler N, McCall L, Allen H, Roumeliotis G,
Chase L, Braden-Moll D, White N, Levandoski L, Malone J, Steinbrueck J, Ulbrecht 
JS, Lambert N, Mulhall P, Wilson T, Lane A, Smaldone A, Modilevsky T, Izquierdo
R, Weinstock R, Mackowiak S, Brindak K, Wherrett D, Daneman D, Pearlman K,
McLellan C, Rogers A, Ipp E, Mao C, Rushovich EH, Thorne I, Jelley D, Greer D,
Metzger D, Austin A, Glasgow A, Turek J, Archer J, Nunlee-Bland G, Johnson K,
Harris J, Driedbart S, Noto R, Romano A, Herl W, Guthrie R, Tatpati O, Brenner A,
Lippert D, Reeves G, Swenson C, Murphy L, Dean H, Berard L, Werbel S, Bell-Farrow
A, Mauseth R, Hanson J, Mishr S, DiCaria L, Wilson B, Wischmeier C, Moosa M, Levy
R, Desemone J, Bentson L, Lando H, Hoelscher J, Biggs W, Carano R, Nostrand P,
Esquival C, Achee L, Kelly J, Nolan P, Otsuka T, Heyrmann K, Autio N, Gohl K,
Prendergast J, Delcher H, Hamilton Reed C, Mellman M, Herskowitz I, Hoffman W,
Naas M, Dubois S, Chaykin L, Pershadsingh H, Shah H, Ettinger V, Reiner B,
McLaughlin J, Levin P, Boniface A, Leigh H, Ginsberg G, Weiss D, Rosecan M, Doyle
P, McAfee J, Goldfogel G, Henschel J, Gorson D, Ramos J, Bush M, Martin K, Birch 
B, Reimer S, Neil J, Saenger P, Dimartino-Nardi J, Capotorto J, Sheehan P,
Quyyumi SA, Cohen N, Stein R, Klonoff D, de Souza J, McCarthy D, Salisbury J,
Edstrom C, William MF, Brown M, Vigersky R, Smith C, Krishna A, Benson R, Murphy 
F, Pruchno C, Davenport M, Clarke W, McDuffie M, Melinkovich G, Bell V, Ravanam
A, Will W, Leonard D, Dahms W, Scott K, Bowyer F, Leichter S, Kaplan R, Lewis S, 
Miller R, Upmanyu M, Goldberg N, Savino R, Wentworth S, Langdon D, Weideman C,
Urban M, Transue D, Whitehouse F, Cara J, Shaw S, Price W, Iverson R, Slag M,
Hutt J, McLean N, Moore R, Christenson R, Valika K, Nayak N, Bloch C, Strom L,
Bailey S, Varma C, Calder D, Bilger M, Larson K, Papenhausen M, Shlesinger Y,
Kenien A, Wright E, Jabbar MA, Lorber D, Berkett J, Robinson R, Kadambi A,
Sullivan W, Meyer E, Bautista JL, Biederman E, Norwood PC, Nassberg S, Goscin L, 
Mata M, Thompson N, Harrell RM, Cabral J, Pietri A, Scott C, Flannery TK, Wilson 
DB, Rogers B, Campos M, Montero M, Beals B, Mair D, Long A, Rood R, Taylor J,
Sevier R, Harris G, Pfeifer M, Blechman M, Giangola J, Creech R, Lathrop M,
Dunaif A, Miceli G, Lewy-Alterbaum L, Jellinger P, Novak S, Gellman K, Lerman S, 
Waxman S, Hamilton D, Driscoll H, Schneier R, Casey J, Boyce P, Meachum J,
Milburn J, Pomeroy D, Moll G, Macyko K, Fox L, Mauras N, Ledereich P, Novotney D,
Gill C, Rossetto B, Houlden R, Heck P, Korducki J, Winston J, Geffner D, Edelman 
S, Henry B, Einhorn D, Fink R, Gold G, Calhoun RW, Leidlein J, Arul K, Henry D,
Donaldson D, Middlestadt K, Grande-Luke L, Guest J, Wermers R, Frindik P, Gewirtz
G, Blyfeld C, Brakin M, Borut D, Geffner D, Winston J, Geffner M, Rodriguez M,
Gura V, Rodriguez M, Shough C, Bays H, Shenouda H, Varma S, Bourgeios M, Sloan L,
Guthrow CE Jr, Shaw S, Ruby R, Motzkin-Kava B, Jebsen D, Zador I, Maby S, Crantz 
F, Zietlow D, Kudzma D, Levy E, Shapiro ET, Jacobi J, Pita J, Abelove W,
Perez-Rodriguez J, Gonzalez-Mendoza L, Richton S, Weissman P, Stein N,
Sherman-Adcock L, Fergeson D, Jacobson M, Sennett J, Etzwiler D, Ramsay R,
Holland M, Carrington S, Seagraves S, Yue G, Downs-Colby J, Flores H, Weinrib S, 
Jones E, Starkman H, White D, Doberne L, Greenfield M, Alexander K, O'Sullivan C,
Duncan R, Barandiaran G, Yunis J, Nunez L, Ramos V, Holland E, Balash W, Sher I, 
Agrin R, Frentz J, Fennoy I, Baron S, Door J, Vinik A, Savery F, Gareis F, Mack
R, Devoe D, Fan Y, Domek D, Kelley D, Roberts T, Gutshall B, Madu I, Poucher R,
Mengel M, Desrosiers P, Banks R, Kopp B, Fishman I, Geller D, Smith W, Duncan J, 
Nyman O, Vaccarello-Cruz M, Schwartz F, Olambiwonnu O, Robles P, Ortiz M, Pines
P, Freedman S, Merrill S, Wise J, Rezvani I, Doyle D, Hale P, Singer-Granick C,
Fore W, Perelman A, Clemmons R, Johnsonbaugh R, Gonzalez A, Baker M, Field C,
Shields C, Walker K, Reddy S, Pillote K, Borchelt M, Townsend P, Bommer D, Curosh
N, Karl D, Phillipson B, Iverson W, Krosnick A, Kahn C, Blodgett B, Iverson N,
Jacobson C, Haynes M, Moore D, Alston R, Eachempati R, Becker D, Weide L, Decker 
M, Greaves J, Curry M, Radcliffe J, Schauf V, Childs D, Crawford R, Charnogursky 
G, Stesin M, Schneider M, Rodbard H, Dempsey M, Brummer R, Elston L, Marseters D,
Lapp P, Glaser N, Soeldner J, Chaurasia V, Michaels R, King A, Olson R, Hale D,
Danney M, Miller S, Madan S, Dudl J, Bohannon N, Berlund M, Jackson T, Kitzmiller
J, Price D, Ehsanipoor K, Homan M, Olshan J, Sorensen T, Perry D A, Nepom G,
McCulloch D, Hirsch I, Kanter R, Niles N, Vogiatzi M, Kerpe V, McVie R,
Aniszewski J, Carroll T, Bacon R, Hudson M, Simpson A, Fili M, Krieger D, Golob
D, Carney J, Khardori R, Peitso M, Lane JT, Katz H, Warhol R, Rothman J, Rooke J,
Jensen DF, Fogel H, Hotes L, Lilavivat U, Gauthier T, Deeb L, Sherradan T, Lavin 
N, Shuey K, Horner J, Tsao J, Scrogin A, Greenlee C, Insel J, Wheeler M, Kamal T,
Wiertz L, Bucholtz H, Dunn J, Wilson K, Frey M, Noto R, Chochinov R, Bridges J,
Amar M, Weinstein R, Poore T, Brink S, Moltz K, Sobel D, Francis G, Sveck R,
Ramey J, Haque N, Villafria A, Villafria R, Madagame J, Stone L, Cech R,
Schnelbach J, Dreidbart S, Noto R, Lebinger T, Shane L, Reece E, Harris R, Welsh 
W, Whitesides P Jr, Scoma A, Ziel F, Alter C, Lock P, Treece G.

OBJECTIVE: We developed a scale to serve as a potential end point for 6-month
glycemic progression (PS6M) toward type 1 diabetes (T1D) in autoantibody-positive
relatives of individuals with T1D.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The PS6M was developed from Diabetes Prevention
Trial-Type 1 (DPT-1) data and tested in the TrialNet Pathway to Prevention Study 
(PTP). It is the difference between 6-month glucose sum values (30-120 min oral
glucose tolerance test values) and values predicted for nonprogressors.
RESULTS: The PS6M predicted T1D in the PTP (P < 0.001). The area under the
receiver operating chacteristic curve was greater (P < 0.001) for the PS6M than
for the baseline-to-6-month difference. PS6M values were higher in those with two
or more autoantibodies, 30-0 min C-peptide values <2.00 ng/mL, or DPT-1 Risk
Scores >7.00 (P < 0.001 for all).
CONCLUSIONS: The PS6M is an indicator of short-term glycemic progression to T1D
that could be a useful tool for assessing preventive treatments and biomarkers.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMCID: PMC4407750 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25758770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2015 Feb;71(2):111-6. doi:
10.6009/jjrt.2015_JSRT_71.2.111.

6. Application of the Monte Carlo simulation 3: leakage dose calculation.

Noto K.

PMID: 25748011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Nucl Med. 2015 Apr;56(4):642-5. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.115.155218. Epub 2015 Mar
5.

American College of Radiology and Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular
Imaging Joint Credentialing Statement for PET/MR Imaging: Brain.

Jadvar H(1), Subramaniam RM(2), Berman CG(3), Boada F(4), Colletti PM(5),
Guimaraes AR(6), McConathy J(7), Meltzer CC(8), Noto RB(9), Packard AB(10),
Rohren EM(11), Oates ME(12).

Author information: 
(1)University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California jadvar@med.usc.edu.
(2)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland. (3)Moffitt Cancer Center,
Tampa, Florida. (4)New York University, New York, New York. (5)University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California. (6)Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts. (7)Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri. (8)Emory
University, Atlanta, Georgia. (9)Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island.
(10)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. (11)M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas; and. (12)University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky.

PMCID: PMC4465538
PMID: 25745088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Int Heart J. 2015;56(2):157-62. doi: 10.1536/ihj.14-222. Epub 2015 Feb 23.

Association between virtual histology intravascular ultrasound findings and
subsequent coronary events in patients with acute coronary syndrome.

Noto T(1), Kameyama T, Satoh T, Nonomura M, Nozawa T, Inoue H.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama University Hospital.

Virtual histology intravascular ultrasound (VH-IVUS) was employed to compare
coronary plaque characteristics between acute coronary syndrome (ACS) patients
with and without subsequent coronary events.It is critical to predict subsequent 
coronary events in patients treated for ACS. Coronary artery events sometimes
occur in lesions that do not receive intervention.VH-IVUS was performed in 57
patients with ACS to analyze 83 non-culprit lesions. Characteristics of plaques
in the non-culprit lesions were determined. Patients were followed-up for 4.8 ±
1.8 years.During the follow-up period, ACS and stable angina pectoris occurred in
7 patients in whom 13 non-culprit lesions had been analyzed. Seventy non-culprit 
lesions in 50 patients who did not experience subsequent coronary events were
also analyzed. Plaque area was greater in 7 patients who had subsequent coronary 
events than in those who did not (11.5 ± 3.1 versus 9.1 ± 3.6 mm(3)/mm, P =
0.03). However, there was no significant difference in plaque burden between the 
two groups (57.1 ± 8.9 versus 55.6 ± 8.7%, P = 0.18). Areas of dense calcium (DC)
and necrotic core (NC) were greater in patients who had subsequent coronary
events than in those who did not (0.6 ± 0.5 versus 0.2 ± 0.3 mm(3)/mm, P < 0.001,
and 1.8 ± 1.0 versus 1.0 ± 0.8 mm(3)/mm, P < 0.01, respectively). When DC area
was larger (= 3.4% of the plaque area), the cumulative coronary event rate
increased significantly (28.6 versus 6.5%, P < 0.01). This was also true for NC
area (= 20.9%, 31.4 versus 5.1%, P < 0.01).Area size of DC or NC in non-culprit
plaques may be associated with subsequent coronary events in patients with ACS.

PMID: 25740395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Int Heart J. 2015;56(2):150-6. doi: 10.1536/ihj.14-224. Epub 2015 Feb 23.

Enhanced expression of hemoglobin scavenger receptor CD163 in accumulated
macrophages within filtered debris between acute coronary syndromes and stable
angina pectoris.

Sato T(1), Kameyama T, Noto T, Ueno H, Inoue H.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, University of Toyama.

Coronary intraplaque hemorrhage up-regulates hemoglobin scavenger receptor CD163 
expression on macrophages, and has an association with vulnerable plaque
development. During percutaneous coronary intervention, mechanical plaque
disruption exposes potentially embolic atheromatous contents from culprit
plaque.In 37 patients with stable angina pectoris (SAP, n = 20) or acute coronary
syndrome (ACS, n = 17), atherothrombotic debris was collected using a
filter-based distal embolic protection device. We immunohistochemically
determined CD14-positive macrophages and CD163-positive macrophages in filtered
debris. We also examined the relation of CD14- and CD163-positive macrophages
with culprit plaque volume and components evaluated with ultrasonic tissue
characterization (VH-IVUS).The only significant difference in clinical
characteristics between the two groups was in hs-CRP. In ACS, the percentage of
CD14- and CD163-positive macrophages to the whole cells (%CD14 and %CD163,
respectively) was significantly higher than that in SAP (20.1 ± 8.2 versus 8.8 ± 
6.8%, P < 0.001 and 32.6 ± 18.9 versus 9.0 ± 3.8%, P < 0.001, respectively). In
IVUS indices of culprit plaque, the remodeling index was significantly higher in 
ACS than in SAP. However, necrotic core component (%NC) in ACS was significantly 
higher than that in SAP. Furthermore, fibrotic component (%Fibrous) in ACS was
significantly lower than that in SAP (56.1 ± 4.7 versus 60.1 ± 3.3%, P = 0.03).
%CD14 and %CD163 had a significant positive correlation with %NC (%CD14: r =
0.40, P = 0.01 and %CD163: r = 0.45, P = 0.01), but only %CD163 was negatively
correlated with %Fibrous (%CD163: r = -0.48, P = 0.01).These findings suggest
that the presence of CD14- and CD163-positive macrophages may reflect plaque
inflammation, NC expansion, and plaque vulnerability in patients with coronary
heart disease.

PMID: 25740391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2015 May;171:55-60. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpc.2015.02.004. Epub 2015 Feb 28.

Monohydroxylated polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons influence spicule formation in 
the early development of sea urchins (Hemicentrotus pulcherrimus).

Suzuki N(1), Ogiso S(2), Yachiguchi K(2), Kawabe K(3), Makino F(3), Toriba A(3), 
Kiyomoto M(4), Sekiguchi T(2), Tabuchi Y(5), Kondo T(6), Kitamura K(7), Hong
CS(8), Srivastav AK(9), Oshima Y(10), Hattori A(11), Hayakawa K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University, Housu-gun, Ishikawa 927-0553, Japan. Electronic address:
nobuos@staff.kanazaw-u.ac.jp. (2)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and 
Environmental Technology, Kanazawa University, Housu-gun, Ishikawa 927-0553,
Japan. (3)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Institute of Medical,
Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences, Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Ishikawa
920-1192, Japan. (4)Marine and Coastal Research Center, Ochanomizu University,
Tateyama, Chiba 294-0301, Japan. (5)Division of Molecular Genetics Research, Life
Science Research Center, University of Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.
(6)Department of Radiological Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, Japan. (7)Faculty
of Health Sciences, Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences,
Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan. (8)Research and Business
Foundation, Hankuk University of Foreign Studies, 81, Oedae-ro, Mohyeon-myeon,
Cheoin-gu, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do 449-791, Republic of Korea. (9)Department of
Zoology, D.D.U. Gorakhpur University, Gorakhpur 273-009, India. (10)Faculty of
Agriculture, Kyushu University, Hakozaki, Fukuoka 812-8581, Japan. (11)Department
of Biology, College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, Tokyo Medical Dental
University, Ichikawa, Chiba 272-0827, Japan.

We previously demonstrated that monohydroxylated polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(OHPAHs), which are metabolites of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), act
on calcified tissue and suppress osteoblastic and osteoclastic activity in the
scales of teleost fish. The compounds may possibly influence other calcified
tissues. Thus, the present study noted the calcified spicules in sea urchins and 
examined the effect of both PAHs and OHPAHs on spicule formation during the
embryogenesis of sea urchins. After fertilization, benz[a]anthracene (BaA) and
4-hydroxybenz[a]anthracene (4-OHBaA) were added to seawater at concentrations of 
10(-8) and 10(-7) M and kept at 18 °C. The influence of the compound was given at
the time of the pluteus larva. At this stage, the length of the spicule was
significantly suppressed by 4-OHBaA (10(-8) and 10(-7) M). BaA (10(-7) M)
decreased the length of the spicule significantly, while the length did not
change with BaA (10(-8) M). The expression of mRNAs (spicule matrix protein and
transcription factors) in the 4-OHBaA (10(-7) M)-treated embryos was more
strongly inhibited than were those in the BaA (10(-7) M)-treated embryos. This is
the first study to demonstrate that OHPAHs suppress spicule formation in sea
urchins.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25737366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biosci Bioeng. 2015 May;119(5):570-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2014.10.015. Epub
2015 Feb 24.

Bioprocess of Kosa bioaerosols: effect of ultraviolet radiation on airborne
bacteria within Kosa (Asian dust).

Kobayashi F(1), Maki T(2), Kakikawa M(3), Yamada M(4), Puspitasari F(5), Iwasaka 
Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)College of Science and Engineering, Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa,
Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan. Electronic address: fumihisa@se.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.
(2)College of Science and Engineering, Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa,
Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan. (3)Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan. (4)National
Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, Japan, Nagao 6-21-1, Tama, Kawasaki 
214-8585, Japan. (5)Graduate School of Natural Science & Technology, Kanazawa
University, Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan. (6)The Board of Directors, The University
of Shiga Prefecture, Yasaka 2500, Hikone, Shiga 522-8533, Japan.

Kosa (Asian dust) is a well-known weather phenomenon in which aerosols are
carried by the westerly winds from inland China to East Asia. Recently, the
frequency of this phenomenon and the extent of damage caused have been
increasing. The airborne bacteria within Kosa are called Kosa bioaerosols. Kosa
bioaerosols have affected ecosystems, human health and agricultural productivity 
in downwind areas. In order to develop a new and useful bacterial source and to
identify the source region of Kosa bioaerosols, sampling, isolation,
identification, measurement of ultraviolet (UV) radiation tolerance and
experimental simulation of UV radiation conditions were performed during Kosa
bioaerosol transportation. We sampled these bioaerosols using a Cessna 404
airplane and a bioaerosol sampler at an altitude of approximately 2900 m over the
Noto Peninsula on March 27, 2010. The bioaerosol particles were isolated and
identified as Bacillus sp. BASZHR 1001. The results of the UV irradiation
experiment showed that the UV radiation tolerance of Kosa bioaerosol bacteria was
very high compared with that of a soil bacterium. Moreover, the UV radiation
tolerance of Kosa bioaerosol spores was higher than that of soil bacterial
spores. This suggested that Kosa bioaerosols are transported across the
atmosphere as living spores. Similarly, by the experimental simulation of UV
radiation conditions, the limited source region of this Kosa bioaerosol was found
to be southern Russia and there was a possibility of transport from the Kosa
source area.

Copyright © 2014 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25735592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Med Phys. 2015 Mar;42(3):1378-88. doi: 10.1118/1.4908207.

Initial implementation of the conversion from the energy-subtracted CT number to 
electron density in tissue inhomogeneity corrections: an anthropomorphic phantom 
study of radiotherapy treatment planning.

Tsukihara M(1), Noto Y(2), Sasamoto R(3), Hayakawa T(3), Saito M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiological Technology, Graduate School of Health Sciences,
Niigata University, Niigata 951-8518, Japan. (2)Department of Radiology, Niigata 
University Medical and Dental Hospital, Niigata 951-8520, Japan. (3)Department of
Radiological Technology, School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Niigata 
University, Niigata 951-8518, Japan.

PURPOSE: To achieve accurate tissue inhomogeneity corrections in radiotherapy
treatment planning, the authors had previously proposed a novel conversion of the
energy-subtracted computed tomography (CT) number to an electron density
(<U+0394>HU-<U+03C1>(e) conversion), which provides a single linear relationship between <U+0394>HU
and <U+03C1>(e) over a wide range of <U+03C1>(e). The purpose of this study is to present an
initial implementation of the <U+0394>HU-<U+03C1>(e) conversion method for a treatment planning
system (TPS). In this paper, two example radiotherapy plans are used to evaluate 
the reliability of dose calculations in the <U+0394>HU-<U+03C1>(e) conversion method.
METHODS: CT images were acquired using a clinical dual-source CT (DSCT) scanner
operated in the dual-energy mode with two tube potential pairs and an additional 
tin (Sn) filter for the high-kV tube (80-140 kV/Sn and 100-140 kV/Sn).
Single-energy CT using the same DSCT scanner was also performed at 120 kV to
compare the <U+0394>HU-<U+03C1>(e) conversion method with a conventional conversion from a CT
number to <U+03C1>(e) (Hounsfield units, HU-<U+03C1>(e) conversion). Lookup tables for <U+03C1>(e)
calibration were obtained from the CT image acquisitions for tissue substitutes
in an electron density phantom (EDP). To investigate the beam-hardening effect on
dosimetric uncertainties, two EDPs with different sizes (a body EDP and a head
EDP) were used for the <U+03C1>(e) calibration. Each acquired lookup table was applied
to two radiotherapy plans designed using the XiO TPS with the superposition
algorithm for an anthropomorphic phantom. The first radiotherapy plan was for an 
oral cavity tumor and the second was for a lung tumor.
RESULTS: In both treatment plans, the performance of the <U+0394>HU-<U+03C1>(e) conversion was 
superior to that of the conventional HU-<U+03C1>(e) conversion in terms of the
reliability of dose calculations. Especially, for the oral tumor plan, which
dealt with dentition and bony structures, treatment planning with the HU-<U+03C1>(e)
conversion exhibited apparent discrepancies between the dose distributions and
dose-volume histograms (DVHs) of the body-EDP and head-EDP calibrations. In
contrast, the dose distributions and DVHs of the body-EDP and head-EDP
calibrations coincided with each other almost perfectly in the <U+0394>HU-<U+03C1>(e)
conversion for 100-140 kV/Sn. The difference between the V100's (the mean
planning target volume receiving 100% of the prescribed dose; a DVH parameter) of
the body-EDP and head-EDP calibrations could be reduced to less than 1% using the
<U+0394>HU-<U+03C1>(e) conversion, but exceeded 11% for the HU-<U+03C1>(e) conversion.
CONCLUSIONS: The <U+0394>HU-<U+03C1>(e) conversion can be implemented for currently available
TPS's without any modifications or extensions. The <U+0394>HU-<U+03C1>(e) conversion appears to
be a promising method for providing an accurate and reliable inhomogeneity
correction in treatment planning for any ill-conditioned scans that include (i)
the use of a calibration EDP that is nonequivalent to the patient's body tissues,
(ii) a mismatch between the size of the patient and the calibration EDP, or (iii)
a large quantity of high-density and high-atomic-number tissue structures.

PMID: 25735292  [PubMed - in process]


152. Schizophr Res. 2015 May;164(1-3):53-8. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2015.01.026. Epub
2015 Feb 21.

Effects of depression on the cytokine profile in drug naïve first-episode
psychosis.

Noto C(1), Ota VK(2), Santoro ML(2), Ortiz BB(3), Rizzo LB(3), Higuchi CH(3),
Cordeiro Q(1), Belangero SI(2), Bressan RA(3), Gadelha A(3), Maes M(4), Brietzke 
E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São
Paulo, Brazil; First Episode Psychosis Program, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da 
Santa Casa de São Paulo (FCMSCSP), São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Genetics Division,
Department of Morphology and Genetics, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo
(UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil. (3)Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal
de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Department of Psychiatry, Deakin
University, Geelong, VIC, Australia; Department of Psychiatry, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, Thailand; Health Sciences Graduate Program, Health Sciences 
Center, State University of Londrina (UEL), Brazil. (5)Department of Psychiatry, 
Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic
address: elisabrietzke@hotmail.com.

Schizophrenia is accompanied by alterations in immuno-inflammatory pathways,
including abnormalities in cytokine profile. The immune assessment of patients in
a first episode of psychosis (FEP) and particularly in drug naïve patients is
very important to further elucidate this association. The objectives of this
study are to delineate the cytokine profile (IL-2, IL-10, IL-4, IL-6, IFN<U+03B3>, TNFa 
and IL-17) in FEP patients (n=55) versus healthy controls (n=57) and to examine
whether the presence of depressive symptoms in FEP is accompanied by a specific
cytokine profile. We found increased levels of IL-6, IL-10 and TNFa in FEP
patients when compared to healthy controls. FEP patients with depression showed
higher IL-4 and TNFa levels versus those without depression. Cytokine levels were
not correlated to the total PANSS and the positive or negative subscale scores.
Our results suggest that FEP is accompanied by a cytokine profile indicative of
monocytic and T regulatory cell (Treg) activation. Depression in FEP is
accompanied by monocytic and Th-2 activation, whereas FEP without depression is
characterized by Treg activation only. In conclusion, depression emerged as a key
component explaining the cytokines imbalance in FEP that is responsible for a
large part of the immune-inflammatory abnormalities described.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25716958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2015 Apr-Jun;37(2):99-105. doi: 10.1590/1516-4446-2014-1389. 
Epub 2015 Feb 24.

Sports practices related to alcohol and tobacco use among high school students.

Bedendo A(1), Noto AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São 
Paulo, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the relationship between alcohol and tobacco use and sports
in a national sample of secondary students.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study enrolled a representative sample of secondary
students from public and private schools from all 27 Brazilian state capitals.
Students were assessed in 2010 by a self-report questionnaire including questions
on drug use and sport activity in the last month (n=13,872).
RESULTS: Subjects who played sports exhibited a higher frequency of alcohol use
and heavy episodic drinking than their peers who did not play sports. Practices
that were associated with higher odds of heavy episodic drinking in the last
month included gym, weight training (adjusted odds ratio [aOR]: 2.0, 95%
confidence interval [95%CI] 1.6-2.4), and soccer (aOR: 1.3, 95%CI 1.1-1.5).
Fighting, martial arts, or capoeira were associated with smoking (aOR: 1.9, 95%CI
1.2-3.2).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest a relationship between some sports preferences 
and a higher risk of alcohol or tobacco use among Brazilian secondary students.
This relationship should be considered in preventive programs.

PMID: 25714754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Clin Schizophr Relat Psychoses. 2015 Feb 24:1-18. [Epub ahead of print]

Disorganized symptoms predicted worse functioning outcome in schizophrenia
patients with established illness.

Ortiz BB(1), Gadelha A(2), Higuchia CH(2), Noto C(2), Medeiros D(3), Pitta JC(4),
Araújo Filho GM(5), Cecílio Hallak JE(6), Bressan RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LiNC), Department of
Psychiatry, Schizophrenia Program (Proesq), Department of Psychiatry, Department 
of Mental Health, Faculdade de Medicina de Mogi das Cruzes (FMUMC), Universidade 
Federal de São Paulo, Hospital das Clínicas Luzia de Pinho Melo - SPDM, São
Paulo, SP, Brazil, Mogi das Cruzes, SP, Brazil. (2)Interdisciplinary Laboratory
of Clinical Neurosciences (LiNC), Department of Psychiatry, Schizophrenia Program
(Proesq), Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo,
SP, Brazil. (3)Schizophrenia Program (Proesq), Department of Psychiatry,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (4)Interdisciplinary
Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LiNC), Department of Psychiatry,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (5)Interdisciplinary
Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LiNC), Department of Psychiatry, Department
of Psychiatry and Medical Psychology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Medical 
School of São José do Rio Preto (FAMERP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (6)Department of
Neurosciences and Behavior, Division of Psychiatry, Faculdade de Medicina de
Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.

Most patients with schizophrenia will have subsequent relapses of the disorder
with continuous impairments in functioning. However, evidence is lacking on how
symptoms influence functioning at different phases of the disease. This study
aims to investigate the relationship between symptom dimensions and functioning
at different phases: acute exacerbation, non-remission and remission. Methods:
Patients with schizophrenia were grouped in acutely ill (n=89), notremitted
(n=89) and remitted (n=69). Three exploratory stepwise linear regression analyses
were performed for each phase of schizophrenia, in which the five PANSS factors
and demographic variables were entered as the independent variables and the total
Global Assessment of Functioning Scale (GAF) score was entered as the dependent
variable. An additional exploratory stepwise logistic regression analysis was
performed to predict subsequent remission at discharge in the inpatient
population. Results: The Disorganized factor was the most significant predictor
for acutely ill patients (P <0.001), while the Hostility factor was the most
significant for not-remitted patients and the Negative factor was the most
significant for remitted patients (P=0.001 and P <0.001). In the logistic
regression, the Disorganized factor score presented a significant negative
association with remission (P=0.007). Conclusions: Higher disorganization
symptoms showed the greatest impact in functioning at acute phase and prevented
patients from achieving remission, suggesting it may be a marker of symptom
severity and worse outcome in schizophrenia.

PMID: 25711508  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


155. J Altern Complement Med. 2015 Mar;21(3):129-40. doi: 10.1089/acm.2013.0471. Epub 
2015 Feb 24.

Mindfulness-based interventions for the treatment of smoking: a systematic
literature review.

de Souza IC(1), de Barros VV, Gomide HP, Miranda TC, Menezes Vde P, Kozasa EH,
Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Psychobiology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo , São Paulo, 
Brazil .

OBJECTIVES: Smoking is a chronic process in which craving and negative affect are
considered the main barriers to maintaining abstinence in patients who have gone 
through treatment. Mindfulness-based interventions have presented encouraging
preliminary results in follow-up lasting up to 6 months. The aim of this study
was to perform a systematic literature review on the effects of mindfulness-based
interventions for the treatment of smoking.
METHODS: Of 198 articles on mindfulness and smoking, 13 controlled empirical
studies were selected for the analysis. The search included papers published
through April 14, 2014. The databases used were Cochrane Central Register of
Controlled Trials, PsycINFO, PubMed, and Scopus.
RESULTS: Scientific interest on mindfulness-based interventions for the treatment
of smoking has increased over the past decade. All articles reported promising
results, especially for smoking cessation, relapse prevention, number of
cigarettes smoked, the moderation of mindfulness on the strength of relationship 
between craving and smoking, and the development of coping strategies to deal
with triggers to smoke. Most of the articles corresponded to pilot or feasibility
randomized controlled trials with low risk of bias regarding random sequence
generation, attrition, and reporting. However, few articles reported sufficient
data on selection, performance, and detection bias.
CONCLUSIONS: Mindfulness appears to induce positive effects on mental health,
which might contribute to the maintenance of tobacco abstinence. Despite the
promising results regarding the responses of tobacco smokers to mindfulness-based
interventions, additional well-designed clinical studies are needed.

PMID: 25710798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2014 Dec 27;6(2):162-7. doi: 10.1021/ml500459f. eCollection
2015.

Potent Irreversible Inhibitors of LasR Quorum Sensing in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

O'Brien KT(1), Noto JG(1), Nichols-O'Neill L(1), Perez LJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Rowan University , 201 Mullica Hill 
Road, Glassboro, New Jersey 08028, United States.

Antagonism of quorum sensing represents a promising new antivirulence approach
for the treatment of bacterial infection. The development of a novel series of
non-natural irreversible antagonists of P. aeruginosa LasR is described. The lead
compounds identified (25 and 28) display potent LasR antagonist activity and
inhibit expression of the P. aeruginosa virulence factors pyocyanin and biofilm
formation in PAO1 and PA14.

PMCID: PMC4329587
PMID: 25699144  [PubMed]


157. Ann Pharmacother. 2015 Mar;49(3):366-7. doi: 10.1177/1060028014564395.

Fosfomycin for multidrug treatment of Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase
bacteremia.

Kyle JM(1), Stollings JL(2), White KD(1), Noto MJ(1), Wheeler AP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA. (2)Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA joanna.stollings@vanderbilt.edu.
(3)Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA.

PMID: 25691478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:627201. doi: 10.1155/2015/627201. Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Monitoring the modifications of the vitreous humor metabolite profile after
death: an animal model.

Rosa MF(1), Scano P(2), Noto A(3), Nioi M(1), Sanna R(2), Paribello F(1),
De-Giorgio F(4), Locci E(1), d'Aloja E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Forensic Science
Unit, University of Cagliari, SS 554 Bivio per Sestu, 09042 Monserrato, Italy.
(2)Department of Chemical and Geological Sciences, University of Cagliari, SS 554
Bivio per Sestu, 09042 Monserrato, Italy. (3)Department of Surgery, University of
Cagliari, SS 554 Bivio per Sestu, 09042 Monserrato, Italy. (4)Public Health
Institute, Forensic Science Unit, Catholic University, Largo Francesco Vito 1,
00165 Rome, Italy.

We applied a metabolomic approach to monitor the modifications occurring in goat 
vitreous humor (VH) metabolite composition at different times (0, 6, 12, 18, and 
24 hours) after death. The (1)H-NMR analysis of the VH samples was performed for 
the simultaneous determination of several metabolites (i.e., the metabolite
profile) representative of the VH status at different times. Spectral data were
analyzed by Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and by Orthogonal Projection to
Latent Structures (OPLS) regression technique. PCA and OPLS suggested that
different spectral regions were involved in time-related changes. The major
time-related compositional changes, here detected, were the increase of lactate, 
hypoxanthine, alanine, total glutathione, choline/phosphocholine, creatine, and
myo-inositol and the decrease of glucose and 3-hydroxybutyrate. We attempted a
speculative interpretation of the biological mechanisms underlying these changes.
These results show that multivariate statistical approach, based on (1)H NMR
metabolite profiling, is a powerful tool for detecting ongoing differences in VH 
composition and may be applied to investigate several physiological and
pathological conditions.

PMCID: PMC4320932
PMID: 25688360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2015 Jan 8;16(1):5082. doi: 10.1120/jacmp.v16i1.5082.

Optimizing radiation dose by varying age at pediatric temporal bone CT.

Noto D(1), Funama Y, Kitajima M, Utsunomiya D, Oda S, Yamashita Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Graduate School of Health Sciences, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto, Japan. noto@gmail.com.

We performed retrospective (first-step) and prospective (second-step) studies to 
evaluate the body information and noise on temporal bone computed tomography (CT)
images in efforts to identify the optimized tube current yielding the greatest
reduction in the radiation exposure of pediatric patients undergoing temporal
bone CT studies. Our first-step study included 90 patients subjected to temporal 
bone CT. We recorded displayed volume CT dose index (CTDIvol), displayed
dose-length product (DLP), image noise, and the patient age and sex. We then
calculated the optimized tube current value with and without IR corresponding to 
the children's age based on the ratio of the noise on images from individuals
older than 18 years. In our second-step study, we enrolled 23 pediatric patients 
and obtained CT scans using our optimized protocol. In both studies we applied
identical analysis techniques. The diagnostic image quality was confirmed reading
reports and a neuroradiologist. Our first-step study indicated that the mean
image noise in children assigned to five ascending age groups from 2 to 12 years 
ranged from 167.59 to 211.44 Hounsfield units (HU). In the second-step study, the
mean image noise in each age group was almost the same as the expected noise
value and the diagnostic image quality was acceptable. The dose reduction was
ranged from 57.5% to 37.5%. Optimization of the tube current-time product allows 
a radiation reduction without a loss in image quality in pediatric patients
undergoing temporal bone CT.

PMID: 25679165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Anal Chem. 2015 Apr 21;87(8):4168-76. doi: 10.1021/ac504861d. Epub 2015 Feb 24.

Colorimetric nanoplasmonic assay to determine purity and titrate extracellular
vesicles.

Maiolo D(1), Paolini L(2), Di Noto G(2), Zendrini A(2), Berti D(3), Bergese P(1),
Ricotta D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry for Technologies Laboratory and INSTM, Department of Mechanical and
Industrial Engineering, University of Brescia, via Branze 38, 25123 Brescia,
Brescia, Italy. (2)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Faculty
of Medicine, University of Brescia, 25123 Brescia, Brescia, Italy. (3)§Department
of Chemistry "Ugo Schiff" and CSGI, University of Florence, via della Lastruccia 
3, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Florence Italy.

Extracellular Vesicles (EVs) - cell secreted vesicles that carry rich molecular
information of the parental cell and constitute an important mode of
intercellular communication - are becoming a primary topic in translational
medicine. EVs (that comprise exosomes and microvesicles/microparticles) have a
size ranging from 40 nm to 1 µm and share several physicochemical proprieties,
including size, density, surface charge, and light interaction, with other
nano-objects present in body fluids, such as single and aggregated proteins. This
makes separation, titration, and characterization of EVs challenging and
time-consuming. Here we present a cost-effective and fast colorimetric assay for 
probing by eye protein contaminants and determine the concentration of EV
preparations, which exploits the synergy between colloidal gold nanoplasmonics,
nanoparticle-protein corona, and nanoparticle-membrane interaction. The assay
hits a limit of detection of protein contaminants of 5 ng/µL and has a dynamic
range of EV concentration ranging from 35 fM to 35 pM, which matches the typical 
range of EV concentration in body fluids. This work provides the first example of
the exploitation of the nanoparticle-protein corona in analytical chemistry.

PMID: 25674701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015 Oct;86(10):1066-74. doi:
10.1136/jnnp-2014-309599. Epub 2015 Feb 4.

Ultrasound in the diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy: structure meets function in
the neuromuscular clinic.

Gallardo E(1), Noto Y(2), Simon NG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Service of Radiology, University Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla; Instituto de 
Investigación Marqués de Valdecilla (IDIVAL), Santander, Spain University of
Cantabria (UC); and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades
Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Santander, Spain. (2)Department of Neurology,
Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
Japan. (3)Prince of Wales Clinical School, University of New South Wales,
Australia Central Clinical School, The University of Sydney, Australia.

Peripheral nerve ultrasound (US) has emerged as a promising technique for the
diagnosis of peripheral nerve disorders. While most experience with US has been
reported in the context of nerve entrapment syndromes, the role of US in the
diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy (PN) has recently been explored. Distinctive
US findings have been reported in patients with hereditary, immune-mediated,
infectious and axonal PN; US may add complementary information to
neurophysiological studies in the diagnostic work-up of PN. This review describes
the characteristic US findings in PN reported to date and a classification of
abnormal nerve US patterns in PN is proposed. Closer scrutiny of nerve
abnormalities beyond assessment of nerve calibre may allow for more accurate
diagnostic classification of PN, as well as contribute to the understanding of
the intersection of structure and function in PN.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25653385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Comput Biol. 2015 May;22(5):402-13. doi: 10.1089/cmb.2014.0155. Epub 2015 Feb
4.

CSAX: Characterizing Systematic Anomalies in eXpression Data.

Noto K(1), Majidi S, Edlow AG, Wick HC, Bianchi DW, Slonim DK.

Author information: 
(1)1 AncestryDNA , San Francisco, California.

Methods for translating gene expression signatures into clinically relevant
information have typically relied upon having many samples from patients with
similar molecular phenotypes. Here, we address the question of what can be done
when it is relatively easy to obtain healthy patient samples, but when
abnormalities corresponding to disease states may be rare and one-of-a-kind. The 
associated computational challenge, anomaly detection, is a well-studied
machine-learning problem. However, due to the dimensionality and variability of
expression data, existing methods based on feature space analysis or individual
anomalously expressed genes are insufficient. We present a novel approach, CSAX, 
that identifies pathways in an individual sample in which the normal expression
relationships are disrupted. To evaluate our approach, we have compiled and
released a compendium of public expression data sets, reformulated to create a
test bed for anomaly detection. We demonstrate the accuracy of CSAX on the data
sets in our compendium, compare it to other leading methods, and show that CSAX
aids in both identifying anomalies and explaining their underlying biology. We
describe an approach to characterizing the difficulty of specific expression
anomaly detection tasks. We then illustrate CSAX's value in two developmental
case studies. Confirming prior hypotheses, CSAX highlights disruption of platelet
activation pathways in a neonate with retinopathy of prematurity and identifies, 
for the first time, dysregulated oxidative stress response in second trimester
amniotic fluid of fetuses with obese mothers. Our approach provides an important 
step toward identification of individual disease patterns in the era of precision
medicine.

PMCID: PMC4424968
PMID: 25651392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2015 Apr;8(2):343-50. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.114.000776. Epub 2015 Jan 27.

Exome sequencing in suspected monogenic dyslipidemias.

Stitziel NO, Peloso GM, Abifadel M, Cefalu AB, Fouchier S, Motazacker MM, Tada H,
Larach DB, Awan Z, Haller JF, Pullinger CR, Varret M, Rabès JP, Noto D, Tarugi P,
Kawashiri MA, Nohara A, Yamagishi M, Risman M, Deo R, Ruel I, Shendure J,
Nickerson DA, Wilson JG, Rich SS, Gupta N, Farlow DN, Neale BM, Daly MJ, Kane JP,
Freeman MW, Genest J, Rader DJ, Mabuchi H, Kastelein JJ, Hovingh GK, Averna MR,
Gabriel S, Boileau C, Kathiresan S.

Comment in
    Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2015 Apr;8(2):250-2.

BACKGROUND: Exome sequencing is a promising tool for gene mapping in Mendelian
disorders. We used this technique in an attempt to identify novel genes
underlying monogenic dyslipidemias.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We performed exome sequencing on 213 selected family members
from 41 kindreds with suspected Mendelian inheritance of extreme levels of
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (after candidate gene sequencing excluded
known genetic causes for high low-density lipoprotein cholesterol families) or
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol. We used standard analytic approaches to
identify candidate variants and also assigned a polygenic score to each
individual to account for their burden of common genetic variants known to
influence lipid levels. In 9 families, we identified likely pathogenic variants
in known lipid genes (ABCA1, APOB, APOE, LDLR, LIPA, and PCSK9); however, we were
unable to identify obvious genetic etiologies in the remaining 32 families,
despite follow-up analyses. We identified 3 factors that limited novel gene
discovery: (1) imperfect sequencing coverage across the exome hid potentially
causal variants; (2) large numbers of shared rare alleles within families
obfuscated causal variant identification; and (3) individuals from 15% of
families carried a significant burden of common lipid-related alleles, suggesting
complex inheritance can masquerade as monogenic disease.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified the genetic basis of disease in 9 of 41 families;
however, none of these represented novel gene discoveries. Our results highlight 
the promise and limitations of exome sequencing as a discovery technique in
suspected monogenic dyslipidemias. Considering the confounders identified may
inform the design of future exome sequencing studies.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4406825
PMID: 25632026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Int J Hematol. 2015 Mar;101(3):268-72. doi: 10.1007/s12185-015-1737-9. Epub 2015 
Jan 28.

Significance of lymphocyte counts at diagnosis in the management of ITP: the
relationship between lymphocyte counts and treatment success in H.
pylori-infected patients.

Nagata A(1), Sekiguchi N, Kurimoto M, Noto S, Takezako N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, National Hospital Organization Disaster Medical
Center of Japan, Tachikawa, Tokyo, 190-0014, Japan.

Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is an acquired disorder characterized by
thrombocytopenia, increased platelet destruction, and the inhibition of platelet 
production by specific autoantibodies. Previous studies have reported
improvements in ITP following the eradication of Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) 
infection. We, herein, investigated the relationship between initial therapy for 
ITP and lymphocyte counts at diagnosis. We retrospectively examined 52 adult
patients with ITP between March 1998 and March 2013. Standard H. pylori
eradication therapy was performed in 31 patients, and lymphocyte counts were
compared before and after this therapy. At the diagnosis of ITP, lymphocyte
counts in H. pylori-infected patients were significantly higher than those in H. 
pylori-negative patients (1.92 ± 0.68 × 10(9)/L vs. 1.42 ± 0.67 × 10(9)/L; p =
0.010). H. pylori eradication was successful in 6/11 patients (54.5 %) and the
platelet count increased in 4/11 H. pylori-positive patients (36.4 %) who
received eradication therapy. On the other hand, eradication therapy was also
administered to 15 patients without H. pylori infection, and responses were
obtained in some H. pylori-negative patients receiving eradication therapy
(9/15). Furthermore, lymphocyte counts were significantly higher in patients who 
achieved a complete response receiving H. pylori eradication therapy than in
patients who did not achieve a complete response (2.4 ± 0.59 × 10(9)/L vs. 1.37 ±
0.60 × 10(9)/L, p = 0.0023). The response of ITP patients to the initial
treatment may be predicted by measuring the lymphocyte count at diagnosis.
Further studies that analyze lymphocyte subsets and the cytokine network are
needed to elucidate the underlying mechanisms.

PMID: 25628102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Atherosclerosis. 2015 Mar;239(1):209-17. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2015.01.014. Epub 2015 Jan 19.

Homozygous familial hypobetalipoproteinemia: two novel mutations in the splicing 
sites of apolipoprotein B gene and review of the literature.

Cefalù AB(1), Norata GD(2), Ghiglioni DG(3), Noto D(1), Uboldi P(2), Garlaschelli
K(2), Baragetti A(2), Spina R(1), Valenti V(1), Pederiva C(4), Riva E(4),
Terracciano L(3), Zoja A(3), Grigore L(5), Averna MR(6), Catapano AL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento Biomedico di Medicina Interna e Specialistica (DIBIMIS),
Università degli Studi di Palermo, Italy. (2)Department of Pharmacology and
Biomolecular Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Melloni Hospital, Milano, Italy. (4)Dipartimento di
Scienze della Salute, Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy. (5)Department of
Pharmacology and Biomolecular Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano,
Italy; IRCCS Multimedica, Milano, Italy. (6)Dipartimento Biomedico di Medicina
Interna e Specialistica (DIBIMIS), Università degli Studi di Palermo, Italy.
Electronic address: maurizio.averna@unipa.it. (7)Department of Pharmacology and
Biomolecular Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy; IRCCS
Multimedica, Milano, Italy. Electronic address: alberico.catapano@unimi.it.

OBJECTIVE: Familial hypobetalipoproteinemia (FHBL) is autosomal codominant
disorder of lipoprotein metabolism characterized by low plasma levels of total
cholesterol (TC), low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (LDL-C) and apolipoprotein 
B (apoB) below the 5(th) percentile of the distribution in the population.
Patients with the clinical diagnosis of homozygous FHBL (Ho-FHBL) are extremely
rare and few patients have been characterized at the molecular level. Here we
report the medical history and the molecular characterization of one paediatric
patient with clinical features of Ho-FHBL.
METHODS: A one month old infant with failure to thrive, severe
hypocholesterolemia and acanthocytosis was clinically and genetically
characterized. Molecular characterization of the proband and her parents was
performed by direct sequencing of the APOB gene and functional role of the
identified mutations was assessed by the minigene methodology.
RESULTS: The proband was found carrying two novel splicing mutations of the APOB 
gene (c.3696+1G > C and c.3697-1G > A). CHOK1H8 cells expressing minigenes
harbouring the mutations showed that these two mutations were associated with the
retention of intron 23 and skipping of exon 24, resulting in two truncated apoB
fragments of approximate size of 26-28 % of ApoB-100 and the total absence of
apoB.
CONCLUSION: We describe the first case of Ho-FHBL due to two splicing mutations
affecting both the donor and the acceptor splice sites of the same intron of the 
APOB gene occurring in the same patient. The clinical management of the proband
is discussed and a review of the clinical and genetic features of the published
Ho-FHBL cases is reported.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25618028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 30;6(3):1531-43.

Helicobacter pylori bacteria alter the p53 stress response via ERK-HDM2 pathway.

Bhardwaj V(1,)(2), Noto JM(3), Wei J(1,)(2), Andl C(2,)(4), El-Rifai W(2,)(4),
Peek RM(4,)(3), Zaika AI(1,)(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA. (2)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
and Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (3)Division of
Gastroenterology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center and Vanderbilt-Ingram
Cancer Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (4)Department of Cancer Biology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center and Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center,
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

H. pylori infection is the strongest known risk factor for gastric cancer.
Inhibition of host tumor suppressor mechanisms by the bacteria underlies the
development of this disease. Among the tumor suppressors affected by H. pylori
are p53 and E-cadherin, which inhibition has been shown to increase the risk of
gastric cancer. In this report, we investigated the interaction between
E-cadherin and p53 in H. pylori-infected cells. We found that downregulation of
E-cadherin leads to cellular stress and activation of p53. In the setting of H.
pylori infection, this mechanism, however, is disrupted. We found that although
co-culture of gastric epithelial cells with H. pylori led to downregulation of
E-cadherin and cellular stress, it resulted in inhibition of p53, which is
mediated by intracellular Erk kinases and HDM2 protein induced by H. pylori.
Experimental inhibition of HDM2/p53 interactions restored p53 activity, and
decreased survival of infected cells. Collectively, our results revealed that
regulation of p53 and E-cadherin is tightly linked through the p53 stress
response mechanism that is inhibited by H. pylori via activation of
Erk1/2-HDM2-p53 pathway leading to survival of damaged cells. This might be
advantageous to the bacteria but may increase the cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC4359312
PMID: 25605238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. JAMA. 2015 Jan 27;313(4):369-78. doi: 10.1001/jama.2014.18400.

Chlorhexidine bathing and health care-associated infections: a randomized
clinical trial.

Noto MJ(1), Domenico HJ(2), Byrne DW(2), Talbot T(1), Rice TW(1), Bernard GR(1), 
Wheeler AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee.

Comment in
    Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2015 Mar;140(6):389.
    JAMA. 2015 May 12;313(18):1863.
    JAMA. 2015 May 12;313(18):1862-3.
    JAMA. 2015 Jan 27;313(4):365-6.
    JAMA. 2015 May 12;313(18):1863-4.

IMPORTANCE: Daily bathing of critically ill patients with the broad-spectrum,
topical antimicrobial agent chlorhexidine is widely performed and may reduce
health care-associated infections.
OBJECTIVE: To determine if daily bathing of critically ill patients with
chlorhexidine decreases the incidence of health care-associated infections.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A pragmatic cluster randomized, crossover
study of 9340 patients admitted to 5 adult intensive care units of a tertiary
medical center in Nashville, Tennessee, from July 2012 through July 2013.
INTERVENTIONS: Units performed once-daily bathing of all patients with disposable
cloths impregnated with 2% chlorhexidine or nonantimicrobial cloths as a control.
Bathing treatments were performed for a 10-week period followed by a 2-week
washout period during which patients were bathed with nonantimicrobial disposable
cloths, before crossover to the alternate bathing treatment for 10 weeks. Each
unit crossed over between bathing assignments 3 times during the study.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary prespecified outcome was a composite of
central line-associated bloodstream infections (CLABSIs), catheter-associated
urinary tract infections (CAUTIs), ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP), and
Clostridium difficile infections. Secondary outcomes included rates of clinical
cultures that tested positive for multidrug-resistant organisms, blood culture
contamination, health care-associated bloodstream infections, and rates of the
primary outcome by ICU.
RESULTS: During the chlorhexidine bathing period, 55 infections occurred: 4
CLABSI, 21 CAUTI, 17 VAP, and 13 C difficile. During the control bathing period, 
60 infections occurred: 4 CLABSI, 32 CAUTI, 8 VAP, and 16 C difficile. The
primary outcome rate was 2.86 per 1000 patient-days during the chlorhexidine and 
2.90 per 1000 patient-days during the control bathing periods (rate difference,
-0.04; 95% CI, -1.10 to 1.01; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.95). After adjusting for baseline variables,
no difference between groups in the rate of the primary outcome was detected.
Chlorhexidine bathing did not change rates of infection-related secondary
outcomes including hospital-acquired bloodstream infections, blood culture
contamination, or clinical cultures yielding multidrug-resistant organisms. In a 
prespecified subgroup analysis, no difference in the primary outcome was detected
in any individual intensive care unit.
CONCLUSION AND RELEVANCE: In this pragmatic trial, daily bathing with
chlorhexidine did not reduce the incidence of health care-associated infections
including CLABSIs, CAUTIs, VAP, or C difficile. These findings do not support
daily bathing of critically ill patients with chlorhexidine.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT02033187.

PMCID: PMC4383133
PMID: 25602496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Environ Sci Process Impacts. 2015 Mar;17(3):578-85. doi: 10.1039/c4em00554f.

Speciation of fluoride in workroom air during primary production of aluminium.

Skaugset NP(1), Ellingsen DG, Notø H, Jordbekken L, Thomassen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Work Environment, National Institute of 
Occupational Health, P.O.Box 8149 DEP, N-0033 Oslo, Norway. nps@stami.no.

Exposure to fluorides (F(-)) and particulate matter (PM) was assessed by personal
sampling with use of Respicon® sampler in Prebake and Søderberg pot rooms in
seven aluminium smelters. The inhalable PM mass was dominated by the
extra-thoracic aerosol sub-fraction, which contributed with around 70% for both
Prebake and Søderberg pot room workers. Quantitative and qualitative differences 
in exposure were found between pot room workers in smelters using these two
technologies. Prebake pot room workers were exposed to 1.4 to 1.7 times higher PM
concentrations than Søderberg pot room workers, depending on aerosol
sub-fraction. Prebake pot room workers were also exposed to 2.5 to 2.9 higher air
concentrations of water-soluble F(-) (FWS(-)) and 2.8 to 5.3 higher air
concentrations of non water-soluble F(-) (FAS(-)) than Søderberg pot room
workers, depending on aerosol sub-fraction. However, exposure to hydrogen
fluoride (HF) was 1.3 times higher among Søderberg pot room workers. The relative
amount of FWS(-), however, was higher among Søderberg pot room workers, while the
relative amount of particulate F(-) (sum of FWS(-) and FAS(-)) was higher among
Prebake pot room workers (6.5 vs. 3.9%). Exposure to the same PM concentration
yielded higher FWS(-) and FAS(-) air concentrations among Prebake compared to
Søderberg pot room workers.

PMID: 25599646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2015 Mar;50(3):347-54. doi: 10.3109/00365521.2014.985707. 
Epub 2015 Jan 16.

Apolipoprotein AI and HDL are reduced in stable cirrhotic patients with adrenal
insufficiency: a possible role in glucocorticoid deficiency.

Spadaro L(1), Noto D, Privitera G, Tomaselli T, Fede G, Scicali R, Piro S, Fayer 
F, Altieri I, Averna M, Purrello F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Biomedicine, Garibaldi Hospital,
University of Catania , Catania , Italy.

BACKGROUNDS AND AIMS: Adrenal insufficiency (AI) has been reported in patients
with stable cirrhosis. A lack of substrates has been suggested as a possible
contributing pathogenic mechanism leading to glucocorticoid deficiency in these
subjects. To better explore this hypothesis, we studied lipoproteins in
cirrhotics with and without AI.
METHODS: A total of 81 cirrhotic patients and 30 normal volunteers were enrolled.
The severity of liver disease was graded by Child-Pugh score. Total cholesterol
(TC), high-density lipoprotein (HDL), low-density lipoprotein (LDL), triglyceride
(TG), and apolipoprotein AI (Apo-AI) levels were evaluated. HDL subfractions were
measured by gradient gel electrophoresis. Adrenal function was assessed by the
Low-Dose Short Synacthen Test.
RESULTS: Cirrhotic patients showed a significant reduction of TC, HDL, LDL, TG,
and Apo-AI levels compared with controls. HDL3 was significantly lower, while
HDL2 was higher, in cirrhotics compared with the controls. AI was observed in 26 
patients. TC, TG, HDL, and Apo-AI were significantly reduced in cirrhotics with
AI compared with those with normal adrenal function. HDL2 and HDL3 did not differ
between these two groups. Delta cortisol was related to TC (r = 0.30, p < 0.01), 
TG (r = 0.22, p = 0.05), and Apo-AI (r = 0.37, p < 0.001). Multivariate analysis 
revealed that Apo-AI and HDL were independently associated with AI.
CONCLUSION: Our study shows that TC, TG, HDL, and Apo-AI are reduced in
cirrhotics with AI. In particular, because both HDL and Apo-AI play a primary
role in providing substrates for steroidogenesis to adrenal cells, this
deficiency may contribute to the pathogenesis of AI in these patients.

PMID: 25592451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. EMBO J. 2015 Feb 12;34(4):559-77. doi: 10.15252/embj.201490062. Epub 2015 Jan 14.

A Tetrahymena Hsp90 co-chaperone promotes siRNA loading by ATP-dependent and
ATP-independent mechanisms.

Woehrer SL(1), Aronica L(1), Suhren JH(1), Busch CJ(1), Noto T(1), Mochizuki
K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
(IMBA), Vienna, Austria. (2)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian 
Academy of Sciences (IMBA), Vienna, Austria kazufumi.mochizuki@imba.oeaw.ac.at.

The loading of small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and microRNAs into Argonaute
proteins is enhanced by Hsp90 and ATP in diverse eukaryotes. However, whether
this loading also occurs independently of Hsp90 and ATP remains unclear. We show 
that the Tetrahymena Hsp90 co-chaperone Coi12p promotes siRNA loading into the
Argonaute protein Twi1p in both ATP-dependent and ATP-independent manners in
vitro. The ATP-dependent activity requires Hsp90 and the tetratricopeptide repeat
(TPR) domain of Coi12p, whereas these factors are dispensable for the
ATP-independent activity. Both activities facilitate siRNA loading by
counteracting the Twi1p-binding protein Giw1p, which is important to specifically
sort the 26- to 32-nt siRNAs to Twi1p. Although Coi12p lacking its TPR domain
does not bind to Hsp90, it can partially restore the siRNA loading and DNA
elimination defects of COI12 knockout cells, suggesting that Hsp90- and
ATP-independent loading of siRNA occurs in vivo and plays a physiological role in
Tetrahymena.

© 2015 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4331008
PMID: 25588944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mar Drugs. 2015 Jan 9;13(1):338-53. doi: 10.3390/md13010338.

Preparation of photocrosslinked fish elastin polypeptide/microfibrillated
cellulose composite gels with elastic properties for biomaterial applications.

Yano S(1), Mori M(2), Teramoto N(3), Iisaka M(4), Suzuki N(5), Noto M(6), Kaimoto
Y(7), Kakimoto M(8), Yamada M(9), Shiratsuchi E(10), Shimasaki T(11), Shibata
M(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Engineering, Chiba
Institute of Technology, 2-17-1 Tsudanuma, Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan.
shinya.y08232@gmail.com. (2)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences,
Faculty of Engineering, Chiba Institute of Technology, 2-17-1 Tsudanuma,
Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan. megumi.m07232@gmail.com. (3)Department of Life 
and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Engineering, Chiba Institute of
Technology, 2-17-1 Tsudanuma, Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan.
teramoto.naozumi@it-chiba.ac.jp. (4)Department of Life and Environmental
Sciences, Faculty of Engineering, Chiba Institute of Technology, 2-17-1
Tsudanuma, Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan. makoto.i10230@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Engineering, Chiba
Institute of Technology, 2-17-1 Tsudanuma, Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan.
natsumi.s09231@gmail.com. (6)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences,
Faculty of Engineering, Chiba Institute of Technology, 2-17-1 Tsudanuma,
Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan. masanari.n11231@gmail.com. (7)Department of
Life and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Engineering, Chiba Institute of
Technology, 2-17-1 Tsudanuma, Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan.
yasuko.k05230@gmail.com. (8)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences,
Faculty of Engineering, Chiba Institute of Technology, 2-17-1 Tsudanuma,
Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan. masashi.k06230@gmail.com. (9)Research &
Development Division, Hayashikane Sangyo Co., Ltd., 2-4-8 Yamato-machi,
Shimonoseki, Yamaguchi 750-8608, Japan. myamada@hayashikane.co.jp. (10)Research &
Development Division, Hayashikane Sangyo Co., Ltd., 2-4-8 Yamato-machi,
Shimonoseki, Yamaguchi 750-8608, Japan. esiratsuti@hayashikane.co.jp.
(11)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Engineering, Chiba 
Institute of Technology, 2-17-1 Tsudanuma, Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan.
shimasaki.toshiaki@it-chiba.ac.jp. (12)Department of Life and Environmental
Sciences, Faculty of Engineering, Chiba Institute of Technology, 2-17-1
Tsudanuma, Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan. mitsuhiro.shibata@p.chibakoudai.jp.

Photocrosslinked hydrogels reinforced by microfibrillated cellulose (MFC) were
prepared from a methacrylate-functionalized fish elastin polypeptide and MFC
dispersed in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO). First, a water-soluble elastin peptide
with a molecular weight of ca. 500 g/mol from the fish bulbus arteriosus was
polymerized by N,N'-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC), a condensation reagent, and
then modified with 2-isocyanatoethyl methacrylate (MOI) to yield a
photocrosslinkable fish elastin polypeptide. The product was dissolved in DMSO
and irradiated with UV light in the presence of a radical photoinitiator. We
obtained hydrogels successfully by substitution of DMSO with water. The composite
gel with MFC was prepared by UV irradiation of the photocrosslinkable elastin
polypeptide mixed with dispersed MFC in DMSO, followed by substitution of DMSO
with water. The tensile test of the composite gels revealed that the addition of 
MFC improved the tensile properties, and the shape of the stress-strain curve of 
the composite gel became more similar to the typical shape of an elastic material
with an increase of MFC content. The rheology measurement showed that the elastic
modulus of the composite gel increased with an increase of MFC content. The cell 
proliferation test on the composite gel showed no toxicity.

PMCID: PMC4306940
PMID: 25584682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2015 Feb 14;17(6):4367-78. doi: 10.1039/c4cp05755d.

Interplay between water uptake, ion interactions, and conductivity in an e-beam
grafted poly(ethylene-co-tetrafluoroethylene) anion exchange membrane.

Pandey TP(1), Maes AM, Sarode HN, Peters BD, Lavina S, Vezzù K, Yang Y, Poynton
SD, Varcoe JR, Seifert S, Liberatore MW, Di Noto V, Herring AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Colorado School of Mines,
Golden, CO 80401, USA. aherring@mines.edu.

We demonstrate that the true hydroxide conductivity in an e-beam grafted
poly(ethylene-co-tetrafluoroethylene) [ETFE] anion exchange membrane (AEM) is as 
high as 132 mS cm(-1) at 80 °C and 95% RH, comparable to a proton exchange
membrane, but with very much less water present in the film. To understand this
behaviour we studied ion transport of hydroxide, carbonate, bicarbonate and
chloride, as well as water uptake and distribution. Water uptake of the AEM in
water vapor is an order of magnitude lower than when submerged in liquid water.
In addition (19)F pulse field gradient spin echo NMR indicates that there is
little tortuosity in the ionic pathways through the film. A complete analysis of 
the IR spectrum of the AEM and the analyses of water absorption using FT-IR led
to conclusion that the fluorinated backbone chains do not interact with water and
that two types of water domains exist within the membrane. The reduction in
conductivity was measured during exposure of the OH(-) form of the AEM to air at 
95% RH and was seen to be much slower than the reaction of CO2 with OH(-) as the 
amount of water in the film determines its ionic conductivity and at relative wet
RHs its re-organization is slow.

PMID: 25578464  [PubMed]


173. Clin Nucl Med. 2015 Feb;40(2):e152-6. doi: 10.1097/RLU.0000000000000608.

Atypical Parkinsonian syndromes with very poor striatal uptake on 123I-ioflupane 
SPECT imaging.

Dibble EH(1), Yoo DC, Noto RB, Friedman JH.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Alpert Medical School of Brown
University and Rhode Island Hospital; and Department of Neurology, Alpert
Medical School of Brown University and Butler Hospital, Providence, RI.

We report a case series of unusual I-ioflupane SPECT imaging findings. Three
patients with atypical parkinsonian symptoms underwent I-ioflupane imaging to
assist in diagnosis. The patients had complete or near-complete absence of
striatal activity. The imaging deficit severity did not consistently correlate
with the clinical deficit severity. These cases suggest that markedly abnormal
uptake patterns may be seen with atypical parkinsonian syndromes. Further
research is warranted to evaluate differences in I-ioflupane uptake patterns
among the various parkinsonian syndromes.

PMID: 25546212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2014 Oct 31;18(4). pii: pyu042. doi:
10.1093/ijnp/pyu042.

Effects of risperidone on cytokine profile in drug-naïve first-episode psychosis.

Noto C(1), Ota VK(1), Gouvea ES(1), Rizzo LB(1), Spindola LM(1), Honda PH(1),
Cordeiro Q(1), Belangero SI(1), Bressan RA(1), Gadelha A(1), Maes M(1), Brietzke 
E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
(Drs Noto, Rizzo, Cordeiro, Bressan, Gadelha, and Brietzke); First Episode
Psychosis Program, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da Santa Casa de São Paulo, São 
Paulo, Brazil (Drs Noto, Gouveia, Honda, and Cordeiro); Genetics Division,
Department of Morphology and Genetics, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil (Drs Ota, Gouveia, Spindola, and Belangero); Department of
Psychiatry, Deakin University, Geelong, Vic., Australia (Dr Maes); Department of 
Psychiatry, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand (Dr Maes). (2)Department 
of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil (Drs Noto,
Rizzo, Cordeiro, Bressan, Gadelha, and Brietzke); First Episode Psychosis
Program, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da Santa Casa de São Paulo, São Paulo,
Brazil (Drs Noto, Gouveia, Honda, and Cordeiro); Genetics Division, Department of
Morphology and Genetics, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
(Drs Ota, Gouveia, Spindola, and Belangero); Department of Psychiatry, Deakin
University, Geelong, Vic., Australia (Dr Maes); Department of Psychiatry,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand (Dr Maes). elisabrietzke@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: There is robust evidence that schizophrenia is characterized by
immune-inflammatory abnormalities, including variations on cytokine levels. The
results of previous studies, however, are heterogeneous due to several
confounding factors, such as the effects of antipsychotic drugs. Therefore,
research on drug-naïve first-episode psychosis (FEP) patients is essential to
elucidate the role of immune processes in that disorder.
METHODS: The aim of this study is to compare cytokine levels (IL-2, IL-10, IL-4, 
IL-6, IFN-<U+03B3>, TNF-a, and IL-17) in drug-naïve FEP patients both before and after
treatment with risperidone for 10 weeks, and to investigate possible associations
between cytokine levels and clinical responses to treatment and presence of
depressive symptoms. It this study, we included 55 drug-naïve FEP patients who
had repeated measurements of cytokine levels and 57 healthy controls.
RESULTS: We found that FEP patients had significantly higher IL-6, IL-10 and
TNF-a levels than healthy controls. After risperidone treatment, these three
cytokines and additionally IL-4 decreased significantly. No significant
difference was found between the post-treatment cytokine levels in FEP patients
and in healthy controls, suggesting that these alterations in cytokine profiles
are a state marker of FEP. No significant association was found between
risperidone-induced changes in cytokines and the clinical response to treatment
or the presence of depression. There was a significant inverse association
between the risperidone-induced changes in IL-10 and the negative symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, our results show a specific cytokine profile in FEP
patients (monocytic and regulatory T-cell activation) and suggest
immunoregulatory effects of risperidone treatment, characterized by suppressant
effects on monocytic, Th2, and T-regulatory functions.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CINP.

PMCID: PMC4360233
PMID: 25522386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Resuscitation. 2015 Mar;88:20-7. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2014.11.028. Epub
2014 Dec 13.

Do early emergency calls before patient collapse improve survival after
out-of-hospital cardiac arrests?

Takei Y(1), Nishi T(2), Kamikura T(3), Tanaka Y(4), Wato Y(5), Kubo M(6),
Hashimoto M(7), Inaba H(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science and Technology, Hiroshima International
University, 555-36 Kurose-gakuendai, Higashi-hiroshima, 739-2695, Hiroshima,
Japan; Department of Emergency Medical Science, Kanazawa University Graduate
School of Medicine, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, 920-8641, Ishikawa, Japan.
Electronic address: y-takei@hs.hirokoku-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Emergency
Medical Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medicine, 13-1
Takara-machi, Kanazawa, 920-8641, Ishikawa, Japan. Electronic address:
ntaiki24@yahoo.co.jp. (3)Department of Emergency Medical Science, Kanazawa
University Graduate School of Medicine, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, 920-8641,
Ishikawa, Japan. Electronic address: kamitaka911@gmail.com. (4)Department of
Emergency Medical Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medicine, 13-1 
Takara-machi, Kanazawa, 920-8641, Ishikawa, Japan. Electronic address:
ytanaka.md@gmail.com. (5)Department of Emergency Medicine, Kanazawa Medical
University, 1-1 Uchinada-machi, Kahoku-Gun, 920-0265, Ishikawa, Japan. Electronic
address: allstar@kanazawa-med.ac.jp. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Ishikawa
Prefectural Central Hospital, 2-1 Kuratsuki-Higashi, Kanazawa, 920-8201,
Ishikawa, Japan. Electronic address: min-kubo3e@ipch.jp. (7)Emergency Medical
Centre, Noto General Hospital, A64-6-4 Fijihashi-machi, Nanao, 926-0816,
Ishikawa, Japan. Electronic address: hashim@noto-hospital.jp. (8)Department of
Emergency Medical Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medicine, 13-1 
Takara-machi, Kanazawa, 920-8641, Ishikawa, Japan. Electronic address:
hidinaba@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

AIM: Some out-of-hospital cardiac arrests (OHCAs) are witnessed after emergency
calls. This study aimed to confirm the benefit of early emergency calls before
patient collapse on survival after OHCAs witnessed by bystanders and/or emergency
medical technicians (EMTs).
METHODS: We analysed 278,310 witnessed OHCAs [EMT-witnessed cases (n=54,172),
bystander-witnessed cases (n=224,138)] without pre-hospital physician involvement
from all Japanese OHCA data prospectively collected between 2006 and 2012. The
data were analysed for the correlation between neurologically favourable 1-month 
survival and the time interval between the emergency call and patient collapse.
RESULTS: When emergency calls were placed earlier before patient collapse, the
proportion of EMT-witnessed cases and survival rate after OHCAs witnessed by
bystanders and EMTs were higher. When analysed only for bystander-witnessed
cases, for earlier emergency calls placed before patient collapse, survival rate 
and incidences of bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and
dispatcher-assisted CPR decreased: 2.9%, 33.6% and 24.4%, respectively, for
emergency calls placed >6min before collapse and 5.5%, 48.8% and 48.5%,
respectively, for those placed 1-2min after collapse. Multivariable logistic
regression showed that call-to-collapse interval (adjusted odds ratio; 95%
confidence interval) (0.92; 0.90-0.94) and EMT response time after collapse
(0.84; 0.82-0.86) were associated with survival after bystander-witnessed OHCAs
with emergency calls before collapse.
CONCLUSION: Early emergency calls before patient collapse efficiently increases
the proportion of EMT-witnessed cases and promotes survival after witnessed
OHCAs. However, early emergency call before collapse may worsen the outcome when 
the patient's condition deteriorates to cardiac arrest before EMT arrival.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25513742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Immun Ageing. 2014 Dec 2;11(1):21. doi: 10.1186/s12979-014-0021-9. eCollection
2014.

The role of platelet gel in osteoarticular injuries of young and old patients.

Rizzo C(1), Vetro R(2), Vetro A(2), Mantia R(2), Iovane A(3), Di Gesù M(2), Vasto
S(4), Di Noto L(1), Mazzola G(5), Caruso C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Transfusion Medicine, University Hospital "Paolo Giaccone", Palermo,
Italy ; Department of Pathobiology and Medical and Forensic Biotechnologies,
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. (2)Mantia Medical Center, Palermo, Italy. 
(3)Department of Legal Sciences, Society and Sport, Palermo, Italy. (4)Department
of Science and Biological, Chemical and Pharmaceutical Technologies, University
of Palermo, Palermo, Italy ; National Center for Research, Institute of
Biomedicine and Molecular Immunology, Palermo, Italy. (5)Unit of Transfusion
Medicine, University Hospital "Paolo Giaccone", Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The use of autologous platelet gel in orthopedics is effective in
accelerating the healing process of osteochondral, muscle, tendon and ligament
lesions. The aim of our study was to verify whether the variability in response
to infiltration with platelet gel was dependent on the underlying disease
treated, sex and age of the patients. During four years, 140 patients have been
treated for musculoskeletal injuries by infiltration of gel platelet and lysate
platelet obtained from autologous thrombin, with echo-ultrasound guided. The
response to treatment was assessed at different time points T0, T1, T2 with
respect to pain estimation (VAS), joint mobility (ROM scale) and echo-ultrasound 
evaluation. This data collection has allowed classifying the response to treated 
lesions in three categories: NR (no response), PR (partial response), CR
(complete response).
RESULTS: The data here reported showed that the ability to physical recovery
response is evident in tendon injuries, while the large joints injuries gave a
poor response. Almost all patients showed a significant pain relief after the
first infiltration, but in terms of echo-ultrasound evaluation and tissue repair,
only the muscle and tendon injuries showed hyperechoic areas, signs or evidences 
of repair. Concerning the correlation between response to infiltration with
platelet gel and gender/age of the patients, the clinical results appear not
influenced by the age and the gender of the patient.
DISCUSSION: Our data indicate that, pain relief and ability to physical recovery 
of muscles, tendons and ligaments depend on tissue repair clearly visible by echo
ultrasound evaluation. On the other hand tissue repair seems not occur in the
large joints (hip and knee) where arthritis and /or corrosion of articular
cartilage cannot be repaired and the only relief is exclusively linked to the
reduction of periarticular inflammation (reduction of the inflammatory leakage
and signs).

PMCID: PMC4263213
PMID: 25505929  [PubMed]


177. J Infect Dis. 2015 Jun 1;211(11):1790-4. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu805. Epub 2014
Dec 11.

Regulation of Helicobacter pylori Virulence Within the Context of Iron
Deficiency.

Noto JM(1), Lee JY(2), Gaddy JA(3), Cover TL(4), Amieva MR(5), Peek RM Jr(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology.
(3)Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, Tennessee.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine Department of
Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley
Healthcare System, Nashville, Tennessee. (5)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California. 
(6)Division of Gastroenterology Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt
University.

Helicobacter pylori strains that harbor the oncoprotein CagA increase gastric
cancer risk, and this risk is augmented under iron-deficient conditions. We
demonstrate here that iron depletion induces coccoid morphology in strains
lacking cagA. To evaluate the stability of augmented H. pylori virulence
phenotypes stimulated by low-iron conditions, H. pylori isolated from
iron-depleted conditions in vivo were serially passaged in vitro. Long-term
passage decreased the ability of hypervirulent strains to translocate CagA or
induce interleukin 8, indicating that hypervirulent phenotypes stimulated by
low-level iron conditions are reversible. Therefore, rectifying iron deficiency
may attenuate disease among H. pylori-infected persons with no response to
antibiotics.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4447831 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25505301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Int J Pharm. 2015 Jan 30;478(2):476-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2014.12.004. Epub 
2014 Dec 8.

Pharmaceutical properties of supramolecular assembly of co-loaded
cardanol/triazole-halloysite systems.

Massaro M(1), Colletti CG(1), Noto R(1), Riela S(2), Poma P(3), Guernelli S(4),
Parisi F(5), Milioto S(5), Lazzara G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento STEBICEF, sez. Chimica, Università di Palermo, Viale delle
Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, Ed. 17, 90128 Palermo, Italy. (2)Dipartimento
STEBICEF, sez. Chimica, Università di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Parco
d'Orleans II, Ed. 17, 90128 Palermo, Italy. Electronic address:
serena.riela@unipa.it. (3)Dipartimento di Scienze per la Promozione della Salute 
e Materno Infantile "G. D'Alessandro", Area Funzionale di Farmacologia,
Università di Palermo, Via del Vespro 129, 90127 Palermo, Italy. (4)Dipartimento 
di Chimica "G. Ciamician", Università di Bologna, via San Giacomo 11, 40126
Bologna, Italy. (5)Dipartimento di Fisica e Chimica, Università di Palermo, Viale
delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, Ed. 17, 90128 Palermo, Italy. (6)Dipartimento 
di Fisica e Chimica, Università di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans 
II, Ed. 17, 90128 Palermo, Italy. Electronic address: giuseppe.lazzara@unipa.it.

Halloysite nanotubes were explored as drug carrier for cardanol, which is
considered as a promising natural anticancer active species. To this aim, besides
the pristine nanoclay, a chemical modification of the nanocarrier was performed
by attaching triazolium salts with different hydrophobicity at the outer surface 
of the hollow nanotubes. The interaction between cardanol and nanotubes was
highlighted in solution by HPLC. This method proved the loading of the drug into 
the nanotubes. The solid dried complexes formed by pristine and modified
halloysite with the cardanol were characterized by IR spectroscopy,
thermogravimetric analysis as well as water contact angle to evidence the
structure, thermal properties and wettability of the obtained materials. The
kinetics of cardanol release as well as cell viability experiments provided
promising results that put forward a new strategy for potential applications of
cardanol as active antiproliferative molecule and clay nanotubes as drug carrier.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25498322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Hemodial Int. 2015 Jul;19(3):360-7. doi: 10.1111/hdi.12250. Epub 2014 Dec 12.

Heparin induces an accumulation of atherogenic lipoproteins during hemodialysis
in normolipidemic end-stage renal disease patients.

Barbagallo CM(1), Noto D(1), Cefalù AB(1), Ganci A(1), Giammarresi C(2), Panno
D(1), Cusumano G(1), Greco M(3), Di Gaudio F(3), Averna MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Department of Internal Medicine and Specialistics (DIBIMIS),
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. (2)Division of Nephrology, Civic Hospital,
Palermo, Italy. (3)Department of Medical Biotechnologies and Legal Medicine,
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

Dyslipidemias may account for the excess of cardiovascular mortality in end-stage
renal disease (ESRD). Lipoprotein studies in ESRD patients are usually relative
to prehemodialysis samples even if significative changes may occur after
dialysis. In this study, we aimed to investigate the effects of ESRD on
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins (TRL) subpopulations distribution and acute change
following hemodialytic procedures, including the relative contribution of heparin
administration. We selected a group of normolipidemic male middle-aged ESRD
patients free of any concomitant disease affecting lipoprotein remnant metabolism
compared with controls. We separated TRL subfractions according to density and
apoE content and evaluated the changes of these particles after hemodialytic
procedures with or without heparin. ESRD subjects had higher TRL subfractions,
with the exception of apoE-rich particles, lower high-density lipoprotein (HDL)
largest subclasses, and a smaller low-density lipoprotein peak particle size than
controls. After a hemodialytic standard procedure with heparin, we demonstrated a
significant reduction of triglyceride, an increase of HDL-cholesterol levels, and
a raise of small very-low-density lipoprotein, intermediate-density lipoproteins 
(IDL), apoE-rich particles, and non-HDL-cholesterol levels. When hemodialysis was
performed without heparin, no significant changes were observed. In the absence
of concomitant hyperlipidemic triggers, ESRD patients show significant
lipoprotein abnormalities before dialysis, but without any increased remnant
particles concentrations. We speculate that hemodialysis, in particular heparin
administration during this procedure, leads to a massive atherogenic TRLs
production because of the acute stimulation of the dysfunctional lipolytic system
not followed by an efficient removal, determining a recurrent lipoprotein remnant
accumulation.

© 2014 International Society for Hemodialysis.

PMID: 25495659  [PubMed - in process]


180. Ann Clin Biochem. 2015 May;52(Pt 3):337-45. doi: 10.1177/0004563214564225. Epub
2014 Dec 2.

Comparison of Hevylite IgA and IgG assay with conventional techniques for the
diagnosis and follow-up of plasma cell dyscrasia.

Paolini L(1), Di Noto G(2), Maffina F(2), Martellosio G(2), Radeghieri A(2),
Luigi C(2), Ricotta D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy paolinilu@gmail.com. (2)Department of
Molecular and Translational Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Brescia,
Brescia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Heavy/light chain assay allows the characterization and
quantification of immunoglobulin light chains bound to heavy chains for each Ig'k
and Ig'<U+03BB> immunoglobulin class, discriminating between the involved/uninvolved
isotypes in plasma cell dyscrasia. The Ig'k/Ig'<U+03BB> ratio (heavy/light chain ratio) 
enables to monitor the trend of monoclonal component during therapy and disease
evolution.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we evaluate the impact of the heavy/light chain assay
in monitoring multiple myeloma patients in comparison with conventional
techniques.
METHODS: Serum samples of 28 patients with IgG or IgA monoclonal component were
collected for a mean of 109 days and analyzed. The heavy/light chain assay was
compared with classical immunoglobulin quantification (Ig'Tot), serum
immunofixation electrophoresis, serum protein electrophoresis, and serum-free
light chains quantification. Serum samples from 30 healthy patients were used as 
control (polyclonal).
RESULTS: Heavy/light chain ratio and serum immunofixation electrophoresis were
comparable in 86% of the cases, and free light chain ratio and heavy/light chain 
ratio in 71.8%. Heavy/light chain assay and Ig'Tot measurements showed a
concentration-dependent agreement in monoclonal patients. The heavy/light chain
assay was able to quantify the monoclonal component migrating in SPE ß region:
this occurred in 10% of our IgG and 50% of our IgA patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The concordance scores indicate that heavy/light chain and Ig'Tot
assays show differences at high monoclonal component values. The heavy/light
chain ratio, serum immunofixation electrophoresis, and free light chain ratio
showed partial concordance. Our study confirmed that, in the context of
heavy/light chain assay, heavy/light chain Ig'k and Ig'<U+03BB> absolute values and
heavy/light chain ratio are both important tools to monitor the presence of
monoclonal component that are difficult to be identified in SPE.

© The Author(s) 2015 Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav.

PMID: 25468997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Int J Cardiol. 2014 Dec 20;177(3):860-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.10.093. Epub 
2014 Nov 5.

Efficacy of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors in the prevention of cerebrovascular
attack in 1016 patients older than 75 years among 4014 type 2 diabetic
individuals.

Hayashi T(1), Kubota K(2), Kawashima S(3), Sone H(4), Watanabe H(5), Ohrui T(6), 
Yokote K(7), Takemoto M(7), Araki A(8), Noda M(9), Noto H(9), Sakuma I(10),
Yoshizumi M(11), Ina K(12), Nomura H(13); Japan CDM group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan. Electronic address: hayashi@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of
Pharmacoepidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Osaka Saiseikai Nakatsu Hospital, Osaka, Japan. (4)Department of Internal
Medicine, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Niigata Graduate School of Medicine,
Niigata, Japan. (5)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics,
Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan. (6)Department of
Geriatric Medicine, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.
(7)Division of Diabetes, Metabolism and Endocrinology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Chiba University Hospital, Chiba, Japan. (8)Division of Diabetes,
Metabolism and Endocrinology, Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan. (9)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine, National Center for
Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (10)Cardiovascular Medicine, Hokko
Memorial Clinic, Sapporo, Japan. (11)Department of Cardiovascular Physiology and 
Medicine, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima University,
Hiroshima, Japan. (12)Department of Geriatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School
of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. (13)Department of Geriatrics, Nagoya University
Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan; Department of Geriatrics, Aichi
Nonami Clinic, Nagoya, Japan.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) reduce ischemic
heart disease (IHD) in middle-aged diabetic individuals, and LDL-cholesterol
(LDL-C) is a risk factor. However, their preventive effects on cerebrovascular
attack (CVA) have not been identified in elderly, especially in elderly = 75
years (late elderly), who account for approximately 30% of diabetic individuals
in Japan. Randomized controlled studies of statins for late elderly are difficult
to carry out, because many co-morbidities in elderly disrupt randomized
controlled conditions.
METHODS: We performed a prospective cohort study (Japan Cholesterol and Diabetes 
Mellitus Study) with 5.5 years of follow-up since 2004. A total of 4014 type 2
diabetic patients without previous IHD or CVA (n=1936 women; age = 67.4 ± 9.5
years; = 75 years: n = 1016) were enrolled, while 405 patients were registered as
sub-cohort patients. We recorded detailed information on medications and
laboratory data after every change in medication in patients of sub-cohort and
suffered from IHD or CVA. We subdivided statin-users into prevalent, new and
non-users.
RESULTS: A total of 104 CVAs occurred during 5.5-years. Plasma HDL-C level was
inversely correlated with CVA in patients = 65 years. In case-control study,
among patients who were not prescribed statins, CVA increased in age-dependent
manner. CVA incidence was lower in prevalent and new statin-users than in
non-users (hazard ratio [HR]:0.46, 0.523), especially in late elderly (HR: 0.51, 
0.21). Statins reduced CVAs mainly due to a direct effect and partially due to
the effects of HDL-C and glucose metabolism. No significant differences were
observed between statins.
CONCLUSION: Statins prevented CVA in middle-aged, elderly and late elderly
diabetic patients via a direct effect. This study is the first to demonstrate the
usefulness of observational studies for statistically analyzing agents' effects
on late elderly.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25466567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Am J Emerg Med. 2015 Jan;33(1):43-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2014.10.018. Epub 2014
Oct 18.

Improper bystander-performed basic life support in cardiac arrests managed with
public automated external defibrillators.

Nishi T(1), Takei Y(2), Kamikura T(3), Ohta K(4), Hashimoto M(5), Inaba H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medical Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School
of Medicine, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan. Electronic address: ntaiki24@yahoo.co.jp.
(2)Department of Emergency Medical Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School
of Medicine, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan; Department of Medical Science and
Technology, Hiroshima International University, Higashi-hiroshima, Hiroshima
Japan. Electronic address: y-takei@hs.hirokoku-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of
Emergency Medical Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan. Electronic address: kamitaka911@gmail.com.
(4)Emergency Medical Center, Ishikawa Prefectural Central Hospital, Kanazawa
city, Ishikawa, Japan. Electronic address: keiohta@ipch.jp. (5)Emergency medical 
Center, Noto General Hospital, Nanao city, Ishikawa, Japan. Electronic address:
hashim@noto-hospital.jp. (6)Department of Emergency Medical Science, Kanazawa
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan. Electronic
address: hidinaba@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

AIM: The aim of the study was to determine the quality of basic life support
(BLS) in out-of-hospital cardiac arrests (OHCAs) receiving bystander
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and public automated external defibrillator
(AED) application.
METHODS: From January 2006 to December 2012, data were prospectively collected
from OHCA) and impending cardiac arrests treated with and without public AED
before emergency medical technician (EMT) arrival. Basic life support actions and
outcomes were compared between cases with and without public AED application.
Interruptions of CPR were compared between 2 groups of AED users: health care
provider (HCP) and non-HCP.
RESULTS: Public AEDs were applied in 10 and 273 cases of impending cardiac arrest
and non-EMT-witnessed OHCAs, respectively (4.3% of 6407 non-EMT-witnessed OHCAs).
Defibrillation was delivered to 33 (13.3%) cases. Public AED application
significantly improved the rate of 1-year neurologically favorable survival in
bystander CPR-performed cases with shockable initial rhythm but not in those with
nonshockable rhythm. Emergency calls were significantly delayed compared with
other OHCAs without public AED application (median: 3 and 2 minutes,
respectively; P < .0001). Analysis of AED records obtained from 136 (54.6%) of
the 249 cases with AED application revealed significantly lower rate of
compressions delivered per minute and significantly greater proportion of CPR
pause in the non-HCP group. Time interval between power on and the first
electrocardiographic analysis widely varied in both groups and was significantly 
prolonged in the non-HCP group (P = .0137).
CONCLUSIONS: Improper BLS responses were common in OHCAs treated with public
AEDs. Periodic training for proper BLS is necessary for both HCPs and non-HCPs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25455048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Resuscitation. 2015 Jan;86:74-81. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2014.11.004. Epub 
2014 Nov 13.

Potential association of bystander-patient relationship with bystander response
and patient survival in daytime out-of-hospital cardiac arrest.

Tanaka Y(1), Maeda T(2), Kamikura T(2), Nishi T(2), Omi W(3), Hashimoto M(4),
Sakagami S(3), Inaba H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medical Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School
of Medicine, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8641, Japan; Department of
Surgery, Shin Kyoto-Minami Hospital, 94 Goshonouchikita-machi, Shimogyo-ku, Kyoto
600-8861, Japan. (2)Department of Emergency Medical Science, Kanazawa University 
Graduate School of Medicine, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8641,
Japan. (3)Department of Cardiology, Kanazawa Medical Centre, 1-1 Ishibiki-machi, 
Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8650, Japan. (4)Emergency Medical Centre, Noto General
Hospital, a-6-4 Fujihashi-machi, Nanao, Ishikawa 926-0816, Japan. (5)Department
of Emergency Medical Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medicine,
13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8641, Japan. Electronic address:
hidinaba@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

AIM: To investigate whether the bystander-patient relationship affects bystander 
response to out-of-hospital cardiac arrest (OHCA) and patient outcomes depending 
on the time of day.
METHODS: This population-based observational study in Japan involving 139,265
bystander-witnessed OHCAs (90,426 family members, 10,479 friends/colleagues, and 
38,360 others) without prehospital physician involvement was conducted from 2005 
to 2009. Factors associated with better bystander response [early emergency call 
and bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation (BCPR)] and 1-month neurologically
favourable survival were assessed.
RESULTS: The rates of dispatcher-assisted CPR during daytime (7:00-18:59) and
nighttime (19:00-6:59) were highest in family members (45.6% and 46.1%,
respectively, for family members; 28.7% and 29.2%, respectively, for
friends/colleagues; and 28.1% and 25.3%, respectively, for others). However, the 
BCPR rates were lowest in family members (35.5% and 37.8%, respectively, for
family members; 43.7% and 37.8%, respectively, for friends/colleagues; and 59.3% 
and 50.0%, respectively, for others). Large delays (= 5 min) in placing emergency
calls and initiating BCPR were most frequent in family members. The overall
survival rate was lowest (2.7%) for family members and highest (9.1%) for
friends/colleagues during daytime. Logistic regression analysis revealed that the
effect of bystander relationship on survival was significant only during daytime 
[adjusted odds ratios (95% CI) for survival from daytime OHCAs with family as
reference were 1.51 (1.36-1.68) for friends/colleagues and 1.23 (1.13-1.34) for
others].
CONCLUSIONS: Family members are least likely to perform BCPR and OHCAs witnessed 
by family members are least likely to survive during daytime. Different
strategies are required for family-witnessed OHCAs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25450573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Feb;1854(2):110-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2014.10.002. 
Epub 2014 Nov 6.

Functional and dysfunctional conformers of human neuroserpin characterized by
optical spectroscopies and Molecular Dynamics.

Noto R(1), Santangelo MG(1), Levantino M(2), Cupane A(2), Mangione MR(1), Parisi 
D(3), Ricagno S(4), Bolognesi M(4), Manno M(5), Martorana V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics, National Research Council of Italy, Palermo, Italy.
(2)Department of Physics and Chemistry, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(3)Institute of Biophysics, National Research Council of Italy, Palermo, Italy;
Department of Biosciences, Institute of Biophysics CNR, Italy and CIMAINA,
University of Milano, Milan, Italy. (4)Department of Biosciences, Institute of
Biophysics CNR, Italy and CIMAINA, University of Milano, Milan, Italy.
(5)Institute of Biophysics, National Research Council of Italy, Palermo, Italy.
Electronic address: mauro.manno@cnr.it.

Neuroserpin (NS) is a serine protease inhibitor (SERPIN) involved in different
neurological pathologies, including the Familial Encephalopathy with Neuroserpin 
Inclusion Bodies (FENIB), related to the aberrant polymerization of NS mutants.
Here we present an in vitro and in silico characterization of native neuroserpin 
and its dysfunctional conformation isoforms: the proteolytically cleaved
conformer, the inactive latent conformer, and the polymeric species. Based on
circular dichroism and fluorescence spectroscopy, we present an experimental
validation of the latent model and highlight the main structural features of the 
different conformers. In particular, emission spectra of aromatic residues yield 
distinct conformational fingerprints, that provide a novel and simple
spectroscopic tool for selecting serpin conformers in vitro. Based on the
structural relationship between cleaved and latent serpins, we propose a
structural model for latent NS, for which an experimental crystallographic
structure is lacking. Molecular Dynamics simulations suggest that NS
conformational stability and flexibility arise from a spatial distribution of
intramolecular salt-bridges and hydrogen bonds.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4332418
PMID: 25450507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2014 Nov;32(4):927-38. doi: 10.1016/j.emc.2014.07.015.
Epub 2014 Sep 16.

Select topics in neurocritical care.

Noto A(1), Marcolini E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Neurocritical Care and Emergency Neurology and Surgical Critical 
Care, Departments of Emergency Medicine and Neurology, Yale University School of 
Medicine, 464 Congress St. Suite 260, New Haven, CT 06519, USA. (2)Divisions of
Neurocritical Care and Emergency Neurology and Surgical Critical Care,
Departments of Emergency Medicine and Neurology, Yale University School of
Medicine, 464 Congress St. Suite 260, New Haven, CT 06519, USA. Electronic
address: emarcolini@gmail.com.

Neurocritical care aims to improve outcomes in patients with life-threatening
neurologic illness. The scope of neurocritical care extends beyond the more
commonly encountered and important field of cerebrovascular disease, as described
previously. This article focuses on neuromuscular, neuroinfectious, and
neuroimmunologic conditions that are significant causes of morbidity and
mortality in the acutely neurologically ill patient. As understanding continues
to increase regarding the physiology of these conditions and the best treatment, 
rapid identification, triage, and treatment of these patients in the emergency
department is paramount.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25441043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;45(1):109-15. doi: 10.3233/JAD-142622.

Idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus has a different cerebrospinal fluid
biomarker profile from Alzheimer's disease.

Jingami N(1), Asada-Utsugi M(1), Uemura K(2), Noto R(3), Takahashi M(4), Ozaki
A(5), Kihara T(6), Kageyama T(7), Takahashi R(3), Shimohama S(8), Kinoshita A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, 
Japan Department of Human Health Sciences, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Department of Neurology, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan Department of Human Health Sciences, Kyoto
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan Department of Neurology,
Ishiki Hospital, Kagoshima, Japan. (3)Department of Neurology, Kyoto University
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (4)Department of Neurology, Osaka
Saiseikai Nakatsu Hospital, Osaka, Japan Department of Neurology, Osaka Redcross 
Hospital, Osaka, Japan. (5)Department of Neurology, Osaka Saiseikai Nakatsu
Hospital, Osaka, Japan Department of Neurology, Kitano Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(6)Department of Neurology, Misasagi Hospital, Kyoto, Japan. (7)Department of
Neurology, Tenri Yorozu Hospital, Nara, Japan. (8)Department of Neurology,
Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo, Japan. (9)Department of Human Health
Sciences, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

The diagnosis of idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus (iNPH) is sometimes
complicated by concomitant Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology. The purpose of the
present study is to identify an iNPH-specific cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarker
dynamics and to assess its ability to differentiate iNPH from AD. Total tau
(t-tau), tau phosphorylated at threonine 181 (p-tau), amyloid-ß (Aß) 42 and 40,
and leucine-rich a-2-glycoprotein (LRG) were measured in 93 consecutive CSF
samples consisting of 55 iNPH (46 tap test responders), 20 AD, 11 corticobasal
syndrome, and 7 spinocerebeller disease. Levels of t-tau and p-tau were
significantly decreased in iNPH patients especially in tap test responders
compared to AD. Correlation was observed between Mini-Mental State Examination
scores and Aß42 in AD (R = 0.44) and mildly in iNPH (R = 0.28). Although Aß42/40 
ratio showed no significant difference between iNPH and AD (p = 0.08), the levels
of Aß40 and Aß42 correlated positively with each other in iNPH (R = 0.73) but
much less in AD (R = 0.26), suggesting that they have discrete amyloid clearance 
and pathology. LRG levels did not differ between the two. Thus, our study shows
that although CSF biomarkers of iNPH patients can be affected by concomitant tau 
and/or amyloid pathology, CSF t-tau and p-tau are highly useful for
differentiation of iNPH and AD.

PMID: 25428256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Medicine (Baltimore). 2014 Nov;93(23):e148. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000148.

Seasonal variations of severe hypoglycemia in patients with type 1 diabetes
mellitus, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and non-diabetes mellitus: clinical analysis 
of 578 hypoglycemia cases.

Tsujimoto T(1), Yamamoto-Honda R, Kajio H, Kishimoto M, Noto H, Hachiya R, Kimura
A, Kakei M, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, National
Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo (TT, RY-H, HK, M Kishimoto, HN, RH);
Division of General Medicine, Jichi Medical University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tochigi (TT, M Kakei); Department of Diabetes Research, Diabetes
Research Center (RY-H, M Kishimoto, HN, MN); Department of Emergency Medicine and
Critical Care, Center Hospital, National Center for Global Health and Medicine,
Tokyo (AK); and First Department of Comprehensive Medicine, Saitama Medical
Center, Jichi Medical University School of Medicine, Saitama, Japan (M Kakei).

Blood glucose control in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM) is reportedly
influenced by the seasons, with hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) levels decreasing in the
summer or warm season and increasing in the winter or cold season. In addition,
several studies have shown that sepsis is also associated with the seasons.
Although both blood glucose control and sepsis can strongly affect the occurrence
of severe hypoglycemia, few studies have examined the seasonal variation of
severe hypoglycemia. The aim of the present study is to examine the association
between severe hypoglycemia and the seasons in patients with type 1 diabetes
mellitus (T1DM), type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), and non-diabetes mellitus
(non-DM). We retrospectively reviewed all the patients with severe hypoglycemia
at a national center in Japan between April 1, 2006 and March 31, 2012. A total
of 57,132 consecutive cases that had visited the emergency room by ambulance were
screened, and 578 eligible cases of severe hypoglycemia were enrolled in this
study. The primary outcome was to assess the seasonality of severe hypoglycemia. 
In the T1DM group (n <U+200A>=<U+200A> 88), severe hypoglycemia occurred significantly more
often in the summer than in the winter (35.2% in summer vs 18.2% in winter, P <U+200A>= 
<U+200A>0.01), and the HbA1c levels were highest in the winter and lowest in the summer 
(9.1% [7.6%-10.1%] in winter vs 7.7% [7.1%-8.3%] in summer, P <U+200A>= <U+200A>0.13). In the
non-DM group (n <U+200A>= <U+200A>173), severe hypoglycemia occurred significantly more often
in the winter than in the summer (30.6% in winter vs 19.6% in summer, P <U+200A>=
<U+200A>0.01), and sepsis as a complication occurred significantly more often in winter 
than in summer (24.5% in winter vs 5.9% in summer, P <U+200A>= <U+200A>0.02). In the T2DM group
(n <U+200A>=<U+200A> 317), the occurrence of severe hypoglycemia and the HbA1c levels did not
differ significantly among the seasons. The occurrence of severe hypoglycemia
might be seasonal and might fluctuate with temperature changes. Patients should
be treated more carefully during the season in which severe hypoglycemia is more 
common.

PMCID: PMC4616344
PMID: 25415670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care. 2015 Oct;4(5):441-52. doi:
10.1177/2048872614560505. Epub 2014 Nov 20.

Contemporary antithrombotic strategies in patients with acute coronary syndrome
admitted to cardiac care units in Italy: The EYESHOT Study.

De Luca L(1), Leonardi S(2), Cavallini C(3), Lucci D(4), Musumeci G(5), Caporale 
R(6), Abrignani MG(7), Lupi A(8), Rakar S(9), Gulizia MM(10), Bovenzi FM(11), De 
Servi S(2); EYESHOT Investigators.

Collaborators: De Luca L, De Servi S, Caporale R, Cavallini C, Ceravolo R,
Formigli D, Leonardi S, Lupi A, Musumeci G, Rakar S, Smecca IM, Maggioni AP,
Lucci D, Lorimer A, Orsini G, Gonzini L, Fabbri G, Bianchini E, Abrignani MG,
Bonura F, Trimarco B, Galasso G, Misuraca G, Manes MT, Tuccillo B, Irace L,
Olivari Z, Totis O, Ledda A, Mauro C, Boccalatte M, Iliceto S, Cacciavillani L,
Savonitto S, Tortorella G, Esposito L, De Rosa P, Calabrò P, Bianchi R,
Napoletano C, Lalla Piccioni L, Pavesi PC, Bovenzi FM, Boni A, Merenda R, Wolff
S, De Ferrari GM, Camporotondo R, Gambino P, Cutaia A, Picariello C, Cemin R,
Chiarella F, Grazioli Gauthier L, Mircoli L, Cavallini C, Del Pinto M,
Finocchiaro ML, Scioli R, Farina R, Naddeo C, Scherillo M, Santopietro S, Metra
M, Costa F, Calculli G, Troito G, Pennisi V, Adornato EM, Pirelli S, Fadin BM, Di
Biase M, Ieva R, Zuin G, Sanfilippo N, Mancuso L, Pani A, Serra E, Marenzi G,
Assanelli EM, Ansalone G, Cacciotti L, Morocutti G, Fresco C, Berti S, Paradossi 
U, Bozzano A, Mauro A, Noussan P, Zanini P, Bolognese L, Falsini G, Costa P,
Manca G, Caldarola P, Locuratolo N, Cipolla T, Becchina M, Cocco G, Scalera G,
Stefanelli S, Smecca IM, Giunta N, Sinagra G, Rakar S, Meloni L, Lai O, Chiaranda
G, Luca G, Sleiman Helou J, Biscottini E, Magliari F, Callerame M, Uguccioni M,
Pugliese M, Sanchez F, Tartaglione S, Ignone G, Mavilio G, Mantovan R, Bini R,
Caico SI, Demolli V, Proietti F, Michisanti M, Musmeci G, Cantamessa P, Sicuso G,
Micalef SS, Accogli M, Zaccaria M, Caputo M, Di G, Piatti L, Farina A, Vicinelli 
P, Paloscia L, Di Clemente D, Felis S, Castini D, Rota C, Casu G, Bonano S,
Margheri M, Ricci Lucchi G, Serdoz R, Proietti P, Autore C, Conti E, Russo V,
Orlando P, Ramondo AB, Bontorin M, Marcolongo M, Santagostino M, Maestroni A,
Vitti P, Rodella P, Bonetti P, Elia M, Lumare R, Politi A, Gritti S, De Servi S, 
Poletti F, Mafrici A, Fusco R, Bongo AS, Bacchini S, Gasparetto V, Ferraiuolo G, 
De Luca M, Campana C, Bonatti R, Gaita F, Bergerone S, Bonmassari R, Zeni P,
Langialonga T, Scarcia A, Caravita L, Musacchio E, Augello G, Usmiani T, Stomaci 
B, Cirino D, Pierini S, Bottiglieri G, Liso A, Mussardo M, Tosi P, Sacco L, Sala 
R, Belloni A, Blengino S, Lisi E, Delfino P, Auguadro C, Brunazzi MC, Pacchioni
E, Fattore L, Bosco B, Blandizzi S, Pajes G, Patruno N, Perna GP, Francioni M,
Favale S, Vestito D, Lombardi A, Capecchi A, Musumeci G, Ferrero P, De Vincenzo
C, Magri G, Indolfi C, De Rosa S, Rossi M, Collarini L, Agnelli D, Conti G,
Tonelli C, Spadaro C, Negroni S, Di Noto G, Lanari A, Casolo G, Del J, Negrini M,
Celentano A, Sifola C, Rellini G, Della A, Molero U, Piovaccari G, Grosseto D,
Callegarin L, Fiasconaro G, Crivello R, Thiebat B, Leone G, Tamburino C, Caruso
G, Cassadonte F, Sassone B, Fuca G, Sormani L, Percoco GF, Mazzucco R, Cazzani E,
Gianni M, Limido A, Luvini M, Guglielmi R, Mannarini A, Moruzzi P, Pastori P,
Golia B, Marzano A, Orazi S, Marchese I, Anselmi M, Girardi P, Nassiacos D,
Meloni S, Busacca P, Generali CA, Corda S, Costanza G, Montalto S, Argenziano L, 
Tommasini P, Emdin M, Pasanisi EM, Colivicchi F, Tubaro M, Azzolini P, Luciani C,
Doronzo B, Coppolino A, Dellavesa P, Zenone F, Di Marco A, De Conti F, Piccinni
GC, Gualtieri MR, Bisignani G, Leone A, Arcuri GM, Marinacci L, Rossi P, Perotti 
S, Cotti Cometti V, Arcidiacono S, Tramontana M, Bazzucchi M, Mezzetti P, Romano 
M, Villani R, Di Giovambattista R, Volpe B, Tedesco L, Carini M, Vinci S, Paolini
EA, Busoni F, Piergentili C, Navazio A, Manca F, Cocco F, Pennetta CA, Maggiolini
S, Galbiati R, Bruna C, Ferrero L, Brigido S, Barducci E, Musacchio D, Manduca B,
Marchese D, Patrassi LA, Pattarino FA, Rocchi M, Briglia S, Fanelli R, Villella
M, Gronda E, Massa D, Lenti V, Di Gregorio L, Bottero M, Bazzanini F, Braggion G,
Antoniceli R, Caraceni D, Guzzo V, Di Giovanni P, Scarpini S, Severgnini B,
Musolino MF, Rossi M, Della Casa S, Gobbi M, Arena G, Bonizzato S, Agnoletto V,
Sansoni S, Pes RA, Denti S, Polizzi GM, Pino R, Commisso B, Merlino A, Di Lorenzo
L, Porchetta I, Scarpini S, Del Furia F, Colombi E, Covini D, Cavalieri F,
Antonaci S, Rubino G, Ciulla A, Bui F, Casorelli E, Caliendo L, Laezza A, Americo
L, Schillaci AM, Cordoni M, Barsotti L, Gaudio C, Barilla F, Cannone M, Memeo R, 
Truncellito L, Andriani A, Salituri S, Verrina F, Pafi M, Sebastiani ML, Amico
AF, Scolozzi D, Lupi G, D'Alea A, Catanzariti D, Angheben C, Ottaviano A,
Levantesi G.

BACKGROUND: Several new antithrombotic therapies have emerged for the treatment
of acute coronary syndrome (ACS). We sought to assess contemporary patterns of
antithrombotic therapies use in patients with ACS.
METHODS AND RESULTS: EYESHOT (EmploYEd antithrombotic therapies in patients with 
acute coronary Syndromes HOspitalized in iTalian cardiac care units) was a
nationwide, prospective registry aimed to evaluate antithrombotic strategies
employed in patients admitted to intensive cardiac care units (CCUs) for an ACS
in Italy. Over a three-week period, 203 CCUs enrolled 2585 consecutive patients: 
41.2% with ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) and 58.8% with non-ST
elevation ACS (NSTE-ACS). During hospitalisation, low-molecular-weight heparins, 
aspirin, and clopidogrel were the most commonly used antithrombotic therapies.
Among patients treated with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI, n=1755), any
crossover of heparin therapy occurred in 30.8% of cases, while switching from one
P2Y12 inhibitor to another occurred in 3.6% of cases in the CathLab and in 14.2% 
before discharge. Of the 790 patients who did not receive revascularisation,
switching of a P2Y12 inhibitor occurred in 5.7% of cases. At discharge, a new
P2Y12 inhibitor (ticagrelor or prasugrel) in association with aspirin was
prescribed in 59.5% of STEMI and 33.9% of NSTE-ACS patients: the most powerful
predictor for prescription was PCI (odds ratio (OR) 6.18; 95% confidence interval
(CI) 4.76-8.01; p<0.0001), whereas age = 75 years was strongly associated with
clopidogrel use (OR 0.28; 95% CI 0.22-0.36; p<0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: The EYESHOT registry shows the current pattern of antithrombotic
treatments for ACS patients admitted to Italian CCUs and provides insights which 
may help to improve the clinical care of such patients.

© The European Society of Cardiology 2014.

PMID: 25414322  [PubMed - in process]


189. J Clin Biochem Nutr. 2014 Nov;55(3):191-5. doi: 10.3164/jcbn.14-26. Epub 2014 Oct
21.

Questionnaire survey on lifestyle of patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis.

Noto H(1), Tokushige K(1), Hashimoto E(1), Taniai M(1), Shiratori K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo Women's Medical University, Department of Medicine and Gastroenterology,
8-1 Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.

Lack of exercise and excessive food intake are known to be the important causes
of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). To elucidate the relationship between
lifestyle and NASH, we surveyed exercise and dietary habits, comparing them among
171 biopsy-proven NASH patients, 29 nonalcoholic fatty liver (NAFL) patients and 
49 normal subjects. Dietary habits including the duration of dinner time, amount 
of rice at dinner, and weekly frequencies of meat, fries, Chinese noodles,
sweets, and instant food consumption were significantly different in male NASH
patients compared to normal male subjects. In women, differences were seen in the
amount of rice at dinner, frequency of eating out, and proclivity for sweets. In 
male NASH patients, the frequency of physical exercise was significantly lower.
The lifestyle tendencies of NASH were almost similar to those of NAFL. In the
comparison between obese NASH and non-obese NASH, no clear lifestyle differences 
were found. In conclusion, the most striking result of this survey was that the
lifestyle of males contributed significantly to the development of NASH. These
results point to treatment of NASH in males. In female NASH patients, lifestyle
differences were minimal, and the effects of other factors such as genetic
background will need to be investigated.

PMCID: PMC4227825
PMID: 25411525  [PubMed]


190. Front Immunol. 2014 Oct 27;5:517. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00517. eCollection
2014.

Immunoglobulin Free Light Chains and GAGs Mediate Multiple Myeloma Extracellular 
Vesicles Uptake and Secondary Nf<U+03BA>B Nuclear Translocation.

Di Noto G(1), Chiarini M(2), Paolini L(1), Mazzoldi EL(1), Giustini V(2),
Radeghieri A(1), Caimi L(1), Ricotta D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Brescia , Brescia , Italy. (2)CREA, Diagnostic Department, Azienda 
Ospedaliera Spedali Civili di Brescia , Brescia , Italy.

Multiple myeloma (MM) is a hematological malignancy caused by a
microenviromentally aided persistence of plasma cells in the bone marrow.
Monoclonal plasma cells often secrete high amounts of immunoglobulin free light
chains (FLCs) that could induce tissue damage. Recently, we showed that FLCs are 
internalized in endothelial and myocardial cell lines and secreted in
extracellular vesicles (EVs). MM serum derived EVs presented phenotypic
differences if compared with monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance
(MGUS) serum derived EVs suggesting their involvement in MM pathogenesis or
progression. To investigate the effect of circulating EVs on endothelial and
myocardial cells, we purified MM and MGUS serum derived EVs with differential
ultracentrifugation protocols and tested their biological activity. We found that
MM and MGUS EVs induced different proliferation and internalization rates in
endothelial and myocardial cells, thus we tried to find specific targets in MM
EVs docking and processing. Pre-treatment of EVs with anti-FLCs antibodies or
heparin blocked the MM EVs uptake, highlighting that FLCs and glycosaminoglycans 
are involved. Indeed, only MM EVs exposure induced a strong nuclear factor kappa 
B nuclear translocation that was completely abolished after anti-FLCs antibodies 
and heparin pre-treatment. The protein tyrosine kinase c-src is present on MM
circulating EVs and redistributes to the cell plasma membrane after MM EVs
exposure. The anti-FLCs antibodies and heparin pre-treatments were able to block 
the intracellular re-distribution of the c-src kinase and the subsequent c-src
kinase containing EVs production. Our results open new insights in EVs cellular
biology and in MM therapeutic and diagnostic approaches.

PMCID: PMC4209816
PMID: 25386176  [PubMed]


191. Diabetol Metab Syndr. 2014 Oct 15;6(1):110. doi: 10.1186/1758-5996-6-110.
eCollection 2014.

Prediction of response to GLP-1 receptor agonist therapy in Japanese patients
with type 2 diabetes.

Imai K(1), Tsujimoto T(1), Goto A(2), Goto M(2), Kishimoto M(3), Yamamoto-Honda
R(3), Noto H(3), Kajio H(1), Noda M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Center Hospital,
National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of
Diabetes Research, Diabetes Research Center, National Center for Global Health
and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 162-8655 Japan. (3)Department of
Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Center Hospital, National Center for
Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan ; Department of Diabetes Research,
Diabetes Research Center, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 
Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 162-8655 Japan.

BACKGROUND: Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists can maintain good
glycemic control in some diabetic. Here we compared the clinical characteristics 
and parameters reflecting glucose metabolism at the time of the initiation of
GLP-1 receptor agonist therapy between patients who responded well to therapy and
those who did not.
METHODS: The records of 43 patients with type 2 diabetes who started receiving
GLP-1 receptor agonist therapy during hospitalization were retrospectively
reviewed. Glucagon stimulation tests were performed, and patients were started on
liraglutide or exenatide therapy. Preprandial blood glucose levels were measured 
on days 2 and 3 of GLP-1 receptor agonist therapy. We used the Cox proportional
hazard model to compare clinical parameters between responders (HbA1c level <8%
at more than 3 months after the initiation of treatment) and non-responders
(HbA1c level =8% at more than 3 months after the initiation of treatment or a
switch to insulin therapy at any time).
RESULTS: Twenty-six of the 43 patients were classified as non-responders. At
baseline, mean HbA1c levels were 9.9% among responders and 9.7% among
non-responders. Compared with treatment with only diet or metformin, the hazard
ratio [HR] for non-response was 5.3 (95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.16-24.6, P =
0.03) for insulin therapy and 5.0 (95% CI: 1.13-22.16, P = 0.03) for sulfonylurea
therapy. Compared with the lowest tertile, the HRs for non-response in the
highest tertile were 3.1 (95% CI: 1.04-8.97, P = 0.04) for the mean preprandial
blood glucose level on days 2 and 3 and 3.4 (95% CI: 1.05-11.01, P = 0.04) for
the body mass index. The response was not significantly associated with the
duration of diabetes or the glucagon stimulation test results. A receiver
operating curve analysis showed that the mean preprandial blood glucose level had
the highest area under the curve value (=0.72) for the prediction of
non-responders.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with poorly controlled diabetes, the response to GLP-1
receptor agonist therapy was significantly associated with the treatment used
before the initiation of therapy, the body mass index, and the mean preprandial
blood glucose level during the 2 days after the initiation of therapy.

PMCID: PMC4209043
PMID: 25349635  [PubMed]


192. J Nucl Med Technol. 2014 Dec;42(4):260-4. doi: 10.2967/jnmt.114.144402. Epub 2014
Oct 23.

Administration of subcutaneous buffered lidocaine prior to breast
lymphoscintigraphy reduces pain without decreasing lymph node visualization.

Hawkins AS(1), Yoo DC(1), Movson JS(1), Noto RB(1), Powers K(2), Baird GL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown
University, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, Rhode Island; and. (2)Alaska
Radiology Associates, Anchorage, Alaska.

Breast lymphoscintigraphy using (99m)Tc-sulfur colloid ((99m)Tc-SC) is well
established in clinical practice for staging patients with breast carcinoma.
Nearly all patients report having pain during the procedure. However, techniques 
used to minimize pain during breast lymphoscintigraphy are highly variable across
institutions. Our study was to determine whether anesthetizing the skin with
sodium bicarbonatehether-buffered lidocaine before performing breast
lymphoscintigraphy reduced the pain experienced by the patients. The second
objective of this study was to evaluate whether anesthetizing the skin with
buffered lidocaine changed visualization of lymph nodes.METHODS: This
prospective, patient-masked and randomized study involved performing breast
lymphoscintigraphy in a control group and experimental group of female breast
cancer patients. The control group did not receive skin anesthetic before
(99m)Tc-SC injections, whereas the experimental group first underwent skin
anesthesia with an injection of 2% sodium bicarbonate-buffered lidocaine. All
patients were asked to rate their pain levels, using the National Institutes of
Health pain scale, before the procedure and immediately after the injections. The
change in pain from baseline was compared between the 2 groups. After the
injections, scintigraphic imaging of the axilla was performed, and the number of 
axillary lymph nodes visualized was recorded.
RESULTS: No significant difference was found in preprocedural baseline pain from 
the control group, compared with the experimental group. There was a
statistically significant difference in the increase in pain experienced during
the procedure between the control group and the experimental group (P = 0.009).
There was no significant difference in the detection of lymph nodes between the
control and experimental groups (P = 0.56).
CONCLUSION: The results from our study indicate that injecting subcutaneous
buffered lidocaine before intradermal injection of (99m)Tc-SC for breast
lymphoscintigraphy significantly decreases patient pain without interfering with 
lymph node visualization.

© 2014 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, Inc.

PMID: 25342184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Ann Occup Hyg. 2015 Jan;59(1):4-24. doi: 10.1093/annhyg/meu080. Epub 2014 Oct 21.

Exposure to thoracic aerosol in a prospective lung function study of cement
production workers.

Notø H(1), Nordby KC(2), Kjuus H(2), Skare Ø(2), Thomassen Y(1), Eduard W(3).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Chemical and Biological Work Environment, National Institute 
of Occupational Health, PO Box 8149 Dep., 0033 Oslo, Norway. (2)2.Department of
Occupational Medicine and Epidemiology, National Institute of Occupational
Health, PO Box 8149 DEP., 0033 Oslo, Norway. (3)1. Department of Chemical and
Biological Work Environment, National Institute of Occupational Health, PO Box
8149 Dep., 0033 Oslo, Norway wijnand.eduard@stami.no.

INTRODUCTION: An exposure study was conducted as part of a multi-national
longitudinal study of lung function in cement production workers.
AIM: To examine exposure to thoracic aerosol among cement production workers
during a 4-year follow-up period.
METHODS: Personal shift measurements of thoracic aerosol were conducted among the
cement production workers within seven job types, 22 plants, and eight European
countries (including Turkey) in 2007, 2009, and 2011. The thoracic sub-fraction
was chosen as the most relevant aerosol fraction related to obstructive dynamic
lung function changes. Production factors, job type, and respirator use were
recorded by questionnaire. The exposure data were log-transformed before mixed
models analysis and results were presented by geometric mean (GMadj) exposure
levels adjusted for plant or job type, worker, and season as random effects.
RESULTS: A total of 6111 thoracic aerosol samples were collected from 2534
workers. Repeated measurements were obtained from 1690 of these workers. The
GMadj thoracic aerosol levels varied between job types from 0.20 to 1.2mg m(-3). 
The highest exposure levels were observed for production, cleaning, and
maintenance workers (0.79-1.2mg m(-3)) and could reach levels where the risk of
lung function loss may be increased. The lowest levels were found for
administrative personnel (0.20mg m(-3)) serving tasks in the production areas.
Office work was not monitored. GMadj exposure levels between plants ranged from
0.19 to 2.0mg m(-3). The time of year/season contributed significantly to the
total variance, but not year of sampling. Production characteristics explained
63% of the variance explained by plant. Workers in plants with the highest number
of employees (212-483 per plant) were exposed at a level more than twice as high 
as those in plants with fewer employees. Other production factors such as cement 
production, bag filling, and tidiness were significant, but explained less of the
exposure variability. These determinants factors can be useful in qualitative
exposure assessment and exposure prevention in the cement production industry.
Respirator use was minor at exposure levels <0.5mg m(-3) but more common at
higher levels.
CONCLUSION: Production, cleaning, and maintenance work were the job types with
highest exposure to thoracic aerosol in cement production plants. However, plant 
had an even larger effect on exposure levels than job type. The number of
employees was the most important factor explaining differences between plants.
Exposure reached levels where the risk of lung function loss may be increased. No
significant differences in exposure between sampling campaigns were observed
during the 4-year study period.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Occupational Hygiene Society.

PMID: 25335937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Soft Matter. 2014 Dec 14;10(46):9281-92. doi: 10.1039/c4sm01360c.

Dicationic organic salts: gelators for ionic liquids.

D'Anna F(1), Rizzo C, Vitale P, Lazzara G, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento STEBICEF, Sezione di Chimica, Università degli Studi di Palermo, 
Viale delle Scienze-Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
francesca.danna@unipa.it renato.noto@unipa.it.

Diimidazolium and dipyrrolidinium organic salts were tested for their ability to 
gel both organic solvents and ionic liquids. Organic salts containing
1-(1-imidazolylmethyl)-3,5-di-(3'-octylimidazolylmethyl)-benzene and
1-(N-pyrrolidylmethyl)-3,5-di-(N,N-octylpyrrolidylmethyl)-benzene cations were
used. In addition to the simple bromide anion, also dianions having a naphthalene
core such as 1,5- and 2,6-naphthalenedisulfonate and 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylate
were taken into account. Gelation tests demonstrated that organic salts used were
able to harden ionic liquids. The materials obtained were investigated for their 
thermal stability and also for electric conductivity properties using micro-DSC
and dielectric spectroscopy. Furthermore, the opacity of some gel phases was
monitored using UV-vis measurements. To obtain information about the gelation
mechanism, gel phase formation was studied as a function of time by means of
resonance light scattering investigation. Finally, the ability of materials to
respond to external stimuli such as magnetic stirring or ultrasound irradiation
was also analyzed. Data collected show that different relationships exist among
the gelator and the ionic liquid structure, determining the properties of
materials and their possible applications.

PMID: 25330144  [PubMed]


195. Intensive Care Med. 2015 Jan;41(1):12-20. doi: 10.1007/s00134-014-3514-2. Epub
2014 Oct 16.

Circulating presepsin (soluble CD14 subtype) as a marker of host response in
patients with severe sepsis or septic shock: data from the multicenter,
randomized ALBIOS trial.

Masson S(1), Caironi P, Fanizza C, Thomae R, Bernasconi R, Noto A, Oggioni R,
Pasetti GS, Romero M, Tognoni G, Latini R, Gattinoni L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Research, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche
Farmacologiche "Mario Negri", Via Privata Giuseppe La Masa 19, 20156, Milan,
Italy, serge.masson@marionegri.it.

Erratum in
    Intensive Care Med. 2015 Sep;41(9):1736.

PURPOSE: Presepsin is a soluble fragment of the cluster-of-differentiation marker
protein 14 (CD14) involved in pathogen recognition by innate immunity. We
evaluated the relation between its circulating concentration, host response,
appropriateness of antibiotic therapy, and mortality in patients with severe
sepsis.
METHODS: Plasma presepsin was measured 1, 2, and 7 days after enrollment of 997
patients with severe sepsis or septic shock in the multicenter Albumin Italian
Outcome Sepsis (ALBIOS) trial. They were randomized to albumin or crystalloids.
We tested with univariate and adjusted models the association of single
measurements of presepsin or changes over time with clinical events, organ
dysfunctions, appropriateness of antibiotic therapy, and ICU or 90-day mortality.
RESULTS: Presepsin concentration at baseline (946 [492-1,887] ng/L) increased
with the SOFA score, the number of prevalent organ dysfunctions or failures, and 
the incidence of new failures of the respiratory, coagulation, liver, and kidney 
systems. The concentration decreased in ICU over 7 days in patients with negative
blood cultures, and in those with positive blood cultures and appropriate
antibiotic therapy; it increased with inappropriate antibiotic therapy (p =
0.0009). Baseline presepsin was independently associated with, and correctly
reclassified, the risk of ICU and 90-day mortality. Increasing concentrations of 
presepsin from day 1 to day 2 predicted higher ICU and 90-day mortality (adjusted
p < 0.0001 and 0.01, respectively). Albumin had no effect on presepsin
concentration.
CONCLUSIONS: Presepsin is an early predictor of host response and mortality in
septic patients. Changes in concentrations over time seem to reflect the
appropriateness of antibiotic therapy.

PMID: 25319385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Chemother. 2015 Feb;27(2):99-105. doi: 10.1179/1973947814Y.0000000219. Epub
2014 Oct 14.

Reduced-dose (two-thirds) R-CHOP chemotherapy for elderly patients with
non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

Kikuchi M, Nakasone H, Akahoshi Y, Nakano H, Ugai T, Wada H, Yamasaki R, Sakamoto
K, Kawamura K, Ishihara Y, Sato M, Ashizawa M, Terasako-Saito K, Kimura S,
Yamazaki R, Kako S, Kanda J, Nishida J, Sekiguchi N, Noto S, Kida M, Hangaishi A,
Usuki K, Kanda Y.

Elderly patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) have a poor prognosis. Owing to 
treatment-related toxicities, there is no standard chemotherapy for the elderly
patients, especially those aged 70 years or older. In this study, we
retrospectively evaluated the efficacy and toxicity of reduced-dose (two-thirds) 
R-CHOP chemotherapy as an initial chemotherapy for 45 patients aged 70 years or
older with B-cell NHL. The WHO classification of NHL included diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) (31), mantle cell lymphoma (5), follicular lymphoma (4), 
extranodal marginal zone lymphoma (1), Burkitt lymphoma (1), and B-cell lymphoma 
whose further types were unclassified (3). The incidences of grade 4 neutropenia 
and febrile neutropenia (FN) were 51.1 and 15.6%, respectively. Efficacy was
evaluated in patients with DLBCL. The overall and complete response (CR) rates
were 96.7 and 90.0%, respectively. Two-year event-free survival (EFS) and overall
survival (OS) were 84.4 and 89.2%, respectively. There was no treatment-related
mortality. In conclusion, two-thirds R-CHOP chemotherapy is a promising treatment
for elderly patients with B-cell NHL in terms of its efficacy and toxicity.

PMID: 25314911  [PubMed - in process]


197. Cell Host Microbe. 2014 Oct 8;16(4):531-7. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2014.09.002.

Inter- and intraspecies metabolite exchange promotes virulence of
antibiotic-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.

Hammer ND(1), Cassat JE(2), Noto MJ(3), Lojek LJ(1), Chadha AD(4), Schmitz JE(1),
Creech CB(5), Skaar EP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, 1161 21(st) Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, 1161 21(st) Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37232, USA;
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, 1161 21(st) Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37232,
USA. (3)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care
Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 1161 21(st) Avenue South
Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy,
Immunology, and Pulmonary Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
1161 21(st) Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (5)Department of Pediatrics, 
Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, 1161 21(st) Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (6)Department of
Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, 1161 21(st) Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. Electronic address:
eric.skaar@vanderbilt.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2014 Oct 8;16(4):427-9.

Adaptations that enable antimicrobial resistance often pose a fitness cost to the
microorganism. Resistant pathogens must therefore overcome such fitness decreases
to persist within their hosts. Here we demonstrate that the reduced fitness
associated with one resistance-conferring mutation can be offset by community
interactions with microorganisms harboring alternative mutations or via
interactions with the human microbiota. Mutations that confer antibiotic
resistance in the human pathogen Staphylococcus aureus led to decreased fitness, 
whereas coculture or coinfection of two distinct mutants resulted in collective
recovery of fitness comparable to that of wild-type. Such fitness enhancements
result from the exchange of metabolites between distinct mutants, leading to
enhanced growth, virulence factor production, and pathogenicity. Interspecies
fitness enhancements were also identified, as members of the human microbiota can
promote growth of antibiotic-resistant S. aureus. Thus, inter- and intraspecies
community interactions offset fitness costs and enable S. aureus to develop
antibiotic resistance without loss of virulence.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4197139
PMID: 25299336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2014 Oct;27 Suppl 2:58-60. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2014.954807.

The triple-I (interactive, intersectorial, interdisciplinary) approach to
validate "omics" investigations on body fluids and tissues in perinatal medicine.

Castagnola M(1), Uda F, Noto A, Fanos V, Faa G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Biochimica e Biochimica Clinica, Università Cattolica , Roma ,
Italy .

Proteomics and metabolomics are emerging in recent years as one of the most
challenging topics in neonatology. They are characterized by a large amount of
data that reflect the complexity of all biological systems more accurately than
traditional methods utilized in clinical chemistry. In this review paper we
present the modifications of the salivary proteome, which represents an easy and 
non-invasive method that offers the opportunity to investigate changes in the
metabolism of preterm infants and in pediatric patients. Moreover, we present the
metabolomics-histologic correlations in newborn piglets at baseline and following
normocapnic hypoxia and reoxygenation. A new method of data analysis, here
summarized as the "triple-I" approach will be finally discussed:
interdisciplinary, intersectorial, interactive.

PMID: 25284179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2014 Oct;27 Suppl 2:53-7. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2014.955963.

Metabolomics technology and their application to the study of the viral
infection.

Noto A(1), Dessi A, Puddu M, Mussap M, Fanos V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, NICU, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section, AOU,
University of Cagliari, Cagliari , Italy and.

OBJECTIVE: In the present review article we have summarized the use of the
metabolomics approach to study the metabolic modifications occurring in several
bio-fluids due to viral infections. The aim is to highlight the ability of
metabolomics to find early fingerprints, which are related to the infections.
METHODS: The (1)H-NMR, UHPLC/MS/MS(2), UPLC/ESI-SYNAPT-HDMS, UPLC-Q-TOF-HDMS
analyses were used for the determination of several metabolites representative of
the viral infections. The data were analyzed by Principal Component Analysis
(PCA), Partial Least Square Discriminant Analysis (PLS-DA) and by regression
techniques.
RESULTS: The major changes were related to nucleotide, carbohydrates, lipids and 
amino acid metabolisms.
CONCLUSIONS: The metabolomics approach could be considered a viable option for
characterization of the viral infection and for detecting on going differences in
the bio-fluids composition.

PMID: 25284178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2014 Oct;27 Suppl 2:46-52. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2014.954784.

The urinary metabolomics profile of an Italian autistic children population and
their unaffected siblings.

Noto A(1), Fanos V, Barberini L, Grapov D, Fattuoni C, Zaffanello M, Casanova A, 
Fenu G, De Giacomo A, De Angelis M, Moretti C, Papoff P, Ditonno R, Francavilla
R.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section,
Department of Surgical Sciences, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria, University of
Cagliari, Cagliari , Italy .

OBJECTIVE: A supervised multivariate model to classify the metabolome alterations
between autistic spectrum disorders (ASD) patients and controls, siblings of
autistic patients, has been realized and used to realize a network model of the
ASD patients' metabolome.
METHODS: In our experiment we propose a quantification of urinary metabolites
with the Mass Spectroscopy technique couple to Gas Chromatography. A multivariate
model has been used to extrapolate the variables of importance for a network
model of interaction between metabolites. In this way we are able to propose a
network-based approach to ASD description.
RESULTS: Children with autistic disease composing our studied population showed
elevated concentration of several organic acids and sugars. Interactions among
diet, intestinal flora and genes may explain such findings. Among them, the
3-(3-hydroxyphenyl)-3-hydroxypropanoic acid has been previously described as
altered in autistic subjects. Other metabolites increased are
3,4-dihydroxybutyric acid, glycolic acid and glycine, cis-aconitic acid;
phenylalanine, tyrosine, p-hydroxyphenylacetic acid, and homovanillic acid are
all involved in the tyrosine pathway leading to neurotransmitter cathecolamine.
CONCLUSION: GC-MS-based metabolomic analysis of the urinary metabolome suggests
to have the required sensitivity and specificity to gain insight into ASD
phenotypes and aid a personalized network-based medicine approach.

PMID: 25284177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2014 Oct;27 Suppl 2:39-45. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2014.955966.

Urinary metabolomics of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD): preliminary data at
birth suggest it is a congenital disease.

Fanos V(1), Pintus MC, Lussu M, Atzori L, Noto A, Stronati M, Guimaraes H,
Marcialis MA, Rocha G, Moretti C, Papoff P, Lacerenza S, Puddu S, Giuffrè M,
Serraino F, Mussap M, Corsello G.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria, University of Cagliari , Cagliari , Italy .

OBJECTIVE: Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) or chronic lung disease is one of the
principal causes of mortality and morbidity in preterm infants. Early
identification of infants at the greater risk of developing BPD may allow a
targeted approach for reducing disease severity and complications. The trigger
cause of the disease comprehends the impairment of the alveolar development and
the increased angiogenesis. Nevertheless, the molecular pathways characterizing
the disease are still unclear. Therefore, the use of the metabolomics technique, 
due to the capability of identifying instantaneous metabolic perturbation, might 
help to recognize metabolic patterns associated with the condition.
METHODS: The purpose of this study is to compare urinary metabolomics at birth in
36 newborns with a gestational age below 29 weeks and birth weight <1500<U+2009>g (very 
low birth weight - VLBW), admitted in Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) divided
into two groups: the first group (18 cases) consisting of newborns who have not
yet developed the disease, but who will subsequently develop it and the second
group (18 controls) consisting of newborns not affected by BPD. Urine samples
were collected within 24-36<U+2009>h of life and immediately frozen at -80<U+2009>°C.
RESULTS: The (1)H-NMR spectra were analyzed using a partial least squares
discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) model coupled with orthogonal Signal Correction.
Using this approach it was possible with urine at birth to discriminate newborns 
that will be later have a diagnosis of BPD with a high statistics power. In
particular, we found five important discriminant metabolites in urine in BPD
newborns: lactate, taurine, TMAO, myoinositol (which increased) and gluconate
(which decreased).
CONCLUSION: These preliminary results seem to be promising for the identification
of predictor's biomarkers characterizing the BPD condition. These data may
suggest that BPD is probably the result of an abnormal development (respiratory
bud, vascular tree, hypodysplasia of pneumocytes) and could be considered a
congenital disease (genetics plus intrauterine epigenetics). Early identification
of infants at the greater risk of developing BPD may allow a targeted approach
for reducing disease severity and complications.

PMID: 25284176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2014 Oct;27 Suppl 2:34-8. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2014.954787.

Monitoring neonatal fungal infection with metabolomics.

Dessì A(1), Liori B, Caboni P, Corsello G, Giuffrè M, Noto A, Serraino F,
Stronati M, Zaffanello M, Fanos V.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria, University of Cagliari , Cagliari , Italy .

The objective of our study was to evaluate the capability of the metabolomics
approach to identify the variations of urine metabolites over time related to the
neonatal fungal septic condition. The study population included a clinical case
of a preterm neonate with invasive fungal infection and 13 healthy preterm
controls. This study showed a unique urine metabolic profile of the patient
affected by fungal sepsis compared to urine of controls and it was also possible 
to evaluate the efficacy of therapy in improving patient health.

PMID: 25284175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2014 Oct;27 Suppl 2:20-6. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2014.954786.

Urinary metabolomics (GC-MS) reveals that low and high birth weight infants share
elevated inositol concentrations at birth.

Barberini L(1), Noto A, Fattuoni C, Grapov D, Casanova A, Fenu G, Gaviano M,
Carboni R, Ottonello G, Crisafulli M, Fanos V, Dessì A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health Clinical and Molecular Medicine, University of
Cagliari , Cagliari , Italy .

OBJECTIVE: Metabolomics is a new "omics" platform aimed at high-throughput
identification, quantification and characterization of small-molecule
metabolites. The metabolomics approach has been successfully applied to the
classification different physiological states and identification of perturbed
biochemical pathways. The purpose of the current investigation is the application
of metabolomics to explore biological mechanisms which may lead to the onset of
metabolic syndrome in adulthood.
METHODS: We evaluated differences in metabolites in the urine collected within 12
h from 23 infants with IUGR (IntraUterine Growth Restriction), or LGA (Large for 
Gestational Age), compared to control infants (10 patients defined AGA:
Appropriate for Gestational Age). Urinary metabolites were quantified by GC-MS
and used to highlight similarities between the two metabolic diseases and
identify metabolic markers for their predisposition. Quantified metabolites were 
analyzed using a multivariate statistics coupled with receiver operator
characteristic curve (ROC) analysis of identified biomarkers.
RESULTS: Urinary myo-inositol was the most important discriminant between
LGA<U+2009>+<U+2009>IUGR and control infants, and displayed an area under the ROC curve<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.
CONCLUSION: We postulate that the increase in plasma and consequently urinary
inositol may constitute a marker of altered glucose metabolism during fetal
development in both IUGR and LGA newborns.

PMID: 25284173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2014 Oct;27 Suppl 2:4-12. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2014.956403.

Urinary metabolomics of pregnant women at term: a combined GC/MS and NMR
approach.

Caboni P(1), Meloni A, Lussu M, Carta E, Barberini L, Noto A, Deiana SF, Mereu R,
Ragusa A, Paoletti AM, Melis GB, Fanos V, Atzori L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Cagliari ,
Cagliari , Italy .

BACKGROUND: Physiological changes leading to parturition are not completely
understood while clinical diagnosis of labour is still retrospective. Gas
chromatography mass spectrometry (GC/MS) and nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (NMR) represent two of the main analytical platforms used in
clinical metabolomics. Metabolomics might help us to improve our knowledge about 
the biochemical mechanisms underlying labour.
METHODS: Urine samples (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>59), collected from pregnant women at term of
gestation before and/or after the onset of labour, were analysed by GC/MS and NMR
techniques in order to identify the metabolic profile. Both GC/MS and NMR data
matrices containing the identified metabolites were analysed by multivariate
statistical techniques in order to characterise the discriminant variables
between labour (L) and not labour (NL) status.
RESULTS: 18 potential metabolites (11 with (1)H-NMR, eight with GC-MS: glycine
was relevant in both) were found discriminant in urine of women during labour.
Taken together, the identified metabolites produced a composite biomarker
pattern, a sort of barcode, capable of differentiating between labour and not
labour conditions. Major discriminant metabolites for NMR and GC/MS analysis
were: alanine, glycine, acetone, 3-hydroxybutiyric acid, 2,3,4-trihydroxybutyric 
acid and succinic acid, giving a urine metabolite signature on the late phase of 
labour.
CONCLUSIONS: The metabolomics analysis evidenced clusters of metabolites involved
in labour condition able to discriminate between urine samples collected before
the onset and during labour, potentially offering the promise of a robust
screening test.

PMID: 25284171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:470253. doi: 10.1155/2014/470253. Epub 2014 Sep 7.

Lung cancer stem cell lose their stemness default state after exposure to
microgravity.

Pisanu ME(1), Noto A(2), De Vitis C(3), Masiello MG(2), Coluccia P(4), Proietti
S(4), Giovagnoli MR(5), Ricci A(5), Giarnieri E(5), Cucina A(4), Ciliberto G(6), 
Bizzarri M(7), Mancini R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Magna Graecia University,
88100 Catanzaro, Italy ; Department of Surgery "P.Valdoni," Sapienza University, 
00161 Rome, Italy. (2)Department of Surgery "P.Valdoni," Sapienza University,
00161 Rome, Italy ; Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Sapienza
University, 00161 Rome, Italy. (3)Department of Surgery "P.Valdoni," Sapienza
University, 00161 Rome, Italy ; IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Fondazione G.
Pascale, 80131 Napoli, Italy. (4)Department of Surgery "P.Valdoni," Sapienza
University, 00161 Rome, Italy. (5)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, 
Sapienza University, 00161 Rome, Italy ; Azienda Ospedaliera S. Andrea, 00189
Rome, Italy. (6)IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Fondazione G. Pascale, 80131
Napoli, Italy. (7)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, 00161
Rome, Italy. (8)Department of Surgery "P.Valdoni," Sapienza University, 00161
Rome, Italy ; Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University,
00161 Rome, Italy ; Azienda Ospedaliera S. Andrea, 00189 Rome, Italy.

Microgravity influences cell differentiation by modifying the morphogenetic field
in which stem cells are embedded. Preliminary data showed indeed that stem cells 
are committed to selective differentiation when exposed to real or simulated
microgravity. Our study provides evidence that a similar event occurs when cancer
stem cells (CSCs) are cultured in microgravity. In the same time, a significant
increase in apoptosis was recorded: those data point out that microgravity
rescues CSCs from their relative quiescent state, inducing CSCs to lose their
stemness features, as documented by the decrease in ALDH and the downregulation
of both Nanog and Oct-4 genes. Those traits were stably acquired and preserved by
CSCs when cells were placed again on a 1 g field. Studies conducted in
microgravity on CSCs may improve our understanding of the fundamental role
exerted by biophysical forces in cancer cell growth and function.

PMCID: PMC4170742
PMID: 25276790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Schizophr Res. 2014 Nov;159(2-3):358-64. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2014.09.008. Epub 
2014 Sep 28.

Changes in gene expression and methylation in the blood of patients with
first-episode psychosis.

Ota VK(1), Noto C(2), Gadelha A(3), Santoro ML(4), Spindola LM(5), Gouvea ES(6), 
Stilhano RS(7), Ortiz BB(8), Silva PN(9), Sato JR(10), Han SW(11), Cordeiro
Q(12), Bressan RA(13), Belangero SI(14).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division of Department of Morphology and Genetics of Universidade
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Brazil; LiNC-Interdisciplinary Laboratory of
Clinical Neurosciences of UNIFESP, Brazil. Electronic address:
vanessakaota@gmail.com. (2)LiNC-Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences of UNIFESP, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry of UNIFESP, Brazil;
Department of Psychiatry of Irmandade da Santa Casa de Misericórdia de São Paulo 
(ISCMSP), Brazil. Electronic address: csnoto@gmail.com. (3)LiNC-Interdisciplinary
Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences of UNIFESP, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry
of UNIFESP, Brazil. Electronic address: aryararipe@yahoo.com.br. (4)Genetics
Division of Department of Morphology and Genetics of Universidade Federal de Sao 
Paulo (UNIFESP), Brazil; LiNC-Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences of UNIFESP, Brazil. Electronic address: santorogen@gmail.com.
(5)Genetics Division of Department of Morphology and Genetics of Universidade
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Brazil; LiNC-Interdisciplinary Laboratory of
Clinical Neurosciences of UNIFESP, Brazil. Electronic address:
leticia.n.spindola@gmail.com. (6)Department of Psychiatry of UNIFESP, Brazil;
Department of Psychiatry of Irmandade da Santa Casa de Misericórdia de São Paulo 
(ISCMSP), Brazil. Electronic address: esgouvea@yahoo.com. (7)Department of
Biophysics of UNIFESP, Brazil. Electronic address: robertasessa@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Psychiatry of UNIFESP, Brazil. Electronic address:
ortiz_bru@hotmail.com. (9)Genetics Division of Department of Morphology and
Genetics of Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Brazil;
LiNC-Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences of UNIFESP, Brazil;
Department of Psychiatry of UNIFESP, Brazil. Electronic address:
patriciaoliveira.unifesp@gmail.com. (10)LiNC-Interdisciplinary Laboratory of
Clinical Neurosciences of UNIFESP, Brazil; Center of Mathematics, Computation and
Cognition, Universidade Federal do ABC, Brazil. Electronic address:
joao.sato@ufabc.edu.br. (11)Department of Biophysics of UNIFESP, Brazil.
Electronic address: universo.han@gmail.com. (12)Department of Psychiatry of
UNIFESP, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry of Irmandade da Santa Casa de
Misericórdia de São Paulo (ISCMSP), Brazil. Electronic address:
qcordeiro@yahoo.com. (13)LiNC-Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences of UNIFESP, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry of UNIFESP, Brazil.
Electronic address: rodrigoabressan@gmail.com. (14)Genetics Division of
Department of Morphology and Genetics of Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo
(UNIFESP), Brazil; LiNC-Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences of
UNIFESP, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry of UNIFESP, Brazil. Electronic address:
sinbelangero@gmail.com.

Schizophrenia is a severe mental health disorder with high heritability. The
investigation of individuals during their first-episode psychosis (FEP), before
the progression of psychotic disorders and especially before treatment with
antipsychotic medications, is particularly helpful for understanding this complex
disease and for the identification of potential biomarkers. In this study, we
compared the expression of genes that are involved in neurotransmission and
neurodevelopment of antipsychotic-naive FEP in the peripheral blood of patients
(n=51) and healthy controls (n=51). In addition, we investigated the
differentially expressed genes with respect to a) DNA methylation, b) the
correlation between gene expression and clinical variables (PANSS), and c) gene
expression changes after risperidone treatment. Expression levels of 11 genes
were quantified with SYBR Green. For methylation analysis, bisulfite sequencing
was performed. A significant decrease in GCH1 mRNA levels was observed in FEP
patients relative to controls. Also, when we compare the FEP patients after
risperidone treatment with controls, this difference remains significant, and no 
significant differences were observed in GCH1 mRNA levels when comparing patients
before and after risperidone treatment. Additionally, although the differences
were non-significant after Bonferroni correction, the expression of GCH1 seemed
to be correlated with PANSS scores, and the GCH1 promoter region was more
methylated in FEP than in controls, thus corroborating the results obtained at
the mRNA level. Few studies have been conducted on GCH1, and future studies are
needed to clarify its potential role in the progression of schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25270546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Acta Radiol. 2015 Oct;56(10):1171-9. doi: 10.1177/0284185114549826. Epub 2014 Sep
29.

Patient-specific tube-voltage selection at coronary CT angiography based on the
combination of X-ray attenuation on scout views and body mass index: how can
appropriate radiation dose be achieved?

Noto D(1), Funama Y(2), Utsunomiya D(3), Oda S(3), Yuki H(3), Yamashita Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. (2)Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan funama@kumamoto-u.ac.jp. (3)Faculty of Life Sciences,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Body weight, body mass index (BMI), and scout X-ray radiographic
attenuation can be used to predict image noise on computed tomographic coronary
angiography (CTCA) images.
PURPOSE: To use a formula to predict patient-specific image noise and then select
an appropriate CTCA patient-specific tube voltage for better radiation control.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Forty-eight patients who underwent CTCA imaging at 120<U+2009>kVp 
were reviewed, and their patient information and scouting X-ray radiographic
attenuations were recorded to identify the best correlations between patient data
and image noise and to develop a predicted image noise formula. Subsequently, 54 
patients subjected to scanning at 100 or 120<U+2009>kVp, depending on the noise
predicted by our formula, were prospectively studied. Two radiologists visually
assessed the image quality of the right coronary artery (RCA), left anterior
descending artery (LAD), and left circumflex artery (LCX) by consensus readings.
RESULTS: The predicted image noise<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.939 BMI<U+2009>+<U+2009>0.025 scouting
attenuation<U+2009>+<U+2009>20.16. The median value of the overall image noise was 30.55<U+2009>HU at 
120<U+2009>kVp and 29.85<U+2009>HU at 100<U+2009>kVp. The mean visual evaluation scores at 100 and
120<U+2009>kVp were 3.25 and 3.24 for the proximal RCA, 3.40 and 3.26 for the proximal
LAD, and 3.30 and 3.15 for the proximal LCX, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The BMI and scouting X-ray radiographic attenuation can be combined
to predict the CTCA image noise. Our prediction formula is useful for deciding
when to switch from the 120- to the 100-kVp technique.

© The Foundation Acta Radiologica 2014.

PMID: 25267922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Bioresour Technol. 2014 Nov;172:444-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2014.09.019. Epub 
2014 Sep 16.

A usage of CO2 hydrate: convenient method to increase CO2 concentration in
culturing algae.

Nakano S(1), Chang KH(1), Shijima A(2), Miyamoto H(3), Sato Y(3), Noto Y(3), Ha
JY(3), Sakamoto M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Environmental Science, Kyung Hee University, 1
Seochon-dong, Giheung-gu, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do 446-701, Republic of Korea.
(2)Graduate School of Engineering, Toyama Prefectural University, 5180 Kurokawa, 
Imizu-shi, Toyama 939-0398, Japan. (3)Faculty of Engineering, Toyama Prefectural 
University, 5180 Kurokawa, Imizu-shi, Toyama 939-0398, Japan. (4)Faculty of
Engineering, Toyama Prefectural University, 5180 Kurokawa, Imizu-shi, Toyama
939-0398, Japan. Electronic address: masaki@pu-toyama.ac.jp.

The addition of CO2 to algal culture systems can increase algal biomass
effectively. Generally, gas bubbling is used to increase CO2 levels in culture
systems; however, it is difficult to quantitatively operate to control the
concentration using this method. In this study, we tested the usability of CO2
hydrate for phytoplankton culture. Specifically, green algae Pseudokirchneriella 
subcapitata were cultured in COMBO medium that contained dissolved CO2 hydrate,
after which its effects were evaluated. The experiment was conducted according to
a general bioassay procedure (OECD TG201). CO2 promoted algae growth effectively 
(about 2-fold relative to the control), and the decrease in pH due to dissolution
of the CO2 in water recovered soon because of photosynthesis. Since the CO2
hydrate method can control a CO2 concentration easily and quantitatively, it is
expected to be useful in future applications.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25263943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Eur J Radiol. 2014 Dec;83(12):2260-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2014.08.015. Epub 2014
Sep 6.

Analysis of decrease in lung perfusion blood volume with occlusive and
non-occlusive pulmonary embolisms.

Ikeda Y(1), Yoshimura N(2), Hori Y(3), Horii Y(2), Ishikawa H(2), Yamazaki M(4), 
Noto Y(5), Aoyama H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and
Dental Science, Japan. Electronic address: ypfranky1@ybb.ne.jp. (2)Department of 
Radiology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Science,
Japan. (3)Department of Radiology, Showa University Fujigaoka Hospital, Japan.
(4)Department of Radiology, Niigata City General Hospital, Japan. (5)Department
of Radiology, Niigata University Medical and Dental Hospital, Japan.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to determine if lung perfusion blood volume
(lung PBV) with non-occlusive pulmonary embolism (PE) differs quantitatively and 
visually from that with occlusive PE and to investigate if lung PBV with
non-occlusive PE remains the same as that without PE.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Totally, 108 patients suspected of having acute PE
underwent pulmonary dual-energy computed tomography angiography (DECTA) between
April 2011 and January 2012. Presence of PE on DECTA was evaluated by one
radiologist. Two radiologists visually evaluated the PE distribution (segmental
or subsegmental) and its nature (occlusive or non-occlusive) on DECTA and
classified perfusion in lung PBV as "decreased," "slightly decreased," and
"preserved". Two radiologists used a lung PBV application to set a region of
interest (ROI) in the center of the lesion and measured HU values of an iodine
map. In the same slice as the ROI of the lesion and close to the lesion, another 
ROI was set in the normal perfusion area without PE, and HUs were measured. The
proportion of lesions was compared between the occlusive and non-occlusive
groups. HUs were compared among the occlusive, non-occlusive, and corresponding
normal groups.
RESULTS: Twenty-five patients had 80 segmental or subsegmental lesions. There
were 37 and 43 lesions in the occlusive and non-occlusive groups, respectively.
The proportion of decreased lesions was 73.0% (27/37) in the occlusive group,
while that of preserved lesions in the non-occlusive group was 76.7% (33/43).
There was a significant difference in the proportion of lesions (P<0.001) between
the two groups. HUs of the iodine map were significantly higher in the
non-occlusive group than in the occlusive group (33.8 ± 8.2 HU vs. 11.9 ± 6.1 HU,
P<0.001). There was no significant difference in HUs for the entire lesion
between the non-occlusive (33.8 ± 8.2 HU) and corresponding normal group (34.5 ± 
6.8 HU; P=0.294).
CONCLUSION: Iodine perfusion tended to be visually and quantitatively preserved
in lungs with nonocclusive PE. Lung PBV is required to evaluate pulmonary blood
flow.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25261886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Ann Clin Biochem. 2015 May;52(Pt 3):327-36. doi: 10.1177/0004563214553808. Epub
2014 Sep 15.

Polyclonal versus monoclonal immunoglobulin-free light chains quantification.

Di Noto G(1), Cimpoies E(1), Dossi A(1), Paolini L(1), Radeghieri A(1), Caimi
L(1), Ricotta D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Brescia, Italy. (2)Department of Molecular and Translational
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Brescia, Italy
doris.ricotta@unibs.it.

BACKGROUND: The clinical usefulness of the serum-free light chain assays has
expanded since their first description, and further applications other than
plasma cell dyscrasia are emerging. Currently, we have the ability to perform the
measurements with two certified methods: the Freelite assay (The Binding Site
Ltd, Birmingham, UK) and the new N Latex free-light chain assay (Siemens,
Germany). In the present study, we investigated the impact of free light chain
concentrations and structures on their quantification, performed with both tests.
METHODS: A total of 524 serum samples from 497 patients from our routine
laboratory were analysed with the Freelite and the N Latex free light chain
assay. The results were compared in two subgroups: with or without monoclonal
component. Twenty-four samples were subsequently investigated for the presence of
dimeric and monomeric free light chain with sodium dodecyl sulphate
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and densitometric quantification.
RESULTS: Methods comparison showed that the Pearson rank correlation coefficients
were 0.90 for polyclonal k and 0.91 for polyclonal <U+03BB> free light chain. Conversely
for monoclonal immunoglobulins, the Pearson rank correlation coefficient was
lower with 0.82 for kM >500 mg/L and 0.56 for <U+03BB>M >500 mg/L. Furthermore,
densitometric quantification of the involved monoclonal free light chains showed 
that both assays do not reflect the Coomassie-stained protein mass.
CONCLUSION: Samples containing high amounts of a single pathologic free light
chain may not be considered like a sample containing a sum of different
polyclonal free light chains. Indeed, free light chain dimerization leads to
different scatter efficiency of macromolecular complexes.

© The Author(s) 2015 Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav.

PMID: 25225181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Int J Pharm. 2014 Nov 20;475(1-2):613-23. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2014.09.019.
Epub 2014 Sep 16.

Development and characterization of co-loaded curcumin/triazole-halloysite
systems and evaluation of their potential anticancer activity.

Riela S(1), Massaro M(2), Colletti CG(2), Bommarito A(3), Giordano C(3), Milioto 
S(4), Noto R(2), Poma P(5), Lazzara G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento STEBICEF, sez. Chimica, Università degli Studi di Palermo, Viale 
delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, Ed. 17, 90128 Palermo, Italy. Electronic
address: serena.riela@unipa.it. (2)Dipartimento STEBICEF, sez. Chimica,
Università degli Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, Ed.
17, 90128 Palermo, Italy. (3)Dipartimento Biomedico di Medicina Interna e
Specialistica, sez. Endocrinologia, Diabetologia, Metabolismo, Università degli
Studi di Palermo, 90127 Palermo, Italy. (4)Dipartimento di Fisica e Chimica,
Università degli Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, Ed.
17, 90128 Palermo, Italy. (5)Dipartimento di Scienze per la Promozione della
Salute e Materno Infantile "G. D'Alessandro", Area Funzionale di Farmacologia,
Università di Palermo, Via del Vespro 129, 90127 Palermo, Italy. (6)Dipartimento 
di Fisica e Chimica, Università degli Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze,
Parco d'Orleans II, Ed. 17, 90128 Palermo, Italy. Electronic address:
giuseppe.lazzara@unipa.it.

Positively charged halloysite nanotubes functionalized with triazolium salts
(f-HNT) were employed as a carrier for curcumin molecules delivery. The synthesis
of these f-HNT new materials is described. Their interaction with curcumin was
evaluated by means dynamic light scattering (DLS) and UV-vis spectroscopy in
comparison with pristine unmodified HNT (p-HNT). The curcumin load into HNT was
estimated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) measurements, while the morphology 
was investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) techniques. Release of
curcumin from f-HNT, at three different pH values, by means of UV-vis
spectroscopy was also studied. Furthermore, different cancer cell lines were used
to evaluate the potential cytotoxic effect of HNT at different concentrations and
culture times. The results indicated that the f-HNT drug carrier system improves 
the solubility of curcumin in water, and that the drug-loaded f-HNT exerted
cytotoxic effects against different cell lines.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25223492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Mol Cancer. 2014 Sep 12;13:213. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-213.

ABCG2, a novel antigen to sort luminal progenitors of BRCA1- breast cancer cells.

Leccia F(1), Del Vecchio L, Mariotti E, Di Noto R, Morel AP, Puisieux A,
Salvatore F, Ansieau S.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate, via Gaetano Salvatore 486, 80145 Naples, Italy.
felicia.leccia@univ-bpclermont.fr.

INTRODUCTION: Tumor-initiating cells (TICs), aka "cancer stem cells", are
believed to fuel tumors and to sustain therapy resistance and systemic
metastasis. Breast cancer is the first human carcinoma in which a subpopulation
of cells displaying a specific CD44+/CD24-/low/ESA+ antigenic phenotype was found
to have TIC properties. However, CD44+/CD24-/low/ESA+ is not a universal marker
phenotype of TICs in all breast cancer subtypes. The aim of this study was to
identify novel antigens with which to isolate the TIC population of the
basal-A/basal-like breast cancer cell lines.
METHODS: We used polychromatic flow-cytometry to characterize the cell surface of
several breast cancer cell lines that may represent different tumor molecular
subtypes. We next used fluorescence-activated cell sorting to isolate the cell
subpopulations of interest from the cell lines. Finally, we explored the
stem-like and tumorigenic properties of the sorted cell subpopulations using
complementary in vitro and in vivo approaches: mammosphere formation assays,
soft-agar colony assays, and tumorigenic assays in NOD/SCID mice.
RESULTS: The CD44+/CD24+ subpopulation of the BRCA1-mutated basal-A/basal-like
cell line HCC1937 is enriched in several stemness markers, including the ABCG2
transporter (i.e., the CD338 antigen). Consistently, CD338-expressing cells were 
also enriched in CD24 expression, suggesting that coexpression of these two
antigenic markers may segregate TICs in this cell line. In support of ABCG2
expression in TICs, culturing of HCC1937 cells in ultra-low adherent conditions
to enrich them in precursor/stem-cells resulted in an increase in
CD338-expressing cells. Furthermore, CD338-expressing cells, unlike their
CD338-negative counterparts, displayed stemness and transformation potential, as 
assessed in mammosphere and colony formation assays. Lastly, CD338-expressing
cells cultured in ultra-low adherent conditions maintained the expression of
CD326/EpCAM and CD49f/a6-integrin, which is a combination of antigens previously 
assigned to luminal progenitors.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, our data suggest that CD338 expression is specific to
the tumor-initiating luminal progenitor subpopulation of BRCA1-mutated cells and 
is a novel antigen with which to sort this subpopulation.

PMCID: PMC4176869
PMID: 25216750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Ultrason Sonochem. 2015 Mar;23:317-23. doi: 10.1016/j.ultsonch.2014.08.003. Epub 
2014 Aug 27.

The ultrasounds-ionic liquids synergy on the copper catalyzed azide-alkyne
cycloaddition between phenylacetylene and 4-azidoquinoline.

Marullo S(1), D'Anna F(2), Rizzo C(3), Noto R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento STEBICEF, Sezione di Chimica, Viale delle Scienze-Parco d'Orleans
II, 90128 Palermo, Italy. Electronic address: salvatore.marullo@unipa.it.
(2)Dipartimento STEBICEF, Sezione di Chimica, Viale delle Scienze-Parco d'Orleans
II, 90128 Palermo, Italy. Electronic address: francesca.danna@unipa.it.
(3)Dipartimento STEBICEF, Sezione di Chimica, Viale delle Scienze-Parco d'Orleans
II, 90128 Palermo, Italy.

The effect of ultrasound irradiation on the copper catalyzed azide-alkyne
cycloaddition between phenylacetylene and 4-azidoquinoline has been studied in
solution of different ionic liquids. In particular, we used ionic liquids
featuring both aliphatic and aromatic mono- and dications, as well as anions
differing in size, symmetry and coordination ability. We also examined the
influence of the ionic liquids structural features on the reaction outcomes,
finding that under magnetic stirring reactivity is favorably affected by the
solvent structural organization, while under sonochemical conditions an opposite 
trend was observed. In all cases examined, sonochemical activation leads to
significant reduction in energy consumption as compared to the reaction conducted
under magnetic stirring.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25199443  [PubMed]


214. Acta Diabetol. 2015 Apr;52(2):307-14. doi: 10.1007/s00592-014-0640-9. Epub 2014
Sep 7.

Prediction of 90-day mortality in patients without diabetes by severe
hypoglycemia: blood glucose level as a novel marker of severity of underlying
disease.

Tsujimoto T(1), Yamamoto-Honda R, Kajio H, Kishimoto M, Noto H, Hachiya R, Kimura
A, Kakei M, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, National Center for
Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

AIM: The present study examined the clinical conditions and predictors of death
in non-diabetic patients with pre-hospital severe hypoglycemia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: From January 2006 to March 2012, we retrospectively
reviewed the medical records to assess the patients with pre-hospital severe
hypoglycemia at a national center in Japan. Severe hypoglycemia was defined as
the presence of any hypoglycemic symptoms requiring the medical assistance of
another person. The patients were followed up for 90 days after the severe
hypoglycemia episode.
RESULTS: A total of 59,602 consecutive cases that visited the emergency room were
screened, and 530 patients with severe hypoglycemia were included in the
subsequent analysis. The mean blood glucose levels in the non-diabetes (non-DM, n
= 163) and diabetes (DM, n = 367) groups were 42.9 and 33.7 mg/dL, respectively. 
The incidence of extremely abnormal QT prolongation (corrected QT interval =0.50 
s) was high in both groups [22.1 vs. 14.7 % (P = 0.11)]. Mortalities within 90
days after severe hypoglycemia were significantly higher in the non-DM group than
in the DM group [20.3 vs. 1.6 % (P < 0.001)]. In addition to patient age,
preexisting advanced liver disease and cancer, and the coexistence of sepsis, a
blood glucose level of <40 mg/dL was identified as a strong predictor of death in
the non-DM group using multivariate Cox proportional hazards models (hazard ratio
3.75; 95 % confidence interval 1.52-9.27; P = 0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: Death in non-diabetic patients with severe hypoglycemia was
independently associated not only with age, advanced liver disease, cancer, and
sepsis, but also with the blood glucose level upon arrival.

PMCID: PMC4374114
PMID: 25192953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Org Chem. 2014 Sep 19;79(18):8678-83. doi: 10.1021/jo501451t. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

Task specific dicationic ionic liquids: recyclable reaction media for the
mononuclear rearrangement of heterocycles.

Rizzo C(1), D'Anna F, Marullo S, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento STEBICEF, Sezione di Chimica, Università degli Studi di Palermo ,
Viale delle Scienze-Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy.

Nine functionalized dicationic ionic liquids were used to study the base
catalyzed mononuclear rearrangement of (Z)-phenylhydrazone of
3-benzoyl-5-phenyl-1,2,4-oxadiazole into the corresponding triazole at 363 K.
Ionic liquids were characterized by the presence of
1-(1-imidazolylmethyl)-3,5-di[1-(3'-octylimidazolylmethyl)]benzene cation,
bearing on the structure a neutral imidazole unit as basic functionality. Besides
anions generally used for monocationic ionic liquids, such as [Br(-)], [BF4(-)], 
and [NTf2(-)], also dianions having a rigid aromatic spacer such as
1,4-benzenedicarboxylate, 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylate, and 1,5- and
2,6-naphthalenedisulfonate were taken into account. Furthermore, to have
information about the effect deriving from the spacer rigidity also dianions such
as 1,4-butanedicarboxylate and 1,6-hexanedicarboxylate were used. The basic
strength of dicationic ionic liquids was determined using the Hammett indicator
method. Data collected gave evidence that the outcome of the target reaction was 
affected by the nature of interactions operating between cation and anion of the 
ionic liquid used. Quite interestingly, solvent systems used had a good
recyclability. Indeed, in some cases, they were reused for four cycles without
significant loss in yield.

PMID: 25184964  [PubMed]


216. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2014 Nov;16(11):735-41. doi: 10.1089/dia.2014.0034. Epub
2014 Aug 27.

The effectiveness and durability of an early insulin pump therapy in children and
adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus.

Brancato D(1), Fleres M, Aiello V, Saura G, Scorsone A, Ferrara L, Provenzano F, 
Di Noto A, Spano L, Provenzano V.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Reference Center for Diabetology and Insulin Pumps, Department of
Internal Medicine and Diabetology, Hospital of Partinico , Partinico (PA), Italy 
.

BACKGROUND: This study evaluated the predictors of effectiveness and durability
of insulin pump therapy in children and adolescents who have initiated continuous
subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) within 2 years after the diagnosis of type 1
diabetes mellitus (T1DM).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The charts of individuals with T1DM using insulin pumps who
were treated at our center were reviewed, including subjects with age at onset of
<22 years, interval between onset and insulin pump commencement (interval
onset-commencement) of <2 years, use of pumps of >1 year, and use of glucose
sensors for <4 weeks/year. The primary end point was the mean glycosylated
hemoglobin (HbA1c) value (MHbA1c) throughout the follow-up.
RESULTS: From 684 patients treated with insulin pumps, 119 met the inclusion
criteria, and 113 were selected for statistical analysis (60 females; age at
diabetes onset, 8.9±5.6 years [mean±SD]; follow-up, 4.0±1.8 years; range, 1-8
years; baseline HbA1c, 9.3±1.8%). Only the interval onset-commencement was a
linear predictor of the MHbA1c (P=0.01; R(2)=0.089). A significant reduction of
the mean yearly HbA1c from baseline throughout all the follow-up was observed
(P<0.001). Categorizing the sample into four quartiles on the basis of an
increasing interval onset-commencement resulted in levels of MHbA1c significantly
lower in the first and second quartiles in comparison with the fourth quartile
(7.6±0.8% and 7.8±1.0%, respectively, versus 8.5±0.8%; P<0.001 and P=0.004,
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests that early pump commencement in children 
and adolescents with T1DM provides lower and more durable HbA1c values than a
late commencement. It is possible that an early pump commencement could prolong
the honeymoon phase, but we cannot confirm or exclude this hypothesis because the
lack of data about C-peptide levels during the follow-up.

PMCID: PMC4201306
PMID: 25162664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. PLoS Genet. 2014 Aug 21;10(8):e1004489. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004489.
eCollection 2014.

SMA-causing missense mutations in survival motor neuron (Smn) display a wide
range of phenotypes when modeled in Drosophila.

Praveen K(1), Wen Y(2), Gray KM(1), Noto JJ(1), Patlolla AR(3), Van Duyne GD(4), 
Matera AG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America.
(2)Integrative Program for Biological and Genome Sciences, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina, United States of America. (4)Department of Biochemistry &
Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (5)Curriculum in Genetics
and Molecular Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina, United States of America; Integrative Program for Biological and 
Genome Sciences, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, United States of America; Department of Biology, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America;
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America.

Mutations in the human survival motor neuron 1 (SMN) gene are the primary cause
of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), a devastating neuromuscular disorder. SMN
protein has a well-characterized role in the biogenesis of small nuclear
ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), core components of the spliceosome. Additional
tissue-specific and global functions have been ascribed to SMN; however, their
relevance to SMA pathology is poorly understood and controversial. Using
Drosophila as a model system, we created an allelic series of twelve Smn missense
mutations, originally identified in human SMA patients. We show that animals
expressing these SMA-causing mutations display a broad range of phenotypic
severities, similar to the human disease. Furthermore, specific interactions with
other proteins known to be important for SMN's role in RNP assembly are
conserved. Intragenic complementation analyses revealed that the three most
severe mutations, all of which map to the YG box self-oligomerization domain of
SMN, display a stronger phenotype than the null allele and behave in a dominant
fashion. In support of this finding, the severe YG box mutants are defective in
self-interaction assays, yet maintain their ability to heterodimerize with
wild-type SMN. When expressed at high levels, wild-type SMN is able to suppress
the activity of the mutant protein. These results suggest that certain SMN
mutants can sequester the wild-type protein into inactive complexes. Molecular
modeling of the SMN YG box dimer provides a structural basis for this dominant
phenotype. These data demonstrate that important structural and functional
features of the SMN YG box are conserved between vertebrates and invertebrates,
emphasizing the importance of self-interaction to the proper functioning of SMN.

PMCID: PMC4140637
PMID: 25144193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Gut. 2015 May;64(5):720-30. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-307650. Epub 2014 Aug 14.

Helicobacter pylori targets cancer-associated apical-junctional constituents in
gastroids and gastric epithelial cells.

Wroblewski LE(1), Piazuelo MB(1), Chaturvedi R(1), Schumacher M(2), Aihara E(2), 
Feng R(2), Noto JM(1), Delgado A(1), Israel DA(1), Zavros Y(2), Montrose MH(2),
Shroyer N(3), Correa P(1), Wilson KT(1), Peek RM Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Departments of Medicine and Cancer Biology,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. (3)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and
Nutrition, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Helicobacter pylori strains that express the oncoprotein CagA augment 
risk for gastric cancer. However, the precise mechanisms through which cag(+)
strains heighten cancer risk have not been fully delineated and model systems
that recapitulate the gastric niche are critical for understanding pathogenesis. 
Gastroids are three-dimensional organ-like structures that provide unique
opportunities to study host-H. pylori interactions in a preclinical model. We
used gastroids to inform and direct in vitro studies to define mechanisms through
which H. pylori modulates expression of the cancer-associated tight junction
protein claudin-7.
DESIGN: Gastroids were infected by luminal microinjection, and MKN28 gastric
epithelial cells were cocultured with H. pylori wild-type cag(+) strains or
isogenic mutants. ß-catenin, claudin-7 and snail localisation was determined by
immunocytochemistry. Proliferation was assessed using 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine, 
and levels of claudin-7 and snail were determined by western blot and flow
cytometry.
RESULTS: Gastroids developed into a self-organising differentiation axis and H.
pylori induced mislocalisation of claudin-7 and increased proliferation in a
CagA- and ß-catenin-dependent manner. In MKN28 cells, H pylori-induced
suppression of claudin-7 was regulated by ß-catenin and snail. Similarly, snail
expression was increased and claudin-7 levels were decreased among H.
pylori-infected individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: H. pylori increase proliferation in a strain-specific manner in a
novel gastroid system. H. pylori also alter expression and localisation of
claudin-7 in gastroids and human epithelial cells, which is mediated by ß-catenin
and snail activation. These data provide new insights into molecular interactions
with carcinogenic potential that occur between H. pylori and epithelial cells
within the gastric niche.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4329117
PMID: 25123931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015 Apr;86(4):378-84. doi:
10.1136/jnnp-2014-308211. Epub 2014 Aug 4.

Nerve ultrasound depicts peripheral nerve enlargement in patients with
genetically distinct Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

Noto Y(1), Shiga K(2), Tsuji Y(1), Mizuta I(1), Higuchi Y(3), Hashiguchi A(3),
Takashima H(3), Nakagawa M(4), Mizuno T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Department of Medical Education and
Primary Care, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (3)Department of Neurology and Geriatrics, Kagoshima
University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima, Japan.
(4)North Medical Center, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

Comment in
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015 Apr;86(4):362.

OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the ultrasound (US) features of peripheral nerves
including nerve roots in patients with different types of Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease (CMT), and the association between US findings, clinical features and
parameters of nerve conduction studies (NCS) in CMT1A.
METHODS: US of median, sural and great auricular nerves and the C6 nerve root was
performed in patients with CMT1A (n=20), MPZ-associated CMT (n=3),
NEFL-associated CMT (n=4), EGR2-associated CMT (n=1), ARHGEF10-associated CMT
(n=1) and in controls (n=30). In patients with CMT1A, we analysed the
correlations between US findings and the following parameters: age, CMT
Neuropathy Score (CMTNS) and NCS indices of the median nerve.
RESULTS: Cross-sectional areas (CSAs) of all the nerves were significantly
increased in patients with CMT1A compared with that in controls. In
MPZ-associated CMT, increased CSAs were found in the median nerve at wrist and in
the great auricular nerve, whereas it was not increased in patients with
NEFL-associated CMT. In patients with CMT1A, there was a positive correlation
between CMTNS and the CSAs in the median nerves or great auricular nerves. In
median nerves in patients with CMT1A, we found a negative correlation between the
nerve conduction velocity and the CSA.
CONCLUSIONS: Nerve US may aid in differentiating among the subtypes of CMT in
combination with NCS. In CMT1A, the median nerve CSA correlates with the disease 
severity and peripheral nerve function.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25091364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Gut. 2015 Jul;64(7):1040-8. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-307295. Epub 2014 Jul 30.

Bacterial CagA protein induces degradation of p53 protein in a p14ARF-dependent
manner.

Wei J(1), Noto JM(2), Zaika E(1), Romero-Gallo J(2), Piazuelo MB(2), Schneider
B(2), El-Rifai W(3), Correa P(2), Peek RM(4), Zaika AI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center and
Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (2)Division of
Gastroenterology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center and Vanderbilt-Ingram
Cancer Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (3)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center and Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
and Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (4)Division of
Gastroenterology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center and Vanderbilt-Ingram
Cancer Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center and Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Infection with Helicobacter pylori is the strongest known risk factor 
for adenocarcinoma of the stomach. Tumorigenic transformation of gastric
epithelium induced by H. pylori is a highly complex process driven by an active
interplay between bacterial virulence and host factors, many aspects of which
remain obscure. In this work, we investigated the degradation of p53 tumour
suppressor induced by H. pylori.
DESIGN: Expression of p53 protein in gastric biopsies was assessed by
immunohistochemistry. Gastric cells were co-cultured with H. pylori strains
isolated from high-gastric risk and low-gastric risk areas and assessed for
expression of p53, p14ARF and cytotoxin-associated gene A (CagA) by
immunoblotting. siRNA was used to inhibit activities of ARF-BP1 and Human Double 
Minute 2 (HDM2) proteins.
RESULTS: Our analysis demonstrated that H. pylori strains expressing high levels 
of CagA virulence factor and associated with a higher gastric cancer risk more
strongly suppress p53 compared with low-risk strains in vivo and in vitro. We
found that degradation of p53 induced by bacterial CagA protein is mediated by
host HDM2 and ARF-BP1 E3 ubiquitin ligases, while the p14ARF protein counteracts 
H. pylori-induced signalling.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide novel evidence that tumorigenicity associated
with H. pylori infection is linked to inhibition of p53 protein by CagA. We
propose a model in which CagA-induced degradation of p53 protein is determined by
a relative level of p14ARF. In cells in which p14ARF levels were decreased due to
hypermethylation or deletion of the p14ARF gene, H. pylori efficiently degraded
p53, whereas p53 is protected in cells expressing high levels of p14ARF.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4312278
PMID: 25080447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Nat Commun. 2014 Jul 28;5:4538. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5538.

A moiré deflectometer for antimatter.

Aghion S(1), Ahlén O(2), Amsler C(3), Ariga A(3), Ariga T(3), Belov AS(4),
Berggren K(2), Bonomi G(5), Bräunig P(6), Bremer J(2), Brusa RS(7), Cabaret L(8),
Canali C(9), Caravita R(10), Castelli F(10), Cerchiari G(11), Cialdi S(10),
Comparat D(8), Consolati G(1), Derking H(2), Di Domizio S(12), Di Noto L(7),
Doser M(2), Dudarev A(2), Ereditato A(3), Ferragut R(1), Fontana A(13), Genova
P(13), Giammarchi M(14), Gligorova A(15), Gninenko SN(4), Haider S(2), Huse
T(16), Jordan E(11), Jørgensen LV(2), Kaltenbacher T(2), Kawada J(3), Kellerbauer
A(11), Kimura M(3), Knecht A(2), Krasnický D(17), Lagomarsino V(18), Lehner
S(19), Magnani A(20), Malbrunot C(21), Mariazzi S(22), Matveev VA(23), Moia F(1),
Nebbia G(24), Nédélec P(25), Oberthaler MK(6), Pacifico N(15), Petràcek V(26),
Pistillo C(3), Prelz F(14), Prevedelli M(27), Regenfus C(9), Riccardi C(20),
Røhne O(16), Rotondi A(20), Sandaker H(15), Scampoli P(28), Storey J(3), Vasquez 
MA(5), pacek M(26), Testera G(12), Vaccarone R(12), Widmann E(19), Zavatarelli
S(12), Zmeskal J(19).

Author information: 
(1)1] Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, 20133 Milan, Italy [2] 
Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sez. di Milano, Via Celoria 16, 20133
Milan, Italy. (2)Physics Department, European Organisation for Nuclear Research, 
1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland. (3)Laboratory for High Energy Physics, Albert
Einstein Center for Fundamental Physics, University of Bern, 3012 Bern,
Switzerland. (4)Institute for Nuclear Research of the Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow 117312, Russia. (5)1] Department of Mechanical and Industrial
Engineering, University of Brescia, Via Branze 38, 25133 Brescia, Italy [2]
Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sez. di Pavia, Via Agostino Bassi 6, 27100
Pavia, Italy. (6)Kirchhoff Institute for Physics, Heidelberg University, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 227, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (7)Department of Physics,
University of Trento and TIFPA-INFN, Via Sommarive 14, 38123 Povo, Trento, Italy.
(8)Laboratoire Aimé Cotton, CNRS, University of Paris-Sud, ENS Cachan, Bâtiment
505, Campus d'Orsay, 91405 Orsay, France. (9)Physics Institute, University of
Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland. (10)1] Istituto
Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sez. di Milano, Via Celoria 16, 20133 Milan, Italy 
[2] Department of Physics, University of Milan, Via Celoria 16, 20133 Milan,
Italy. (11)Max Planck Institute for Nuclear Physics, Saupfercheckweg 1, 69117
Heidelberg, Germany. (12)Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sez. di Genova,
Via Dodecaneso 33, 16146 Genoa, Italy. (13)Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare,
Sez. di Pavia, Via Agostino Bassi 6, 27100 Pavia, Italy. (14)Istituto Nazionale
di Fisica Nucleare, Sez. di Milano, Via Celoria 16, 20133 Milan, Italy.
(15)Institute of Physics and Technology, University of Bergen, Allégaten 55, 5007
Bergen, Norway. (16)Department of Physics, University of Oslo, Sem Sælandsvei 24,
0371 Oslo, Norway. (17)1] Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32,
20133 Milan, Italy [2] Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sez. di Genova, Via
Dodecaneso 33, 16146 Genoa, Italy. (18)1] Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, 
Sez. di Genova, Via Dodecaneso 33, 16146 Genoa, Italy [2] Department of Physics, 
University of Genoa, Via Dodecaneso 33, 16146 Genoa, Italy. (19)Stefan Meyer
Institute for Subatomic Physics, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Boltzmanngasse 3, 
1090 Vienna, Austria. (20)1] Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sez. di
Pavia, Via Agostino Bassi 6, 27100 Pavia, Italy [2] Department of Physics,
University of Pavia, Via Bassi 6, 27100 Pavia, Italy. (21)1] Physics Department, 
European Organisation for Nuclear Research, 1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland [2]
Stefan Meyer Institute for Subatomic Physics, Austrian Academy of Sciences,
Boltzmanngasse 3, 1090 Vienna, Austria. (22)1] Department of Physics, University 
of Trento and TIFPA-INFN, Via Sommarive 14, 38123 Povo, Trento, Italy [2] Stefan 
Meyer Institute for Subatomic Physics, Austrian Academy of Sciences,
Boltzmanngasse 3, 1090 Vienna, Austria. (23)1] Institute for Nuclear Research of 
the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow 117312, Russia [2] Joint Institute for
Nuclear Research, Dubna 141980, Russia. (24)Istituto Nazionale di Fisica
Nucleare, Sez. di Padova, Via Marzolo 8, 35131 Padua, Italy. (25)Institute of
Nuclear Physics of Lyon, CNRS/IN2P3, University Lyon 1, 69622 Villeurbanne,
France. (26)Czech Technical University in Prague, FNSPE, Brehová 7, 11519 Prague 
1, Czech Republic. (27)Department of Physics and INFN Bologna, University of
Bologna, Via Irnerio 46, 40126 Bologna, Italy. (28)1] Laboratory for High Energy 
Physics, Albert Einstein Center for Fundamental Physics, University of Bern, 3012
Bern, Switzerland [2] Department of Physics, University of Napoli Federico II,
Via Cinthia, 80126 Naples, Italy.

The precise measurement of forces is one way to obtain deep insight into the
fundamental interactions present in nature. In the context of neutral antimatter,
the gravitational interaction is of high interest, potentially revealing new
forces that violate the weak equivalence principle. Here we report on a
successful extension of a tool from atom optics--the moiré deflectometer--for a
measurement of the acceleration of slow antiprotons. The setup consists of two
identical transmission gratings and a spatially resolving emulsion detector for
antiproton annihilations. Absolute referencing of the observed antimatter pattern
with a photon pattern experiencing no deflection allows the direct inference of
forces present. The concept is also straightforwardly applicable to antihydrogen 
measurements as pursued by the AEgIS collaboration. The combination of these very
different techniques from high energy and atomic physics opens a very promising
route to the direct detection of the gravitational acceleration of neutral
antimatter.

PMCID: PMC4124857
PMID: 25066810  [PubMed]


222. Phys Rev Lett. 2014 Jul 11;113(2):023601. Epub 2014 Jul 7.

Optomechanical Rydberg-atom excitation via dynamic Casimir-Polder coupling.

Antezza M(1), Braggio C(2), Carugno G(2), Noto A(3), Passante R(4), Rizzuto L(4),
Ruoso G(5), Spagnolo S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Université Montpellier 2, Laboratoire Charles Coulomb UMR 5221, F-34095
Montpellier, France and CNRS, Laboratoire Charles Coulomb UMR 5221, F-34095
Montpellier, France and Institut Universitaire de France - 103, bd Saint-Michel, 
F-75005 Paris, France. (2)Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Universitá degli
Studi di Padova, Via Francesco Marzolo 8, I-35131 Padova, Italy and INFN, Sezione
di Padova, Via Francesco Marzolo 8, I-35131 Padova, Italy. (3)Université
Montpellier 2, Laboratoire Charles Coulomb UMR 5221, F-34095 Montpellier, France 
and CNRS, Laboratoire Charles Coulomb UMR 5221, F-34095 Montpellier, France and
Dipartimento di Fisica e Chimica, Universitá degli Studi di Palermo and CNISM,
Via Archirafi 36, I-90123 Palermo, Italy. (4)Dipartimento di Fisica e Chimica,
Universitá degli Studi di Palermo and CNISM, Via Archirafi 36, I-90123 Palermo,
Italy. (5)INFN, Laboratori Nazionali di Legnaro, Viale dell'Universitá 2, I-35020
Legnaro (PD), Italy.

We study the optomechanical coupling of a oscillating effective mirror with a
Rydberg atomic gas, mediated by the dynamical atom-mirror Casimir-Polder force.
This coupling may produce a near-field resonant atomic excitation whose
probability scales as <U+221D>(d(2)an(4)t)(2)/z(0)(8), where z(0) is the average
atom-surface distance, d the atomic dipole moment, a the mirror's effective
oscillation amplitude, n the initial principal quantum number, and t the time. We
propose an experimental configuration to realize this system with a cold atom gas
trapped at a distance ~2×10<U+2009><U+2009>µm from a semiconductor substrate whose dielectric
constant is periodically driven by an external laser pulse, hence realizing an
effective mechanical mirror motion due to the periodic change of the substrate
from transparent to reflecting. For a parabolic gas shape, this effect is
predicted to excite about ~10(2) atoms of a dilute gas of 10(3) trapped Rydberg
atoms with n=75 after about 0.5<U+2009><U+2009>µs, which is high enough to be detected in
typical Rydberg gas experimental conditions.

PMID: 25062178  [PubMed]


223. Phys Rev Lett. 2014 Jul 11;113(2):020403. Epub 2014 Jul 8.

Thermal and nonthermal signatures of the Unruh effect in Casimir-Polder forces.

Marino J(1), Noto A(2), Passante R(3).

Author information: 
(1)SISSA-International School for Advanced Studies and INFN, Via Bonomea 265,
34136 Trieste, Italy and Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of
Innsbruck, Technikerstrasse 21a, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria. (2)Dipartimento di
Fisica e Chimica, Universitá degli Studi di Palermo and CNISM, Via Archirafi 36, 
I-90123 Palermo, Italy and Université Montpellier 2, Laboratoire Charles Coulomb 
UMR 5221-F-34095, Montpellier, France. (3)Dipartimento di Fisica e Chimica,
Universitá degli Studi di Palermo and CNISM, Via Archirafi 36, I-90123 Palermo,
Italy.

We show that Casimir-Polder forces between two relativistic uniformly accelerated
atoms exhibit a transition from the short distance thermal-like behavior
predicted by the Unruh effect to a long distance nonthermal behavior, associated 
with the breakdown of a local inertial description of the system. This
phenomenology extends the Unruh thermal response detected by a single accelerated
observer to an accelerated spatially extended system of two particles, and we
identify the characteristic length scale for this crossover with the inverse of
the proper acceleration of the two atoms. Our results are derived separating at
fourth order in perturbation theory the contributions of vacuum fluctuations and 
radiation reaction field to the Casimir-Polder interaction between two atoms
moving in two generic stationary trajectories separated by a constant distance
and linearly coupled to a scalar field. The field can be assumed in its vacuum
state or at finite temperature, resulting in a general method for the computation
of Casimir-Polder forces in stationary regimes.

PMID: 25062144  [PubMed]


224. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2014 Oct-Dec;36(4):336-9. doi: 10.1590/1516-4446-2013-1330.
Epub 2014 Jul 16.

Factor structure of the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) in Brazil:
convergent validation of the Brazilian version.

Higuchi CH(1), Ortiz B(1), Berberian AA(1), Noto C(1), Cordeiro Q(2), Belangero
SI(1), Pitta JC(3), Gadelha A(1), Bressan RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Laboratory in Clinical Neuroscience (LiNC), Department of
Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Center for Integrated Mental Health, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da Santa
Casa de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (3)Department of Psychiatry, UNIFESP,
São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: The Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) was developed to
assess the symptoms of schizophrenia dimensionally. Although it is widely used in
clinical trials in Brazil, it is not fully validated. The aim of this study is to
assess the factor structure of the Brazilian PANSS and generate validation data
for its current version.
METHODS: A total of 292 patients diagnosed with schizophrenia were enrolled.
RESULTS: Principal component analysis suggested a forced five-factor final model 
that accounted for 58.44% of the total variance, composed of negative,
disorganization/cognition, excitement, positive, and depression/anxiety.
CONCLUSION: The Brazilian PANSS has a similar factor structure and internal
consistency compared to versions in several other languages.

PMID: 25028780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:602526. doi: 10.1155/2014/602526. Epub 2014 Jun 11.

Emerging biomarkers and metabolomics for assessing toxic nephropathy and acute
kidney injury (AKI) in neonatology.

Mussap M(1), Noto A(2), Fanos V(2), Van Den Anker JN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, IRCCS San Martino-IST, University Hospital,
National Institute for Cancer Research, Largo Rosanna Benzi 10, 16132 Genoa,
Italy. (2)Department of Pediatrics and Clinical Medicine, Section of Neonatal
Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section, Azienda Mista
and University of Cagliari, 09042 Cagliari, Italy. (3)Division of Pediatric
Clinical Pharmacology, Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC 20010, 
USA.

Identification of novel drug-induced toxic nephropathy and acute kidney injury
(AKI) biomarkers has been designated as a top priority by the American Society of
Nephrology. Increasing knowledge in the science of biology and medicine is
leading to the discovery of still more new biomarkers and of their roles in
molecular pathways triggered by physiological and pathological conditions.
Concomitantly, the development of the so-called "omics" allows the progressive
clinical utilization of a multitude of information, from those related to the
human genome (genomics) and proteome (proteomics), including the emerging
epigenomics, to those related to metabolites (metabolomics). In preterm newborns,
one of the most important factors causing the pathogenesis and the progression of
AKI is the interaction between the individual genetic code, the environment, the 
gestational age, and the disease. By analyzing a small urine sample, metabolomics
allows to identify instantly any change in phenotype, including changes due to
genetic modifications. The role of liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry
(LC-MS), proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR), and other emerging
technologies is strategic, contributing basically to the sudden development of
new biochemical and molecular tests. Urine neutrophil gelatinase-associated
lipocalin (uNGAL) and kidney injury molecule-1 (KIM-1) are closely correlated
with the severity of kidney injury, representing noninvasive sensitive surrogate 
biomarkers for diagnosing, monitoring, and quantifying kidney damage. To become
routine tests, uNGAL and KIM-1 should be carefully tested in multicenter clinical
trials and should be measured in biological fluids by robust, standardized
analytical methods.

PMCID: PMC4071811
PMID: 25013791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. BMC Endocr Disord. 2014 Jul 10;14:56. doi: 10.1186/1472-6823-14-56.

Need and disparities in primary care management of patients with diabetes.

Buja A(1), Gini R, Visca M, Damiani G, Federico B, Donato D, Francesconi P,
Marini A, Donatini A, Brugaletta S, Bardelle G, Baldo V, Bellentani M; Valore
Project.

Collaborators: Brambilla A, Correani M, Cosentino N, Cricelli C, Fulvi S, Gallina
P, Mazzaglia G, Noto G, Palumbo F, Pasqua A, Romeo D, Rubin R, Sforza S,
Silvestrini G, Verdini E, Viola G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine of the University of Padova, Laboratory of
Public Health and Population Studies, Via Loredan, 18, 35100 Padova, Italy.
alessandra.buja@unipd.it.

BACKGROUND: An aging population means that chronic illnesses, such as diabetes,
are becoming more prevalent and demands for care are rising. Members of primary
care teams should organize and coordinate patient care with a view to improving
quality of care and impartial adherence to evidence-based practices for all
patients. The aims of the present study were: to ascertain the prevalence of
diabetes in an Italian population, stratified by age, gender and citizenship; and
to identify the rate of compliance with recommended guidelines for monitoring
diabetes, to see whether disparities exist in the quality of diabetes patient
management.
METHODS: A population-based analysis was performed on a dataset obtained by
processing public health administration databases. The presence of diabetes and
compliance with standards of care were estimated using appropriate algorithms. A 
multilevel logistic regression analysis was applied to assess factors affecting
compliance with standards of care.
RESULTS: 1,948,622 Italians aged 16+ were included in the study. In this
population, 105,987 subjects were identified as having diabetes on January 1st,
2009. The prevalence of diabetes was 5.43% (95% CI 5.33-5.54) overall, 5.87% (95%
CI 5.82-5.92) among males, and 5.05% (95% CI 5.00-5.09) among females. HbA1c
levels had been tested in 60.50% of our diabetic subjects, LDL cholesterol levels
in 57.50%, and creatinine levels in 63.27%, but only 44.19% of the diabetic
individuals had undergone a comprehensive assessment during one year of care.
Statistical differences in diabetes care management emerged relating to gender,
age, diagnostic latency period, comorbidity and citizenship.
CONCLUSIONS: Process management indicators need to be used not only for the
overall assessment of health care processes, but also to monitor disparities in
the provision of health care.

PMCID: PMC4107618
PMID: 25011729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Schizophr Res. 2014 Sep;158(1-3):277-8. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2014.06.008. Epub
2014 Jul 5.

What are the PANSS items most related with global improvements in patients with
schizophrenia? Toward a reduced version of the PANSS.

Ortiz BB(1), Gadelha A(2), Higuchi CH(2), Pitta JC(2), Kagan S(3), Vong MR(3),
Noto C(2), Hallak JE(4), Bressan RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LiNC), Department of
Psychiatry, Federal University of São Paulo. Rua Pedro de Toledo, 669, 3° andar, 
CEP 05039-032 São Paulo, Brazil; Department of Mental Health, Hospital das
Clínicas Luzia de Pinho Melo - SPDM, Mogi das Cruzes. Rua Manoel de Oliveira,
Mogi das Cruzes CEP 08773-130, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Interdisciplinary Laboratory
of Clinical Neurosciences (LiNC), Department of Psychiatry, Federal University of
São Paulo. Rua Pedro de Toledo, 669, 3° andar, CEP 05039-032 São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Department of Mental Health, Hospital das Clínicas Luzia de Pinho Melo - SPDM,
Mogi das Cruzes. Rua Manoel de Oliveira, Mogi das Cruzes CEP 08773-130, São
Paulo, Brazil. (4)Department of Neurosciences and Behavior, Division of
Psychiatry, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo,
Avenida Bandeirantes, 3900, CEP: 14040-040 Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.

PMID: 25008793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. BMC Res Notes. 2014 Jul 8;7:437. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-7-437.

Aneuploidy is permissive for hepatocyte-like cell differentiation from human
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Noto FK, Determan MR, Cai J, Cayo MA, Mallanna SK, Duncan SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, The Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. duncans@mcw.edu.

BACKGROUND: The characterization of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and
embryonic stem cells (ESCs) routinely includes analyses of chromosomal integrity.
The belief is that pluripotent stem cells best suited to the generation of
differentiated derivatives should display a euploid karyotype; although, this
does not appear to have been formally tested. While aneuploidy is commonly
associated with cell transformation, several types of somatic cells, including
hepatocytes, are frequently aneuploid and variation in chromosomal content does
not contribute to a transformed phenotype. This insight has led to the proposal
that dynamic changes in the chromosomal environment may be important to establish
genetic diversity within the hepatocyte population and such diversity may
facilitate an adaptive response by the liver to various insults. Such a positive 
contribution of aneuploidy to liver function raises the possibility that, in
contrast to existing dogma, aneuploid iPSCs may be capable of generating
hepatocyte-like cells that display hepatic activities.
RESULTS: We examined whether a human iPSC line that had multiple chromosomal
aberrations was competent to differentiate into hepatocytes and found that loss
of normal chromosomal content had little impact on the production of
hepatocyte-like cells from iPSCs.
CONCLUSIONS: iPSCs that harbor an abnormal chromosomal content retain the
capacity to generate hepatocyte-like cells with high efficiency.

PMCID: PMC4105394
PMID: 25002137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2014;2014:824756. doi: 10.1155/2014/824756. Epub 2014 Jun
2.

Lipid peroxidation, nitric oxide metabolites, and their ratio in a group of
subjects with metabolic syndrome.

Caimi G(1), Lo Presti R(1), Montana M(1), Noto D(1), Canino B(1), Averna MR(1),
Hopps E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento Biomedico di Medicina Interna e Specialistica, Università di
Palermo, Via del Vespro 129, 90100 Palermo, Italy.

Our aim was to evaluate lipid peroxidation, expressed as thiobarbituric
acid-reactive substances (TBARS), nitric oxide metabolites (nitrite + nitrate)
expressed as NOx, and TBARS/NOx ratio in a group of subjects with metabolic
syndrome (MS). In this regard we enrolled 106 subjects with MS defined according 
to the IDF criteria, subsequently subdivided into diabetic (DMS) and nondiabetic 
(NDMS) and also into subjects with a low triglycerides/HDL-cholesterol (TG/HDL-C)
index or with a high TG/HDL-C index. In the entire group and in the four
subgroups of MS subjects we found an increase in TBARS and NOx levels and a
decrease in TBARS/NOx ratio in comparison with normal controls. Regarding all
these parameters no statistical difference between DMS and NDMS was evident, but 
a significant increase in NOx was present in subjects with a high TG/HDL-C index 
in comparison with those with a low index. In MS subjects we also found a
negative correlation between TBARS/NO x ratio and TG/HDL-C index. Considering the
hyperactivity of the inducible NO synthase in MS, these data confirm the altered 
redox and inflammatory status that characterizes the MS and suggest a link
between lipid peroxidation, inflammation, and insulin resistance, evaluated as
TG/HDL-C index.

PMCID: PMC4060162
PMID: 24987495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Int J Urol. 2014 Nov;21(11):1162-6. doi: 10.1111/iju.12533. Epub 2014 Jun 25.

Effect of carbazochrome sodium sulfonate on refractory chronic prostatitis.

Oh-oka H(1), Yamada T, Noto H, Umeyama T, Kadekawa K, Ashitomi K, Nishijima S,
Sugaya K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, National Hospital Organization, Kobe Medical Center,
Kobe, Hyogo.

OBJECTIVES: To study the effect of carbazochrome sodium sulfonate, an agent that 
reduces capillary permeability, on refractory chronic prostatitis.
METHODS: Patients with prostatitis refractory to at least 8 weeks of routine
therapy and with urinalysis positive for microhematuria were considered for the
present study. In addition to their prior therapy, the patients received
carbazochrome at a dose of 30<U+2009>mg three times a day. The severity of pain (score
0-10), daytime and night-time frequency, international prostate symptom score,
global self-assessment, urine occult blood positivity, and adverse events were
assessed after 4 and 8 weeks of treatment, and compared with baseline findings.
RESULTS: A total of 50 patients (mean age 68.6<U+2009>±<U+2009>8.5 years) were evaluable. The
pain score decreased significantly from 3.2<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.1 at baseline to 1.7<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.4 after 
4 weeks of treatment and to 1.1<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.8 after 8 weeks. Daytime and night-time
frequency, storage symptoms, post-micturition symptoms, and urine occult blood
positivity also significantly improved. More than 36% of the patients gave a
global self-assessment rating of "improved" or "better" after both 4 and 8 weeks 
of treatment. Mild adverse events occurred in three patients; one had nausea and 
two developed drug rash.
CONCLUSIONS: Carbazochrome seems to effectively improve pain as well as storage
and post-micturition symptoms in patients with refractory chronic prostatitis.

© 2014 The Japanese Urological Association.

PMID: 24964194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2014;54(5):434-9.

[Normokalemic periodic paralysis lasting for two weeks: a severe form of sodium
channelopathy with M1592V mutation].

[Article in Japanese]

Shiga K(1), Mizuta I, Noto Y, Nakagawa M, Sasaki R, Yamawaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Education, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine.

A 73-year-old man with recurrent periodic paralytic episodes lasting for two
weeks each admitted to our hospital because of the leg weakness and the elevated 
value of serum creatine kinase. On admission, weakness in the proximal legs and
mild eye lid myotonia were noted. Needle electromyography revealed abundant
myotonic discharges. The prolonged exercise test showed a continuous reduction of
compound muscle action potentials in the abductor digiti minimi muscle. Direct
sequencing of SCN4A in the proband showed a G-to-A alteration at position 4774
that results in a change of 1592(nd) methionine to valine (M1592V). Cosegregation
regarding the M1592V mutation and paralytic phenotype in this family was
confirmed. Two cardinal features in this family were longer paralytic episodes
compared to classical hyperkalemic/normokalemic periodic paralysis and the normal
potassium value during the paralytic episodes. This study together with
antecedent reports indicates that M1592V mutation shares a much greater clinical 
diversity ranging from congenital paramyotonia to periodic paralysis with a
longer duration.

PMID: 24943082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Psychiatr Res. 2014 Sep;56:130-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2014.05.012. Epub
2014 Jun 4.

Evaluation of neurotransmitter receptor gene expression identifies GABA receptor 
changes: a follow-up study in antipsychotic-naïve patients with first-episode
psychosis.

Ota VK(1), Noto C(2), Gadelha A(3), Santoro ML(4), Ortiz BB(5), Andrade EH(6),
Tasso BC(7), Spindola LM(8), Silva PN(9), Abílio VC(10), Smith Mde A(11), Sato
JR(12), Brietzke E(13), Cordeiro Q(14), Bressan RA(15), Belangero SI(16).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division, Department of Morphology and Genetics, Universidade Federal
de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua Botucatu, 740, Edifício Leitao da Cunha, 1° andar,
CEP 04023-900, São Paulo, Brazil; LiNC - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua Pedro de Toledo, 
669, 3° andar fundos, CEP 05039-032, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address:
vanessakaota@gmail.com. (2)LiNC - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua Pedro de Toledo, 
669, 3° andar fundos, CEP 05039-032, São Paulo, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry,
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil; Department of
Psychiatry, Irmandade da Santa Casa de Misericórdia de São Paulo (ISCMSP), São
Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: csnoto@gmail.com. (3)LiNC - Interdisciplinary 
Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo
(UNIFESP), Rua Pedro de Toledo, 669, 3° andar fundos, CEP 05039-032, São Paulo,
Brazil; Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP),
São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: aryararipe@yahoo.com.br. (4)Genetics
Division, Department of Morphology and Genetics, Universidade Federal de Sao
Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua Botucatu, 740, Edifício Leitao da Cunha, 1° andar, CEP
04023-900, São Paulo, Brazil; LiNC - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua Pedro de Toledo, 
669, 3° andar fundos, CEP 05039-032, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address:
santorogen@gmail.com. (5)Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de Sao
Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: ortiz_bru@hotmail.com.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), São
Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: ehsa84@gmail.com. (7)Department of Psychiatry,
Irmandade da Santa Casa de Misericórdia de São Paulo (ISCMSP), São Paulo, Brazil.
Electronic address: braztasso@ymail.com. (8)Genetics Division, Department of
Morphology and Genetics, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua
Botucatu, 740, Edifício Leitao da Cunha, 1° andar, CEP 04023-900, São Paulo,
Brazil; LiNC - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences,
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua Pedro de Toledo, 669, 3° andar
fundos, CEP 05039-032, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address:
leticia.n.spindola@gmail.com. (9)Genetics Division, Department of Morphology and 
Genetics, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua Botucatu, 740,
Edifício Leitao da Cunha, 1° andar, CEP 04023-900, São Paulo, Brazil; LiNC -
Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences, Universidade Federal de
Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua Pedro de Toledo, 669, 3° andar fundos, CEP 05039-032,
São Paulo, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo
(UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address:
patriciaoliveira.unifesp@gmail.com. (10)LiNC - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of
Clinical Neurosciences, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua Pedro de
Toledo, 669, 3° andar fundos, CEP 05039-032, São Paulo, Brazil; Department of
Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil;
Department of Pharmacology, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), São
Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: vanabilio@gmail.com. (11)Genetics Division,
Department of Morphology and Genetics, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo
(UNIFESP), Rua Botucatu, 740, Edifício Leitao da Cunha, 1° andar, CEP 04023-900, 
São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: macsmith.morf@epm.br. (12)LiNC -
Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences, Universidade Federal de
Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua Pedro de Toledo, 669, 3° andar fundos, CEP 05039-032,
São Paulo, Brazil; Center of Mathematics, Computation and Cognition, Universidade
Federal do ABC, Santo Andre, Brazil. Electronic address: joao.sato@ufabc.edu.br. 
(13)LiNC - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences, Universidade
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua Pedro de Toledo, 669, 3° andar fundos, CEP
05039-032, São Paulo, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de
Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address:
elisabrietzke@hotmail.com. (14)Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de 
Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry, Irmandade da
Santa Casa de Misericórdia de São Paulo (ISCMSP), São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic
address: qcordeiro@yahoo.com. (15)LiNC - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical
Neurosciences, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua Pedro de Toledo, 
669, 3° andar fundos, CEP 05039-032, São Paulo, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry,
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic
address: rodrigoabressan@gmail.com. (16)Genetics Division, Department of
Morphology and Genetics, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua
Botucatu, 740, Edifício Leitao da Cunha, 1° andar, CEP 04023-900, São Paulo,
Brazil; LiNC - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences,
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua Pedro de Toledo, 669, 3° andar
fundos, CEP 05039-032, São Paulo, Brazil; Department of Psychiatry, Universidade 
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address:
sinbelangero@gmail.com.

A study of the gene expression levels in the blood of individuals with
schizophrenia in the beginning of the disease, such as first-episode psychosis
(FEP), is useful to detect gene expression changes in this disorder in response
to treatment. Although a large number of genetic studies on schizophrenia have
been conducted, little is known about the effects of antipsychotic treatment on
gene expression. The aim of the present study was to examine differences in the
gene expression in the blood of antipsychotic-naïve FEP patients before and after
risperidone treatment (N = 44) and also to verify the correlation with treatment 
response. In addition, we determined the correlations between differentially
expressed genes and clinical variables. The expression of 40 neurotransmitter and
neurodevelopment-associated genes was assessed using the RT2 Profiler PCR Array. 
The results indicated that the GABRR2 gene was downregulated after risperidone
treatment, but no genes were associated with response to treatment and clinical
variables after Bonferroni correction. GABRR2 downregulation after treatment can 
both suggest an effect of risperidone treatment or processes related to disease
progression, either not necessarily associated with the improvement of symptoms. 
Despite this change was observed in blood, this decrease in GABRR2 mRNA levels
might be an effect of changes in GABA concentrations or other systems interplay
consequently to D2 blockage induced by risperidone, for example. Thus, it is
important to consider that antipsychotics or the progression of psychotic
disorders might interfere with gene expression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24935901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 May 29;10(5):e1003578. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003578. 
eCollection 2014.

Finding novel molecular connections between developmental processes and disease.

Park J(1), Wick HC(1), Kee DE(1), Noto K(1), Maron JL(2), Slonim DK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Tufts University, Medford, Massachussetts,
United States of America. (2)Department of Pediatrics, The Floating Hospital for 
Children at Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America. (3)Department of Computer Science, Tufts University, Medford,
Massachussetts, United States of America; Department of Pathology, Tufts
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Identifying molecular connections between developmental processes and disease can
lead to new hypotheses about health risks at all stages of life. Here we
introduce a new approach to identifying significant connections between gene sets
and disease genes, and apply it to several gene sets related to human
development. To overcome the limits of incomplete and imperfect information
linking genes to disease, we pool genes within disease subtrees in the MeSH
taxonomy, and we demonstrate that such pooling improves the power and accuracy of
our approach. Significance is assessed through permutation. We created a
web-based visualization tool to facilitate multi-scale exploration of this large 
collection of significant connections (http://gda.cs.tufts.edu/development).
High-level analysis of the results reveals expected connections between
tissue-specific developmental processes and diseases linked to those tissues, and
widespread connections to developmental disorders and cancers. Yet interesting
new hypotheses may be derived from examining the unexpected connections. We
highlight and discuss the implications of three such connections, linking
dementia with bone development, polycystic ovary syndrome with cardiovascular
development, and retinopathy of prematurity with lung development. Our results
provide additional evidence that TGFB lays a key role in the early pathogenesis
of polycystic ovary syndrome. Our evidence also suggests that the VEGF pathway
and downstream NFKB signaling may explain the complex relationship between
bronchopulmonary dysplasia and retinopathy of prematurity, and may form a bridge 
between two currently-competing hypotheses about the molecular origins of
bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Further data exploration and similar queries about
other gene sets may generate a variety of new information about the molecular
relationships between additional diseases.

PMCID: PMC4038461
PMID: 24874013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Crit Care. 2014 Oct;29(5):808-13. doi: 10.1016/j.jcrc.2014.04.009. Epub 2014
Apr 26.

Drainage of pleural effusion in mechanically ventilated patients: time to measure
chest wall compliance?

Formenti P(1), Umbrello M(2), Piva IR(3), Mistraletti G(4), Zaniboni M(5), Spanu 
P(2), Noto A(2), Marini JJ(6), Iapichino G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unità Operativa di Anestesia e Rianimazione, Azienda Ospedaliera San
Paolo-Polo Universitario, Milano, Italy. Electronic address:
formenti.paolo80@gmail.com. (2)Unità Operativa di Anestesia e Rianimazione,
Azienda Ospedaliera San Paolo-Polo Universitario, Milano, Italy. (3)Dipartimento 
di Fisiopatologia Medico-Chirurgica e dei Trapianti, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Milano, Italy. (4)Unità Operativa di Anestesia e Rianimazione, Azienda
Ospedaliera San Paolo-Polo Universitario, Milano, Italy; Dipartimento di
Fisiopatologia Medico-Chirurgica e dei Trapianti, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Milano, Italy. (5)Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Azienda Ospedaliera
Ospedale Niguarda Ca' Granda, Milano, Italy. (6)Department of Pulmonary and
Critical Care, University of Minnesota, Regions Hospital, St Paul, MN, USA.

PURPOSE: Pleural effusion (PE) is commonly encountered in mechanically
ventilated, critically ill patients and is generally addressed with evacuation or
by fluid displacement using increased airway pressure (P(AW)). However, except
when massive or infected, clear evidence is lacking to guide its management. The 
aim of this study was to investigate the effect of recruitment maneuvers and
drainage of unilateral PE on respiratory mechanics, gas exchange, and lung
volume.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifteen critically ill and mechanically ventilated
patients with unilateral PE were enrolled. A 3-step protocol (baseline,
recruitment, and effusion drainage) was applied to patients with more than 400 mL
of PE, as estimated by chest ultrasound. Predefined subgroup analysis compared
patients with normal vs reduced chest wall compliance (C(CW)). Esophageal and
P(AW)s, respiratory system, lung and C(CW)s, arterial blood gases, and
end-expiratory lung volumes were recorded.
RESULTS: In the whole case mix, neither recruitment nor drainage improved gas
exchange, lung volume, or tidal mechanics. When C(CW) was normal, recruitment
improved lung compliance (81.9 [64.8-104.1] vs 103.7 [91.5-111.7] mL/cm H2O, P < 
.05), whereas drainage had no significant effect on total respiratory system
mechanics or gas exchange, although it measurably increased lung volume (1717 vs 
2150 mL, P < .05). In the setting of reduced C(CW), however, recruitment had no
significant effect on total respiratory system mechanics or gas exchange, whereas
pleural drainage improved respiratory system and C(CW)s as well as lung volume
(42.7 [38.9-50.0] vs 47.0 [43.8-63.3], P < .05 and 97.4 [89.3-97.9] vs 126.7
[92.3-153.8] mL/cm H2O, P < .05 and 1580 vs 1750 mL, P < .05, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Drainage of a moderate-sized effusion should not be routinely
performed in unselected population of critically ill patients. We suggest that
measurement of C(CW) may help in the decision-making process.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24863983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014 Aug 15;737:106-16. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.05.015. Epub 
2014 May 22.

Antiproteinuric effect of pirfenidone in a rat model of anti-glomerular basement 
membrane glomerulonephritis.

Takakura K(1), Mizukami K(2), Mitori H(2), Noto T(2), Tomura Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Research, Astellas Pharma Inc., 21 Miyukigaoka, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305-8585, Japan. Electronic address: koji.takakura@astellas.com. (2)Drug 
Discovery Research, Astellas Pharma Inc., 21 Miyukigaoka, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8585, Japan.

While pirfenidone has been established as an effective anti-fibrosis remedy,
whether or not its antifibrotic effect contributes to a reduction of proteinuria 
remains unclear. We investigated the renoprotective properties of pirfenidone in 
an anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM) glomerulonephritis model both
prophylactically and therapeutically to determine its profile against
proteinuria. In the prophylactic regimen, pirfenidone was treated immediately
after anti-serum injection. We observed a significant reduction in the
progression of proteinuria (P<0.05) and decline in renal function (P<0.01) and
also noted histological improvement in renal injury. These effects appeared to be
due to the maintained expression of nephrin and podocin on podocytes as well as
the reduced expression of profibrotic factors like transforming growth factor-ß
(TGF-ß). The expression of nephrin mRNA was strongly negatively correlated with
the amount of urinary protein excretion (R=-0.84, P<0.001), implicating podocyte 
damage in the outcome of proteinuria (R(2)=0.70). These results suggest that
preservation of podocytes with the pirfenidone treatment may have resulted in the
decrease of proteinuria. In contrast, when the therapeutic regimen was initiated 
2 weeks after nephritis induction, pirfenidone had little effect on the
progression of proteinuria, although the decline of renal function and fibrosis
were suppressed. Taken together, present findings suggested that pirfenidone
prevented the progression of proteinuria only when administered prophylactically 
but was still able to ameliorate the decline of renal function independent of
proteinuria. In conclusion, pirfenidone as a prophylactic regimen reduces
proteinuria in anti-GBM nephritis via preservation of podocytes with markedly
reduced efficacy when administered as a therapeutic regimen.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24858365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2014 May;70(5):445-52.

[Radiation dose evaluation in a photon-counting digital mammography unit].

[Article in Japanese]

Matsubara K(1), Matsumoto C, Mochiya Y, Toda K, Noto K, Koshida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Quantum Medical Technology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Kanazawa
University.

The purpose of our study was to evaluate radiation dose and beam quality in
photon-counting digital mammography (PCDM) and compare them with those in a
full-field digital mammography (FFDM) unit. Dose variation in the X-ray tube axis
direction, aluminum half-value layer, average glandular and skin doses, and
contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) were evaluated for the PCDM and FFDM units. In
PCDM, the dose variation in the X-ray tube axis direction was greater than that
in FFDM. At a tube voltage of 28 kV, the first half-value layers were 0.407 mmAl 
for PCDM, 0.357 mmAl for FFDM with a molybdenum target and molybdenum filter
(Mo/Mo), and 0.579 mmAl for FFDM with a tungsten target and rhodium filter
(W/Rh). The average glandular doses with 45-mm-equivalent breast thickness were
0.723 mGy for the PCDM, 1.55 mGy for the FFDM with Mo/Mo in low-dose mode, and
0.835 mGy for the FFDM with W/Rh in low-dose mode. In PCDM, the skin dose was
equivalent to or lower than that in FFDM. The CNR was 2.65±0.04, 2.35±0.04, and
2.52±0.03 for the PCDM, FFDM with Mo/Mo, and that with W/Rh, respectively. The
CNR for PCDM was significantly higher than that for FFDM (p<0.001). It is
therefore possible to reduce the radiation dose to the patient by using a PCDM
unit while maintaining a significantly higher CNR than with the FFDM unit.

PMID: 24858289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Clin Biochem. 2014 Jun;47(9):708-10. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2014.05.020. Epub
2014 May 20.

Urine metabolomic profiling in neonatal nephrology.

Fanos V(1), Noto A(2), Caboni P(3), Pintus MC(2), Liori B(3), Dessì A(2), Mussap 
M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria, Italy. Electronic address: vafanos@tiscali.it.
(2)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria, Italy. (3)Department of Life and Environmental
Sciences, University of Cagliari, Italy. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine,
IRCCS AOU San Martino - IST, University-Hospital Genoa, Genoa 16132, Italy.

Metabolomics, the latest "omics" technology aims to study the complete set of low
molecular weight metabolites that may change according to the physiological or
the pathological state of the organism. Clinical studies dealing with
metabolomics in neonatal and pediatric nephrology are very few. In this paper we 
present the experimental studies in newborn animal models, together with the
available data on human newborns. Finally the urine metabolomic profiling of 3
newborns who suffered from severe perinatal asphyxia and were treated with
hypothermia. They are located in a different part of the multivariate space, the 
reason of the differences being the basal metabolic profile (resilience) of each 
neonate: 1 died and 2 survived (one of them developed an acute kidney injury).
The main metabolites responsible for the different metabolic profile among the 3 
newborns are presented. In the future each neonatologist and nephrologist should 
become skilled in the metabolomic field.

Copyright © 2014 The Canadian Society of Clinical Chemists. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24858245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Surg Clin North Am. 2014 Jun;94(3):573-86. doi: 10.1016/j.suc.2014.03.004.

Controversy over radioiodine ablation in thyroid cancer: who benefits?

Yoo DC(1), Noto RB(2), Mazzaglia PJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Rhode Island Hospital, The Warren Alpert
Medical School of Brown University, 593 Eddy Street, Providence, RI 02903, USA.
Electronic address: dyoo@lifespan.org. (2)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Rhode
Island Hospital, The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, 593 Eddy
Street, Providence, RI 02903, USA. (3)Department of General Surgery, Rhode Island
Hospital, The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, 593 Eddy Street, 
Providence, RI 02903, USA.

Recent studies have proposed that overdiagnosis is probably the principal cause
of the increased incidence of thyroid cancer. The controversy around radioiodine 
ablation is complicated by the ever increasing numbers of small, low-risk thyroid
cancers being diagnosed. This article examines the history and evolving
epidemiology of the disease and treatment.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24857577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 May 20;15(5):8959-78. doi: 10.3390/ijms15058959.

Genes and gene networks involved in sodium fluoride-elicited cell death
accompanying endoplasmic reticulum stress in oral epithelial cells.

Tabuchi Y(1), Yunoki T(2), Hoshi N(3), Suzuki N(4), Kondo T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics Research, Life Science Research Center,
University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.
ytabu@cts.u-toyama.ac.jp. (2)Department of Radiological Sciences, Graduate School
of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani,
Toyama 930-0194, Japan. yunokiki@med.u-toyama.ac.jp. (3)Department of Animal
Science, Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodai, 
Kobe 657-8501, Japan. nobhoshi@kobe-u.ac.jp. (4)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute
of Nature and Environmental Technology, Kanazawa University, Housu-gun, Ishikawa 
927-0553, Japan. nobuos@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (5)Department of Radiological
Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of 
Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan. kondot@med.u-toyama.ac.jp.

Here, to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying cell death induced by
sodium fluoride (NaF), we analyzed gene expression patterns in rat oral
epithelial ROE2 cells exposed to NaF using global-scale microarrays and
bioinformatics tools. A relatively high concentration of NaF (2 mM) induced cell 
death concomitant with decreases in mitochondrial membrane potential, chromatin
condensation and caspase-3 activation. Using 980 probe sets, we identified 432
up-regulated and 548 down-regulated genes, that were differentially expressed by 
>2.5-fold in the cells treated with 2 mM of NaF and categorized them into 4
groups by K-means clustering. Ingenuity® pathway analysis revealed several gene
networks from gene clusters. The gene networks Up-I and Up-II included many
up-regulated genes that were mainly associated with the biological function of
induction or prevention of cell death, respectively, such as Atf3, Ddit3 and Fos 
(for Up-I) and Atf4 and Hspa5 (for Up-II). Interestingly, knockdown of Ddit3 and 
Hspa5 significantly increased and decreased the number of viable cells,
respectively. Moreover, several endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-related genes
including, Ddit3, Atf4 and Hapa5, were observed in these gene networks. These
findings will provide further insight into the molecular mechanisms of
NaF-induced cell death accompanying ER stress in oral epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4057769
PMID: 24853129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. PLoS One. 2014 May 20;9(5):e97773. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097773. eCollection
2014.

A metabolomic approach to animal vitreous humor topographical composition: a
pilot study.

Locci E(1), Scano P(2), Rosa MF(3), Nioi M(3), Noto A(4), Atzori L(1), Demontis
R(3), De-Giorgio F(5), d'Aloja E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(2)Department of Chemical and Geological Sciences, University of Cagliari,
Cagliari, Italy. (3)Department of Public Health, Clinical and Molecular Medicine 
- Forensic Science Unit -University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. (4)Department
of Surgery, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. (5)Institute of Public
Health, Catholic University, Rome, Italy.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the feasibility of a (1)H-NMR-based
metabolomic approach to explore the metabolomic signature of different
topographical areas of vitreous humor (VH) in an animal model. Five ocular globes
were enucleated from five goats and immediately frozen at -80 °C. Once frozen,
three of them were sectioned, and four samples corresponding to four different VH
areas were collected: the cortical, core, and basal, which was further divided
into a superior and an inferior fraction. An additional two samples were
collected that were representative of the whole vitreous body. (1)H-NMR spectra
were acquired for twenty-three goat vitreous samples with the aim of
characterizing the metabolomic signature of this biofluid and identifying whether
any site-specific patterns were present. Multivariate statistical analysis (MVA) 
of the spectral data were carried out, including Principal Component Analysis
(PCA), Hierarchical Cluster Analysis (HCA), and Partial Least Squares
Discriminant Analysis (PLS-DA). A unique metabolomic signature belonging to each 
area was observed. The cortical area was characterized by lactate, glutamine,
choline, and its derivatives, N-acetyl groups, creatine, and glycerol; the core
area was characterized by glucose, acetate, and scyllo-inositol; and the basal
area was characterized by branched-chain amino acids (BCAA), betaine, alanine,
ascorbate, lysine, and myo-inositol. We propose a speculative approach on the
topographic role of these molecules that are mainly responsible for metabolic
differences among the as-identified areas. (1)H-NMR-based metabolomic analysis
has shown to be an important tool for investigating the VH. In particular, this
approach was able to assess in the samples here analyzed the presence of
different functional areas on the basis of a different metabolite distribution.

PMCID: PMC4028277
PMID: 24845217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Diabetes Investig. 2013 May 6;4(3):225-32. doi: 10.1111/jdi.12068.

Latest insights into the risk of cancer in diabetes.

Noto H(1), Goto A(2), Tsujimoto T(3), Osame K(4), Noda M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine Center Hospital Tokyo Japan ;
Department of Diabetes Research Diabetes Research Center Research Institute
National Center for Global Health and Medicine Tokyo Japan. (2)Department of
Diabetes Research Diabetes Research Center Research Institute National Center for
Global Health and Medicine Tokyo Japan. (3)Departments of Diabetes and Metabolic 
Medicine Center Hospital Tokyo Japan. (4)Department of General Medicine National 
Cancer Center Hospital Tokyo Japan.

A growing body of evidence from observational studies and meta-analyses of the
data suggest that diabetes mellitus is associated with an increased risk of
cancer. Meta-analyses have shown that diabetes increases the risks of total
cancer, and of site-specific cancers of the breast, endometrium, bladder, liver, 
colorectum and pancreas, and that it decreases the risk of prostate cancer.
Insulin resistance and secondary hyperinsulinemia is the most frequently proposed
hypothesis, and hyperglycemia itself might promote carcinogenesis. In addition to
several facets of lifestyle including obesity, smoking and lack of exercise,
treatment for diabetes might affect the risk of cancer. For instance, metformin, 
an insulin sensitizer, reportedly has a potential anticancer effect. In light of 
the exploding global epidemic of diabetes, even a modest increase in the cancer
risk will translate into a substantial socioeconomic burden. The current insights
underscore the need for clinical attention and better-designed studies of the
complex interactions between diabetes and cancer.

PMCID: PMC4015656
PMID: 24843658  [PubMed]


242. Oncogene. 2015 Apr 2;34(14):1865-71. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.135. Epub 2014 May 19.

Matrix metalloproteinase 7 restrains Helicobacter pylori-induced gastric
inflammation and premalignant lesions in the stomach by altering macrophage
polarization.

Krakowiak MS(1), Noto JM(2), Piazuelo MB(2), Hardbower DM(3), Romero-Gallo J(2), 
Delgado A(2), Chaturvedi R(2), Correa P(2), Wilson KT(4), Peek RM Jr(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
TN, USA. (2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA. (3)1] Division of
Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN, USA [2] Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA. (4)1] Department of
Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA [2]
Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA [3] Department of Pathology, Microbiology and 
Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA [4] Veterans
Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, TN, USA. (5)1] Department 
of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA [2]
Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

Helicobacter pylori is the strongest risk factor for the development of gastric
cancer. Although the specific mechanisms by which this pathogen induces
carcinogenesis have not been fully elucidated, high-expression interleukin
(IL)-1ß alleles are associated with increased gastric cancer risk among H.
pylori-infected persons. In addition, loss of matrix metalloproteinase 7 (MMP7)
increases mucosal inflammation in mouse models of epithelial injury, and we have 
shown that gastric inflammation is increased in H. pylori-infected MMP7(-/-)
C57BL/6 mice. In this report, we define mechanisms that underpin such responses
and extend these results into a genetic model of MMP7 deficiency and gastric
cancer. Wild-type (WT) or MMP7(-/-) C57BL/6 mice were challenged with broth alone
as an uninfected control or the H. pylori strain PMSS1. All H. pylori-challenged 
mice were successfully colonized. As expected, H. pylori-infected MMP7(-/-)
C57BL/6 mice exhibited a significant increase in gastric inflammation compared
with uninfected or infected WT C57BL/6 animals. Loss of MMP7 resulted in M1
macrophage polarization within H. pylori-infected stomachs, as assessed by
Luminex technology and immunohistochemistry, and macrophages isolated from
infected MMP7-deficient mice expressed significantly higher levels of the M1
macrophage marker IL-1ß compared with macrophages isolated from WT mice. To
extend these findings into a model of gastric cancer, hypergastrinemic WT INS-GAS
or MMP7(-/-) INS-GAS mice were challenged with H. pylori strain PMSS1. Consistent
with findings in the C57BL/6 model, H. pylori-infected MMP7-deficient INS-GAS
mice exhibited a significant increase in gastric inflammation compared with
either uninfected or infected WT INS-GAS mice. In addition, the incidence of
gastric hyperplasia and dysplasia was significantly increased in H.
pylori-infected MMP7(-/-) INS-GAS mice compared with infected WT INS-GAS mice,
and loss of MMP7 promoted M1 macrophage polarization. These results suggest that 
MMP7 exerts a restrictive role on H. pylori-induced gastric injury and the
development of premalignant lesions by suppressing M1 macrophage polarization.

PMCID: PMC4237684
PMID: 24837365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Zoolog Sci. 2014 May;31(5):330-7. doi: 10.2108/zs130265.

Effects of inorganic mercury and methylmercury on osteoclasts and osteoblasts in 
the scales of the marine teleost as a model system of bone.

Yachiguchi K(1), Sekiguchi T, Nakano M, Hattori A, Yamamoto M, Kitamura K, Maeda 
M, Tabuchi Y, Kondo T, Kamauchi H, Nakabayashi H, Srivastav AK, Hayakawa K,
Sakamoto T, Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)1 Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University, Housu-gun, Ishikawa 927-0553, Japan.

To evaluate the effects of inorganic mercury (InHg) and methylmercury (MeHg) on
bone metabolism in a marine teleost, the activity of tartrate-resistant acid
phosphatase (TRAP) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) as indicators of such activity 
in osteoclasts and osteoblasts, respectively, were examined in scales of nibbler 
fish (Girella punctata). We found several lines of scales with nearly the same
TRAP and ALP activity levels. Using these scales, we evaluated the influence of
InHg and MeHg. TRAP activity in the scales treated with InHg (10(-5) and 10(-4)
M) and MeHg (10(-6) to 10(-4) M) during 6 hrs of incubation decreased
significantly. In contrast, ALP activity decreased after exposure to InHg (10(-5)
and 10(-4) M) and MeHg (10(-6) to 10(-4) M) for 18 and 36 hrs, although its
activity did not change after 6 hrs of incubation. As in enzyme activity 6 hrs
after incubation, mRNA expression of TRAP (osteoclastic marker) decreased
significantly with InHg and MeHg treatment, while that of collagen (osteoblastic 
marker) did not change significantly. At 6 hrs after incubation, the mRNA
expression of metallothionein, which is a metal-binding protein in osteoblasts,
was significantly increased following treatment with InHg or MeHg, suggesting
that it may be involved in the protection of osteoblasts against mercury exposure
up to 6 hrs after incubation. To our knowledge, this is the first report of the
effects of mercury on osteoclasts and osteoblasts using marine teleost scale as a
model system of bone.

PMID: 24832906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Med Chem. 2014 Sep 11;57(17):7182-205. doi: 10.1021/jm500442z. Epub 2014 May
28.

The medicinal chemistry of liver X receptor (LXR) modulators.

Tice CM(1), Noto PB, Fan KY, Zhuang L, Lala DS, Singh SB.

Author information: 
(1)Vitae Pharmaceuticals Inc. , 502 West Office Center Drive, Fort Washington,
Pennsylvania 19034, United States.

LXRs have been of interest as targets for the treatment of atherosclerosis for
over a decade. In recent years, LXR modulators have also garnered interest for
potential use in the treatment of inflammation, Alzheimer's disease (AD),
dermatological conditions, hepatic steatosis, and oncology. To date, no LXR
modulator has successfully progressed beyond phase I clinical trials. In this
Perspective, we summarize published medicinal chemistry efforts in the context of
the available crystallographic data, druglikeness, and isoform selectivity. In
addition, we discuss the challenges that need to be overcome before an LXR
modulator can reach clinical use.

PMID: 24832115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Am J Dermatopathol. 2014 May;36(5):420-1, 439. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000000014.

Cutaneous plaques and ulnar neuropathy: challenge.

Mantovani L(1), Zauli S, Toni G, Noto S, Bettoli V, Virgili A.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Dermatology, University of
Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy; and Department of Health Sciences, Section of Social
Dermatology, San Martino Hospital, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.

PMID: 24803062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2014 Jun;16(6):414. doi: 10.1007/s11883-014-0414-4.

Beyond statins: new lipid lowering strategies to reduce cardiovascular risk.

Noto D(1), Cefalù AB, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento Biomedico di Medicina Interna e Specialistica, Università degli
Studi di Palermo, Palermo, Italy, notoddd@alice.it.

Statins are the first-line therapy in LDL-Cholesterol (LDL-C) reduction and its
clinical use has contributed to significant prevention and treatment of
atherosclerotic vascular disease. Yet, a significant proportion of patients
remain at high risk. Recently, a number of new therapies have been developed to
further lower LDL-C. These agents may provide clinical benefit on top of statin
therapy in patients with high residual risk, severe hypercholesterolemia or as an
alternative for patients who are intolerant to statins. We review four novel
approaches based on the inhibition of proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type
9 (PCSK9), apolipoprotein-B100 (apoB), Cholesteryl ester transport protein (CETP)
and microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP). ApoB and MTP inhibitors
(Mipomersen and Lomitapide) are indicated only for homozygous familial
hypercholesterolemia patients. The results of ongoing trials with CETP and PCSK9 
inhibitors may warrant a wider employment in different categories of patients at 
high risk for cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 24777633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. PeerJ. 2014 Apr 10;2:e347. doi: 10.7717/peerj.347. eCollection 2014.

Fluvial transport potential of shed and root-bearing dinosaur teeth from the late
Jurassic Morrison Formation.

Peterson JE(1), Coenen JJ(2), Noto CR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geology, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh , Oshkosh, WI , United 
States. (2)Department of Geology and Environmental Geosciences, Northern Illinois
University , DeKalb, IL , United States. (3)Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Wisconsin-Parkside , Kenosha, WI , United States.

Shed dinosaur teeth are commonly collected microvertebrate remains that have been
used for interpretations of dinosaur feeding behaviors, paleoecology, and
population studies. However, such interpretations may be biased by taphonomic
processes such as fluvial sorting influenced by tooth shape: shed teeth, removed 
from the skull during life, and teeth possessing roots, removed from the skull
after death. As such, teeth may behave differently in fluvial systems due to
their differences in shape. In order to determine the influence of fluvial
processes on the preservation and distribution of shed and root-bearing dinosaur 
teeth, the hydrodynamic behaviors of high-density urethane resin casts of shed
and root-bearing Allosaurus and Camarasaurus teeth were experimentally tested for
relative transport distances at increasing flow velocities in an artificial
fluviatile environment. Results show that tooth cast specimens exhibited
comparable patterns of transport at lower velocities, though the shed
Camarasaurus teeth transported considerably farther in medium to higher flow
velocities. Two-Way ANOVA tests indicate significant differences in the mean
transport distances of tooth casts oriented perpendicular to flow (p < 0.05) with
varying tooth morphologies and flow velocities. The differences exhibited in the 
transportability of shed and root-bearing teeth has important implications for
taphonomic reconstructions, as well as future studies on dinosaur population
dynamics, paleoecology, and feeding behaviors.

PMCID: PMC3994629
PMID: 24765581  [PubMed]


248. Early Hum Dev. 2014 Mar;90 Suppl 1:S78-83. doi: 10.1016/S0378-3782(14)70024-6.

Urinary (1)H-NMR and GC-MS metabolomics predicts early and late onset neonatal
sepsis.

Fanos V(1), Caboni P(2), Corsello G(3), Stronati M(4), Gazzolo D(5), Noto A(6),
Lussu M(7), Dessì A(6), Giuffrè M(3), Lacerenza S(8), Serraino F(3), Garofoli
F(9), Serpero LD(5), Liori B(2), Carboni R(6), Atzori L(7).

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
Electronic address: vafanos@tiscali.it. (2)Department of Life and Environmental
Sciences, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. (3)Operative Unit of
Pediatrics and Neonatal Intensive Therapy, Mother and Child Department,
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. (4)Neonatal Unit and Neonatal Intensive
Care Unit, Maternal-Infant Department, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo,
Pavia, Italy; Laboratory of Neonatal Immunology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San
Matteo, Pavia, Italy. (5)Department of Maternal, Fetal and Neonatal Health, C.
Arrigo Children's Hospital, Alessandria, Italy. (6)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, 
Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria,
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. (7)Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. (8)Neonatal Unit and Neonatal Intensive 
Care Unit, Maternal-Infant Department, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo,
Pavia, Italy. (9)Laboratory of Neonatal Immunology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico 
San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.

The purpose of this article is to study one of the most significant causes of
neonatal morbidity and mortality: neonatal sepsis. This pathology is due to a
bacterial or fungal infection acquired during the perinatal period. Neonatal
sepsis has been categorized into two groups: early onset if it occurs within 3-6 
days and late onset after 4-7 days. Due to the not-specific clinical signs, along
with the inaccuracy of available biomarkers, the diagnosis is still a major
challenge. In this regard, the use of a combined approach based on both nuclear
magnetic resonance ((1)H-NMR) and gas-chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS)
techniques, coupled with a multivariate statistical analysis, may help to uncover
features of the disease that are still hidden. The objective of our study was to 
evaluate the capability of the metabolomics approach to identify a potential
metabolic profile related to the neonatal septic condition. The study population 
included 25 neonates (15 males and 10 females): 9 (6 males and 3 females)
patients had a diagnosis of sepsis and 16 were healthy controls (9 males and 7
females). This study showed a unique metabolic profile of the patients affected
by sepsis compared to non-affected ones with a statistically significant
difference between the two groups (p = 0.05).

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24709468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:731620. doi: 10.1155/2014/731620. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Metabolomics network characterization of resuscitation after normocapnic hypoxia 
in a newborn piglet model supports the hypothesis that room air is better.

Fanos V(1), Noto A(1), Xanthos T(2), Lussu M(3), Murgia F(3), Barberini L(4),
Finco G(5), d'Aloja E(6), Papalois A(2), Iacovidou N(7), Atzori L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section,
University of Cagliari, 09042 Cagliari, Italy. (2)National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Medical School, 10679 Athens, Greece. (3)Department of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Cagliari, 09042 Cagliari, Italy. (4)Department
of Neurological Sciences, University of Cagliari, 09042 Cagliari, Italy.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Cagliari, 09042 Cagliari, Italy.
(6)Forensic Science Department, Cagliari Teaching Hospital and University,
University of Cagliari, 09042 Cagliari, Italy. (7)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Neonatal Division, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens,
Medical School, 10679 Athens, Greece.

Perinatal asphyxia is attributed to hypoxia and/or ischemia around the time of
birth and may lead to multiorgan dysfunction. Aim of this research article is to 
investigate whether different metabolomic profiles occurred according to oxygen
concentration administered at resuscitation. In order to perform the experiment, 
forty newborn piglets were subjected to normocapnic hypoxia and reoxygenation and
were randomly allocated in 4 groups resuscitated with different oxygen
concentrations, 18%, 21%, 40%, and 100%, respectively. Urine metabolic profiles
at baseline and at hypoxia were analysed by (1)H-NMR spectroscopy and metabolites
were also identified by multivariate statistical analysis. Metabolic pathways
associations were also built up by ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA).
Bioinformatics analysis of metabolites characterized the effect of metabolism in 
the 4 groups; it showed that the 21% of oxygen is the most "physiological" and
appropriate concentration to be used for resuscitation. Our data indicate that
resuscitation with 21% of oxygen seems to be optimal in terms of survival,
rapidity of resuscitation, and metabolic profile in the present animal model.
These findings need to be confirmed with metabolomics in human and, if so, the
knowledge of the perinatal asphyxia condition may significantly improve.

PMCID: PMC3947697
PMID: 24696864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Diabetol Metab Syndr. 2014 Mar 31;6:48. doi: 10.1186/1758-5996-6-48. eCollection 
2014.

Improvement of both fasting and postprandial glycemic control by the two-step
addition of miglitol and mitiglinide to basal insulin therapy: a pilot study.

Ihana N(1), Tsujimoto T(1), Yamamoto-Honda R(2), Kishimoto M(2), Kajio H(2), Noto
H(2), Kakei M(3), Noda M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Center for
Global Health and Medicine Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan ; Division of General
Medicine, Jichi Medical University Graduate School of Medicine, Tochigi, Japan.
(2)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Center for
Global Health and Medicine Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Division of General 
Medicine, Jichi Medical University Graduate School of Medicine, Tochigi, Japan ; 
First Department of Comprehensive Medicine, Saitama Medical Center, Jichi Medical
University School of Medicine, Saitama, Japan. (4)Department of Diabetes,
Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Center for Global Health and Medicine
Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan ; Department of Diabetes Research, Diabetes
Research Center, National, Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Combination therapy consisting of basal insulin and oral hypoglycemic
agents (OHAs) is effective for the treatment of type 2 diabetes (T2DM) that
cannot be adequately controlled using OHAs alone. Though basal insulin with
metformin or sulfonylurea is an effective therapy, it cannot reduce postprandial 
glycemia without the risk of hypoglycemia. We examined a two-step regimen
consisting of the addition of postprandial hypoglycemic agents (an
alpha-glucosidase inhibitor and a glinide) in patients whose T2DM was poorly
controlled using basal insulin therapy.
METHODS: Inpatients between the ages of 30-79 years who had T2DM and an HbA1c
level of more than 7.0% were recruited. The patients were treated with once-daily
insulin glargine with or without metformin, depending on the patient's age and
renal function. Insulin glargine was titrated to achieve a target fasting glucose
level of 70-130 mg/dL as a first step (STEP0). If the 2-hour postprandial glucose
(PBG) level was higher than the target of 180 mg/dL, miglitol treatment
(150 mg/day) was initiated, with dose adjustments (75-225 mg) allowed depending
on abdominal symptoms and the PBG (STEP1). If the PBG of the patients remained
higher than the target after 3 days of treatment, mitiglinide (30 mg/day,
titrated up to 60 mg) was added (STEP2). We then evaluated the proportion of
patients who achieved the target PBG before and after the two-step regimen.
Continuous Glucose Monitoring (CGM) was performed throughout the two-step
protocol in most of the patients.
RESULTS: Of the 16 patients who were recruited (median age, 67.0 [58.0-71.0]
years; body mass index, 25.0 [22.0-27.9] kg/m(2); HbA1c level at admission, 9.1% 
[8.35-10.4%]), 1 patient (6.25%) achieved the target PBG at STEP 0 and 14
patients (87.5%) had achieved the target PBG at the end of the treatment protocol
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002). CGM showed a significant decrease in the glucose level at each step 
of the protocol. The standard deviations in the CGM glucose levels for 24 hours, 
MAGE, and M-value also improved.
CONCLUSIONS: The two-step addition of postprandial hypoglycemic agents to basal
insulin therapy is potentially effective and safe for decreasing both the fasting
and postprandial glucose levels.

PMCID: PMC4025538
PMID: 24684803  [PubMed]


251. Endocr J. 2014;61(6):553-60. Epub 2014 Mar 28.

A newer conversion equation for the correlation between HbA1c and glycated
albumin.

Inoue K(1), Tsujimoto T, Yamamoto-Honda R, Goto A, Kishimoto M, Noto H, Kajio H, 
Doi S, Miyazaki S, Terauchi Y, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Center Hospital,
National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo 162-8655, Japan.

Glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) and glycated albumin (GA) are frequently used as
glycemic control markers. These markers are influenced by either altered
hemoglobin metabolism or albumin metabolism. We investigated the correlation
between HbA1c and GA by collecting only data that had not been affected by the
turnover of either HbA1c or GA and proposed a novel equation for accurately
estimating the extrapolated HbA1c (eHbA1c) value based on the GA value. Data sets
for a total of 2461 occasions were obtained from 731 patients (including
non-diabetes patients) whose HbA1c and GA values were simultaneously measured.
Data sets obtained from patients undergoing hemodialysis, patients with
hematological malignancies, pregnancy, chronic liver diseases, hyperthyroidism,
steroid treatment or a blood transfusion during the past 3 months, or patients
without albumin, hemoglobin, eGFR, or urinary protein measurements and data sets 
with an eGFR of less than 30 mL/min/1.73 m(2), a hemoglobin level of less than 10
mg/dL, an albumin level of below 3.0 g/mL, or a urinary protein level of 3+ were 
excluded. Finally, we selected 284 data sets. We then analyzed these data sets,
performed a scatter plot to examine the correlation between HbA1c and GA, and
established an equation describing the resulting correlation. Based on all the
data points, the resulting equation was HbA1c = 0.216 × GA + 2.978 [R(2) =
0.5882, P < 0.001].

PMID: 24681757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Infez Med. 2014 Mar;22(1):50-6.

Extra-cerebral severe infections associated with haemorrhagic hereditary
telangiectasia (Rendu-Osler-Weber Disease): five cases and a review of the
literature.

Musso M(1), Capone A(1), Chinello P(1), Di Bella S(1), Galati V(1), Noto P(1),
Taglietti F(1), Topino S(1), Petrosillo N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Second Division of Infectious Diseases, National Institute for Infectious
Diseases Lazzaro Spallanzani, Rome, Italy.

Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is one of the most common autosomal 
dominant disorders and is characterized by genetically determined abnormalities
of vascular structure. People affected by HHT are predisposed to severe
infections such as cerebral abscesses, typical of patients with pulmonary
arteriovenous malformations, and extra-cerebral infections such as bacteraemia,
septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, hepatic abscesses, skin infections and infective
endocarditis. We present a retrospective series of severe bacterial
extra-cerebral infections in five patients affected by HHT, admitted to our
Institute from January 2007 to June 2013. We also reviewed the literature of the 
last five years concerning infectious complications in people affected by HHT.
Our study shows that HHT patients with infectious complications exclusively
localized in extra-cerebral sites are usually fragile, old and affected by
comorbidities. Moreover, we recognized a trend of Staphylococcus aureus (SA)
severe infection recurrence in such patients, both in our series and in the
literature. In our opinion these results suggest the need to evaluate the
possible benefits of SA nasal colonization screening and decolonization in such
patients.

PMID: 24651092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2014 Mar;70(3):191-8.

[Development of a digital chest phantom for studies on energy subtraction
techniques].

[Article in Japanese]

Hayashi N(1), Taniguchi A, Noto K, Shimosegawa M, Ogura T, Doi K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Radiological Technology, Gunma Prefectural College of Health
Sciences.

Digital chest phantoms continue to play a significant role in optimizing imaging 
parameters for chest X-ray examinations. The purpose of this study was to develop
a digital chest phantom for studies on energy subtraction techniques under ideal 
conditions without image noise. Computed tomography (CT) images from the LIDC
(Lung Image Database Consortium) were employed to develop a digital chest
phantom. The method consisted of the following four steps: 1) segmentation of the
lung and bone regions on CT images; 2) creation of simulated nodules; 3)
transformation to attenuation coefficient maps from the segmented images; and 4) 
projection from attenuation coefficient maps. To evaluate the usefulness of
digital chest phantoms, we determined the contrast of the simulated nodules in
projection images of the digital chest phantom using high and low X-ray energies,
soft tissue images obtained by energy subtraction, and "gold standard" images of 
the soft tissues. Using our method, the lung and bone regions were segmented on
the original CT images. The contrast of simulated nodules in soft tissue images
obtained by energy subtraction closely matched that obtained using the gold
standard images. We thus conclude that it is possible to carry out simulation
studies based on energy subtraction techniques using the created digital chest
phantoms. Our method is potentially useful for performing simulation studies for 
optimizing the imaging parameters in chest X-ray examinations.

PMID: 24647055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. N Engl J Med. 2014 Apr 10;370(15):1412-21. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1305727. Epub 2014 
Mar 18.

Albumin replacement in patients with severe sepsis or septic shock.

Caironi P(1), Tognoni G, Masson S, Fumagalli R, Pesenti A, Romero M, Fanizza C,
Caspani L, Faenza S, Grasselli G, Iapichino G, Antonelli M, Parrini V, Fiore G,
Latini R, Gattinoni L; ALBIOS Study Investigators.

Collaborators: Gattinoni L, Caironi P, Pesenti A, Fumagalli R, Tognoni G, Romero 
M, Latini R, Masson S, Vincent JL, Suter PM, Valsecchi MG, Santosuosso A, Cavana 
M, Ortu A, Gabini R, Perno S, Anelli A, Amoruso R, Ferraris S, Borelli M, Massei 
R, Riva I, Poli G, Papagni G, Bortone F, Mamprin F, Keim R, Brivio M, Colageo U, 
Mimii EP, Sangiorgi G, Siniscalchi A, Pierucci E, Giovannitti A, Gentile C,
Pascucci F, Antonini B, Zummo U, Valsecchi R, Cerisara M, Trezzi T, Dossena A,
Ribola A, Tamayo L, Zoppellari R, Volta CA, Mangani V, Fanfani E, Chelazzi C,
Bartoli T, Parrini V, Oggioni R, Fedele A, Molin A, Berri C, Guarino A, Isetta M,
Bonfiglio M, Tissino F, Silvestri L, Milanesi M, Sbrana G, Motta E, Iannaco I,
Casadio MC, Pasetti GS, Palandini A, Cascione C, Puscio D, Cellai F, Boccalatte
D, Silvestri S, Fausto CI, Lupo V, Zompanti V, Iacobone E, Gattari D, Ronzoni G, 
Beck E, Francesconi S, Colombo R, Raimondi F, Castelli A, De Gasperi A,
Radrizzani D, Ferla LE, Giudici R, Bellato V, Bordone G, Gavazzeni V, Lesmo A,
Ripamonti D, Vesconi S, Papoff A, Rossi A, Noto A, Pezzi A, Zanforlin G, Kandil
H, Ballotta A, Bettini F, Vaghi GM, Rossi S, Pessina C, Casagrande D, Trivellato 
A, Costagli V, Moise G, Furla M, Marelli S, Caspani L, Panigada M, Bruzzone P,
Isgrò S, Abbruzzese C, Tagliabue P, Solca M, Bonazzi M, Cattaneo A, Rossi N,
Andreoni P, Pasetto A, Girardis M, Barbieri E, Piazza O, Giarratano A, Raineri
SM, Cortegiani A, Zagara G, Bono M, Galzerano A, Garzilli T, Dentini N, Bindi M, 
Biancofiore G, Mercante WP, Disconzi MM, Todesco N, Lunardi S, Sani E, Carli M,
Bracciotti G, Gori V, Braccini P, Maggio G, Braschi A, Bottazzi A, Iotti G,
Nicora B, Salati G, Salsi P, Antonelli M, Pennisi MA, Bello G, Caccese R,
D'Ambrosio M, Rocco M, Sanseverino M, Gatta A, Nastasi M, Corsi A, Facondini F,
Franchi F, Mongelli P, Ferrario M, Carulli F, Del Curto S, Schiappacasse G,
Dalpiaz C, Armani S, Verderosa I, Marzullo A, Tonetti F, De Piero ME, Livigni S, 
Fiore G, Cerutti A, Erbetta S, Napolitano R, Pastorelli M, Bona F, Debernardi F, 
Gallo M, Segala V, Parigi L, Perzolla D, Marson F, Chiarandini P, Cammarano C,
Sermann G, De Lucia S, Frigerio A, Distaso F, Franco R, Bossi E, Laudi C, De
Nardin M, Violo T, Lazzari F, Vestali A, Della Mora E, Polati E, Martini A,
Cristallini S, Totaro C, Milan B, Dan M, Ruberti S, Danzi V.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2014 Jun;10(6):302-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Jul 3;371(1):83.
    Crit Care. 2014;18(5):509.
    Crit Care. 2014;18(5):510.
    Natl Med J India. 2014 May-Jun;27(3):145-7.
    Med Klin Intensivmed Notfmed. 2014 Oct;109(7):544-6.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Jul 3;371(1):84.
    Ann Intern Med. 2014 Jul 15;161(2):JC6.
    Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2014 May;139(22):1148.

BACKGROUND: Although previous studies have suggested the potential advantages of 
albumin administration in patients with severe sepsis, its efficacy has not been 
fully established.
METHODS: In this multicenter, open-label trial, we randomly assigned 1818
patients with severe sepsis, in 100 intensive care units (ICUs), to receive
either 20% albumin and crystalloid solution or crystalloid solution alone. In the
albumin group, the target serum albumin concentration was 30 g per liter or more 
until discharge from the ICU or 28 days after randomization. The primary outcome 
was death from any cause at 28 days. Secondary outcomes were death from any cause
at 90 days, the number of patients with organ dysfunction and the degree of
dysfunction, and length of stay in the ICU and the hospital.
RESULTS: During the first 7 days, patients in the albumin group, as compared with
those in the crystalloid group, had a higher mean arterial pressure (P=0.03) and 
lower net fluid balance (P<0.001). The total daily amount of administered fluid
did not differ significantly between the two groups (P=0.10). At 28 days, 285 of 
895 patients (31.8%) in the albumin group and 288 of 900 (32.0%) in the
crystalloid group had died (relative risk in the albumin group, 1.00; 95%
confidence interval [CI], 0.87 to 1.14; P=0.94). At 90 days, 365 of 888 patients 
(41.1%) in the albumin group and 389 of 893 (43.6%) in the crystalloid group had 
died (relative risk, 0.94; 95% CI, 0.85 to 1.05; P=0.29). No significant
differences in other secondary outcomes were observed between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with severe sepsis, albumin replacement in addition to
crystalloids, as compared with crystalloids alone, did not improve the rate of
survival at 28 and 90 days. (Funded by the Italian Medicines Agency; ALBIOS
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00707122.).

PMID: 24635772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Clin Infect Dis. 2014 Jun;58(12):1783-4. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciu159. Epub 2014 Mar
14.

Detectable serum tobramycin levels in patients with renal dysfunction and recent 
placement of antibiotic-impregnated cement knee or hip spacers.

Noto MJ(1), Koethe JR(1), Miller G(1), Wright PW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee.

PMCID: PMC4064010
PMID: 24633689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Brain Nerve. 2014 Mar;66(3):237-46.

[Ultrasound diagnosis of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous
group of diseases with over 45 different causative gene mutations identified.
Nerve conduction studies are important for the classification and diagnosis of
CMT, whereas ultrasound (US) is increasingly used to assess the peripheral nerves
of patients with CMT, as a complement to neurophysiological studies. Recent
ultrasound assessment reports of peripheral nerves in CMT are summarized here. An
ultrasound finding of CMT1A, which is the most common demyelinating subtype of
CMT, is characterized by uniform enlargement of peripheral nerves and nerve
roots. Patients with CMT1B (MPZ mutation) also have larger nerves than normal
subjects do. Peripheral nerves of patients with CMT2, which is an axonal type of 
CMT, are slightly larger than those of normal subjects. Focal enlargement of
nerves at entrapment sites is a characteristic US finding of hereditary
neuropathy with liability to pressure palsy. US findings of CMT are thus
subtype-specific. Therefore, the assessment of nerve US may become a useful
supporting tool for the diagnosis of CMT subtypes.

PMID: 24607948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2014 Aug;52(8):e175-8. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2014-0144.

The novel variant p.Ser465Leu in the PCSK9 gene does not account for the
decreased LDLR activity in members of a FH family.

Ruotolo A, Di Taranto MD, D'Agostino MN, Marotta G, Gentile M, Nunziata M, Sodano
M, Di Noto R, Del Vecchio L, Rubba P, Fortunato G.

PMID: 24607922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2014 Jan-Mar;36(1):16-23. doi: 10.1590/1516-4446-2013-1180.
Epub 2014 Mar 1.

Nonprescribed use of tranquilizers and use of other drugs among Brazilian
students.

Opaleye ES(1), Ferri CP(1), Locatelli DP(1), Amato TC(1), Noto AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São PauloSP,
Brazil, Department of Psychobiology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP),
São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: To describe patterns of nonprescribed use of tranquilizers by
students aged 10 to 18 years and assess the sociodemographic characteristics of
these adolescents and their use of other substances.
METHODS: A randomized and stratified sample of 47,979 students from state and
private schools of the 27 Brazilian state capitals completed a self-report
questionnaire. Poisson regression was used to estimate the associations between
tranquilizer use and sociodemographic factors, as well as the use of other
psychotropic substances.
RESULTS: The lifetime prevalence of nonprescribed use of tranquilizers was 3.9%. 
Use was most common among girls, wealthier adolescents, and those from private
schools. An association was found between use of tranquilizers and lifetime use
of alcohol (prevalence ratio [PR] = 3.15; 95% confidence intervals [95%CI]
2.58-3.85), tobacco (PR = 2.61; 95%CI 2.31-2.95), illicit drugs (PR = 3.70; 95%CI
3.19-4.29), and other prescription drugs (PR = 7.03; 95%CI 6.18-7.99). As the
number of substances adolescents reported having used increased, so did the
nonprescribed use of tranquilizers.
CONCLUSIONS: Nonprescribed use of tranquilizers by adolescents might indicate the
use of other substances, including high-risk combinations such as tranquilizers
and alcohol. The risks of this association should be addressed during the early
stages of drug prevention programs.

PMID: 24604458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Genesis. 2014 Jun;52(6):626-35. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22767. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

The Zic2 gene directs the formation and function of node cilia to control cardiac
situs.

Barratt KS(1), Glanville-Jones HC, Arkell RM.

Author information: 
(1)Early Mammalian Development Laboratory, Research School of Biology, Evolution,
Ecology and Genetics, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 0200,
Australia.

The first molecular herald of organ asymmetry during murine embryogenesis is
found at the periphery of the node in early-somite stage embryos. Asymmetric gene
expression and calcium accumulation at the node occurs in response to a left-ward
flow of extracellular fluid across the node, generated by motile cilia within the
pit of the node and likely sensed by immotile cilia in the periphery of the node.
The ciliation of node cells is controlled by a cascade of node-restricted
transcription factor activity during mid-late gastrulation. Mutation of the
murine Zic2 transcription factor is associated with random cardiac situs and a
loss of asymmetric gene expression at the early-somite node and in the lateral
plate. Zic2 is not expressed in these regions but is transiently expressed in the
mid-late gastrula node at the time of ciliogenesis. The cilia of the node are
overtly abnormal in Zic2 mutant embryos being dysmorphic and short relative to
wild-type littermates. The expression of the Noto, Rfx3, and Foxj1 transcription 
factors known to regulate ciliogenesis is greatly depleted in the mid-gastrula
node of mutants, as is the expression of the Pkd1l1 gene required for cilia
function. Zic2 appears to be a component of the gene regulatory network that
drives ciliation of node cells during gastrulation.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24585447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Am J Emerg Med. 2014 Apr;32(4):334-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2013.12.045. Epub 2014
Jan 3.

Thirty and ninety days mortality predictive value of admission and in-hospital
procalcitonin and mid-regional pro-adrenomedullin testing in patients with
dyspnea. Results from the VERyfing DYspnea trial.

Travaglino F(1), Russo V(2), De Berardinis B(3), Numeroso F(4), Catania P(5),
Cervellin G(6), Nigra SG(7), Geraci F(8), Bressan MA(9), Guerrini S(10), Cavazza 
M(11), Folli C(12), Monzani V(13), Battista S(14), Mengozzi G(15), Noto P(16),
Carpinteri G(17), Semplicini A(18), Stella F(19), Ingrassia S(20), Moscatelli
P(21), Giuntini P(22), Salerno G(23), Cardelli P(24), Di Somma S(25).

Author information: 
(1)Emergency Department, Sant'Andrea Hospital, School of Medicine and Psychology 
"Sapienza" Univesity, Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
francesco.travaglino@gmail.com. (2)Emergency Department, Sant'Andrea Hospital,
School of Medicine and Psychology "Sapienza" Univesity, Rome, Italy. Electronic
address: veryo85@hotmail.it. (3)Emergency Department, Sant'Andrea Hospital,
School of Medicine and Psychology "Sapienza" Univesity, Rome, Italy. Electronic
address: benedetta.db@gmail.com. (4)Emergency Medicine Department, Parma Teaching
Hospital, Parma, Italy. Electronic address: FNumeroso@ao.pr.it. (5)Emergency
Medicine Department, Parma Teaching Hospital, Parma, Italy. Electronic address:
pamelacatania@live.com. (6)Emergency Medicine Department, Parma Teaching
Hospital, Parma, Italy. Electronic address: GCervellin@ao.pr.it. (7)Emergency
Medicine Department, San Matteo Teaching Hospital, Pavia, Italy. Electronic
address: stefano.genierenigra@email.it. (8)Emergency Medicine Department, San
Matteo Teaching Hospital, Pavia, Italy. Electronic address:
francescogeraci@gmail.com. (9)Emergency Medicine Department, San Matteo Teaching 
Hospital, Pavia, Italy. Electronic address: m.bressan@smatteo.pv.it.
(10)Emergency Medicine Department, S. Orsola-Malpighi Teaching Hospital, Bologna,
Italy. Electronic address: stefania.guerrini@aosp.bo.it. (11)Emergency Medicine
Department, S. Orsola-Malpighi Teaching Hospital, Bologna, Italy. Electronic
address: mario.cavazza@aosp.bo.it. (12)Emergency Medicine Department, Maggiore
Teaching Hospital, Milan, Italy. Electronic address:
christian.folli@policlinico.mi.it. (13)Emergency Medicine Department, Maggiore
Teaching Hospital, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: vmonzani@policlinico.mi.it. 
(14)Emergency Medicine Department, Città della Scienza e della Salute Hospital,
Turin, Italy. Electronic address: stefania.battista@libero.it. (15)Emergency
Medicine Department, Città della Scienza e della Salute Hospital, Turin, Italy.
Electronic address: gmengozzi@cittadellasalute.to.it. (16)Emergency Medicine
Department, Vittorio Emanuele Teaching Hospital, Catania, Italy. Electronic
address: p.noto@hotmail.it. (17)Emergency Medicine Department, Vittorio Emanuele 
Teaching Hospital, Catania, Italy. Electronic address: gcarpinteri@gmail.com.
(18)Internal Medicine Department, SS Giovanni e Paolo Hospital in Venice,
University of Padua, Italy. Electronic address: andrea.semplicini@unipd.it.
(19)Internal Medicine Department, SS Giovanni e Paolo Hospital in Venice,
University of Padua, Italy. Electronic address: fede.stella@gmail.com.
(20)Emergency Medicine Department, San Martino Teaching Hospital, Cenoa
University, Italy. Electronic address: stella99@alice.it. (21)Emergency Medicine 
Department, San Martino Teaching Hospital, Cenoa University, Italy. Electronic
address: moscatellievandro@gmail.com. (22)Emergency Medicine Department, San
Martino Teaching Hospital, Cenoa University, Italy. Electronic address:
patriziagiuntini53@gmail.com. (23)Clinical and Molecular Medicine Department
Sant'Andrea Hospital, School of Medicine and Psychology "Sapienza" Univesity,
Rome, Italy. Electronic address: sagerardo@libero.it. (24)Clinical and Molecular 
Medicine Department Sant'Andrea Hospital, School of Medicine and Psychology
"Sapienza" Univesity, Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
patrizia.cardelli@uniroma1.it. (25)Emergency Department, Sant'Andrea Hospital,
School of Medicine and Psychology "Sapienza" Univesity, Rome, Italy. Electronic
address: salvatore.disomma@uniroma1.it.

INTRODUCTION: Mid-regional pro-atrial natriuretic peptide (MR-proANP),
procalcitonin (PCT), and mid-regional pro-adrenomedullin (MR-proADM) demonstrated
usefulness for management of emergency department patients with dyspnea.
METHODS: To evaluate in patients with dyspnea, the prognostic value for 30 and 90
days mortality and readmission of PCT, MR-proADM, and MR-proANP, a multicenter
prospective study was performed evaluating biomarkers at admission, 24 and 72
hours after admission. Based on final diagnosis, patients were divided into acute
heart failure (AHF), primary lung diseases, or both (AHF + NO AHF).
RESULTS: Five hundred one patients were enrolled. Procalcitonin and MR-proADM
values at admission and at 72 hours were significantly (P < .001) predictive for 
30-day mortality: baseline PCT with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.70 and PCT
at 72 hours with an AUC of 0.61; baseline MR-proADM with an AUC of 0.62 and
MR-proADM at 72 hours with an AUC of 0.68. As for 90-day mortality, both PCT and 
MR-proADM baseline and 72 hours values showed a significant (P < .0001)
predictive ability: baseline PCT with an AUC of 0.73 and 72 hours PCT with an AUC
of 0.64; baseline MR-proADM with an AUC of 0.66 and 72 hours MR-proADM with an
AUC of 0.71. In AHF, group biomarkers predicted rehospitalization and mortality
at 90 days, whereas in AHF + NO AHF group, they predict mortality at 30 and 90
days.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients admitted for dyspnea, assessment of PCT plus MR-proADM
improves risk stratification and management. Combined use of biomarkers is able
to predict in the total cohort both rehospitalization and death at 30 and 90
days.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24559907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Neuroimmunomodulation. 2014;21(2-3):131-9. doi: 10.1159/000356549. Epub 2014 Feb 
14.

Targeting the inflammatory pathway as a therapeutic tool for major depression.

Noto C(1), Rizzo LB, Mansur RB, McIntyre RS, Maes M, Brietzke E.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neuroscience (LINC), Federal
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

In the last decades convergent findings from several lines of evidence has
revealed a robust association between major depressive disorder (MDD) and
inflammatory pathways. Despite this, the translation of these findings into new
and better treatments for MDD has not occurred. The objective of this study is to
comprehensively review what is already known with reasonable certainty on
inflammatory pathways in MDD, to clarify some points that have been
insufficiently studied and to discuss the implications of these findings for
future studies targeting inflammatory pathways as a therapeutic tool for
individuals with MDD.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24557046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Resuscitation. 2014 May;85(5):595-601. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2014.01.025. 
Epub 2014 Feb 7.

1H NMR-metabolomics: can they be a useful tool in our understanding of cardiac
arrest?

Chalkias A(1), Fanos V(2), Noto A(2), Castrén M(3), Gulati A(4), Svavarsdóttir
H(5), Iacovidou N(6), Xanthos T(7).

Author information: 
(1)MSc "Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation", Medical School, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Athens, Greece; Hellenic Society of Cardiopulmonary
Resuscitation, Athens, Greece. Electronic address: thanoschalkias@yahoo.gr.
(2)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section, AOU
and University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. (3)Karolinska Institutet, Department
of Clinical Science and Education, Södersjukhuset and Section of Emergency
Medicine, Södersjukhuset, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Midwestern University, Downers
Grove, IL, USA. (5)School of Health Sciences, University of Akureyri, Akureyri,
Iceland. (6)Hellenic Society of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation, Athens, Greece;
2nd Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Neonatal Division, Medical School,
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece. (7)MSc
"Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation", Medical School, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Athens, Greece; Hellenic Society of Cardiopulmonary
Resuscitation, Athens, Greece.

OBJECTIVE: This review focuses on the presentation of the emerging technology of 
metabolomics, a promising tool for the detection of identifying the unrevealed
biological pathways that lead to cardiac arrest.
DATA SOURCES: The electronic bases of PubMed, Scopus, and EMBASE were searched.
Research terms were identified using the MESH database and were combined
thereafter. Initial search terms were "cardiac arrest", "cardiopulmonary
resuscitation", "post-cardiac arrest syndrome" combined with "metabolomics".
RESULTS: Metabolomics allow the monitoring of hundreds of metabolites from
tissues or body fluids and already influence research in the field of cardiac
metabolism. This approach has elucidated several pathophysiological mechanisms
and identified profiles of metabolic changes that can be used to follow the
disease processes occurring in the peri-arrest period. This can be achieved
through leveraging the strengths of unbiased metabolome-wide scans, which include
thousands of final downstream products of gene transcription, enzyme activity and
metabolic products of extraneously administered substances, in order to identify 
a metabolomic fingerprint associated with an increased risk of cardiac arrest.
CONCLUSION: Although this technology is still under development, metabolomics is 
a promising tool for elucidating biological pathways and discovering clinical
biomarkers, strengthening the efforts for optimizing both the prevention and
treatment of cardiac arrest.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24513156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Chemosphere. 2014 Jul;107:324-30. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.12.077. Epub
2014 Feb 5.

Factors affecting atmospheric 1-, 2-nitropyrenes and 2-nitrofluoranthene in
winter at Noto peninsula, a remote background site, Japan.

Tang N(1), Sato K(2), Tokuda T(3), Tatematsu M(2), Hama H(2), Suematsu C(2),
Kameda T(4), Toriba A(2), Hayakawa K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences, Kanazawa University,
Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan. Electronic address:
tou@p.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (2)Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health
Sciences, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan.
(3)Ishikawa Prefectural Institute of Public Health and Environmental Science,
1-11, Taiyogaoka, Kanazawa 920-1154, Japan. (4)Graduate School of Energy Science,
Kyoto University, Gokasho, Uji 611-0011, Japan.

Airborne particulates were collected at a background site (Wajima Air Monitoring 
Station; WAMS) on the Noto Peninsula, Japan from January 2006 to December 2007.
1-, 2-nitropyrenes (1-, 2-NPs) and 2-nitrofluoranthene (2-NFR), in the
particulates were determined with a sensitive HPLC method with chemiluminescence 
detection. The average concentrations were higher in winter than in summer. A
meteorological analysis indicated that the air samples collected in winter were
transported mainly from Northeast China over the Japan Sea. Both the
concentration ratios of 2-NFR to 1-NP and 1-NP to pyrene were similar to those in
Shenyang in Northeast China which located along the air transportation route to
WAMS, but not in Kanazawa which near WAMS. These results strongly suggest that
most of the atmospheric 1-, 2-NPs and 2-NFR at WAMS in winter were long range
transported from Northeast China.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24508157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014 Apr 1;306(7):G606-13. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00333.2013. Epub 2014 Feb 6.

Helicobacter pylori-induced posttranscriptional regulation of H-K-ATPase
a-subunit gene expression by miRNA.

Zhang YM(1), Noto JM, Hammond CE, Barth JL, Argraves WS, Backert S, Peek RM Jr,
Smolka AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina;

Acute Helicobacter pylori infection of gastric epithelial cells induces CagA
oncoprotein- and peptidoglycan (SLT)-dependent mobilization of NF-<U+03BA>B p50
homodimers that bind to H-K-ATPase a-subunit (HKa) promoter and repress HKa gene 
transcription. This process may facilitate gastric H. pylori colonization by
induction of transient hypochlorhydria. We hypothesized that H. pylori also
regulates HKa expression posttranscriptionally by miRNA interaction with HKa
mRNA. In silico analysis of the HKa 3' untranslated region (UTR) identified
miR-1289 as a highly conserved putative HKa-regulatory miRNA. H. pylori infection
of AGS cells transfected with HKa 3' UTR-Luc reporter construct repressed
luciferase activity by 70%, whereas <U+0394>cagA or <U+0394>slt H. pylori infections partially 
abrogated repression. Transfection of AGS cells expressing HKa 3' UTR-Luc
construct with an oligoribonucleotide mimetic of miR-1289 induced maximal
repression (54%) of UTR activity within 30 min; UTR activity was unchanged by
nontargeting siRNA transfection. Gastric biopsies from patients infected with
cagA(+) H. pylori showed a significant increase in miR-1289 expression compared
with uninfected patients or those infected with cagA(-) H. pylori. Finally,
miR-1289 expression was necessary and sufficient to attenuate biopsy HKa protein 
expression in the absence of infection. Taken together, these data indicate that 
miR-1289 is upregulated by H. pylori in a CagA- and SLT-dependent manner and
targets HKa 3' UTR, affecting HKa mRNA translation. The sensitivity of HKa mRNA
3' UTR to binding of miR-1289 identifies a novel regulatory mechanism of gastric 
acid secretion and offers new insights into mechanisms underlying transient H.
pylori-induced hypochlorhydria.

PMCID: PMC4116396
PMID: 24503769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 3;9(2):e87686. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087686. eCollection 
2014.

PRODH polymorphisms, cortical volumes and thickness in schizophrenia.

Ota VK(1), Bellucco FT(2), Gadelha A(3), Santoro ML(1), Noto C(3), Christofolini 
DM(4), Assunção IB(5), Yamada KM(2), Ribeiro-dos-Santos AK(6), Santos S(6), Mari 
JJ(5), Smith MA(2), Melaragno MI(2), Bressan RA(3), Sato JR(7), Jackowski AP(8), 
Belangero SI(9).

Author information: 
(1)Disciplina de Genética, Departamento de Morfologia e Genética, Universidade
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil ; LiNC - Laboratório
Interdisciplinar de Neurociências Clínicas, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo
(UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil. (2)Disciplina de Genética, Departamento 
de Morfologia e Genética, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo,
Sao Paulo, Brazil. (3)LiNC - Laboratório Interdisciplinar de Neurociências
Clínicas, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo,
Brazil ; Departamento de Psiquiatria, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo
(UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Brazil. (4)Disciplina de Genética e Reproducao Humana,
Departamento de Ginecologia e Obstetrícia, Faculdade de Medicina do ABC (FMABC), 
Santo Andre, Sao Paulo, Brazil. (5)Departamento de Psiquiatria, Universidade
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Brazil. (6)Laboratório de Genética
Humana e Médica, Universidade Federal do Pará (UFPA), Belém, Pará, Brazil.
(7)LiNC - Laboratório Interdisciplinar de Neurociências Clínicas, Universidade
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil ; Center of
Mathematics, Computation and Cognition, Universidade Federal do ABC, Santo Andre,
Brazil. (8)LiNC - Laboratório Interdisciplinar de Neurociências Clínicas,
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(9)Disciplina de Genética, Departamento de Morfologia e Genética, Universidade
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil ; LiNC - Laboratório
Interdisciplinar de Neurociências Clínicas, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo
(UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil ; Departamento de Psiquiatria,
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Schizophrenia is a neurodevelopmental disorder with high heritability. Several
lines of evidence indicate that the PRODH gene may be related to the disorder.
Therefore, our study investigates the effects of 12 polymorphisms of PRODH on
schizophrenia and its phenotypes. To further evaluate the roles of the associated
variants in the disorder, we have conducted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
scans to assess cortical volumes and thicknesses. A total of 192 patients were
evaluated using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID), Positive and
Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS), Calgary Depression Scale, Global Assessment of
Functioning (GAF) and Clinical Global Impression (CGI) instruments. The study
included 179 controls paired by age and gender. The samples were genotyped using 
the real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP)-PCR and Sanger sequencing methods. A sample of 138 patients
and 34 healthy controls underwent MRI scans. One polymorphism was associated with
schizophrenia (rs2904552), with the G-allele more frequent in patients than in
controls. This polymorphism is likely functional, as predicted by PolyPhen and
SIFT, but it was not associated with brain morphology in our study. In summary,
we report a functional PRODH variant associated with schizophrenia that may have 
a neurochemical impact, altering brain function, but is not responsible for the
cortical reductions found in the disorder.

PMCID: PMC3912045
PMID: 24498354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Int J Hematol. 2014 Mar;99(3):288-95. doi: 10.1007/s12185-014-1514-1. Epub 2014
Feb 5.

Impact of C-Myc gene-related aberrations in newly diagnosed myeloma with
bortezomib/dexamethasone therapy.

Sekiguchi N(1), Ootsubo K, Wagatsuma M, Midorikawa K, Nagata A, Noto S, Yamada K,
Takezako N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, National Hospital Organization Disaster Medical
Center, 3256 Midori-cho, Tachikawa, Tokyo, 190-0014, Japan, nao26@aol.com.

Recent studies have suggested that c-Myc over-expression may be a factor
indicating poor prognosis in multiple myeloma (MM), although c-Myc gene-related
abnormalities, including translocation and gene amplification, have not been
fully investigated in the novel agent era. Additional chromosome 8 may be
considered as aggressive disease in the 1990s. To clarify the impact of these
aberrations, we retrospectively analyzed newly diagnosed MM (NDMM) and
relapsed/refractory MM (RRMM) with bortezomib and dexamethasone induction
therapy. In the present study, the high-risk group was defined as having at least
one of the following present: non-hyperdiploidy, IgH/FGFR3, and del p53. Forty
NDMM cases were analyzed. At the median follow-up duration of 14.1 months, 14
RRMM were recognized. The proportions of patients in the high-risk, c-Myc
gene-related aberrations, and additional chromosome 8 groups at diagnosis were
45.5, 22.5, and 10 %, respectively. The proportions of patients who developed
RRMM in the high-risk, c-Myc gene-related aberrations, and additional chromosome 
8 groups were 41.7, 77.7, and 50 %, respectively. Furthermore, patients with
c-Myc gene-related abnormalities tended to exhibit inferior progression-free
survival (PFS), and those with c-Myc gene-related abnormalities and/or additional
chromosome 8 showed statistically shorter PFS. Therefore, c-Myc gene-related
abnormalities and additional chromosome 8 may be related to a poorer prognosis.

PMID: 24496825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Microbes Infect. 2014 Apr;16(4):362-6. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2014.01.003. Epub
2014 Jan 28.

Molecular characterization of hepatitis A outbreak in the province of Rome, Lazio
region, Italy, January-July 2013.

Capobianchi MR(1), Garbuglia AR(2), Agrati C(2), Rianda A(2), Noto P(2),
Corpolongo A(2), Cataldo MA(2), Rosati S(2), Zaccaro P(2), Loffredo M(3), Pompa
MG(4), Girardi E(5), Scognamiglio P(5), Ippolito G(6); GEAS Group.

Collaborators: Antinori A, D'Offizi G, Petrosillo N, Palmieri F, Nurra G,
Casalanguida A, Ciufoli A, Petrecchia A, Abdeddaim A, Baldini F, Capone A,
Chinello P, Cicalini S, Cirino L, Corpolongo A, Galati V, Ghirga P, Giancola L,
Iacomi F, Maddaluno R, Mariano A, Mencarini P, Oliva A, Taglietti F, Topino S,
Vincenzi L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, National Institute for Infectious Diseases "L.
Spallanzani", Via Portuense 292, 00149 Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
maria.capobianchi@inmi.it. (2)Laboratory of Virology, National Institute for
Infectious Diseases "L. Spallanzani", Via Portuense 292, 00149 Rome, Italy.
(3)Local Health Unit ASL Roma D, Via dell'Imbrecciato, 71b/73, 00149, Rome,
Italy. (4)Ministry of Health, DG for Prevention, V Office, Via G. Ribotta 5,
00144, Rome, Italy. (5)Department of Epidemiology, National Institute for
Infectious Diseases "L. Spallanzani", Via Portuense 292, 00149 Rome, Italy.
(6)Scientific Direction, National Institute for Infectious Diseases "L.
Spallanzani", Via Portuense 292, 00149 Rome, Italy.

Reduced circulation of hepatitis A virus lead to an increase of susceptible
individuals, and outbreaks occurred recently. In Northern Italy an outbreak is
ongoing, attributed to a monophyletic genotype IA strain, with mixed frozen
berries as probable source. From 01/01/2013 to 07/15/2013, 30 cases were
diagnosed at National Institute for Infectious Diseases, Rome, Italy,
representing about twice the number of cases in whole 2012. Phylogenetic analysis
indicated that most, although not all, infections were attributable to the same
monophyletic genotype IA strain identified in the contemporary Northern Italy
outbreak. This strain is also very similar to previous isolates from Venezuela.

Copyright © 2014 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 24486185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. N Engl J Med. 2014 Jan 23;370(4):322-33. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1304839.

Two phase 3 trials of bapineuzumab in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease.

Salloway S(1), Sperling R, Fox NC, Blennow K, Klunk W, Raskind M, Sabbagh M,
Honig LS, Porsteinsson AP, Ferris S, Reichert M, Ketter N, Nejadnik B, Guenzler
V, Miloslavsky M, Wang D, Lu Y, Lull J, Tudor IC, Liu E, Grundman M, Yuen E,
Black R, Brashear HR; Bapineuzumab 301 and 302 Clinical Trial Investigators.

Collaborators: Salloway S, Sperling R, Raskind M, Sabbagh M, Honig L,
Porsteinsson A, Ferris S, Weisman D, Harris L, Diamond B, Casher A, Thomas V,
Rhodes D, Olivia C, Years A, Rosenzweig A, Klein B, Arnold S, Boruta V,
Blue-Schaller A, McGowan J, Wurziger J, Yalkinoglu O, Wurziger J, Kirsch M,
Schindler C, Spirling A, Ohnesorge M, Kluge A, McCartney M, Stubbs T, Sweeney K, 
Johnson K, Santangelo R, Woo B, DiCarli M, Williams S, Passler J, Cheng D, Ingram
W, Jutras S, Shay M, McGlew A, Warner-Coviello S, Nandan R, Rees P, Iqbal N,
Naqvi Z, Stair K, Jacob S, Malik M, Ghumman I, Naqvi S, Ahmed M, Gulati S, Thaker
J, Spano S, Shah N, Dietrich D, Henning W, Hessel C, Frank M, Permann D, Schaefer
V, Armstrong L, Mills M, Schleining A, English J, Davis B, Miller T, Bennett T,
Wodushek T, Nash J, Nelson J, Miller P, Bernhardt T, Denny L, Burger J,
Hermann-Gertz J, Eggers B, Kittlitz M, Dittrich A, Germander C, Jahn-Gertz G,
Zahrend A, Kollewe E, Grotius C, Zimmerman E, Heckman S, Brown A, Gillen R, Nevin
S, Cioppa E, Clemins D, Roe N, Regan C, Cowan J, Evans S, Forchetti C, Vaishnavi 
S, Sanfilippo M, Leahy B, Pilat J, Layne J, Reiss M, Gupta V, Dubox J, Stelton D,
Merideth R, McGregor C, Schlinder J, Badal L, Kay C, Thompson R Jr, Okolisan M,
Frech R, Valerio J, Carmichael D, Blair S, Verdoom P, Dempsey GM, Dempsey G,
Winterkorn K, Munoz J, Hunter R, Morgan E, Riddle A, Smith R, Griffith E, Seaman 
T, Brazis V, Johnson W, Martin A, Strange L, Durden L, Bustos A, Spear M, Ettigi 
P, Anderson K, Atri P, Barnhardt J, Saiyed S, Koduru B, Gilliam C, Petree D,
Walthour T, Hegab I, Hines F, Nazmy W, Gilliam J, Hartsook R, Jacobson A, Damski 
P, Herskowitz B, Gran J, Bryer M, Ortiz M, Lino K, Herskowitz A, Creel C, Ocana
M, Zacharis A, Brownstone P, Garmany G, Miller J, Nystrom P, Brucher M, Sharp M, 
Zacharias S, Shioshita D, Lemme-Raup P, Teague A, Solis B, Asheim B, Shua-Haim J,
Clayton A, Shua-Haim V, Patel S, Poole P, Ahuja M, Lee P, Smith J, Cheshun Z,
Shua-Haim K, Pabon S, Mehra V, Porras J, Bryant S, Bartolome E, Hoh C, Murphy J, 
Sharif S, Buchsbaum M, Kortman K, Kovacs I, Chini N, Brown L, Markind S, Culligan
N, Bonwetsch R, Richter L, Peters S, Neumann B, Girgenti C, Glicklich M, Engelman
A, Rosales I, Pelikan M, Torabi E, Gereg J, Lasher E, Simas C, Mauro J, Murphy D,
Onofrio D, Greco D, Bobulinski M, Pennarola A, Cappillino B, Zagar D, Siegel K,
Palmer A, Carson K, McAllister P, Czapka B, Bebon C, Hong A, Kadimi S, Cretella
L, Gottschalk P, Gross J, Reis L, McCarthy C, Del Vecchio-Scully D, Toothaker T, 
Brown K, Termine A, Desai S, Dankwah-Quansah M, Kingson S, Castaneda G, Adams N, 
Miner D, Castelot A, Thompson J, Anderson G, Twyman C, Chumley W, Cecil S,
Sanders L, Kinley J, Heckler N, Yearsley T, Rodgers C, Shirley M, Clark P, Coates
F, O'Brien S, Adkisson P, McCreary J, Knox C, Stobbs J, Alva G, Alva A, Kellogg
J, Lykke M, Rabe M, Shih B, Wu J, Hoh C, Buchsbaum M, Fuller W, Voss G, Malone M,
Fuller G, Weaver S, Kittelsrud J, Erpenbach J, Syverson G, Hinker C, LaFollette
G, Sheth M, Ageton C, Hurd M, Ehli A, Rodd J, Zarate-Rowell E, Ibraheem L, Chau
J, Razinia T, Valdes C, Ferris C, Rodero M, Safranko B, Chen H, Yoo C, Huang P,
Steen S, Cascione M, Sergay S, Wilson R, Reddy S, Vila M, Nunamker M, Kilian C,
Francis D, Carlson K, Andia L, Scalf L, Donharl L, Alvarez A, Branscum A, Tariot 
P, Yaari R, Small S, Chavira M, Reiman E, Brand H, Cooper L, Dennis-Busier W,
Bandy D, Seward J, Weir J, Monarrez C, Branch D, Langbaum J, Mohammand A, Ross C,
Mullen L, Goodwin S, Fleisher A, Burke A, Jakimovich L, Costanzo D, Drimer-Kagan 
T, Holt C, High N, Wright K, Reeder S, Saunders K, Richter N, Vadovicky S,
Salomon E, Lopez R, Frantz M, Minero J, Langlois C, Chana G, Hamilton E,
Media-Rodriguez S, LeFranc D, Luk M, Martin A, Weiler K, Baker M, Martinez-Lujan 
L, Sabbagh M, Jacobson S, Belden C, Holladay D, Cottam R, Shill H, Edwards J,
Connor D, Davis K, Allinich D, Sala J, Covert M, Ceimo J, Molnar C, Malek-Ahmadi 
M, Schwartz E, Conrad P, Lopez J, Karoll E, Rangel A, Delco C, Obradov Z, Kohl K,
Montalvo B, Bandy D, Chong C, Doody R, Rountree S, Lipscomb E, Chowdhury M,
Bishop J, Gorton J, Powers M, Villaneuva-Meyer J, Awosika-Olumo M, Dawson T,
Heggins J, Dang M, Wong M, Bronson M, Wideman M, Stevens T, Karagol A, Capriles
V, Monk E, Hittle A, Parker J, Severa L, Coon P, Kersten D, Martin A, Douglas K, 
Liggett C, Dillon J, Knapp H, Gransberry K, Verdon R, Watson S, Audet S, Bauwens 
N, Aspinwall J, Green P, Goetting M, Bouma J, Rauch R, Schneider C, Packard K,
Kothi R, Timpe R, Hunt E, McNett C, Moorman H, Skaf E, Mehta R, Burke P,
Hotchkiss D, Fields P, Taborn J, Cutler J, Johnson B, Meyer J, Moorman K, Jawahir
J, Berker E, Stern R, Nair A, Green R, Kopits I, Barest G, Nadgir R, Mandell A,
Gokce N, Mwicigi J, Mian A, Wang J, Rossi C, Poon S, Callaghan J, Sakai O, Hong
H, Raghavan S, Joshi P, Cook E, Johnson K, Steinberg E, McGowan T, DiCarli M,
Johnson P, Qui W, McElveen W, Gonzalez R, Roberston K, Byerly K, Roman V, Scott
M, Bradshaw A, Woods P, Dowell M, Clark A, Roby S, Hoffman C, Fuentes M,
Bohler-Sampson P, Marino E, Foil B, Morran M, Williams S, Noorani S, Brody M,
Watson D, Berger S, Hackebeil A, Barbati G, Bouchard C, Kung M, Mauceri J,
Espinoza J, Fuquay-Scolari A, Smith C, Tobin W, Wahlestedt L, Marshall G, Rentz
D, McGinnis S, Johnson K, Olson L, Frey M, Atri A, Searl M, Sperling R, Mountz J,
Frishe K, Vitolo O, Amariglio R, Di Carli M, Vander Vliet M, Horkey L, Larvie M, 
Donovan N, Lorius N, Boot B, Sapir D, Roy K, Kim S, Seiden D, Caso J, Piloto E,
Aguilera M, Mendez C, Kosche K, Rex L, Grnja V, Bello I, Berrios G, Frank A,
Guzman D, Habib R, Gravelle C, Latour D, De hartog A, Yamin S, Richardson I,
Nelson R, Loy-English I, Smith L, Walter C, Salloway S, Lederer D, Fennelly W,
Blackham B, Primack J, Monast D, Kechichian C, Malloy P, Sofios V, Weinman S,
Santoro R, Mello K, Maxwell C, Gardner M, Rickler K, McLaughlin N, Johnson K,
Tirpaeck L, Jerue D, Piryatinsky I, Di Carli M, Cheng D, Marsland R, Read P,
Mikos A, Medeiros D, Kinney F, Dahl D, Thurstin A, May R, Reeves H, Garner R,
Steele T, Tolbert L, Lindbergh K, Redwine M, Hammel J, Savage R, White S, Kirby
N, Litman R, Maiorca M, McKenna H, Vickeri D, Wilson L, Cherif B, Klein P,
Khalafallah K, Janicz K, Saillard J, Franklin M, Gee F, Gvozdjan D, Clark J,
Pesce R, Kofalt J, Tape S, Hernandez G, Stewart R, Goldstone R, Oladapo G,
Franklin M, Soufer J, Goldstein L, Rabideau D, Berardi S, Miller N, Koliani L,
DeLuca J, Lebowitz R, Levinson P, Rubenstein S, Edelsohn L, Arnaudo E, Carunchio 
M, Fink A, Handler J, Paradise M, Greenberg G, Yu Y, Lichtenstein J, Killar E,
Munson A, Mueller T, Moore D, Greenbaum K, Leschek-Gelman L, Lesem M, Brown P,
Clay D, Timmons J, Brown S, Katic A, Claghorn J, Kalimuddin M, Libo-On A, Malit
W, Bernick C, Sholar M, Ramani L, Munic-Miller D, Vranesh G, Venkatesh Y, Kluge
R, Geiser D, Newland D, Koneru B, Viens T, Keene J, Morgan V, Mather T,
Macpherson C, Hartmann T, Michie D, Biton V, Gibson G, Sillivan J, Miller K,
Landers L, Hollis-Holderfield D, Hemphill D, Biton A, DeSantis M, Annas T, Moore 
C, Kunze J, Garg P, Lail J, Kirby K, Doherr C, Barker J 2nd, Wang X, Berg S,
Rosenberg G, Campopiano M, Dobkin L, Richard-Aasen S, Champ J, Dutka C, Celanovic
M, Minkel J, Wilson J, Belt N, Flamm L, Kasdan R, Katz D, Chandler L, Clegg R,
Duncan H, Moutz J, Harris J, Gautier C, Champ L, Reid V, Ravella C, Garg P, Jones
C, Pulford K, Usher G, Warach J, Cass P, Joslin A, Balenger B, Morin C, Roth K,
Conroy C, Gruber H, Keefe P, Daley D, Gajaraj K, Omidvar O, Goenjian A, Patel N, 
Walling D, Cohen A, Harris A, Stephens J, Mori C, Arceo F, Brand J, Segui C,
Foster E, Cabral A, Iler R, Bonomo G, Freinhar J, Huy M, Wu J, Kemp M, Issa C,
Reynolds S, Bui D, Marlotte L, Britton C, Lachica R, Webb C, Guinto A, Zaky C, Te
S, Tanimura C, Fukuma A, Lloyd C, Wise A, Lam P, Botros D, Rosas L, Boyd G,
Gladding R, Becker S, Norris A, Flores A, Parikh A, Baker L, Stephens D, Martinez
M, Keenan C, Waight T, Ho T, Lorine K, Ramezan-Arab N, Yang V, Yang C, Kashani S,
Spoor K, Ayele E, Honig L, Bell K, Janicki S, Dominguez-Rivera E, Tejeda R, Cheng
D, Ichise M, Gordillo M, Mules L, Rocha A, Steinerman J, Noble J, Curtis C, Dever
M, Creamer M, Marsh V, Mele P, Heurich E, Romm O, Patel P, McDonough J, Schubert 
T, Smith K, Fairbank J, Gonyea C, Bryant M, Taylor K, McMahon S, Daniels J, Foust
S, Stanton S, Afolabi J, Romm C, Bowman W, Davila L, Hardcastle B, Hoeckendorf J,
Hassman M, Wagenseller L, Hill K, Hassman D, Joseph A, Schwartz K, Brudon D,
Fisher C, Tasca P, Ball R, Licht J, Bakst I, Chaudhary K, Friedman E, Barie L, Da
Pena E, Cantu-Reyna G, De Paur L, Yagi N, Coffey D, Bujarski K, Clough E, Johnson
J, LeBlanc P, Alexandre F, Anderson C, Bingham K, Nixon S, Hurlbut-Styke J, Torok
E, Lonquist M, Mungari K, Strasser R, Scott S, Nelson K, Higgins D, Ramierz V,
Earl J, Anderson T, Engstrom D, Scholl R, Lesselyong J, Grove J, Drotning A,
Edgelman J, Scriviano S, Nash M, Olson D, Miller J, Schindler K, Turknett J,
Yarbrough G, Panter C, Thomas-Seaton L, Young K, Myers S, Vedanarayanan L, Golson
S, Previto-Craft L, Bruflodt A, Krendel D, Kennedy P, Schiff A, Williamson M,
Houssami Y, Rozin S, Townsend N, Brazeale A, Mohajermilani Y, Cutsuries A,
Micheli M, Meltzer C, Bruflodt S, Chandler S, Flemister C, Whiting M, Gbadebo D, 
Mayo S, Jackson R, Caltabiano N, Hazelrig C, Stein M, Toups K, Coney S, Stenstrom
A, Saroukhanians S, Weinstein R, Maack N, Miller E, Chee L, Crain S, Kirkland C, 
Chuck L, Englander M, Kendall S, Tedesco M, Christiansen M, Stacey H, Nguyen L,
Converse T, Bermak J, Eicher-Raymond C, Kron M, Ryan S, Fisch T, Tatum P, Florer 
J, Morimoto C, Germain M, Girard G, Boismenu C, Doucet C, Pare N, Bergeron G,
Vanasse C, DeGrace S, Marks D, Corwin L, Cunio M, Ricks N, Brogna L, Schober G,
Johnson K, Cheng D, Ferraro J, Di Carli M, Madore M, Birbiglia V, Parsons L,
Kearney E, Pelissier S, Orzechowski C, Nair V, Desautels R, Schwartz G, Azzoug A,
Bacher Y, Dastoor D, Kin N, Thavundayil J, Bossy T, Ouellette M, Anton A, Dai X, 
Sully J, Huang A, Niazi S, Legare C, Kadulina Y, Papazova I, Subramanian R,
Radulescu C, Lippa C, Gliebus G, Rosso A, Silversteen J, Hepler M, Irwin D,
Koenigsberg R, Kulandaivel K, Kazmi K, Paylor T, Durmala L, Edwards C, Arnold S, 
Kharkar S, Kalanuria A, Ambady P, Eppig J, Nieves C, Mbeo G, Kabasakalian A,
Edwards J, Spruill D, Beyer J, Doraiswamy M, Hellegers C, Husn H, Gersing K,
Aiello M, Kelley L, Burks M, Lateef N, Gang C, Richardson B, Arnold M, Cooper J, 
Wrubel B, Jehle L, Macarewich M, Nielsen T, Wexler B, Lockhart S, Barber J,
Wesson J, Nolan V, Chrisler A, McCormick L, Prausnitz S, Moore N, Zaietta G,
Macmillan P, Vyas U, Murillo L, Wallace S, Kadam R, Turner J, Swami S, Cooke J,
Patel R, Wilson T, Kolsterman L, Morrison B, Kadari R, Vashist A, Modarresifar H,
Sheini S, Massey S, Vidic T, Gibson R, Uitdenhowen S, Elliot G, Pelletier J,
Siatczynski A, Goodwin A, Hapner S, Fiedler J, Roberts T, Quakenbush M, Wu S,
Naeem M, Igleburger J, Aubert F Jr, Briggs S, Page S, Grantham D, Lomax J, Burke 
L, Phillippi S, Talor V, Piacente G, Ouellette B, Harper J, Pakutinski T, Levey
A, Lah J, Tune L, Stout D, Cellar J, Meng S, Rogers S, Ollivierre M, Masterson M,
Wingo T, Strozier L, Peterson-Hazan S, Jones M, Meltzer C, Hales C, Hu W,
Stennett S, Zanders L, Kozarsky J, Huh J, Perkins K, Edwards K, Rosenthal B,
Gorman C, Button J, O'Connor J, Boorse E, Button A, DePalma T, Senzon C, Staunton
S, Goodman W, Rieben N, Higgins J, Steiner D, Rampersad J, Lowenstein P, Saffioti
D, Metz S, Berko A, Upadhyay H, Batwin V, Fogel Y, Keilson M, Casale C, Weinberg 
R, Chang F, Gerbers V, Bustos-Wyss A, Gupta A, Williams R, Curfman T, Sible S,
Elias C, Lobsiger K, Long J Jr, Frazine R, Cecil J, Fisher M, Grumley P, Pittard 
J, Stricklin D, Wallace J, Massey C, Jones T, Dunning A, Wentworth M, Sowash D,
Allen S, Dome E, Alexander E Jr, Adamson D, Moller B, Brown H, Adamson W, Jones
M, McCoy M, Grubbs J, Middleton C, Ibata B, Harris K, Turner R, Reynolds B,
Johnson K, Ward C, Kolawole O, Browning S, Brown A, Behan K, Schultz A,
Berokowitz F, Arnold S, Gebrou A, Lawrence R, Aisen P, Tornatore C, Zhu J, Duarte
D, Santos D, Janicic-Kahric N, Zielinska P, Sita F, Stevenson M, Redington K,
Apter J, Southwick W, Blyskal A, Doring D, Procaccini S, Bergner T, Bush K, Aamir
T, Shim-Chim K, Gajian G, Allen L, Schafer L, Raymond C, Tabachnik P, Siddique M,
Harrington-Dix F, Kogan L, MacFadden W, Shechet B, Huang B, Soika R, Selivra E,
Scott-Igoe A, Shamel M, Ostertag K, Davillo R, Willis S, Wolfson T, Hofman J,
Barnhart B, Castro K, Dean G, McDonald M, Sharer J, Ross M, Rinehart T, Cermin A,
Nash M, Olson D, Miller J, Schindler K, Yarbrough G, Panter C, Thomas-Seaton L,
Young K, Myers S, Vedanarayanan L, Golson S, Previto-Craft L, Bruflodt A, Krendel
D, Kennedy P, Schiff A, Williamson M, Houssami Y, Rozin S, Townsend N, Brazeale
A, Mohajermilani Y, Cutsuries A, Micheli M, Meltzer C, Bruflodt S, Chandler S,
Flemister C, Whiting M, Gbadebo D, Mayo S, Jackson R, Caltabiano N, Hazelrig C,
Schwartz R, Archer B, Aultman J, Burks D, Crimmins S, Dickson A, Evans S,
Fernandez J, Helveston W, Lynn C, Maksi J, McIlwain M, Pinard F, Schneider J,
Starrett J, Szatmary G, Warren C, Shatz R, Lemere W, Holmes T, Pabla P, Eilya S, 
McCarthy S, Patel S, Cerghet M, Jones J, Reuther J, Kozak T, Gitt J, Mussomeli J,
Barricks R, Adams S, Fenton G, Hamann J, Huang A, Rumble L, Carothers B, Trncic
N, Saber T, Carlos S, Cooper M, Kloos R, Wallace R, Nambron, Subasic D, Miller E,
DiStefano J, Carpenter M, Chong C, Morris G, Chrvala W, Khan I, Stankovic G,
Pawenski N, Hamre J, Bessette L, Ferries E, Pearson N, Burk E, Robillard A, Bocti
C, Charette L, Chayer C, Comeau M, Demers P, Lachance N, Lachapelle L, Lepine C, 
Trouve M, Garcia A, Reid S, McAvoy L, Peltsch A, Vanstone A, Breen A, Chesney T, 
Ye B, Bowes J, Kohlenberg C, Stec D, Strehlow L, Daniels N, Dobratz A, Green J,
Koplin A, Doria E, Reich H, Winter S, Koplin L, Rowe E, Matthews B, Hake A,
Rexroth D, Unverzagt F, Havison K, Fleming K, Donadio L, Miller B, Turchi K,
Fletcher J, Lim M, Van Hook E, Brewer C, Klank B, Ramos C, Cavanaugh K, Zauber S,
Chehrenama H, Stark S, Khosla J, Shadley C, Mullins P, Bergsrud D, Mullins J,
Battle C, Jones K, Alway D, Brown K, Garrison J 3rd, McCarroll G, Weiss T, Poss
G, Friedman R, Garza L, Martin J, Yeatts R, Hendrix E, De Jesus K, Reyes C,
Sansalone L, Hoffman S, Crenshaw L, Lester D, Gonzalez A, Damon A, Shiwach R,
Sureddi S, Michaels C, Siwach R, Buckner R, Shiwach A, Nelson L, Jon-Ubabuco N,
Jones J, Marchand A, Peters G, Singh D, Sawyer C, Galindo B, Robinson D, Heritage
S, Rana M, Jennings D, Marek K, Russell D, Becker P, Fussell B, Hawkins K, Uy W, 
Paul E, Stottle D, Gazda S, Neiman R, Van Delden E, Kleinguenther R, Ales G,
Martinez G, Hoyler C, Young A, Smitley M, Mapa M, Lester M, Mappes S, Luncefold
C, Dib O, Garza M, Villasenor J, Collins C, Krumbholz R, Munoz D, Davtian A,
Davtian A, Tananyan T, Pilavian C, Santos-Alonso B, Romero R, Lasky B, Kochumian 
M, Booker J, Kessel K, Burr V, Booker R, Andrus M, Harrison M, Sonnier C, Brooks 
R, Bushnell S, Pilcher T, Rovner B, Carsello J, Liang T, Maloney E, McElwaine M, 
Sadaka R, Sailor L, Shaffer A, Tisera R, Weiss D, Kornsey E, Goldenberg J, Kramer
E, Goldenstein M, Cardona K, Kennedy A, Thomson N, Gordon K, Baker J, Michaelson 
S, Barron M, De Manna R, Calideen S, Johnson J, Benedict-Somich T, Andew J, Raj
A, Ardila J, Bondurant R, Chanti-Ketteri M, Everidge E, Fargher K, Giordano A,
Harrison T, Hayes J, Luhn B, Malek-Ahmadi M, McCasland L, Murray L, Sanchez-Ramos
J, Savage S, Smith A, Sneed K, Tetan N, Ventura N, Whelan G, Owens M, Rosenberg
P, Bergey A, Brasic J, Dieter M, Gogel C, Guevara M, Marano C, Oh E, Pedroso J,
Smith L, Steinberg M, Wong D, Ye W, Watkins F, Williamson J, Mayer S, Davis B,
Wittmer P, Gordon M, Standfield J, Smith H, Garg P, Chamberlain D, Gordineer L,
Ingram J, Freeman C, Knowles I, Downer L, Goldberg S, Edington L, Bartoli C,
Ramsay S, Chertkow H, Vaitekunas S, Gold S, Kelner N, Whitehead V, Hosein C, Kape
H, Babins L, Marques S, Bergman H, Yadalam K, Murphy C, Woodard C, Novak T,
Garrett S, Gardiner S, Smith C, Laughlin C, Campbell C, Victory P, Doucet L,
Saucier J, Bennett A, Ashworth B, Long M, Applebaum J, Spencer W, McCabe S, Acuna
L, Lieberman L, Copeland T, Biunno M, Dahmes R, Traylor A, Sigler M, Kemery T,
Jubelin B, Talwar N, Minagar A, Kelley R, Elliott D, Kelley N, Shneyder N, Reddy 
A, Brewer C, Booth A, Hoffman K, Jinkins P, Pinkston J, Khandelwal K, Bridges B, 
Wiegel T, Lafitte J, Lafitte L, Bezucha S, Harris M, Chalamidas K, McGee J, Golas
S, Rujescu D, Clauss T, Genius J, Dammer E, Bitzer E, Buschert V, Hoessler Y,
Benninghoff J, Autenrieth Z, Randhawa S, Arledge N, Aven M, Bow L, Ferguson C,
Fisher M, Green A, Griffin C, Heinzig D, Howorth L, Imes N, Lawson-Allen S,
Narula R, Ringrose R, Robert J, Skaggs S, Taylor C, Thomas M, Tirado J,
Dinnerstein E, Lannon M, Howard L, Kaminow L, Beaulieu J, Miller T, Carlson L,
Henninger H, Margolin D, Margolin J, Wall J, Ossinalde C, Molina M, Agustin L,
Morino S, Hamel H, Norwood P, Basi T, Graff-Radford N, Ertekin-Taner N, Freeman
W, Kendall T, Kistler D, Murray L, Grant S, Fletcher R, Pao W, Knopman D, Boeve
B, Molano J, Haukom N, O'Neil P, Bennett J, Maroney-Smith M, McCormick J,
Schriever T, Tangalos E, Swenson-Dravis D, Baxter K, Albers C, Ellison J, Harper 
D, Forester B, Olson D, Kim S, Wodward M, Johnson K, Di Carli M, Malloy M,
Jordan-Arthur B, Antuono P, Franczak M, Schindler C, Ravanelli-Meyer J, Antuono
L, Jones J, Koschnitzke M, Krouwer B, Rozman S, Sugden J, Banks J, Novic S,
Hadedorn K, Lopez J, Templin L, Klink K, Anderson L, McDonald A, Nygro H, Wilks
K, Safirstein B, Zapata L, Alonso D, Diaz C, Bedoya E, Sanchez R, Cymberknopf B, 
Torres A, Du Preez M, Swart S, Vicic J, Roberts P, Hunter F, Kubanska A,
Shillington M, Reynoso N, Outram C, Loring T, Matheson-MacLean S, Lichtenstein T,
Williams R, Benoit B, Hattrick K, Roberts P, Hunter F, Shillington M, Campbell J,
MacLeod W, Hibbert L, Barkhuizen F, McIntosh R, Kooy J, Fowler S, Roberts P,
Lindsay J, Belik M, Gates A, Pretorius T, Bredenkamp J, Thebaud A, Romain J,
Cowell S, Pierson M, Bell S, Greco A, Ball H, Liss J, Canedo J, Kaplan P,
Sidhpura J, Madril G, Harris P, Ford M, Price N, Meltzer C, Schwartz S, Stewart
S, Appledorn K, Toffler E, Pitman A, Herbst K, Frost L, Henderson C, Couturier N,
Wolfe C, Graham O, Mintzer J, Brawman-Mintzer O, Faison W, Hatchell M, Craig M,
Flynn-Longmire C, Davis F, Lucas S, Brown-Jenkins S, Bachman D, Broadway J,
Porter K, Dempsey L, Walker A, Cherry R, Kirbach S, Lange M, Mitchell L, Cerenzia
J, Stuckey M, Murphy M, Ravenel D, Williams A, Martin K, Russell S, Weichsel R,
Ashby N, Jones E, Kennedy K, Hamilton E, DesMarteau J, Richard E, MacDonnell K,
Rumboldt Z, Lewis E 3rd, Pursley W, Safrit M, Speakman S, Holycross J, Hunsicker 
A, Snider R, Snider S, Traynham E, Modlin T, Mills J, White T, Watts J,
Dal-Bianco P, Wieszmuellner S, Werner K, Pirker A, Rapf A, Lehrner J,
Assem-Hilger E, Moser D, Peuhringer P, Sieczkowski E, Imre M, Ratzinger G,
Dolinar E, Schmidt R, Lechner A, Reinhart B, Homayoon N, Petrovic K, Leitner M,
Pichler A, Radl B, Gold S, Dandapani B, Graham J, Gulk K, Anthony E, Beckner W,
Sunter W Jr, Robinson P, Kuczinski M, Thomas M, Rainwater G, Wallinger B, Vasile 
C, Bowen R, Ferguson J, Farmer M, Lefebvre G, Cameron M, Shafer J, Zarrella A,
Hensely-Oaten J, DeCoeur S, Agronin M, Adorno N, Bishop R, Riveros J, Phillips D,
Martinez M, Newton B, Cole B, Colina N, Philord J, Mestre R, Silverman M, Centeno
R, Miloslavich K, Katz L, Barnett V, Bryant M, Alalu R, Alvarado N, Reiner R,
Kohrman B, Grant T, Schwartz H, Pardo P, Pino I, Rey G, Rivas-Vasquez R, Marcos
J, Hernandez I, Berriors G, Amador B, Arguelles M, Ramires C, Sheldon E, Padilla 
A, Racher D, Beltran T, Reyno-Ramos N, Rosales V, Capdevilla K, Suarez K,
Gonzalez M, Bello I, Hurtado P, Acosta A, Bozoki A, Henry J, Goudreau J, Flatley 
D, Campbell S, Doerr T, McGhee-Helmy T, Leiter K, Gillespie M, Snider D, Wehner
S, Friedman L, Spallinger M, Chaps M, Doneson S, Mann L, D'Mello D, Leipprandt E,
Bielski R, Schramm J, Defever E, Rice B, Pinheiro A, Bell L, Watt J, Harrison N, 
Frank R, Lee-Livingston N, Kapper J Jr, Feldman A, Klapper A, Gossen R, Parks H, 
Wilson K, Greaves A, Waldman J, Winegarner D, Rowe V, Feaster T, Engle A, O'Shea 
A, Smith P, Hunter J, Cowee J, Dall K, Kreshel L, Jenkins L, Mo S, Karr C, Town
D, Cannon L, Kemble L, Cone S, Schell D, English J, Gilbert R Jr, Russell C,
Court D, Wilhite C, Serbanescu A, Gallagher E, Shindell S, Grossman H, Schimming 
C, Marzloff G, Fernandez J, Vigario A, Lundquist T, Corn B, Karani R, Charney D, 
Mirigliani E, Rivas S, Neugroschi J, Tipiani D, Romirowsky A, Pomara N, Liption
M, De la Pena C, Hernando R, Sarreal A, Schmeltz A, Belzer K, Zillka S,
Blumenthal A, Wisniewski T, Murman D, Adolphson M, Bayer B, Beck J, Brewer C,
Burke W, Cowardin C, Dietze T, Haire C, Herstein R, Hoffnung D, Larson L,
Madhavan D, Martin M, Melgoza M, Moore T, Oborny A, Orr C, Padala P, Peterson C, 
Phillips M, Scholl W, Singh S, Sweeny S, Taghavi S, Tefft S, Spikol L, Varrato J,
Isayev Y, Barbour P, Castaldo J, Liew C, Ottinger J, Jenny D, Li Y, Berman L,
Kanchana S, Jimenez S, Knapp K, Swiatek C, McElhenney M, Clauser G, Walicki D,
Galuska J, Cain J, Fox C, Cerrone M, Dondero L, Nabhan S, Malhotra S, Malhotra V,
Faust C, Masters T, Stewart M, Wagner L, Kirkland C, Mayle A, Hellgren R, Dorfman
B, Eldeo D, Burns M, Boyce L, Hoopingarner S, Cobb P, Blackford C, Boyce M,
Gehret L, Nussbaum R, Goyal M, Swank M, Zaidi S, Thompson T, Curry R, Norwood S, 
Biber M, Gilpatrick M, Johnson K, Stein A, Di Carli M, Stanton M, Scinto L,
Scofield M, Bell R, Cheng D, Barrios V, Atkinson V, Sullivan H, Oster M, Devine
S, Shoukimas G, Rimmer D, Cincotta M, McMillian D, Burkholder J, Andrefsky J,
Bavis J, Berke J, Bhagat A, Casanova J, Al Jaberi M, Rosenberg L, Sadeghian A,
Stalker A, Thakore N, Hagen T, Concialdi P, Duszynaki F, Gednetz K, Ruppenthal C,
Williams W, Lewis C, Tramontano G, Redling T, Wilder-Willis K, Sangama E,
Hinrichs C, Tennyson K, Genkin I, Bonk R, Glassmoyer M, Mendez N, Capstraw E,
Noye J, Taylor S, Bernardo D, Kelly M, Harris J, Todd H, Hammond T, Swerdloff M, 
Tarras S, Rosenzweig T, Pearlman S, Todd M, Scott M, Weitz R, Flaten P, Collins
M, Holub R, Xynellis J, Markert T, Torpey S, Brown J Sr, Olin L, Kohn M, Sanders 
M, Hansen T, Gatus R, Irwin L, Magliulo J, McAteer D, Brann L, Stewart E, Upright
S, Sellman D, Khan T, Ryan J, Button K, Fairbank J, Collins H, Ellsworth D,
Kudrow D, Yarema V, Arreloa G, Latorre J, Newman T, Vasquez E, Valdez B, Hung E, 
Stevens J, Lee K, Brown L, Wu J, Cabrera I, Gibbon G, Honeycutt W, Isa A,
Nieves-Quinones D, Cabrera-Castelao A, Leli D, Carter S, Petit A, Holley K,
Honeycutt L, Waldman S, Mossa S, Ciabarra A, Moon J, Kang E, Slaven M, Armstrong 
P, Wu J, Fani S, Ornelas A, Kittur S, Cowley C, Chapman J, Graziano S, Poiesz B, 
Shrestha M, Sprague A, Stratton S, Verman S, Bhagavatula K, Blumner J, Goriganti 
M, Vertino M, Schad L, Pulvino K, Stein L, Arnold T, Segal R, Henderson K,
O'Brien B, Rucker A, Liu Y, Sandidge A, Bradley R, Leonard R, Landy S, Vasu R,
Gerard G, Martinez J, Gerard P, Sanza D, Michalak M, Morran M, Smith S, Hansen C,
Corsoe E, Cohen S, Cohen C, Nicula M, Sindilar A, Schlesinger L, Chauhan T,
Wilson L, Parameswaran V, Jagani M, Dos Santos P, Ng K, Marinoff N, Wace K,
Khaikh A, Rasile M, Mistry J, Chaudhary B, Buchman E, Saha S, Maheswaran S,
Wainberg S, Wace A, Strilchuk A, Goldstick L, Jacobs A, Flexman J, Wiemerslage L,
Armantrout S, Jacobs B, Pence L, McOwen P, Decker Y, Weller J, Boyer S, Baker K, 
Ritter D, Kussman J, Kusko M, Chueh D, Schermerhorn C, Nguyen T, Drancea G,
Scarpino D, Perez G, Badrtalei S, Ortiz T, Hasso A, Hess M, Moe A, Brokenbourgh
M, Schaerf F, Keown R, Ouaou R, Schaerf M, Bannester C Jr, Black J, Driscoll P,
Carlin L, Mowzoon N, Carracino W, Robinson W, Polley N, Edgecomb C, Mather T,
Roby C, Votolato R, Young M, Sylvester C, Hall C, Harvey M, Kramarz M, Holt M,
Nasreddine Z, Berger L, Clement J, Fillatrault R, Boulanger J, D'Amour CP, Laure 
S, Robidoux J, Collin I, Gimard J, Laprade L, Milot M, Trepanier M, Laperle V,
Robillard-Roy M, Lafreniere J, De Melo C, Gauthier J, Primeau L, Blaquiere S,
Ostiguy D, Ellis J, Bashara B, Bednar L, Axt J, Hess B, Ciliberti K, Parise M,
Willis T, Shreefter A, Gallagher C, Macchi R, Noto K, Mansen R, Kleiner J, Kloman
A, Lamoureaux R, Clionsky M, Marshall S, Edwards K, Kittler J, Grandey E,
Majchrowski H, Vittone T, Ramsey-Rosenheim J, Johnson K, Cheng D, Kalinowsky E,
Plager A, McCauley S, Steinman S, Steinman J, Reynolds A, Leland H, Weslowski K, 
Nash M, Olson D, Miller J, Schindler K, Turknett J, Yarbrough G, Panter C,
Thomas-Seaton L, Young K, Myers S, Vedanarayanan L, Golson S, Bruflodt A, Craft
L, Townsend N, Houssami Y, Brazeale M, Rozin S, Krendel D, Kennedy P, Schiff A,
Williamson M, Mohajermilani Y, Cutsuries A, Michelli M, Meltzer C, Brufoldt S,
Chandler S, Flemister C, Whiting M, Gbadebo D, Mayo S, Jackson R, Caltabiano N,
Hazelrig C, Mudd A, Shubin R, Dow L, Edge-Booth H, Lee A, Martel C, McNamara M,
Philpott L, Plemons A, Sider D, Walker V, Woo D, Gywnn M, Lacey D, Freschi J,
King S, Walton M, Rinow M, Burks J, Barker J 2nd, Lees T, Schmechel D, Jolly J,
Howard V, Washburn F, Weinstein B, Synn J, Whisnant T, Colvin A, Bucher N, Wendt 
J, Weldman D, Chua R, Putty T, Scully T, Vance K, Laguna J, Peterson B, Putty D, 
Fox G, Caffrey J, Ronan P, Dalby P, Saul N, Wagner M, Schroeder A, Sullivan S,
Brown D, Mesulam M, Johnson N, Borosh B, Regalado J, Lipowski K, Wu C, Gliebus G,
Gilpin L, Weaver L, Ouellette N, Gitelman D, Gottfried J, Weintraub S, Musil S,
Sadowski M, Agugliaro G, Baquiran C, Blinkoff D, Epstein E, Ferris S, Galvin J,
George A, Golomb J, Jenkins T, Ku-Pang N, Lerer J, Lew A, Monteiro I, Moutoussis 
N, Pogorelec D, Shulman M, Sierra A, Sollins Y, Solomon T, Torossian C,
Wisniewski T, Yunger J, Zichlin M, Zweig Y, Gurnani A, Quinn J, Kaye J, Silbert
L, Wild K, Sommer H, Erten-Lyons D, Lear J, Larsen D, Buracchio T, Stanko M,
Salazar S, Loree E, Klein E, Mikszewski J, Mai A, Olsson L, Johnston R, Nattrass 
S, Vogt E, Wood C, Hadford C, Adams J, Birk D, Tuchman M, Brown J, York R,
Punchowski L, Montgomery L, Stanford L, Pratt J, Schleyer P, Skiles R, Tuchman C,
McCallister K, Carta-Sanchez V, Rahe M, Iwasz M, Foley C, Breuer L, Ferazzoli S, 
Forde A, Percicles M, Tannazzo T, Chintakayala D, Bhutaney B, Waites D, Andreoli 
N, Quadri L, Seide C, Shah N, Borrie M, AlAama T, Best S, Burham A, Campbell M,
Mardin W, Parker E, Poirier S, To O, Truemner J, Viger M, Wells J, Arnold S,
Huege S, Weintraub D, Watson M, McCoubrey H, Rockwell K Jr, Wolk D, Janis P,
Martinez P, Nunez-Lopez J, Hamilton R, Combs M, Dubroff J, Brookstein P,
Rivera-Colon J, Rehrig T, Newberg A, Rooney D, Rousseau R, Alsina J, Alvarez J,
Arana J, Berreiro A, Carrasco A, Cesar M, Cunningham M, Flores P, Galano A,
Hernandez I, Hernandez Y, Isla A, Mejia W, Miller C, Oskooilar N, Wilcox C, De
Francisco D, Katz B, Guevarra K, Henry M, Bacon P, Tong M, Heiser J, Cabrera C,
Thach A, Manuputty H, Grosz D, Heiser J, Oskooilar N, Wilcox C, Flores L,
Morrissey J, Katz B, Henry M, Stotts M, Belden W, Flowers S, Panlilio M,
Oskooilar N, Wilcox C, De Francisco D, Katz B, Guevarra K, Henry M, Bacon P, Tong
M, Heiser J, Cabrera C, Thach A, Manuputty H, Kwentus J, Hall S, Nhema S,
Chandler A, Jenkins C, Richardson K, Bagwell R Jr, Couey C, Sadowsky C, Burke R, 
Cipriani D, Drain B, Kessel C, Layne S, Martinez W, Moreno A, Stone R, Sununu T, 
Tirana E, Villena T, Wingkun E, Winner P, Wolfson H, Zuniga J, Pernsteiner E,
Mega M, Cohan S, Luz P, Huddleston M, Curtis C, Timmins C, Bernards J, Moses D,
Smoot K, Migaki G, Edmondson G, Siaroff B, Cave M, Rogers L, Mackey D, Burkley D,
Carlini W, Sullivan K, Narus M, Dibb C, Hehn S, Jaasko K, Milhoun B, Nicols K,
Duffy M, Heath R, Nieto J, George-Strader D, Espasadin J, Petrie W, Hart J,
Jamieson R, Jack R, DeLaney R, Harkleroad M, Rogers J, Graham R, Killen D,
Williams N, De La Gandara J, Pedraza A, Pantuso V, Herr K, Greenberg R, Wilgoren 
N, Komlos D, Ranjan R, Sedenik J, Sofianos J, Manuel M, Campbell E, Couture D,
Bowman M, Broadway S, Carnes K, Naslund P, Hales T, Gabr R, Glenn S, Hull K,
Konanc D, Ferrell W, Freedman S, Yerramsetty P, Tim R, Perkins A, Starnes H,
Jackson J, Butler H, Downs J, Conder R, Farley C, Garriss T, Griffin M,
Strickland L, Allen R, Yelton M, Allen M, Chakraburtty A, Andrus J, Teague J,
Jerden B, Smela D, Dasharathy G, Aven M, Wright M, Roberts J, Holland R, Cox J,
Greyson R, Waugh K, Smith S, Grandle S, Grandle G, Corbin B, Frotmann T,
Nardandrea J, Clevinger S, Brown D, Riddle P, Culp-Papierniak N, Yordan J,
Patterson M, Spencer R, Sorrentino J, Craggs L, Sorrentino L, Sloan B, Phanumas
D, De La Pena J, De La Pena D, Shrestha S, Patel K, Patel M, Rai M, Thapamagar S,
Cunningham M, Khan T, Dedovic L, Neupane B, Haupt E, Malla S, Spain T, Subedi S, 
Ott B, Astphan M, Bauer L, Boxerman J, Bricusse P, Daiello L, Davis J, Erbozhurt 
T, Faucher N, Friedman M, Gaynor E, Knott S, Lazar J, Miller L, Oden E, Querfurth
H, Rizvi S, Smith M, Tremont G, Stoukides J, Cimini D, Cerullo A, Adams H,
Rainville L, Teixeira G, Stoukides C, Nolan L, Ritzau J, Brown R, Rodgers J Jr,
Keegan A, Luis C, Hawkins C, Parrish J, Rickard C, Hill K, Moritz G, Giordano A, 
Burke D, Baker S, Lincoln C, Stilson P, Arthur G, Gillett R, Rindfleisch C,
Grantham M, Koepf M, Lund L, Reed J, Bakski P, Girard J, Alvarez Y, Baker S, Mc
Mearty A, Ventura N, Kluge R, Geiser D, Newland D, Koneru B, Viens T, Keene J,
Morgan V, Mather T, Macpherson C, Hartmann T, Michie D, Bettinger I, Boutwell C, 
Weinstein C, Old K, Arkin S, Dobbie T, Grau C, Summers D, Smithson L, Schwartzman
M, Bell S, Peters M, Rymer M, McIntire J, Carter M, Mullen A, Milburn L,
Grossberg G, Tait R, Chibnall J, Malmstrom T, Brown S, Morefield C, Filla-Taylor 
J, Bhatt A, Redden M, Eller S, Cruz-Flores S, Holzemer E, Manepalli J, Feen E,
Piriyawat P, Desai A, Fann A, Herr C, Bassil N, Thaipisuttikul P, Patel L, Singh 
I, Goldstein J, Engelmann G, Gabriel B, Kavanagh-Hale K, Yee P, Ludwig D, Marcal 
T, Henderson E, Tindle M, Henderson R, Rowe C, Aissi N, Steinberg A, Gok P,
Miller M, Borden K, Nishioka E, Targan L, Newman E, Klein D, Itzcovich-Schuster
J, Malamed M, Schreiber M, Ettlinger R, Brown M, Grosz Y, Resille L, Smith W,
Matsoyan N, Schuster R, Rose E, Hayes M, Wu J, Labunsky L, Svidler D, Neal C,
Ramirez V, Hosseini S, Ossinalde C, Haider J, Winston J, Whitehead C, Simpson C, 
Eisenberg L, Walker D, McColl R, Feldman R, Burt M, Feldman K, McLendon D,
Woodard V, Peppard K, Feldman R, Burt M, Feldman K, McLendon D, Woodard V,
Peppard K, Plopper M, Ayers C, Berkowitz A, Buchsbaum M, Buda M, Cary D, Coughlin
J, Dang K, Dobrina M, Geriak M, Hessling T, Highum J, Hoh C, LoCascio C, Morache 
C, Nicolas F, Pirlliman C, Tecca D, Woods L, Ferencz G, Miskin P, Sandler L,
DiPaolo R, Escandon S, Sandler D, Gomez S, McMurray S, Ala T, Elble R, Lokaitis
B, Popovich A, Young C, Richey A, Zec R, Kohlrus S, Fritz S, Vatakis N, Fink G,
Shylman S, Yuryev-Golger I, Starosta Z, Mogilyansky Y, Gutkin J, Montoya L, Li G,
King R, Fowler R, Stengel L, Thursby V, Holt W, Shahzad S, Bowman M, Henegar R,
Livingston J, Rossen M, Gutzmer R, Wightman H, Flanagan W, Melchionna E, Sorrell 
M, Nelson C, Panasci S, Gallaher C, McGovern L, Lapponese T, Lichtenstein A,
Stedman M, Herrero B, Pea C, Dagon E, Drum L, Mallery J, Pea P, Blackmer K,
Rossignol D, Sanders C, Eubanks W, Carulli D, Pea L, Maloney K, Rodriguez L,
Hernandez M, Scheppf A, Urive P, Altemose R, Blazek M, Baker A, Carver M, Myers
S, Pasternak S, Kertesz A, Finger E, Morlog D, Pantazopoulos K, Jesso S, Losk S, 
Moore L, Wilson K, Ottum M, Adamoski R, Nelson J, Smith W, Crider C, Conrad M,
Horton M, Bergthold J, Wellnitz M, Plank K, Marambe L, Yeo A, Cohen S, Vasquez A,
Bell D, Di Dio A, Lash S, Cohen K, Alvarez Y, Tearney M, Thomas C, Passaro E,
Richardson M, Ginsberg P, Cutie E, Di Mattia M, Bauer C, Triana S Jr, Copil L,
Freeman R, Schwartz H, Steinberg J, Maniar M, Dokson J, Padilla A, Seliger I, Ng 
B, Camacho A, Sanchez R, Lopez-Castleberry C, Stevens C, Wetherill P, Galindo J, 
Gaspar J, Puyot D, Au W, Kile S, Au Y, Olsen-Wilson K, Fry B, Donnel T, Benabides
B, Dolnak D, Ishaque S, Jenkin F, Packard T, Williams J, Vassilenko E, Robinson
C, Tunell G, Greenfield C, Chafetz P, Benfield-Phillips J, Wood G, Blansit S,
White L, Hastings M, O'Leary S, Davis Q, Marotta G, Poisinelli A, Allan P,
Gandell D, Pitcher N, Tersigni M, Accarrino J, Dopslaff N, Attardo L, Cornejo L, 
Sacareni C, Sedran D, Ng N, Ronchi N, Tsui V, Bacolor M, Ervin J, Bradshaw B,
Brouillette L, Ervin S, Wyatt P, Bedford J, Jokerst S, Dubin P, Biggs D,
Sachedina R, Marquez S, Tyson M, Sandefur M, Hager R, Irwin L, MacPhall M,
Eldridge R, Baker E, Box M, Jacques P, Wendland R, Kalafer M, Pressman P, Lyman
M, Cummins A, Wilkening A, Lombardo S, Dobi A, Geiger A, Levin A, Lombardo C,
Arnold S, Solomon P, Catapano-Friedman L, Stitelman M, Levin P, Robinson M,
Mazzola M, Little D, Murphy C, Budson A, Casey M, Burgher R, Michalcuzk D, Paro
R, Hearst J, Redlich H, Burgher T, Ramirez A, Richards R, Munson K, Markowitz J, 
Dufort M, Reif T, Flether C, Ross J, Desai G, MacMillan A, Ross D, Doyle K,
Vaccarelli J, Donovan L, Aponte T, Dioguardi V, Sadlon J, Garcia W, Rothschild H,
Bradley S, Ponugoti P, Bodala D, Donne F, Arnold P, Wilder-Willis K, Gomez J,
Ornstein M, Koempel F, Kundla T, Gartner M, Scharre C, Agrawal P, Davis R,
deRoche M, Ferguson J, Grothause J, Himes B, Icenhour J, Kataki M, Keddie E,
Kostyk S, Kovesci R, Stoicea N, Vrettos N, Wessner M, Lobatz M, Blumenfeld A,
Heinen J, Rosenberg J, Schim J, Sanchez G, Chippendale T, O'Neill-Conover C,
Sadoff M, Wang A, Soto E, Frishberg B, Sahagian G, Tenorio A, Hinkle L, Oh I, Hoh
C, Brower J, Banker L, Buchsbaum M, Hubbard R, Roger L, Jerez O, Hensgen H, Perez
T, Bumby N, Lobatz M, Blumenfield A, Heinen J, Rosenberg J, Schim J, Sanchez G,
Chippendale T, O'Neill-Conover C, Sadoff M, Wang A, Soto E, Frishberg B, Sahagian
G, Tenorio A, Hinkle L, Oh I, Hoh C, Brower J, Banker L, Buchsbaum M, Lerner A,
Foxhall S, Ogrocki P, Hudson L Jr, Sanders M, Banchy M, Sami S, Ahern G, Hishaw
G, Merski S, Carmody R, Norris G, Godard J, Van Skiver M, Sinnard J, Ross D,
Baldwin M, Menchola M, Hemmer J, Seal L, Schmidt K, Furet O, Patry D, Cohen A,
Hogan D, Muller P, Megarry C, Smith E, DeCarli C, Seavey W, Park L, Sweeney K,
Levallois M, Campos J, Barjas-Ochoa E, Butler A, Conover C, Grill J, Ringman J,
Beigi M, Kennedy L, Lu P, Quach J, Tingus K, Friedman J, Bailey M, Cummings J,
Pazienza S, Benitez A, Yi D, Chang N, Rushing M, Bardens J, Barsuglia J, Kang C, 
Medina L, Becker B, Alas A, Boxer A, Rabinovici G, Matthews B, Nicolson R, Miller
Z, Barton C, Lee S, Rosen H, Fine E, Hall J, Sullivan K, Sha S, Vossel K, LaMarre
A, Valcour V, Tartaglia C, De May M, Adams K, Perry D, Haws K, Rosenbloom M,
Racine C, Kerchner G, Chao S, Ho R, Thibodeau M, Sullivan C, Arnold K, Zizak V,
King L, Mozer E, Lubega S, Brewer J, Lehmer M, Vanderswag H, Fontaine D, Peavy G,
Buchsbaum M, Jenkins C, Gigliotti C, Gonzales J, Espinoza S, Hoh C, Pierce A, Sun
J, Da Pena E, Espinoza R, Sherzai A, Caccavale T, Tam S, Wilson A, Preda A,
Potkin S, Faziola L, Nguyen D, Kemp A, Wu J, Ramsey G, Pellicer R, Shah N, Plon
L, Upton J, Hannaford D, Highurn D, Milne N, Mastrianni J, Williams S, Grant K,
Freed G, Lacy M, Young J, Semmes E, Nader T, Weiner M, Levin A, Austria E, Burns 
J, Anderson H, Couldry B, Kaus C, Swerdlow R, Parker C, Curtis L, Switzer P,
Scott L, Bothwell R, Laubinger M, Arthur A, Corey K, Mahan E, Schaeffer D, Skea
K, Jicha G, Howe J, Smith C, Kennedy F, Schmitt F, Cambi F, Caban-Holt A,
Holbrook K, Fee D, Tandy T, Sitzlar S, Spencer D, Lightner B, Nichols H, Everman 
S, Freeman S, Cooper G, Newsham P, Turner K, Vanderpool K, Carr S, Smart M,
Markesbery W, Wethington M, Dudderar C, Fishman P, Powell S, Barry E, Roberts S, 
Nickerson C, Anderson K, Chopra A, Scheinthal S, Forsberg M, Palli P, Friedman M,
Fogle M, Elahi A, Ruchinskas R, DiVito P, Maslowski K, Barbas N, Heidebrink J,
Shah G, Giordani B, Lord J, Rothley J, Woon F, Votruba K, Cline C, Wilson S,
Hammers D, Powells D, Michalski L, Coulas T, Franti L, Ford A, McFadden M, Ford
C, Bachert L, Edmonds E, Prestopnik J, Adair J, De Greinel E, Wroblewski M, Jung 
R, Knoefel J, Barrow R, Harmon M, Aragon J, Knebl J, Heffeman J, Hooper C,
Alvarez L, Hall J, Harty B, Davanloo H, Patki D, Lopez O, Sweet R, Macedonia L,
Aizenstein H, Berman S, Baumgartner T, Sarles E, Rothfus W, Doyle J, Mountz J,
Simpson D, Heyman R, Zachariah W, Ruszhiewicz J, Klunk W, McDade E, Rickard C,
Greenberg K, Wolk D, Porsteinsson A, Salem-Spencer S, Goldstein B, Cole C, Bean
S, Kowalski N, Miller A, Martin K, Stear K, Brand C, Richard J, Ismail S, Cosman 
K, Ciancaglinia P, Smith A, Ardila J, Baxter D, Casady L, Chanti-Ketteri M,
Chichkova R, Fargher K, Luhn B, Major B, Malek-Ahmadi M, Murray L, Mutolo S,
Pfeiffer E, Raj B, Sneed K, Teten N, Ventura N, Whelan G, Auchus A, Huang J,
Brint J, Hennessey L, Hickerson A, Wahba M, Dale D, Patel Y, Figures K, Kearns L,
Cucio-Brint A, Haykal M, Pfeiffer B, Rosenberg R, Womack K, Svetlik D, Miles K,
Acevedo A, Phan M, Diaz-Arrastia R, Weiner M, Lake T, Lug E, Harrah K, Chansard
M, Koch K, Ogunnaike B, Giesecke N, Noe C, Whitten C, Khan N, Isah C, Eschweiler 
G, Kuder-Buletta E, Trunk T, Niebler R, Waechter T, Von Ulardt J, Zwarg E, Bosch 
S, Ethofer T, Riepe M, Wigand M, Palm C, Schiffczyk C, Walter-Nebenprufer B,
Kalkan R, Altintas E, von Arnim C, Baslic J, Gualazzini S, Polivka D, Schuck E,
Donniacuo A, Pohler T, Pfluger M, Zamrini E, Foster N, Levy J, Mesley R, Kay M,
Sharma R, Mesley S, Plante D, King R, Allen T, Duff K, Redd W, Floore T, Bersick 
M, Dennett K, Dekosky S, Geldmacher D, Solorzano G, Manning C, Davis R, Webber C,
Zieman S, Damgaard P, Ducharme J, McDermott A, Christoper J, Thompson-Heisterman 
A, Opie R, Davis M, Wooten G, Steiner A, Rinehardt E, Leone K, Johnston K,
Pendelbury W, Boyd J, Daley R, Dumas J, Edgren C, Farrag A, Hamill R, Ingvoldstad
C, Jafree I, Jenkins L, Kenney S, Lenox S, Lucy S, Marsh-Reed J, Moustakas A,
Oesterle C, Peyser J, Savage A, Shang Y, Smith L, Waterman S, Asthana S, Gleason 
C, Carlsson C, Barczi S, Johnson S, Johnston S, Sivesind P, Zugin Z, Markgraf T, 
Christian B, Mueller B, Blazel H, Harding S, Sachs J, Wroblewski M, Gassman M,
Hart D, Calder C, Storey J Jr, Beesley B, Brooks R, Finkle A, Bailey M, Wymer J, 
Sadekoski C, Edmunds M, Penc S, Raskind M, Brown N, Burges D, Conybeare D, Eliza 
S, Hoff D, Hutchings E, Lawrence J, Leverenz J, Li G, Mayer C, McCraw K,
O'Connell J, Patel U, Peskind E, Peterson M, Ritcher W, Rohde K, Shen A, Stewart 
M, Stout J, Tsuang D, Wang L, Petrie E, Kelly W, Trader D, Wang R, Trader K, Lee 
E, Gordon R, Holt L, Qasabian L, Gamalyan S, Iskin A, Castro R, Guillen M,
Bagramyan K, Dougherty J Jr, Gibson R, Smith W, Gibson S, Shumate M, Fisher A,
Oglesby L, Vine D, Smith D, George K, Nichols B, Enyeart J, Sorenson C, Gowdy B, 
Lewandowski J, Wheeler K, Schowengerdt A, Smith G, Hom A, Carr D, Nobbe J, Snider
B, Ghoshal N, Fierberg B, Eastep J, Gier J, Dreyfus D, Coats M, Tomlinson C,
Oliver A, Tarawneh R, Aeschleman M, Galvin J, Overkamp W, Wier V, Sundermann J,
Tornabene J, Kaster S, Timiras M, Savina V, Horner J, Roozen C, Smith J, Akers J,
Keren R, Wherrett J, McNeill D, Fiss T, Sukhai S, Ghazanfari B, Anor C, MacLennan
V, Ip R, Arone Y, Fischler L, van Dyck C, Tampi R, Aziz R, Friedman G, Whang P,
Reech K, Benincasa A, Wiemers S, MacAvoy M, Frye T, Vinci M, Barcelos N, Hu J,
Corsi M, Nishimura N, Oellette P, Ryan-Parsch C, Lopez J, Mayeri S, Shamsi M,
Taylor S, Ricitelli D, Azar B, Beltran C, Chivukulu R, Correa P, Wiznia L, Cheng 
D, Vallabhaneni S, Patel S, Henry S, Werdiger N, Cleves-Bayon J, Wiechers I,
Paturzo K, Nygaard H, Bowen G, Brisibe T, Laborde-Lahoz P, Wagner A, Nespoli M,
De Asis S, Good S.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Apr 10;370(15):1459.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Apr 10;370(15):1460.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Jan 23;370(4):377-8.
    Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2014 Mar;139(10):468.

BACKGROUND: Bapineuzumab, a humanized anti-amyloid-beta monoclonal antibody, is
in clinical development for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease.
METHODS: We conducted two double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, phase 3
trials involving patients with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease--one
involving 1121 carriers of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) e4 allele and the other
involving 1331 noncarriers. Bapineuzumab or placebo, with doses varying by study,
was administered by intravenous infusion every 13 weeks for 78 weeks. The primary
outcome measures were scores on the 11-item cognitive subscale of the Alzheimer's
Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS-cog11, with scores ranging from 0 to 70 and higher
scores indicating greater impairment) and the Disability Assessment for Dementia 
(DAD, with scores ranging from 0 to 100 and higher scores indicating less
impairment). A total of 1090 carriers and 1114 noncarriers were included in the
efficacy analysis. Secondary outcome measures included findings on
positron-emission tomographic amyloid imaging with the use of Pittsburgh compound
B (PIB-PET) and cerebrospinal fluid phosphorylated tau (phospho-tau)
concentrations.
RESULTS: There were no significant between-group differences in the primary
outcomes. At week 78, the between-group differences in the change from baseline
in the ADAS-cog11 and DAD scores (bapineuzumab group minus placebo group) were
-0.2 (P=0.80) and -1.2 (P=0.34), respectively, in the carrier study; the
corresponding differences in the noncarrier study were -0.3 (P=0.64) and 2.8
(P=0.07) with the 0.5-mg-per-kilogram dose of bapineuzumab and 0.4 (P=0.62) and
0.9 (P=0.55) with the 1.0-mg-per-kilogram dose. The major safety finding was
amyloid-related imaging abnormalities with edema among patients receiving
bapineuzumab, which increased with bapineuzumab dose and APOE e4 allele number
and which led to discontinuation of the 2.0-mg-per-kilogram dose. Between-group
differences were observed with respect to PIB-PET and cerebrospinal fluid
phospho-tau concentrations in APOE e4 allele carriers but not in noncarriers.
CONCLUSIONS: Bapineuzumab did not improve clinical outcomes in patients with
Alzheimer's disease, despite treatment differences in biomarkers observed in APOE
e4 carriers. (Funded by Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy and Pfizer; Bapineuzumab 
301 and 302 ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT00575055 and NCT00574132, and EudraCT 
number, 2009-012748-17.).

PMCID: PMC4159618
PMID: 24450891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Endocr Pract. 2014 Jul;20(7):657-62. doi: 10.4158/EP13418.OR.

Comparison of TSH Levels with Liquid Formulation Versus Tablet Formulations of
Levothyroxine in the Treatment of Adult Hypothyroidism.

Brancato D(1), Scorsone A(1), Saura G(1), Ferrara L(1), Di Noto A(1), Aiello
V(1), Fleres M(1), Provenzano V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Regional Reference Center for Diabetology and Insulin Pumps, Department of
Internal Medicine and Diabetology, Hospital of Partinico, ASP 6 Palermo, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: A great number of factors can interfere with levothyroxine (LT4)
tablet absorption, leading to increased serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
levels and, accordingly, to increased LT4 requirements. LT4 oral solution
(LT4-OS) is a novel formulation with a pharmacokinetics profile different from
those of tablets. The aim of this study was to retrospectively evaluate whether
serum TSH levels were decreased after switching adult hypothyroid patients from
the tablet to LT-OS.
METHODS: We retrospectively evaluated 53 outpatients on LT4 replacement therapy
(consumed within 1 hour before breakfast) who switched from LT4 tablets to LT4-OS
without changing the daily dose. We compared preswitch TSH (TSH1) with TSH level 
60 to 90 days after the switch (TSH2) and examined the clinical differences
between the patients whose TSH did and did not drop after the switch.
RESULTS: After the switch, TSH levels decreased from a median value of 3.04
(interquartile range [IQR] 1.75-6.80) to 2.30 (IQR 1.21-3.81) µIU/mL, and the
difference was significant (P = .0034). We observed a TSH reduction (TSH2/TSH1
ratio <1) in 36/53 (67.9%) of patients; the median TSH2/TSH1 ratio was 0.71 (IQR 
0.37-1.14). In the group of patients whose TSH dropped, we observed an increased 
frequency of factors interfering with LT4 absorption (P = .014). The median
TSH2/TSH1 ratios were 0.50 (IQR 0.31-0.72) and 0.85 (IQR 0.65-1.36) for patients 
with and without interfering factors, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Our study confirms that LT4-OS could have an increased absorption
rate in comparison to LT4 tablets, especially in the presence of other factors
interfering with LT4 absorption.

PMID: 24449674  [PubMed - in process]


270. Indian J Hematol Blood Transfus. 2013 Sep;29(3):147-51. doi:
10.1007/s12288-012-0177-4. Epub 2012 Jul 29.

Bortezomib, dexamethasone, and high-dose melphalan as conditioning for stem cell 
transplantation in young Japanese multiple myeloma patients: a pilot study.

Takezako N(1), Sekiguchi N(1), Nagata A(1), Homma C(1), Noto S(1), Miwa A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, National Hospital Organization Disaster Medical
Center of Japan, 3256 Midori-cho, Tachikawa-shi, Tokyo, 190-0014 Japan.
(2)Department of Hematology, National Center for Global Health and Medicine,
1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjyuku-ku, Tokyo, 162-8655 Japan.

Autologous stem cell transplantation is recommended for younger patients with
newly diagnosed multiple myeloma because of a high complete response rate and
better survival. Bortezomib shows a synergistic effect with melphalan and has no 
prolonged hematologic toxicity, and the complete response rate after autologous
stem cell transplantation is improved by combining bortezomib with melphalan for 
conditioning. Twelve patients were enrolled in a phase 2 study between February
and November 2010, receiving bortezomib (1 mg/m(2) × 4), dexamethasone
(20 mg/body × 8), and melphalan (200 mg/m(2)) for conditioning. No toxic deaths
occurred. Neutrophils (absolute neutrophil count =0.5 × 10(9)/L) and platelets
(=20 × 10(9)/L without transfusion) recovered after a median of 5 days (range:
4-6 days) and 7 days (range: 4-8 days), respectively. No patient was admitted for
exacerbation of peripheral neuropathy. Four patients obtained a stringent
complete response, three patients obtained a complete response, and three
patients showed a very good partial response. These results suggest that this
conditioning regimen is safe and promising for young Japanese multiple myeloma
patients. A prospective multicenter trial of this regimen combined with suitable 
induction and consolidation therapy should be performed.

PMCID: PMC3710561
PMID: 24426360  [PubMed]


271. Resuscitation. 2014 Apr;85(4):492-8. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2013.12.019.
Epub 2013 Dec 30.

Factors associated with quality of bystander CPR: the presence of multiple
rescuers and bystander-initiated CPR without instruction.

Takei Y(1), Nishi T(2), Matsubara H(3), Hashimoto M(4), Inaba H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science and Technology, Hiroshima International
University Japan. Electronic address: y-takei@hs.hirokoku-u.ac.jp. (2)Department 
of Emergency Medical Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medicine
Japan. Electronic address: ntaiki24@yahoo.co.jp. (3)Department of Emergency
Medical Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medicine Japan.
Electronic address: h.matsubara@city.kaga.lg.jp. (4)Department of Neurosurgery,
Noto General Hospital Japan. Electronic address: hashim@noto-hospital.jp.
(5)Department of Emergency Medical Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School
of Medicine Japan. Electronic address: hidinaba@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

AIMS: To identify the factors associated with good-quality bystander
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (BCPR).
METHODS: Data were prospectively collected from 553 out-of-hospital cardiac
arrests (OHCAs) managed with BCPR in the absence of emergency medical technicians
(EMT) during 2012. The quality of BCPR was evaluated by EMTs at the scene and was
assessed according to the standard recommendations for chest compressions,
including proper hand positions, rates and depths.
RESULTS: Good-quality BCPR was more frequently confirmed in OHCAs that occurred
in the central/urban region (56.3% [251/446] vs. 39.3% [42/107], p=0.0015), had
multiple rescuers (31.8% [142/446] vs. 11.2% [12/107], p<0.0001) and received
bystander-initiated BCPR (22.0% [98/446] vs. 5.6% [6/107], p<0.0001).
Good-quality BCPR was less frequently performed by family members (46.9%
[209/446] vs. 67.3% [72/107], p=0.0001), elderly bystanders (13.5% [60/446] vs.
28.0% [30/107], p=0.0005) and in at-home OHCAs (51.1% [228/446] vs. 72.9%
[78/107], p<0.0001). BCPR duration was significantly longer in the good-quality
group (median, 8 vs. 6min, p=0.0015). Multiple logistic regression analysis
indicated that multiple rescuers (odds ratio=2.8, 95% CI 1.5-5.6),
bystander-initiated BCPR (2.7, 1.1-7.3), non-elderly bystanders (1.9, 1.1-3.2),
occurrence in the central region (2.1, 1.3-3.3) and duration of BCPR (1.1,
1.0-1.1) were associated with good-quality BCPR. Moreover, good-quality BCPR was 
initiated earlier after recognition/witness of cardiac arrest compared with
poor-quality BCPR (3 vs. 4min, p=0.0052). The rate of neurologically favourable
survival at one year was 2.7 and 0% in the good-quality and poor-quality groups, 
respectively (p=0.1357).
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of multiple rescuers and bystander-initiated CPR are
predominantly associated with good-quality BCPR.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24384508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2013 Sep;38(17):2807-17.

[Chemical constituents from roots and rhizomes of Panax ginseng cultivated in
Jilin province].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang HP(1), Yang XB(2), Yang XW(3), Liu JX(2), Wang YP(4), Zhang LX(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China. sungirl9626@163.com (2)Xiyuan
Hospital, China Academy of Chinese Sciences, Beijing 100091, China. (3)State Key 
Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Peking University, Beijing 100191, China. (4)Institute of Special Wild Economic
Animals and Plants Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Changchun
130122, China. (5)College of Chinese Medicinal Materials, Jilin Agricultural
University, Changchun 130118, China.

The chemical constituents of the roots and rhizomes of Panax ginseng were
systematically investigated by various column chromatographic methods including
Amberlite XAD-4 macroporous adsorptive resins and silica gel as well as
high-performance liquid chromatography, and their chemical structures were
identified by physico-chemical properties and spectral analyses. Twenty-eight
compounds were isolated from the 70% ethanolic-aqueous extract and identified as 
koryoginsenoside R1 (1), ginsenoside Rg1 (2), ginsenoside Rf (3), notoginsenoside
R2 (4), ginsenoside Rg2 (5), notoginsenoside Fe (6), ginsenjilinol (7),
ginsenoside Re5 (8), noto-ginsenoside N (9), notoginsenoside R1 (10), ginsenoside
Re2 (11), ginsenoside Re1 (12), ginsenoside Re (13), ginsenoside Rs2 (14),
ginsenoside Ro methyl ester (15), ginsenoside Rd (16), ginsenoside Re3 (17),
ginsenoside Re4 (18), 20-gluco-ginsenoside Rf (19), ginsenoside Ro (20),
ginsenoside Rc (21), quinquenoside-R1 (22), ginsenoside Ra2 (23), ginsenoside Rb1
(24), ginsenoside Ra1 (25), ginsenoside Ra3 (26), ginsenoside Rb2 (27), and
notoginsenoside R4 (28). All isolated compounds are 20 (S) -protopanaxadiol or
protopanaxatriol type triterpenoid saponins. Compound 1 was isolated from the
roots and rhizomes of P. ginseng cultivated in Jilin province for the first time 
and compound 6 was isolated from the roots and rhizomes of P. ginseng for the
first time. The 1H-NMR data of compounds 6, 14 and 19 were assigned for the first
time.

PMID: 24380303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Vis Exp. 2013 Dec 17;(82):e51105. doi: 10.3791/51105.

Cell-based flow cytometry assay to measure cytotoxic activity.

Noto A(1), Ngauv P, Trautmann L.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute of Florida.

Cytolytic activity of CD8+ T cells is rarely evaluated. We describe here a new
cell-based assay to measure the capacity of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells to kill
CD4+ T cells loaded with their cognate peptide. Target CD4+ T cells are divided
into two populations, labeled with two different concentrations of CFSE. One
population is pulsed with the peptide of interest (CFSE-low) while the other
remains un-pulsed (CFSE-high). Pulsed and un-pulsed CD4+ T cells are mixed at an 
equal ratio and incubated with an increasing number of purified CD8+ T cells. The
specific killing of autologous target CD4+ T cells is analyzed by flow cytometry 
after coculture with CD8+ T cells containing the antigen-specific effector CD8+ T
cells detected by peptide/MHCI tetramer staining. The specific lysis of target
CD4+ T cells measured at different effector versus target ratios, allows for the 
calculation of lytic units, LU30/10(6) cells. This simple and straightforward
assay allows for the accurate measurement of the intrinsic capacity of CD8+ T
cells to kill target CD4+ T cells.

PMCID: PMC4111270
PMID: 24378436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Version 2. F1000Res. 2013 Mar 12 [revised 2013 Sep 10];2:85. doi:
10.12688/f1000research.2-85.v2. eCollection 2013.

Tectal etiology for irrepressible saccades: a case study in a Rhesus monkey.

Gnadt JW(1), Noto CT(2), Kanwal JS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Georgetown University School of
Medicine, Washington DC, 20057, USA ; Department of Physiology and Biophysics,
Howard University College of Medicine, Washington DC, 20059, USA. (2)Department
of Physiology and Biophysics, Georgetown University School of Medicine,
Washington DC, 20057, USA ; Department of Neurology, Georgetown University School
of Medicine, Washington DC, 20057, USA.

Brain circuits controlling eye movements are widely distributed and complex. The 
etiology of irrepressible square wave saccades is not fully understood and is
likely different for different neuropathologies. In a previous study,
spontaneously occurring irrepressible saccades were noted after a cerebrovascular
accident that damaged the rostral superior colliculus (SC) and its commissure in 
a Rhesus monkey. Here, we tracked and quantified the development of similar
symptoms in a Rhesus monkey caused by a lesion in the rostromedial SC and its
commissure. We documented the changes in these saccadic intrusions while the
monkey attempted fixation of a target on three consecutive days post-onset. On
the first day, eye jerk amplitude was ~10 degrees and the direction was ~30
degrees above the left horizontal meridian. On the second day, the amplitude
decreased to 6.5 degrees and the direction shifted towards vertical, ~20 degrees 
to the left of the vertical meridian. Size, but not direction, of the eye jerks
continued to decrease until intrusions dissipated within one month. Histological 
examination after ~6 months from the first appearance of the intrusions revealed 
a lesion in the commissure of the SC. Results from this and the previous study
confirm the involvement of the commissure of the SC as the common target for
triggering this neuropathy. Our data suggest that commissural fibers play an
important role in maintaining normal visual stability. Interrupting the
commissure between the two superior colliculi causes saccadic intrusions in the
form of irrepressible jerking of the eyes, probably by disrupting inhibitory
signals transmitted through the commissure. Furthermore, disappearance of the
symptoms suggests that inhibitory fields within the SC are plastic and can
expand, possibly via inputs from inter-collicular and nigrotectal pathways.

PMCID: PMC3829126
PMID: 24358893  [PubMed]


275. Intern Med. 2013;52(24):2801-4.

Extramedullary hematopoietic pleural effusion accompanied by follicular lymphoma.

Sekiguchi N(1), Noto S, Wagatsuma M, Midorikawa K, Tezuka S, Hagino T, Saito I,
Yamada K, Takezako N, Miwa A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, National Hospital Organization Disaster Medical
Center, Japan.

Extramedullary hematopoietic effusion (EHE) is recognized to be an unusual
phenomenon accompanied by hematologic disorders. Only a few reports are available
of EHE occurring in patients with lymphoma. We herein report the case of a
54-year-old man with follicular lymphoma. Bone marrow aspirates and biopsied
specimens showed diffuse invasion of small cleaved atypical lymphoid cells that
were positive for CD10, 20, bcl2, immunoglobulin lambda and Bcl-2-IgH
rearrangement. The pleural effusion aspirates and a biopsied specimen obtained
via thoracoscopy revealed megakaryocytes and immature myeloid cells in addition
to lymphoma cells. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of EHE 
accompanied by lymphoma according to the World Health Organization
classification.

PMID: 24334589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Clin Biochem. 2014 Apr;47(6):423-6. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2013.11.018. Epub 
2013 Dec 5.

Clinical metabolomics and hematic ADMA predict the future onset of cardiorenal
syndrome in young grown-up subjects who were born preterm.

Bassareo PP(1), Fanos V(2), Noto A(2), Solla P(3), Barberini L(2), Flore G(4),
Puddu M(2), Mercuro G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences "M. Aresu", University of Cagliari, Cagliari,
Italy. Electronic address: piercard@inwind.it. (2)Department of Surgery, Section 
of Neonatal Intensive Care Unit and Puericulture, University of Cagliari,
Cagliari, Italy. (3)Movement Disorders Center, Institute of Neurology, University
of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. (4)Department of Medical Sciences "M. Aresu",
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: To look for differences in the urinary metabolic profile and in the
hematic asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) levels between a group of young adults
born preterm with an extremely low birthweight (<1000 g; ex-ELBW; n=19) and a
control group of subjects born at term with a weight appropriate for their
gestational age (AGA; n=13); and to look for a possible correlation between the
urinary metabolic profile in ex-ELBW and their hematic levels of ADMA.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Urine samples were analyzed by (1)H nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy, and then submitted to unsupervised and supervised
multivariate analysis. Samples of blood were collected and ADMA concentration was
assessed by high-performance liquid chromatography.
RESULTS: Using supervised PLS-DA (partial least squares discriminant analysis)
model, the authors were able to discriminate between ex-ELBW and AGA.
Statistically significant differences were detected in the ADMA levels between
ex-ELBW and AGA (p<0.02). Ex-ELBW metabolic profile correlated with ADMA
concentrations (r=0.456, p<0.05). Conversely, ADMA levels in AGA did not
correlated with their metabolic profiles.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the relevance of the metabolomic technique
as a predictive tool of the metabolic status in ex-ELBW. The relationship between
ex-ELBW urinary metabolic profile and their blood ADMA levels suggests the
presence of a subclinical cardio-renal involvement in these subjects.

Copyright © 2013 The Canadian Society of Clinical Chemists. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24316102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Dec 5;4:e947. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.444.

Stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 is a key factor for lung cancer-initiating cells.

Noto A(1), Raffa S, De Vitis C, Roscilli G, Malpicci D, Coluccia P, Di Napoli A, 
Ricci A, Giovagnoli MR, Aurisicchio L, Torrisi MR, Ciliberto G, Mancini R.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome,
Italy [2] Laboratory of Research and Diagnostics, Department of Surgery
'P.Valdoni', Sapienza University of Rome.

In recent years, studies of cancer development and recurrence have been
influenced by the cancer stem cells (CSCs)/cancer-initiating cells (CICs)
hypothesis. According to this, cancer is sustained by highly positioned,
chemoresistant cells with extensive capacity of self renewal, which are
responsible for disease relapse after chemotherapy. Growth of cancer cells as
three-dimensional non-adherent spheroids is regarded as a useful methodology to
enrich for cells endowed with CSC-like features. We have recently reported that
cell cultures derived from malignant pleural effusions (MPEs) of patients
affected by adenocarcinoma of the lung are able to efficiently form spheroids in 
non-adherent conditions supplemented with growth factors. By expression
profiling, we were able to identify a set of genes whose expression is
significantly upregulated in lung tumor spheroids versus adherent cultures. One
of the most strongly upregulated gene was stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD1), the
main enzyme responsible for the conversion of saturated into monounsaturated
fatty acids. In the present study, we show both by RNA interference and through
the use of a small molecule inhibitor that SCD1 is required for lung cancer
spheroids propagation both in stable cell lines and in MPE-derived primary tumor 
cultures. Morphological examination and image analysis of the tumor spheroids
formed in the presence of SCD1 inhibitors showed a different pattern of growth
characterized by irregular cell aggregates. Electron microscopy revealed that the
treated spheroids displayed several features of cellular damage and
immunofluorescence analysis on optical serial sections showed apoptotic cells
positive for the M30 marker, most of them positive also for the stemness marker
ALDH1A1, thus suggesting that the SCD1 inhibitor is selectively killing cells
with stem-like properties. Furthermore, SCD1-inhibited lung cancer cells were
strongly impaired in their in vivo tumorigenicity and ALDH1A1 expression. These
results suggest that SCD1 is a critical target in lung cancer tumor-initiating
cells.

PMCID: PMC3877537
PMID: 24309934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Intern Med. 2013;52(23):2629-33.

Successful treatment of chronic intractable itching using oral pregabalin in a
patient with diabetes and systemic prurigo nodularis: a case report of an
iliopsoas muscle abscess.

Imai K(1), Kishimoto M, Tsujimoto T, Yamamoto-Honda R, Ihana N, Ono K, Hachiya R,
Inoue K, Goto M, Goto A, Noto H, Kajio H, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine, Center Hospital, National
Center for Global Health and Medicine, Japan.

A 73-year-old Japanese man developed chronic intractable itching due to prurigo
nodularis. High-dose glucocorticoid ointment failed, and the treatment resulted
in poor glycemic control. Repeated scratching caused hematogenous bacterial
dissemination via cutaneous injuries, resulting in the formation of iliopsoas and
spinal epidural abscesses that required long-term antibiotic treatment.
Pregabalin was administered to treat the pruritus, and a considerable improvement
was observed. A reduction in the dose and intensity of the topical
corticosteroids improved the patient's glycemic control, resulting in the
complete resolution of the abscesses. Pregabalin significantly improved the
patient's pruritus and decreased the risk of infection.

PMID: 24292753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2013;23(11):1215-6.

[Nerve ultrasound is useful for the diagnosis of neuromuscular diseases].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine.

High-resolution ultrasound allowed for more detailed morphological assessment
peripheral nerves and muscles. It is important to elucidate ultrasound features
of peripheral nerves or muscles in various neuromuscular diseases because
ultrasound is a widely used, non-invasive and easily accessible diagnostic tool. 
We attempted to demonstrate characteristic findings of nerve ultrasound in
patients with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT), Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS), and Cervical radiculopathy. In patients with CMT1A, cross sectional areas 
(CSAs) of all the nerves we examined were significantly larger than those in
normal controls. Additionally, median nerve CSA had positive correlation with CMT
neuropathy score, and negative correlation with nerve conduction velocity. In
patients with ALS, increased CSA forearm/upper arm ratio of the median nerve was 
a characteristic finding to support the diagnosis. In patients with cervical
radiculopathy, we could observe that decreased CSA and diameter of the nerve root
corresponding to the findings of MRI and electromyography. These results
demonstrate that the combination of electrophysiological study, diagnostic
imaging, and nerve ultrasound could lead to accurate diagnosis of various
neuromuscular diseases.

PMID: 24291934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Lancet. 2014 Mar 15;383(9921):970-83. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61836-X. Epub
2013 Nov 22.

Metabolic mediators of the effects of body-mass index, overweight, and obesity on
coronary heart disease and stroke: a pooled analysis of 97 prospective cohorts
with 1·8 million participants.

Global Burden of Metabolic Risk Factors for Chronic Diseases Collaboration (BMI
Mediated Effects), Lu Y, Hajifathalian K, Ezzati M, Woodward M, Rimm EB, Danaei
G.

Collaborators: Selmer R, Strand BH, Fang X, Gu DF, Huxley R, Imai Y, Kim HC, Lam 
TH, Pan WH, Rodgers A, Suh I, Ueshima H, Woodward M, Maegawa H, Okayama A,
Ueshima H, Aoki N, Nakamura M, Wu ZS, Wu ZS, Yao CH, Luszcz M, Welborn TA, Tang
Z, Liu LS, Xie JX, Ameratunga S, MacMahon S, Norton R, Whitlock G, Knuiman MW,
Divitini ML, Christensen H, Wu XG, Yu XH, Zhou J, Tamakoshi A, Pan WH, Chen LQ,
Shan GL, Wu ZL, Sritara P, Duan XF, Gu DF, Jackson R, MacMahon S, Norton R,
Whitlock G, Li YH, Jiang CQ, Lam TH, Arima H, Iida M, Kiyohara Y, Ho SC, Woo J,
Hong Z, Huang MS, Zhou B, Fuh JL, Choudhury SR, Kita Y, Ueshima H, Jee SH, Kim
IS, Suh I, Giles GG, Hashimoto T, Sakata K, Dobson A, Imai Y, Ohkubo T, Hozawa A,
Jamrozik K, Hobbs M, Broadhurst R, Nakachi K, Fang XH, Li SC, Yang QD, Chen ZM,
Tanaka H, Kita Y, Nozaki A, Ueshima H, Horibe H, Matsutani Y, Kagaya M, Hughes K,
Lee J, Chew SK, Heng D, Zhang HY, Zhou BF, Shimamoto K, Saitoh S, Li ZZ, Zhang
HY, Jamrozik K, Norman P, He Y, Lam TH, Yao SX, Parker ED, Pereira MA, Stevens J,
Panagiotakos DB, Pitsavos C, Attia JR, D'Este CA, Zhang X, Clays E, De Bacquer
DA, Van Herck K, Divitini ML, Knuiman MW, Morrison HI, Wang F, Chuang SY, Pan WH,
Yeh WT, Chen Z, Smith MC, Zhou M, Wang W, Zhang XT, Zhao D, Selmer R, Strand BH, 
Vollset SE, Fuchs SC, Fuchs FD, Moreira LB, Dontas IA, Dontas CA, Kafatos AG,
Moschandreas J, Lanti M, Menotti A, Kromhout D, Menotti A, Jensen MK, Overvad K, 
Tjonneland A, Klotsche J, Wittchen HU, Fischer S, Hanefeld M, Schwanebeck U,
Simons LA, Simons J, Bender R, Matthies S, Nissinen A, Tolonen HK, Tuomilehto J, 
Nissinen A, Tuomilehto J, Chaturvedi N, Fuller JH, Soedamah-Muthu SS, De Bacquer 
DA, Kotseva K, Wood DA, Bots ML, Moons KG, Heliovaara M, Knekt PB, Rissanen H,
Ferrie JE, Shipley MJ, Smith GD, Johansson S, Lappas G, Rosengren A, Sham A, Woo 
J, Yu RH, Hata J, Kiyohara Y, Ninomiya T, Hoshide S, Kario K, Rastenyte D,
Tamosiunas A, de Simone G, Devereux RB, Gerdts E, Colquhoun DM, Keech AC, Kirby
AC, Mizuno K, Nakamura H, Uchiyama S, Bassett JK, Giles GG, Hodge AM, Lappas G,
Rosengren A, Wilhelmsen L, Dhaliwal SS, Welborn TA, Nakamura Y, Okayama A,
Ueshima H, Kadota A, Okamura T, Ueshima H, Sandvei MS, Vatten LJ, Vik A, Morkedal
B, Romundstad PR, Sandvei MS, Elkind MS, Gardener H, Sacco RL, Selmer R, Strand
BH, Mignano A, Novo S, Rizzo M, Assmann G, Schulte H, Lissner L, Skoog I, Sundh
V, Marin A, Medrano MJ, Hofman A, Kuningas M, Stricker BH, van der Graaf Y,
Visseren FL, Lee JJ, Rastenyte D, Tamosiunas A, Bemelmans W, de Groot LC, de
Hollander EL, Adachi H, Hirai Y, Azizi F, Hadaegh F, Khalili D, Mathiesen EB,
Njolstad I, Wilsgaard T, Can G, Onat A, Arnlov J, Sundstrom J, Blackburn HW,
Jacobs DR, Averna MR, Cefalu AB, Noto D, Concin H, Nagel G, Ulmer H, Krasnow RE, 
Swan G, Kivimaki M, Shipley MJ, Batty GD, Shipley MJ, Milic N, Ostojic MC,
Parapid B, Geleijnse JM, Kromhout D, Waterham E, Feskens EJ, Kromhout D, Waterham
E.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2014 Jun 14;383(9934):2042.
    Lancet. 2014 Jun 14;383(9934):2042-3.
    Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2014 May;139(21):1092.
    Lancet. 2014 Jun 14;383(9934):2043-4.
    Lancet. 2014 Mar 15;383(9921):935-6.

BACKGROUND: Body-mass index (BMI) and diabetes have increased worldwide, whereas 
global average blood pressure and cholesterol have decreased or remained
unchanged in the past three decades. We quantified how much of the effects of BMI
on coronary heart disease and stroke are mediated through blood pressure,
cholesterol, and glucose, and how much is independent of these factors.
METHODS: We pooled data from 97 prospective cohort studies that collectively
enrolled 1·8 million participants between 1948 and 2005, and that included 57,161
coronary heart disease and 31,093 stroke events. For each cohort we excluded
participants who were younger than 18 years, had a BMI of lower than 20 kg/m(2), 
or who had a history of coronary heart disease or stroke. We estimated the hazard
ratio (HR) of BMI on coronary heart disease and stroke with and without
adjustment for all possible combinations of blood pressure, cholesterol, and
glucose. We pooled HRs with a random-effects model and calculated the attenuation
of excess risk after adjustment for mediators.
FINDINGS: The HR for each 5 kg/m(2) higher BMI was 1·27 (95% CI 1·23-1·31) for
coronary heart disease and 1·18 (1·14-1·22) for stroke after adjustment for
confounders. Additional adjustment for the three metabolic risk factors reduced
the HRs to 1·15 (1·12-1·18) for coronary heart disease and 1·04 (1·01-1·08) for
stroke, suggesting that 46% (95% CI 42-50) of the excess risk of BMI for coronary
heart disease and 76% (65-91) for stroke is mediated by these factors. Blood
pressure was the most important mediator, accounting for 31% (28-35) of the
excess risk for coronary heart disease and 65% (56-75) for stroke. The percentage
excess risks mediated by these three mediators did not differ significantly
between Asian and western cohorts (North America, western Europe, Australia, and 
New Zealand). Both overweight (BMI =25 to <30 kg/m(2)) and obesity (BMI =30
kg/m(2)) were associated with a significantly increased risk of coronary heart
disease and stroke, compared with normal weight (BMI =20 to <25 kg/m(2)), with
50% (44-58) of the excess risk of overweight and 44% (41-48) of the excess risk
of obesity for coronary heart disease mediated by the selected three mediators.
The percentages for stroke were 98% (69-155) for overweight and 69% (64-77) for
obesity.
INTERPRETATION: Interventions that reduce high blood pressure, cholesterol, and
glucose might address about half of excess risk of coronary heart disease and
three-quarters of excess risk of stroke associated with high BMI. Maintenance of 
optimum bodyweight is needed for the full benefits.
FUNDING: US National Institute of Health, UK Medical Research Council, National
Institute for Health Research Comprehensive Biomedical Research Centre at
Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, Lown Scholars in Residence Program on
cardiovascular disease prevention, and Harvard Global Health Institute Doctoral
Research Grant.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3959199
PMID: 24269108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Diabetes Complications. 2014 Mar-Apr;28(2):196-202. doi:
10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2013.10.005. Epub 2013 Oct 18.

Impaired macrophage production of anti-atherosclerotic interleukin-10 induced by 
coronary intraplaque hemorrhage in patients with acute coronary syndrome and
hyperglycemia.

Sato T(1), Kameyama T(2), Noto T(3), Inoue H(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Second Department of Internal Medicine, University of Toyama, Toyama,
Japan. Electronic address: kirotaro19731013@yahoo.co.jp. (2)The Second Department
of Internal Medicine, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan. (3)Saiseikai Toyama
Hospital,, Toyama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Coronary intraplaque hemorrhage (IPH) accelerates atherosclerosis.
Extracellular hemoglobin (Hb) released by IPH is cleared by macrophages with
CD163 receptors. This process provokes secretion of the anti-atherosclerotic
cytokine interleukin (IL)-10. The present study aimed to investigate the
relationship between macrophage accumulation and IL-10 production provoked by IPH
in plaques obtained from acute coronary syndrome (ACS) patients with
hyperglycemia.
METHODS: In 50 ACS patients, atherothrombotic debris was retrieved during
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). The debris was stained with antibodies 
to CD163, glycophorin A (GPA, a marker of IPH) and IL-10. %CD163 was defined as
the ratios of CD163-positive cells to all cells. %IL-10 and %GPA were defined as 
the ratio of positively stained areas per total tissue area. Based on
glycosylated Hb [HbA1c (NGSP)] = 6.5%, fasting blood sugar (FBS) = 126 mg/dL, and
insulin resistance (HOMA-IR>2.5), patients were divided into a diabetes mellitus 
(DM) group (N = 18, HbA1c = 6.5% or FBS = 126 mg/dL), an insulin resistance (IR) 
group (N = 15, HOMA-IR>2.5, HbA1c<6.5%, and FBS< 126 mg/dL), and a normal (NR)
group (N = 17).
RESULTS: Compared to the NR group, %GPA and %CD163 were increased in the DM and
IR groups. %IL-10 was similar among the three groups. However, %IL-10/%CD163
ratios were decreased in the DM (2.5 ± 0.6, P = 0.01) and IR (2.7 ± 0.8, P =
0.02) groups compared to the NR group (5.8 ± 4.7). Only in the NR group was there
a significant correlation between %IL-10 and %CD163.
CONCLUSIONS: Impairment of the anti-inflammatory effect provoked by IPH
contributes to premature atherosclerosis even in the IR group.

© 2014.

PMID: 24239333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2014 Oct;14(4):806-10. doi: 10.1111/ggi.12168. Epub 2013
Nov 12.

Importance of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels in elderly diabetic
individuals with type IIb dyslipidemia: A 2-year survey of cardiovascular events.

Ina K(1), Hayashi T, Araki A, Kawashima S, Sone H, Watanabe H, Ohrui T, Yokote K,
Takemoto M, Kubota K, Noda M, Noto H, Ding QF, Zhang J, Yu ZY, Yoon BK, Nomura H,
Kuzuya M; Japan CDM Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.

AIM: The risk factors for ischemic heart disease (IHD) or cerebrovascular
accident (CVA) in elderly diabetic individuals with type IIb dyslipidemia are not
fully known. Therefore, we investigated the relationship between lipid levels and
IHD and CVA in diabetic individuals with type IIb dyslipidemia.
METHOD: The Japan Cholesterol and Diabetes Mellitus Study is a prospective cohort
study of 4014 type 2 diabetic patients (1936 women; age 67.4 ± 9.5 years). The
primary end-points were the onset of IHD or CVA. Lipid and glucose levels, and
other factors were investigated in relation to the occurrence of IHD or CVA. A
total of 462 participants were included in the group of patients with type IIb
dyslipidemia.
RESULTS: The 462 diabetic participants with type IIb dyslipidemia were divided
into those who were aged <65 years, 65-74 years and >75 years (n=168, 190 and
104, respectively). High-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) and low-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol/HDL-C were significantly associated with the risk of
cardiovascular events in diabetic individuals with type IIb dyslipidemia who were
aged <65 years, and HDL-C and diastolic blood pressure was significantly
associated with cardiovascular events in patients aged 65-74 years. Non-HDL-C was
not significantly associated with the risk of cardiovascular events. Multiple
regression analysis showed that lower HDL-C was significantly associated with the
risk of cardiovascular events in diabetic individuals with type IIb dyslipidemia 
who were aged <65 years and 65-74 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Lower HDL-C was an important risk factor for cardiovascular events
in diabetic individuals with type IIb dyslipidemia who were aged <75 years.

© 2013 Japan Geriatrics Society.

PMID: 24215618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1093:209-24. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-694-8_17.

Analysis of Piwi-loaded small RNAs in Tetrahymena.

Noto T(1), Kurth HM, Mochizuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences,
Vienna, Austria.

Erratum in
    Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1093:E1-2.

Scan RNAs (scnRNAs) are developmentally regulated siRNAs of ~26-32 nucleotides in
length that are involved in programmed DNA elimination in Tetrahymena. scnRNAs
are loaded onto the Piwi-related protein Twi1p and 2'-O-methylated at their 3'
termini. We describe two alternative strategies for analyzing the Twi1p-loaded
scnRNAs: preparation of loaded scnRNAs by immuno-purification of the Twi1p-scnRNA
complex and exclusion of non-methylated scnRNAs during cDNA library construction 
using periodate oxidation.

PMID: 24178568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Feb 4;63(4):337-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.09.021. Epub
2013 Oct 16.

Long-term prognostic impact of dobutamine stress echocardiography in patients
with Kawasaki disease and coronary artery lesions: a 15-year follow-up study.

Noto N(1), Kamiyama H(2), Karasawa K(2), Ayusawa M(2), Sumitomo N(2), Okada T(2),
Takahashi S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Nihon University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: info@noto-clinic.com. (2)Department
of Pediatrics and Child Health, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.

OBJECTIVES: This study sought to determine the prognostic value of dobutamine
stress echocardiography (DSE) over a 15-year follow-up for predicting cardiac
events in adolescent Kawasaki disease (KD) patients with coronary artery lesions 
(CALs).
BACKGROUND: Although DSE is an established technique for the detection of
coronary artery disease, its prognostic value to predict cardiac events in
adolescent KD patients with CALs is unknown.
METHODS: Fifty-eight adolescent KD patients, including 36 patients with CALs
documented by coronary angiography, and 22 patients with normal coronary arteries
documented by echocardiography who underwent DSE were reviewed at initial testing
(mean age: 13.6 years) and at 15 years' follow-up. Follow-up events were
tabulated as major adverse cardiac events (MACEs) that included cardiac death,
nonfatal myocardial infarction, and revascularization.
RESULTS: During a mean follow-up of 14.7 years, there were 16 patients with MACEs
(acute myocardial infarction: n = 1; old myocardial infarction: n = 7; coronary
artery bypass grafting: n = 4; percutaneous coronary intervention: n = 4).
Significant coronary artery disease (CAD) (>70% coronary stenosis) was detected
in 31.0% of patients at initial testing and 42.1% at follow-up. However, there
were no significant differences in wall motion score indices (WMSI) at peak DSE
between initial testing and follow-up (p = 0.762). Five of 6 patients (85%) with 
false-positive DSE results (WMSI: =1.25) at initial testing, who had giant
aneurysms without CAD, developed CAD with MACEs during follow-up. Cumulative
event-free survival rate to 15 years was 25.0% in patients with WMSI =1.25 and
91.7% in patients with WMSI <1.25. Cox regression analysis showed the grade of
peak WMSI at initial testing to be the only independent predictor of MACEs
(relative risk: 3.28; 95% confidence interval: 1.73 to 6.20).
CONCLUSIONS: DSE provided independent prognostic information up to 15 years in
adolescent KD survivors.

Copyright © 2014 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24140657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2013 Dec;305(11):G786-96. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00279.2013. Epub 2013 Oct 17.

Strain-specific suppression of microRNA-320 by carcinogenic Helicobacter pylori
promotes expression of the antiapoptotic protein Mcl-1.

Noto JM(1), Piazuelo MB, Chaturvedi R, Bartel CA, Thatcher EJ, Delgado A,
Romero-Gallo J, Wilson KT, Correa P, Patton JG, Peek RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Jr., 2215 Garland Ave., Medical Research Bldg. IV 1030C, Nashville, TN 37232. 
richard.peek@vanderbilt.edu.

Helicobacter pylori is the strongest risk factor for gastric cancer, and strains 
harboring the cag pathogenicity island, which translocates the oncoprotein CagA
into host cells, further augment cancer risk. We previously reported that in vivo
adaptation of a noncarcinogenic H. pylori strain (B128) generated a derivative
strain (7.13) with the ability to induce adenocarcinoma, providing a unique
opportunity to define mechanisms that mediate gastric carcinogenesis. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that regulate expression of oncogenes or tumor 
suppressors and are frequently dysregulated in carcinogenesis. To identify miRNAs
and their targets involved in H. pylori-mediated carcinogenesis, miRNA
microarrays were performed on RNA isolated from gastric epithelial cells
cocultured with H. pylori strains B128, 7.13, or a 7.13 cagA(-) isogenic mutant. 
Among 61 miRNAs differentially expressed in a cagA-dependent manner, the tumor
suppressor miR-320 was significantly downregulated by strain 7.13. Since miR-320 
negatively regulates the antiapoptotic protein Mcl-1, we demonstrated that H.
pylori significantly induced Mcl-1 expression in a cagA-dependent manner and that
suppression of Mcl-1 results in increased apoptosis. To extend these results,
mice were challenged with H. pylori strain 7.13 or its cagA(-) mutant; consistent
with cell culture data, H. pylori induced Mcl-1 expression in a cagA-dependent
manner. In human subjects, cag(+) strains induced significantly higher levels of 
Mcl-1 than cag(-) strains, and Mcl-1 expression levels paralleled the severity of
neoplastic lesions. Collectively, these results indicate that H. pylori
suppresses miR-320, upregulates Mcl-1, and decreases apoptosis in a
cagA-dependent manner, which likely confers an increased risk for gastric
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3882435
PMID: 24136787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Psychiatry Res. 2013 Dec 30;210(3):1290-2. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2013.09.016.
Epub 2013 Oct 7.

Neurotransmitter receptor and regulatory gene expression in peripheral blood of
Brazilian drug-naïve first-episode psychosis patients before and after
antipsychotic treatment.

Ota VK(1), Noto C, Gadelha A, Santoro ML, Silva PN, Melaragno MI, Smith Mde A,
Cordeiro Q, Bressan RA, Belangero SI.

Author information: 
(1)Disciplina de Genética, Departamento de Morfologia e Genética, Universidade
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua Botucatu, 740, Edifício Leitao da Cunha, 1°
andar, CEP 04023-900, São Paulo, Brazil; LiNC-Laboratório Interdisciplinar de
Neurociências Clínicas, Departamento de Psiquiatria, Universidade Federal de Sao 
Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua Pedro de Toledo, 669, 3° andar fundos, CEP 05039-032, São
Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: vanessakaota@gmail.com.

Little is known about how genes expressed in blood relate to schizophrenia or
antipsychotic use. We analyzed gene expression in 10 first-episode psychosis
patients and nine controls using PCR Arrays. GABRR2 and CHRNA3 were found to be
differentially expressed after risperidone treatment. These genes may be
regulated by antipsychotic use.

© 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24113126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Chemother. 2014 Jun;26(3):130-2. doi: 10.1179/1973947813Y.0000000149. Epub 2013
Dec 6.

Is 1H NMR metabolomics becoming the promising early biomarker for neonatal sepsis
and for monitoring the antibiotic toxicity?

Noto A, Mussap M, Fanos V.

Metabolomics, the latest of omics disciplines, has been successfully used in
various fields of basic research such as pharmacology and toxicology. Recently,
this new science has gained an important role in the translational research of
diagnostics. In this regard, the challenge for neonatologists and medical
laboratories is to diagnose neonatal sepsis, a disease with high mortality and
morbidity due to the difficulty in diagnosing it. Metabolomics, through its
ability to identify perturbations caused by this condition, aims at recognizing
metabolites that characterize neonatal sepsis with high specificity and
sensitivity. The purpose of this review is to highlight the ability of
metabolomics to find early biomarkers for this condition, as well as to predict
the toxic effects caused by antibiotics.

PMID: 24112754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. BMC Infect Dis. 2013 Oct 10;13:473. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-13-473.

The potential impact of routine testing of individuals with HIV indicator
diseases in order to prevent late HIV diagnosis.

Scognamiglio P(1), Chiaradia G, De Carli G, Giuliani M, Mastroianni CM, Aviani
Barbacci S, Buonomini AR, Grisetti S, Sampaolesi A, Corpolongo A, Orchi N, Puro
V, Ippolito G, Girardi E; SENDIH Study Group.

Collaborators: Girardi E, Orchi N, Angeletti C, Balzano R, Elia P, Navarra A,
Nurra G, Palummieri A, Alba L, Ammassari A, Antinori A, Baldini F, Bellagamba R, 
Bevilacqua N, Boumis E, Capobianchi MR, Cerilli S, Chinello P, Corpolongo A,
D'Arrigo R, De Carli G, D'Offizi G, Forbici F, Fusco FM, Galati V, Ghirga P,
Giancola L, Gori C, Grisetti S, Lauria FN, Liuzzi G, Marconi P, Mariano A,
Narciso P, Nicastri E, Noto P, Palmieri A, Perno CF, Petrosillo N, Pisapia R,
Pittalis S, Puro V, Sampaolesi A, Scognamiglio P, Sciarrone MR, Selleri M, Sias
C, Topino S, Tozzi V, Vincenzi L, Visco Comandini U, Vlassi C, Zaccarelli M,
Zaniratti S, Vullo V, Falciano M, Andreoni M, Sarmati L, Buonomini AR, Di Carlo
A, Giuliani M, Brancatella R, Maggi T, Errico F, De Filippis A, Di Bacco R,
Schito S, Gattari P, Spizzichino L, Francesconi M, Pace G, Gallo I, Anzalone E,
Mastroianni CM, Tacconi L, Mercurio VS, Lichtner M, Raponi GN, Pitorri A,
Caterini A, Aviani Barbacci S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Infectious Diseases "L, Spallanzani" (IRCCS), Via
Portuense 292, Rome 00149, Italy. enrico.girardi@inmi.it.

BACKGROUND: The aim of our work was to evaluate the potential impact of the
European policy of testing for HIV all individuals presenting with an indicator
disease, to prevent late diagnosis of HIV. We report on a retrospective analysis 
among individuals diagnosed with HIV to assess whether a history of certain
diseases prior to HIV diagnosis was associated with the chance of presenting late
for care, and to estimate the proportion of individuals presenting late who could
have been diagnosed earlier if tested when the indicator disease was diagnosed.
METHODS: We studied a large cohort of individuals newly diagnosed with HIV
infection in 13 counselling and testing sites in the Lazio Region, Italy
(01/01/2004-30/04/2009). Considered indicator diseases were: viral hepatitis
infection (HBV/HCV), sexually transmitted infections, seborrhoeic dermatitis and 
tuberculosis. Logistic regression analysis was performed to estimate association 
of occurrence of at least one indicator disease with late HIV diagnosis.
RESULTS: In our analysis, the prevalence of late HIV diagnosis was 51.3%
(890/1735). Individuals reporting at least one indicator disease before HIV
diagnosis (29% of the study population) had a lower risk of late diagnosis
(OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.7; 95%CI: 0.5-0.8) compared to those who did not report a previous
indicator disease. 52/890 (5.8%) late presenters were probably already infected
at the time the indicator disease was diagnosed, a median of 22.6 months before
HIV diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that testing for HIV following diagnosis of an
indicator disease significantly decreases the probability of late HIV diagnosis. 
Moreover, for 5.5% of late HIV presenters, diagnosis could have been anticipated 
if they had been tested when an HIV indicator disease was diagnosed.However, this
strategy for enhancing early HIV diagnosis needs to be complemented by
client-centred interventions that aim to increase awareness in people who do not 
perceive themselves as being at risk for HIV.

PMCID: PMC3852490
PMID: 24112129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Hypertens Res. 2014 Mar;37(3):225-31. doi: 10.1038/hr.2013.141. Epub 2013 Oct 10.

Comparative effects of telmisartan and valsartan as add-on agents for
hypertensive patients with morning blood pressure insufficiently controlled by
amlodipine monotherapy.

Yoshida H(1), Akasaka H(1), Saitoh S(1), Shimamoto K(1), Miura T(1); SPEED
investigators.

Collaborators: Shimamoto K, Miura T, Saitoh S, Yoshida H, Oimatsu H, Ooiwa H,
Tanaka S, Nishimiya T, Hayashi M, Matsuki T, Mori Y, Higashiura K, Yamaguchi T,
Ogawa S, Kodama K, Furugen M, Ishimoto R, Saito N, Fukuoka M, Hamabe K, Murakami 
H, Nakagawa M, Kikuiri K, Nishihara M, Sato S, Noto T, Tsuchida A, Ishii K, Iwata
M, Komakine T, Suzuki K, Nakamura Y, Nozawa Y, Kobayashi H, Togashi N, Shoji T,
Ando T, Yamauchi K, Kijima T, Sawai N, Nishizato K, Yamamoto H, Nakata T,
Koyanagi T, Hotta H, Kyuma M, Ohtomo T, Tobisawa T, Shinshi Y, Miyazaki S, Ohnuma
Y, Hasegawa T, Takada A, Terashima Y, Yoshioka T, Matsumoto T, Tsubokura T,
Takagawa Y, Yoshida D, Sakamoto K, Nakamura Y, Koizumi T, Hagiwara M, Urabe K,
Marusaki S, Yoshida S, Kaneko N, Ura N, Sasaki H, Ise T, Nishitani T, Nishimura
M, Togashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular, Renal and Metabolic Medicine, Sapporo Medical
University, School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

The aim of this study was to determine the efficacies of valsartan and
telmisartan as add-on agents for the control of morning blood pressure (BP) in
patients already on amlodipine monotherapy. A total of 414 hypertensive patients 
were prospectively enrolled in a 4-week run-in period when they were treated with
amlodipine (5<U+2009>mg/day), and home BP was measured in the morning and evening.
Patients with home systolic BP (SBP) being 135-159<U+2009>mm<U+2009>Hg in the morning at the
end of the run-in period were randomized to additional treatment with valsartan
(80<U+2009>mg/day) or with telmisartan (40<U+2009>mg/day) for 8 weeks. The primary endpoint was
the change in morning home BP, and secondary endpoints included variability of
morning home BP. Of the 282 patients randomized, 262 patients (n=131, in each
treatment) completed the protocols. Demographic parameters and baseline morning
SBP/diastolic BP (DBP) (146.3±7.1/84.8±9.3 vs. 146.0±7.1/84.2±9.1<U+2009>mm<U+2009>Hg) were
comparable in the valsartan group and telmisartan group, and changes in SBP/DBP
after 8-week treatment were not significantly different between the two groups
(-7.4±10.6/-3.9±6.1 vs. -8.3±9.9/-5.0±5.9<U+2009>mm<U+2009>Hg). Valsartan significantly
increased individual standard deviation and variation coefficient of morning SBP,
but telmisartan did not change either of these indices of SBP variation. In
subgroups with baseline SBP being above the median (145.2<U+2009>mm<U+2009>Hg), change in DBP
was significantly larger by telmisartan than by valsartan (-6.3±5.6 vs.
-3.9±6.7<U+2009>mm<U+2009>Hg, P<0.05). These results suggest that telmisartan is more useful
than valsartan as an add-on agent for reducing the level and variability of
morning BP in patients on amlodipine monotherapy.

PMID: 24108237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Proteomics. 2013 Nov;13(22):3293-7. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201300170. Epub 2013 Oct 9.

Surface proteomic analysis of differentiated versus stem-like osteosarcoma human 
cells.

Gemei M(1), Corbo C, D'Alessio F, Di Noto R, Vento R, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate s.c.a.r.l, Napoli, Italy.

Cancer stem cell characterization represents a breakthrough in cancer research.
Despite evidence showing the existence and the role of cancer stem cells in
osteosarcoma (OS) onset and progression, little is known about their specific
surface phenotype. To address this issue, we carried out a cytometric analysis
with an antibody-array comprising 245 membrane proteins comparing the stem and
differentiated OS cells. As experimental model, we chose the stem-like cell line 
3aminobenzamide-OS and its parental, differentiated, cell line MG63. We
identified 50 differentially expressed, 23 homogeneously expressed, and 172 not
expressed proteins in the two cell line models, thus defining a surface protein
signature specific for each of them. Furthermore, we selected ERK1/2 (p44/42
mitogen-activated protein kinases) as a potential pathway correlated with
processes that characterize tumorigenic potential and stemness of
3aminobenzamide-OS cells.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24106197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. ChemSusChem. 2013 Nov;6(11):2157-60. doi: 10.1002/cssc.201300145. Epub 2013 Sep
18.

Molecular relaxations in magnesium polymer electrolytes via GHz broadband
electrical spectroscopy.

Piccolo M(1), Giffin GA, Vezzù K, Bertasi F, Alotto P, Guarnieri M, Di Noto V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial Engineering, Universitàdegli Studi di Padova, Via
Gradenigo 6 A, 35131 Padova (Italy).

GHz broadband electrical spectroscopy (G-BES) is adopted to investigate the
molecular relaxations and interactions occurring within the system in an oxygen- 
and water-free atmosphere in the 300 kHz-20 GHz and -40 to 250<U+2009>°C frequency and
temperature ranges, respectively. A new electrolyte for magnesium secondary
batteries that can transfer magnesium ions efficiently is presented. This
electrolyte is based on polyethylene glycol 400 and a polymeric form of d-MgCl2 .
The information obtained by G-BES is crucial for studying the conduction
mechanism of these new electrolytes.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24106158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Inorg Chem. 2013 Oct 21;52(20):11697-9. doi: 10.1021/ic4021417. Epub 2013 Oct 8.

Selective retention of methanol over ethanol by a cyclen-based
cryptand/copper(II) complex.

Habata Y(1), Ikeda M, Sah AK, Noto K, Kuwahara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, and Research Center for
Materials with Integrated Properties, Toho University , 2-2-1 Miyama, Funabashi, 
Chiba 274-8510, Japan.

A cyclen-based cryptand (2) was prepared in a two-step synthesis from
dioxocyclen. When a Cu(CF3SO3)2 complex with 2 was prepared in methanol, the
2/Cu(CF3SO3)2 complex incorporated one methanol in the cavity formed by the
diethyleneoxy unit and the NH group of the cyclen. When prepared in ethanol, the 
2/Cu(CF3SO3)2 complex similarly incorporated one ethanol. Cold electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry (CSI-MS) of the 2/Cu(CF3SO3)2/alcohol complexes
selectively retains methanol over ethanol under CSI-MS conditions.

PMID: 24102248  [PubMed]


293. J Hosp Infect. 2013 Nov;85(3):233-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jhin.2013.08.004. Epub 2013
Sep 8.

Successful control of an outbreak of colonization by Klebsiella pneumoniae
carbapenemase-producing K. pneumoniae sequence type 258 in a neonatal intensive
care unit, Italy.

Giuffrè M(1), Bonura C, Geraci DM, Saporito L, Catalano R, Di Noto S, Nociforo F,
Corsello G, Mammina C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sciences for Health Promotion and Mother-Child Care 'G.
D'Alessandro', University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

Comment in
    J Hosp Infect. 2014 Aug;87(4):247-8.

This article reports an outbreak of colonization by Klebsiella pneumoniae
carbapenemase-producing K. pneumoniae (KPC-Kp) sequence type (ST) 258 in a
neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) in Palermo, Italy. KPC-Kp ST258 was detected 
by an active surveillance culture programme. Between 18th September and 14th
November 2012, KPC-Kp was isolated from 10 out of 54 neonates admitted in the
outbreak period. No cases of infection were recorded. Male sex was associated
with colonization, whereas administration of ampicillin- sulbactam plus
gentamicin was protective. Infection control interventions interrupted the spread
of KPC-Kp without the need to close the NICU to new admissions.

Copyright © 2013 The Healthcare Infection Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 24074641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Vascular. 2014 Dec;22(6):471-2. doi: 10.1177/1708538113498590. Epub 2013 Sep 24.

Different serum levels of interleukin-23 in patients affected by peripheral
arterial disease.

David A(1), Saitta S(2), De Caridi G(3), David T(1), Noto A(1), Minciullo PL(4), 
Spinelli F(3), Gangemi S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Psychiatric and Anesthesiological Sciences,
University of Messina, Messina, Italy. (2)Department of Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, School and Unit of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of
Messina, Messina, Italy. (3)Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Sciences,
University of Messina, Messina, Italy. (4)Department of Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, School and Unit of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of
Messina, Messina, Italy pminciullo@unime.it. (5)Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, School and Unit of Allergy and Clinical Immunology,
University of Messina, Messina, Italy Institute of Biomedicine and Molecular
Immunology, National Research Council, Palermo, Italy.

PMID: 24067793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2013 Oct;26 Suppl 2:80-3. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2013.829698.

Urinary NGAL and hematic ADMA levels: an early sign of cardio-renal syndrome in
young adults born preterm?

Bassareo PP(1), Fanos V, Mussap M, Flore G, Noto A, Puddu M, Saba L, Mercuro G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences "M. Aresu", University of Cagliari , Cagliari ,
Italy .

BACKGROUND: Prematurity at birth is a known risk factor for the development of an
early chronic renal disease. Urinary neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin
(NGAL) is a well established biomarker of kidney injury, while high blood levels 
of asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) are associated with the future development 
of adverse cardiovascular events and cardiac death.
AIMS: (1) to verify the presence of statistically significant differences between
urinary NGAL and hematic ADMA levels in young adults born preterm at extremely
low birth weight (<1000 g; ex-ELBW) and those of a control group of healthy
adults born at term (C) (2) to seek correlations between NGAL and ADMA levels,
which would indicate the presence of an early cardio-renal involvement in
ex-ELBW.
METHODS: Twelve ex-ELBW subjects (six males and six female, mean age: 23.9 ± 3.2 
years) were compared with 12 C (six males and six female). Urinary NGAL and
hematic ADMA levels were assessed.
RESULTS: Urinary NGAL levels were higher in ex- ELBW subjects compared to C (p < 
0.05), as well as hematic ADMA concentrations (p < 0.05). A statistically
significant correlation was found between urinary NGAL and ADMA (r = -0.60, p <
0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: Our preliminary findings support the hypothesis that in ex-ELBW
subjects the development of an early chronic kidney disease contributes towards
inducing an increase in the atherosclerotic process and in the risk of future
adverse cardiovascular events.

PMID: 24059560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2013 Oct;26 Suppl 2:24-6. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2013.830411.

In search of biomarkers for diagnosing and managing neonatal sepsis: the role of 
angiopoietins.

Mussap M(1), Cibecchini F, Noto A, Fanos V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, IRCCS San Martino-IST, University-Hospital,
National Institute for Cancer Research , Genoa , Italy and.

Angiopoietin-1 (Ang-1) and angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2) are antagonistic ligands that
bind to the extracellular domain of the Tie-2 receptor, which is almost
exclusively expressed by endothelial cells. Angiopoietins can directly stimulate 
both endothelial cells and neutrophils for an overall proinflammatory and
proangiogenic response. An increasing number of experimental and clinical studies
gave evidence that in the course of sepsis the serum levels of Ang-1 and Ang-2 as
well as their ratio significantly differ from those in healthy subjects, in
non-septic hospitalized patients, and in patients with non-infectious systemic
inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) or critical illness. Further evidences have
demonstrated that the magnitude of Ang-2 dysregulation correlates with the
severity of sepsis and the mortality rate. Since the onset of neonatal sepsis is 
often subtle and the diagnosis occurs later, Ang-1 and Ang-2 appear to be very
promising biomarkers for improving the diagnosis and the management of septic
newborns.

PMID: 24059548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2013 Oct;26 Suppl 2:20-3. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2013.832062.

Metabolomics in paediatric oncology: a potential still to be exploited.

Spiga L(1), Atzori L, Noto A, Moretti C, Mussap M, Masile A, Lussu M, Fanos V.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section,
University of Cagliari , Cagliari , Italy .

Oncology is a branch of medicine in rapid evolution in the attempt to find
innovative methods for early diagnosis and a better understanding of tumoral
processes leading to the development of new therapies. Metabolomics is the
emerging discipline among the "omics" sciences which makes it possible to further
expand our knowledge concerning cancer biology. Different studies have revealed
the potential role of metabolomics in gaining an understanding of
pathophysiological processes in cancer, improving tumor staging, characterizing
tumors and searching for biomarkers predictive of therapeutic responses. However,
to date there are few works aimed at gaining deeper insights into infantile
oncology through metabolomics.

PMID: 24059547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2013 Oct;26 Suppl 2:17-9. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2013.829684.

Metabolomics: a new tool for the investigation of metabolic changes induced by
cytomegalovirus.

Locci E(1), Noto A, Lanari M, Lazzarotto T, Fanos V, Atzori L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Cagliari , Cagliari , Italy .

To date, cytomegalovirus (CMV) is one of the most studied and characterized
virus, however the current knowledge on the effect of the human CMV (HCMV)
infection on global metabolism is still poorly understood. Metabolomics is a new 
approach based on the systematic study of the complete set of low molecular
weight compounds, both endogenous and exogenous, found within a cell, tissue,
biofluid or organism. The purpose of this review is to provide insight into the
use of the metabolomic approach on the study of the impact of HCMV on the human
metabolome. The results described in this work suggest that metabolomics could be
a new tool for HCMV investigation.

PMID: 24059546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Pain. 2014 Jan;155(1):108-17. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2013.09.016. Epub 2013 Sep 21.

A pilot trial of intravenous pamidronate for chronic low back pain.

Pappagallo M(1), Breuer B(2), Lin HM(3), Moberly JB(4), Tai J(5), Noto C(6),
Sanchez A(6), Manfredi PL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Grünenthal USA, Bedminster, NJ, USA. Electronic address:
marco.pappagallo@grunenthal.com. (2)Department of Pain Medicine and Palliative
Care, Beth Israel Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. (3)Department of Health
Evidence and Policy, Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. (4)Grünenthal
USA, Bedminster, NJ, USA. (5)The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research at
North Shore-LIJ Health System, Long Island, NY, USA. (6)Department of
Anesthesiology, Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. (7)Patrician
Medical, West Chester, PA, USA.

Intravenous (i.v.) bisphosphonates relieve pain in conditions such as Paget's
disease of bone, metastatic bone disease, and multiple myeloma. Based on positive
findings from a prior case series, we conducted a randomized placebo-controlled
study to assess the analgesic effect of i.v. pamidronate in subjects with chronic
low back pain (CLBP) and evidence of degenerative disease of the spine. Four
groups of 11 subjects (7 active, 4 placebo) were enrolled at escalating dose
levels of 30, 60, 90, and 180 mg pamidronate (the latter administered as two 90
mg infusions). Primary outcomes were safety and change from baseline in average
daily pain scores, recorded at 1, 2, 3, and 6 months postinfusion using
electronic diaries. Secondary outcomes included responder rate, daily worst pain,
and pain-related interference with daily function. There were no
pamidronate-related serious adverse events or other significant safety findings. 
A statistically significant overall treatment difference in pain scores was
observed, with clinically meaningful effects persisting for 6 months in the 180
mg pamidronate group. Least squares mean changes in daily average pain score were
-1.39 (SE=0.43) for placebo, and -1.53 (0.71), -1.26 (0.81), -1.42 (0.65), and
-4.13 (0.65) for pamidronate 30, 60, 90, and 180 mg, respectively (P=0.012 for
pamidronate 180 mg vs placebo). The proportion of responders, changes in worst
pain, and pain interference with daily function were also significantly improved 
for pamidronate 180 mg compared with placebo. In conclusion, i.v. pamidronate,
administered as two 90 mg infusions, decreased pain intensity for 6 months in
subjects with CLBP.

Copyright © 2013 International Association for the Study of Pain. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3947358
PMID: 24060707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Org Chem. 2013 Oct 18;78(20):10203-8. doi: 10.1021/jo401594r. Epub 2013 Oct 4.

Molecular "pincer" from a diimidazolium salt: a study of binding ability.

Marullo S(1), D'Anna F, Cascino M, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Sezione di Chimica, Dipartimento STEBICEF, Università degli Studi di Palermo ,
Viale delle Scienze-Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy.

The anion recognition ability of the dicationic imidazolium salt
3,3'-di-n-octyl-1,1'-(1,3-phenylenedimethylene)diimidazolium
1,5-naphthalenedisulfonate ([m-Xyl-(oim)2][1,5-NDS]) was investigated in
acetonitrile solution by means of proton NMR titrations. A wide range of anions, 
comprising simple inorganic ions, halides, and mono- and dicarboxylates was taken
into account. The study showed that this receptor binds carboxylate anions more
strongly than halides. Moreover [m-Xyl-(oim)2][1,5-NDS] displays selectivity for 
di- over monocarboxylate anions. The complex stability was mainly affected by the
anion basicity in the presence of monocarboxylates, whereas the flexibility of
the alkyl chain linking the two carboxylate moieties appeared to play a major
role in the presence of dicarboxylate anions.

PMID: 24059818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Lipid Res. 2013 Dec;54(12):3481-90. doi: 10.1194/jlr.P039875. Epub 2013 Sep 20.

Clinical characteristics and plasma lipids in subjects with familial combined
hypolipidemia: a pooled analysis.

Minicocci I(1), Santini S, Cantisani V, Stitziel N, Kathiresan S, Arroyo JA,
Martí G, Pisciotta L, Noto D, Cefalù AB, Maranghi M, Labbadia G, Pigna G,
Pannozzo F, Ceci F, Ciociola E, Bertolini S, Calandra S, Tarugi P, Averna M, Arca
M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, Sapienza University 
of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Angiopoietin-like 3 (ANGPTL3) regulates lipoprotein metabolism by modulating
extracellular lipases. Loss-of function mutations in ANGPTL3 gene cause familial 
combined hypolipidemia (FHBL2). The mode of inheritance and hepatic and vascular 
consequences of FHBL2 have not been fully elucidated. To get further insights on 
these aspects, we reevaluated the clinical and the biochemical characteristics of
all reported cases of FHBL2. One hundred fifteen FHBL2 individuals carrying 13
different mutations in the ANGPTL3 gene (14 homozygotes, 8 compound
heterozygotes, and 93 heterozygotes) and 402 controls were considered. Carriers
of two mutant alleles had undetectable plasma levels of ANGPTL3 protein, whereas 
heterozygotes showed a reduction ranging from 34% to 88%, according to genotype. 
Compared with controls, homozygotes as well as heterozygotes showed a significant
reduction of all plasma lipoproteins, while no difference in lipoprotein(a)
[Lp(a)] levels was detected between groups. The prevalence of fatty liver was not
different in FHBL2 subjects compared with controls. Notably, diabetes mellitus
and cardiovascular disease were absent among homozygotes. FHBL2 trait is
inherited in a codominant manner, and the lipid-lowering effect of two ANGPTL3
mutant alleles was more than four times larger than that of one mutant allele. No
changes in Lp(a) were detected in FHBL2. Furthermore, our analysis confirmed that
FHBL2 is not associated with adverse clinical sequelae. The possibility that
FHBL2 confers lower risk of diabetes and cardiovascular disease warrants more
detailed investigation.

PMCID: PMC3826694
PMID: 24058201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Muscle Nerve. 2014 May;49(5):745-8. doi: 10.1002/mus.24056.

Contrasting echogenicity in flexor digitorum profundus-flexor carpi ulnaris: a
diagnostic ultrasound pattern in sporadic inclusion body myositis.

Noto Y(1), Shiga K, Tsuji Y, Kondo M, Tokuda T, Mizuno T, Nakagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, 465 Kajii-cho, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto, 602-0841, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: In this study we aimed to clarify whether muscle ultrasound (US) of
the forearm can be used to differentiate between patients with sporadic inclusion
body myositis (s-IBM) and those with s-IBM-mimicking diseases.
METHODS: We compared the echo intensity (EI) of the flexor digitorum profundus
(FDP) muscle and the flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU) muscles in patients with s-IBM (n
= 6), polymyositis/dermatomyositis (PM/DM; n = 6), and amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS; n = 6).
RESULTS: We identified EI abnormalities in 100% of patients with s-IBM, 33% of
those with PM/DM, and 33% of those with ALS. An "FDP-FCU echogenicity contrast," 
a US pattern involving a higher EI in the FDP than in the FCU, was observed in
all patients with s-IBM, but in none of those with PM/DM or ALS.
CONCLUSIONS: FDP-FCU echogenicity contrast in muscle US is a sensitive diagnostic
indicator of s-IBM.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24037920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Clin Chim Acta. 2013 Nov 15;426:127-38. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2013.08.020. Epub 2013
Sep 11.

The role of metabolomics in neonatal and pediatric laboratory medicine.

Mussap M(1), Antonucci R, Noto A, Fanos V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Medicine Service, IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST, University-Hospital,
National Institute for Cancer Research, Genova, Italy.

Metabolomics consists of the quantitative analysis of a large number of low
molecular mass metabolites involving substrates or products in metabolic pathways
existing in all living systems. The analysis of the metabolic profile detectable 
in a human biological fluid allows to instantly identify changes in the
composition of endogenous and exogenous metabolites caused by the interaction
between specific physiopathological states, gene expression, and environment. In 
pediatrics and neonatology, metabolomics offers new encouraging perspectives for 
the improvement of critically ill patient outcome, for the early recognition of
metabolic profiles associated with the development of diseases in the adult life,
and for delivery of individualized medicine. In this view, nutrimetabolomics,
based on the recognition of specific cluster of metabolites associated with
nutrition and pharmacometabolomics, based on the capacity to personalize drug
therapy by analyzing metabolic modifications due to therapeutic treatment may
open new frontiers in the prevention and in the treatment of pediatric and
neonatal diseases. This review summarizes the most relevant results published in 
the literature on the application of metabolomics in pediatric and neonatal
clinical settings. However, there is the urgent need to standardize physiological
and preanalytical variables, analytical methods, data processing, and result
presentation, before establishing the definitive clinical value of results.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24035970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2014 Jan;85(1):85-91. doi:
10.1136/jnnp-2013-305617. Epub 2013 Sep 11.

Spreading of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis lesions--multifocal hits and local
propagation?

Sekiguchi T(1), Kanouchi T, Shibuya K, Noto Y, Yagi Y, Inaba A, Abe K, Misawa S, 
Orimo S, Kobayashi T, Kamata T, Nakagawa M, Kuwabara S, Mizusawa H, Yokota T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Graduate School, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, , Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2013 Nov;9(11):600.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether or not the lesions in sporadic amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS) originate from a single focal onset site and spread
contiguously by prion-like cell-to-cell propagation in the rostrocaudal direction
along the spinal cord, as has been hypothesised (the 'single seed and simple
propagation' hypothesis).
METHODS: Subjects included 36 patients with sporadic ALS and initial symptoms in 
the bulbar, respiratory or upper limb regions. Abnormal spontaneous activities in
needle electromyography (nEMG)-that is, fibrillation potentials, positive sharp
waves (Fib/PSWs) or fasciculation potentials (FPs)-were compared among the
unilateral muscles innervated by different spinal segments, especially between
the T10 and L5 paraspinal muscles, and between the vastus medialis and biceps
femoris. Axon length and the proportion of muscle fibre types, which are both
related to motoneuronal vulnerability in ALS, are similar in the paired muscles.
RESULTS: Fourteen of 36 patients showed a non-contiguous distribution of nEMG
abnormalities from the onset site, with skipping of intermediate segments. In
eight of them, the non-contiguous pattern was evident between paired muscles with
the same motoneuronal vulnerability. The non-contiguously affected lumbosacral
lesions involved motoneuron columns horizontally or radially proximate to one
another, appearing to form a cluster in four of the eight patients. FPs, known to
precede Fib/PSWs, were shown more frequently than Fib/PSWs in all the lumbosacral
segments but L5, suggesting that 2nd hits occur at L5 and then spread to other
lumbosacral segments.
CONCLUSIONS: In sporadic ALS, the distribution of lower motoneuron involvement
cannot be explained by the 'single seed and simple propagation' hypothesis alone.
We propose a 'multifocal hits and local propagation' hypothesis instead.

PMID: 24027298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Horm Res Paediatr. 2013;80(4):242-51. doi: 10.1159/000354126. Epub 2013 Sep 10.

A four-year, open-label, multi-center, randomized, two-arm study of Genotropin®
in patients with idiopathic short stature: comparison of an individualized,
target-driven treatment regimen to standard dosing of Genotropin® - analysis of
two-year data.

Counts DR(1), Silverman LA, Geffner ME, Rajicic N, Hey-Hadavi J, Thornton PS,
Wajnrajch MP; ISS Study Group.

Collaborators: Brenner D, Angulo M, Escobar O, Bao Y, Carakushansky M, Cohen A,
Counts D, Tansey M, Geffner M, Repaske D, Levitsky L, Russell W, Sher E, Allen H,
Ten S, Frank G, Newfield R, Kemp S, Noto R, Ross J, Silverman L, Rotenstein D,
Quattrin T, Travers S, Rapaport R, Wright N, Franklin S, Brown R, Bowlby D,
Nemery R, Zhou P, Zipf W, Nayak S, Cernich J, Plotnick L, Richton S, Thornton P, 
Desrosiers P, Frangos M, Hutchison M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Maryland, Baltimore, Md., USA.

BACKGROUND: Several models have been developed to predict growth response to
growth hormone (GH) based on auxological and biochemical parameters for children 
with non-GH-deficient, idiopathic short stature (ISS).
OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate if an individualized, formula-based, target-driven GH
regimen for children with ISS would lead to a height (Ht) gain to -1.3 SDS during
the first 24 months of treatment of this 4-year study, with less variability than
with standard weight-based dosing.
METHODS: A 4-year, open-label, multi-center, randomized, two-arm study comparing 
formula-based dosing of Genotropin® GH from 0.18 to 0.7 mg/kg/week versus
standard FDA-approved ISS dosing of Genotropin® (0.37 mg/kg/week). Subjects (n = 
316, 89 females) were prepubertal, 3-14 years of age, bone age 3-10 years (m) and
3-9 years (f), naive to GH treatment, Ht SDS -3 to -2.25, Ht velocity <25th
percentile for bone age, and peak GH >10 ng/ml.
RESULTS: The majority (83%) of subjects had Ht SDS within the normal range by 2
years. All subjects displayed catch-up growth consistent with other studies of GH
treatment of ISS.
CONCLUSION: The formula-based therapy did not meet the primary endpoint achieving
targeted gain with lower variability. No new safety concerns were found.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24021297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Subst Abuse Treat Prev Policy. 2013 Sep 10;8:31. doi: 10.1186/1747-597X-8-31.

Brief intervention and decrease of alcohol consumption among women: a systematic 
review.

Gebara CF(1), Bhona FM, Ronzani TM, Lourenço LM, Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology, Research Center on Health and Substance Use
(NEPSIS), Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), Rua Botucatu, 862 - 1°
andar, 04023-062 São Paulo - SP, Brazil. carla_gebara@yahoo.com.br.

Problems related to alcohol consumption are priority public health issues
worldwide and may compromise women's health. The early detection of risky alcohol
consumption combined with a brief intervention (BI) has shown promising results
in prevention for different populations. The aim of this study was to examine
data from recent scientific publications on the use of BI toward reducing alcohol
consumption among women through a systematic review. Electronic searches were
conducted using Web of Science, PubMed(Medline) and PsycInfo databases. In all
databases, the term "brief intervention" was associated with the words "alcohol" 
and "women", and studies published between the years 2006 and 2011 were selected.
Out of the 133 publications found, the 36 scientific articles whose central theme
was performing and/or evaluating the effectiveness of BI were included. The full 
texts were reviewed by content analysis technique. This review identified
promising results of BI for women, especially pregnant women and female college
students, in different forms of application (face-to-face, by computer or
telephone) despite a substantial heterogeneity in the clinical trials analyzed.
In primary care, which is a setting involving quite different characteristics,
the results among women were rather unclear. In general, the results indicated a 
decrease in alcohol consumption among women following BI, both in the number of
days of consumption and the number of doses, suggesting that the impact on the
woman's reproductive health and the lower social acceptance of female consumption
can be aspects favorable for the effectiveness of BI in this population.

PMCID: PMC3847063
PMID: 24016074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2014 Oct;40(6):697-713. doi: 10.1111/nan.12086.

Development of a culture system to induce microglia-like cells from
haematopoietic cells.

Noto D(1), Sakuma H, Takahashi K, Saika R, Saga R, Yamada M, Yamamura T, Miyake
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, National Institute of Neuroscience, National Center 
of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Neurology and
Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical Science,
Kanazawa, Japan.

AIMS: Microglia are the resident immune cells in the central nervous system,
originating from haematopoietic-derived myeloid cells. A microglial cell is a
double-edged sword, which has both pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory
functions. Although understanding the role of microglia in pathological
conditions has become increasingly important, histopathology has been the only
way to investigate microglia in human diseases.
METHODS: To enable the study of microglial cells in vitro, we here establish a
culture system to induce microglia-like cells from haematopoietic cells by
coculture with astrocytes. The characteristics of microglia-like cells were
analysed by flow cytometry and functional assay.
RESULTS: We show that triggering receptor expressing on myeloid
cells-2-expressing microglia-like cells could be induced from lineage negative
cells or monocytes by coculture with astrocytes. Microglia-like cells exhibited
lower expression of CD45 and MHC class II than macrophages, a characteristic
similar to brain microglia. When introduced into brain slice cultures, these
microglia-like cells changed their morphology to a ramified shape on the first
day of the culture. Moreover, we demonstrated that microglia-like cells could be 
induced from human monocytes by coculture with astrocytes. Finally, we showed
that interleukin 34 was an important factor in the induction of microglia-like
cells from haematopoietic cells in addition to cell-cell contact with astrocytes.
Purified microglia-like cells were suitable for further culture and functional
analyses.
CONCLUSION: Development of in vitro induction system for microglia will further
promote the study of human microglial cells under pathological conditions as well
as aid in the screening of drugs to target microglial cells.

© 2013 The Authors. Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of the British Neuropathological Society.

PMCID: PMC4282385
PMID: 24016036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Drugs. 2013 Sep;73(14):1549-68. doi: 10.1007/s40265-013-0113-4.

Pharmacological and psychosocial management of mental, neurological and substance
use disorders in low- and middle-income countries: issues and current strategies.

de Jesus Mari J(1), Tófoli LF, Noto C, Li LM, Diehl A, Claudino AM, Juruena MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Borges Lagoa 
570 - 1° andar, Vila Clementino, São Paulo, SP, 04038-000, Brazil,
jamari17@gmail.com.

Mental, neurological, and substance use disorders (MNS) are among the largest
sources of medical disability in the world, surpassing both cardiovascular
disease and cancer. The picture is not different in low- and middle-income
countries (LAMIC) where the relative morbidity associated with MNS is increasing,
as a consequence of improvement in general health indicators and longevity.
However, 80 % of individuals with MNS live in LAMIC but only close to 20 % of
cases receive some sort of treatment. The main aim of this article is to provide 
non-specialist health workers in LAMIC with an accessible guide to the affordable
essential psychotropics and psychosocial interventions which are proven to be
cost effective for treating the main MNS. The MNS discussed in this article were 
selected on the basis of burden, following the key priority conditions selected
by the Mental Health Action Programme (mhGAP) developed by the World Health
Organization (WHO) (anxiety, stress-related and bodily distress disorders;
depression and bipolar disorder; schizophrenia; alcohol and drug addiction; and
epilepsy), with the addition of eating disorders, because of their emergent trend
in middle-income countries. We review best evidence-based clinical practice in
these areas, with a focus on drugs from the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines
and the psychosocial interventions available in LAMIC for the management of these
conditions in primary care. We do this by reviewing guidelines developed by
prestigious professional associations and government agencies, clinical trials
conducted in LAMIC and systematic reviews (including Cochrane reviews) identified
from the main international literature databases (MEDLINE, EMBASE and PsycINFO). 
In summary, it can be concluded that the availability and use of the
psychotropics on the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines in LAMIC, plus an
array of psychosocial interventions, can represent a cost-effective way to expand
treatment of most MNS. The translation of these findings into policies can be
achieved by relatively low supplementary funding, and limited effort engendered
by governments and policy makers in LAMIC.

PMID: 24000001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Nephron Exp Nephrol. 2013;123(3-4):34-45. doi: 10.1159/000354057. Epub 2013 Aug
23.

Gene expression analysis detected a low expression level of C1s gene in
ICR-derived glomerulonephritis (ICGN) mice.

Tamura K(1), Uchio-Yamada K, Manabe N, Noto T, Hirota R, Unami A, Matsumoto M,
Miyamae Y.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Safety Research Laboratories, Astellas Pharma Inc., Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: ICR-derived glomerulonephritis (ICGN) strain is a novel inbred strain
of mice with a hereditary nephrotic syndrome. Deletion mutation of tensin 2
(Tns2), a focal adhesion molecule, has been suggested to be responsible for
nephrotic syndrome in ICGN mice; however, the existence of other associative
factors has been suggested.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To identify additional associative factors and to better
understand the onset mechanism of nephrotic syndrome in ICGN mice, we conducted a
comprehensive gene expression analysis using DNA microarray. Immune-related
pathways were markedly altered in ICGN mice kidney as compared with ICR mice.
Furthermore, the gene expression level of complement component 1, s subcomponent 
(C1s), whose human homologue has been reported to associate with lupus nephritis,
was markedly low in ICGN mouse kidney. Real-time quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction confirmed a low expression level of C1s
in ICGN mouse liver where the C1s protein is mainly synthesized. A high serum
level of anti-dsDNA antibody and deposits of immune complexes were also detected 
in ICGN mice by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and immunohistochemical
analyses, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the immune system, especially the complement
system, is associated with nephrotic syndrome in ICGN mice. We identified a low
expression level of C1s gene as an additional associative factor for nephrotic
syndrome in ICGN mice. Further studies are needed to elucidate the role of the
complement system in the onset of nephrotic syndrome in ICGN mice.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23989031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Environ Pollut. 2013 Nov;182:324-34. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2013.07.020. Epub 2013
Aug 23.

Source contribution analysis of surface particulate polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon concentrations in northeastern Asia by source-receptor relationships.

Inomata Y(1), Kajino M, Sato K, Ohara T, Kurokawa J, Ueda H, Tang N, Hayakawa K, 
Ohizumi T, Akimoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Asia Center for Air Pollution Research, 1182, Sowa, Nishi-ku, Niigatashi,
Niigata 950-2144, Japan. Electronic address: inomata@acap.asia.

We analyzed the source-receptor relationships for particulate polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon (PAH) concentrations in northeastern Asia using an aerosol chemical
transport model. The model successfully simulated the observed concentrations. In
Beijing (China) benzo[a]pyren (BaP) concentrations are due to emissions from its 
own domain. In Noto, Oki and Tsushima (Japan), transboundary transport from
northern China (>40 °N, 40-60%) and central China (30-40 °N, 10-40%) largely
influences BaP concentrations from winter to spring, whereas the relative
contribution from central China is dominant (90%) in Hedo. In the summer, the
contribution from Japanese domestic sources increases (40-80%) at the 4 sites.
Contributions from Japan and Russia are additional source of BaP over the
northwestern Pacific Ocean in summer. The contribution rates for the
concentrations from each domain are different among PAH species depending on
their particulate phase oxidation rates. Reaction with O3 on particulate surfaces
may be an important component of the PAH oxidation processes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23973884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol. 2013;40(2):219-21.

Colostrum in menopause effects on vaginal cytology/symptoms.

Tucci S(1), Mancini R, De Vitis C, Noto A, Marra E, Lukic A, Giovagnoli MR,
Moscarini M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics and Urology, Sapienza University of
Rome, Rome, Italy. stefania_tucci@yahoo.com

The aim of this study was to assess the effects of three weeks of daily colostrum
cream on vaginal cytology and local symptoms related to menopause. Genito-urinary
symptoms and cell morphology were analyzed at time 0 (T0) and after three weeks
(16 +/- days since the end of treatment) at time 1 (T1). Dyspareunia, vaginal
dryness, and maturation index (MI) reached a statistically significant difference
between T0 and T1. The results proved to be an alternative treatment for vaginal 
distress caused by lack of hormones in patients in which hormonal treatment is
contraindicated.

PMID: 23971242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2013 Oct 21;15(39):16626-33. doi: 10.1039/c3cp51745d. Epub
2013 Aug 20.

Dielectric relaxations and conduction mechanisms in polyether-clay composite
polymer electrolytes under high carbon dioxide pressure.

Kitajima S(1), Bertasi F, Vezzù K, Negro E, Tominaga Y, Di Noto V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic and Polymer Materials Chemistry, Tokyo University of
Agriculture and Technology, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan.
ytominag@cc.tuat.ac.jp.

The composite material P(EO/EM)-Sa consisting of synthetic saponite (Sa)
dispersed in poly[ethylene oxide-co-2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl glycidyl ether]
(P(EO/EM)) is studied by "in situ" measurements using broadband electrical
spectroscopy (BES) under pressurized CO2 to characterize the dynamic behavior of 
conductivity and the dielectric relaxations of the ion host polymer matrix. It is
revealed that there are three dielectric relaxation processes associated with:
(I) the dipolar motions in the short oxyethylene side chains of P(EO/EM) (ß); and
(II) the segmental motion of the main chains comprising the polyether components 
(afast, aslow). aslow is attributed to the slow a-relaxation of P(EO/EM)
macromolecules, which is hindered by the strong coordination interactions with
the ions. Two conduction processes are observed, sDC and sID, which are
attributed, respectively, to the bulk conductivity and the interdomain
conductivity. The temperature dependence of conductivity and relaxation processes
reveals that afast and aslow are strongly correlated with sDC and sID. The "in
situ" BES measurements under pressurized CO2 indicate a fast decrease in sDC at
the initial CO2 treatment time resulting from the decrease in the concentration
of polyether-M(n+) complexes, which is driven by the CO2 permeation. The
relaxation frequency (fR) of aslow at the initial CO2 treatment time increases
and shows a steep rise with time with the same behavior of the afast mode. It is 
demonstrated that the interactions between polyether chains of P(EO/EM) and
cations in the polymer electrolyte layers embedded in Sa are probably weakened by
the low permittivity of CO2 (e = 1.08). Thus, the formation of ion pairs in the
polymer electrolyte domains of P(EO/EM)-Sa occurs, with a corresponding reduction
in the concentration of ion carriers.

PMID: 23963202  [PubMed]


313. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 5;8(8):e70811. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070811. Print 2013.

C-src enriched serum microvesicles are generated in malignant plasma cell
dyscrasia.

Di Noto G(1), Paolini L, Zendrini A, Radeghieri A, Caimi L, Ricotta D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

Plasma cell dyscrasias are immunosecretory disorders that can lead to
hematological malignancies such as Multiple Myeloma (MM). MM accounts for 15% of 
all hematologic cancers, and those diagnosed with MM typically become severely
ill and have a low life expectancy. Monoclonal immunoglobulin Free Light Chains
(FLC) are present in the serum and urine of many patients with plasma cell
diseases. The biological differences between monoclonal FLCs, produced under
malignant or benign dyscrasias, has not yet been characterized. In the present
study, we show that endothelial and heart muscle cell lines internalize kappa and
lambda FLCs. After internalization, FLCs are rerouted in the extracellular space 
via microvesicles and exosomes that can be re-internalized in contiguous cells.
Only FLCs secreted from malignant B Lymphocytes were carried in Hsp70, annexin V,
and c-src positive vesicles. In both MM and AL Amyloidosis patients we observed
an increase in microvesicle and exosome production. Isolated serum vesicles from 
MM, AL Amyloidosis and monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) 
patients contained FLCs. Furthermore MM and AL amyloidosis vesicles were strongly
positive for Hsp70, annexin V, and c-src compared to MGUS and control patients.
These are the first data implying that FLCs reroute via microvesicles in the
blood stream, and also suggest a potential novel mechanism of c-src activation in
plasma cell dyscrasia.

PMCID: PMC3733647
PMID: 23940647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(1):217-25. doi: 10.2337/dc13-0701. Epub 2013 Aug 12.

Vital signs, QT prolongation, and newly diagnosed cardiovascular disease during
severe hypoglycemia in type 1 and type 2 diabetic patients.

Tsujimoto T(1), Yamamoto-Honda R, Kajio H, Kishimoto M, Noto H, Hachiya R, Kimura
A, Kakei M, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding author: Mitsuhiko Noda, mnoda@hosp.ncgm.go.jp.

OBJECTIVE To assess vital signs, QT intervals, and newly diagnosed cardiovascular
disease during severe hypoglycemia in diabetic patients. RESEARCH DESIGN AND
METHODS From January 2006 to March 2012, we conducted a retrospective cohort
study to assess type 1 and type 2 diabetic patients with severe hypoglycemia at a
national center in Japan. Severe hypoglycemia was defined as the presence of any 
hypoglycemic symptoms that could not be resolved by the patients themselves in
prehospital settings. RESULTS A total of 59,602 cases that visited the emergency 
room by ambulance were screened, and 414 cases of severe hypoglycemia were
analyzed. The median (interquartile range) blood glucose levels were not
significantly different between the type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) (n = 88) and 
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) (n = 326) groups (32 [24-42] vs. 31 [24-39]
mg/dL, P = 0.59). During severe hypoglycemia, the incidences of severe
hypertension (=180/120 mmHg), hypokalemia (<3.5 mEq/L), and QT prolongation were 
19.8 and 38.8% (P = 0.001), 42.4 and 36.3% (P = 0.30), and 50.0 and 59.9% (P =
0.29) in the T1DM and T2DM groups, respectively. Newly diagnosed cardiovascular
disease during severe hypoglycemia and death were only observed in the T2DM group
(1.5 and 1.8%, respectively). Blood glucose levels between the deceased and
surviving patients in the T2DM group were significantly different (18 [14-33] vs.
31 [24-39] mg/dL, P = 0.02). CONCLUSIONS T1DM and T2DM patients with severe
hypoglycemia experienced many critical problems that could lead to cardiovascular
disease, fatal arrhythmia, and death.

PMID: 23939540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes. 2013 Jul 26;6:257-61. doi: 10.2147/DMSO.S49767. Print 
2013.

Effect of calcium channel blockers on incidence of diabetes: a meta-analysis.

Noto H(1), Goto A, Tsujimoto T, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine, Center Hospital, National
Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan ; Department of Diabetes
Research, Diabetes Research Center, Research Institute, National Center for
Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

AIMS: Insulin resistance and the progressive loss of ß-cell function are
components of the fundamental pathophysiology of type II diabetes. A recent
experimental study suggested that calcium channel blockers (CCBs) might inhibit
ß-cell apoptosis, enhance ß-cell function, and prevent diabetes. The present
meta-analysis examined the clinical effect of CCBs on the incidence of diabetes.
METHODS: MEDLINE, EMBASE, ISI Web of Science, the Cochrane Library, and
ClinicalTrials. gov were each searched for relevant articles published up to
March 11, 2013. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) with a follow-up period of at
least 1-year were included. Identified articles were systematically reviewed, and
those with pertinent data were selected for inclusion in a meta-analysis.
RESULTS: We included ten RCTs in a meta-analysis. Of the 108,118 people with
hypertension and no pre-existing diabetes, 7,073 (6.5%) cases of type II diabetes
were reported. CCBs were associated with a higher incidence of diabetes than
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) or angiotensin-receptor blockers
(ARBs; pooled risk ratios [95% confidence intervals]: 1.23 [1.01-1.51] and 1.27
[1.14-1.42], respectively) and a lower incidence compared with ß blockers or
diuretics (0.83 [0.73-0.94] and 0.82 [0.69-0.98], respectively). The overall risk
of diabetes among subjects taking CCBs was not significant (0.99 [0.85-1.15]).
CONCLUSION: THE USE OF CCBS WAS NOT SIGNIFICANTLY ASSOCIATED WITH INCIDENT
DIABETES COMPARED TO OTHER ANTIHYPERTENSIVE AGENTS: the association with diabetes
was lowest for ACEIs and ARBs, followed by CCBs, ß blockers, and diuretics.
Although CCBs can be safely used in hypertensive patients, it would be premature 
to advocate CCBs for the prevention or treatment of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3735278
PMID: 23935375  [PubMed]


316. Org Biomol Chem. 2013 Sep 21;11(35):5836-46. doi: 10.1039/c3ob40807h.

Solution and thermal behaviour of novel dicationic imidazolium ionic liquids.

D'Anna F(1), Gunaratne HQ, Lazzara G, Noto R, Rizzo C, Seddon KR.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento STEBICEF, Università degli Studi di Palermo, Viale delle
Scienze-Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy. francesca.danna@unipa.it
renato.noto@unipa.it.

A new class of functionalised dicationic ionic liquids, containing a central
cationic unit capped by a basic functionality (imidazole), has been synthesised. 
These salts have been characterised in isotropic solution using proton and 2D-NMR
spectroscopy, and their thermal stability has been studied by DSC and TGA. All
these novel salts contain the
1-(1-imidazolylmethyl)-3,5-di{1-(3'-octylimidazolylmethyl)}-benzene cation as a
defining structural motif. Salts of both singly and doubly charged anions were
prepared and, in particular, the selected monoanions (Br(-), [BF4](-), or
[NTf2](-)) differ in size, shape and hydrogen-bonding ability, whereas the
dianions differ in the nature of the spacer, such as 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate,
2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylate, 1,5- and 2,6-naphthalenedisulfonate,
1,4-butanedicarboxylate, and 1,6-hexanedicarboxylate. These ionic liquids exhibit
the presence of different conformers in solution, whose distribution is affected 
by the nature of the anion. The nature of the anion also affects their thermal
stability.

PMID: 23900265  [PubMed]


317. Expert Rev Neurother. 2013 Jul;13(7):795-806; quiz 807. doi:
10.1586/14737175.2013.811132.

Recognition of bipolar disorder type I before the first manic episode: challenges
and developments.

Noto MN(1), de Souza Noto C, de Jesus DR, Zugman A, Mansur RB, Berberian AA,
Leclerc E, McIntyre RS, Correll CU, Brietzke E.

Author information: 
(1)Program for Recognition and Intervention in Individuals in at Risk Mental
States (PRISMA), Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil. marianenoto@hotmail.com

Bipolar disorder (BD) usually follows a neurobiological progression pathway, but 
a relatively long interval between the first symptoms of the disorder and the
correct diagnosis and treatment takes place in most patients. Strategies used to 
recognize BD at an early stage and even prior to the first manic episode could
help identify the risk and modifying factors that influence the onset and course 
of disease, and improve outcomes. Drawing on current research results, this
article presents considerations on risk factors for the development of BD,
including genetic/familial risk, endophenotypes and clinical characteristics.
Taken together, this article provides a framework and tools for research on the
BD prodrome, as well as for the early recognition and timely treatment of
patients prior to and immediately after the emergence of BD.

PMID: 23898851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Oncotarget. 2013 Aug;4(8):1253-65.

Combination therapy with anti-ErbB3 monoclonal antibodies and EGFR TKIs potently 
inhibits non-small cell lung cancer.

Noto A(1), De Vitis C, Roscilli G, Fattore L, Malpicci D, Marra E, Luberto L,
D'Andrilli A, Coluccia P, Giovagnoli MR, Normanno N, Ruco L, Aurisicchio L,
Mancini R, Ciliberto G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Molecolare, Sapienza Universita' di Roma,
Italy.

Personalized therapy of advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has been
improved by the introduction of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), gefitinib
and erlotinib. EGFR TKIs induce dramatic objective responses and increase
survival in patients bearing sensitizing mutations in the EGFR intracytoplasmic
tyrosine kinase domain. However, virtually all patients develop resistance, and
this is responsible for disease relapse. Hence several efforts are being
undertaken to understand the mechanisms of resistance in order to develop
combination treatments capable to sensitize resistant cells to EGFR TKIs. Recent 
studies have suggested that upregulation of another member of the EGFR receptor
family, namely ErbB3 is involved in drug resistance, through increased
phosphorylation of its intracytoplasmic domain and activation of PI3K/AKT
signaling. In this paper we first show, by using a set of malignant pleural
effusion derived cell cultures (MPEDCC) from patients with lung adenocarcinoma,
that surface ErbB3 expression correlates with increased AKT phosphorylation.
Antibodies against ErbB3, namely A3, which we previously demonstrated to induce
receptor internalization and degradation, inhibit growth and induce apoptosis
only in cells overexpressing surface ErbB3. Furthermore, combination of
anti-ErbB3 antibodies with EGFR TKIs synergistically affect cell proliferation in
vitro, cause cell cycle arrest, up-regulate p21 expression and inhibit tumor
growth in mouse xenografts. Importantly, potentiation of gefitinib by anti-ErbB3 
antibodies occurs both in de novo and in ab initio resistant cells. Anti-ErbB3
mAbs strongly synergize also with the dual EGFR and HER2 inhibitor lapatinib. Our
results suggest that combination treatment with EGFR TKI and antibodies against
ErbB3 should be a promising approach to pursue in the clinic.

PMCID: PMC3787155
PMID: 23896512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Transl Med. 2013 Jul 27;11:180. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-180.

Activation of an early feedback survival loop involving phospho-ErbB3 is a
general response of melanoma cells to RAF/MEK inhibition and is abrogated by
anti-ErbB3 antibodies.

Fattore L(1), Marra E, Pisanu ME, Noto A, de Vitis C, Belleudi F, Aurisicchio L, 
Mancini R, Torrisi MR, Ascierto PA, Ciliberto G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Molecolare, Sapienza Università di Roma,
Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Treatment of advanced melanoma has been improved with the advent of
the BRAF inhibitors. However, a limitation to such treatment is the occurrence of
resistance. Several mechanisms have been identified to be responsible for the
development of resistance, either MEK-dependent or MEK-independent. In order to
overcome resistance due to reactivation of MEK signaling, MEK inhibitors are
being clinically developed with promising results. However, also in this case
resistance inevitably occurs. It has been recently reported that ErbB3, a member 
of the EGFR receptor family, may be involved in the establishment of drug
resistance.
METHODS: Three melanoma cell lines were tested: LOX IMVI (BRAF V600E), MST-L
(BRAF V600R) and WM266 (BRAF V600D). Phosphorylation of Receptor Tyrosine Kinases
(RTKs) was assessed by an RTK array. Western blot analysis was performed on total
protein extracts using anti-ErbB3, anti-AKT and anti-ERK 1/2 antibodies. The
expression of neuregulin after vemurafenib treatment was assessed by Real Time
PCR and Western blotting. The growth inhibitory effects of vemurafenib,
GSK1120212b and/or anti-ErbB3 mAbs were evaluated by in vitro colony formation
assays.
RESULTS: In the present study we demonstrate that ErbB3 is the main RTK
undergoing rapidly hyperphosphorylation upon either treatment with a BRAF
inhibitor or with a MEK inhibitor in a panel of melanoma cell lines harboring a
variety of V600BRAF mutations and that this results in a strong activation of
phospho-AKT. Importantly, ErbB3 activation is fully abrogated by the simultaneous
use of anti-ErbB3 monoclonal antibodies, which are also shown to potently
synergize with BRAF inhibitors in the inactivation of both AKT and ERK pathways
and in the inhibition of melanoma cell growth. We show that upregulation of
phospho-ErbB3 is due to an autocrine loop involving increased transcription and
production of neuregulin by melanoma cells.
CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of these results, we propose that initial co-treatment 
with BRAF and/or MEK inhibitors and anti-ErbB3 antibodies should be pursued as a 
strategy to reduce the ErbB3-dependent feedback survival mechanism and enhance
duration of clinical response.

PMCID: PMC3729364
PMID: 23890105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Cancer Sci. 2013 Jul;104(7):965-76. doi: 10.1111/cas.12203.

Report of the Japan Diabetes Society/Japanese Cancer Association Joint Committee 
on Diabetes and Cancer.

Kasuga M(1), Ueki K, Tajima N, Noda M, Ohashi K, Noto H, Goto A, Ogawa W, Sakai
R, Tsugane S, Hamajima N, Nakagama H, Tajima K, Miyazono K, Imai K.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

In recent years, diabetes has been shown to be associated with cancer risk, and
this has led to a joint committee being formed, enlisting experts from the Japan 
Diabetes Society and the Japanese Cancer Association to address this issue.
Epidemiological data in Japan provides evidence to demonstrate that diabetes is
associated with increased risk for cancers, especially colorectal, liver, and
pancreatic cancers. The mechanisms through which diabetes is assumed to promote
oncogenesis include insulin resistance and associated hyperinsulinemia,
hyperglycemia, and inflammation. Common risk factors for type 2 diabetes and
cancer include aging, male sex, obesity, physical inactivity, inappropriate diet 
(excessive red/processed meat intake, inadequate vegetable/fruit/dietary fiber
intake), excessive alcohol drinking, and smoking. Given that inappropriate
diet/exercise, smoking and excessive alcohol drinking are common risk factors for
diabetes and cancer, diet/exercise therapy, smoking cessation and alcohol
moderation may be associated with decreased risk for cancer in diabetic patients.
There is as yet limited evidence as to whether any particular antidiabetic agents
may influence cancer risk.

© 2013 The Japanese Cancer Association and the Japan Diabetes Society.

PMID: 23879470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2014;37(2):139-47. doi: 10.1007/s11239-013-0971-3.

The impact of anti-inflammatory cytokines provoked by CD163 positive macrophages 
on ventricular functional recovery after myocardial infarction.

Sato T(1), Kameyama T, Noto T, Nakadate T, Ueno H, Yamada K, Inoue H.

Author information: 
(1)The Second Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama University Hospital, 2630
Sugitani, Toyama, 930-0194, Japan, kirotaro19731013@yahoo.co.jp.

Present study aimed to investigate the impact of anti-inflammatory cytokines
provoked by the hemoglobin scavenger receptor, CD163, on left ventricular (LV)
functional recovery after successful reperfusion in patients with acute
myocardial infarction (AMI). Intraplaque hemorrhage accelerates plaque
destabilization. Extracellular hemoglobin is cleared by CD163, a macrophage
scavenger receptor. This process provokes secretion of anti-inflammatory
atheroprotective cytokine, interleukin (IL)-10. In 40 patients with the first
AMI, coronary atherothrombotic debris was retrieved during percutaneous coronary 
intervention (PCI), stained with antibodies to CD163 and IL-10. LV function was
determined by echocardiography before PCI and 6 months after PCI. %CD163 was
defined as ratio of CD163 (+)-cells to whole cells. %IL-10 was expressed as the
ratio of positively stained areas per total tissue. Patients were divided into
two groups depending on the amount of CD163 (+)-cells: CD163 > 10 % (CD163high,
n = 20) and CD163 = 10 % (CD163low, n = 20). CD163high group had significantly
higher %IL-10. Final thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) flow grade was 
significantly lower in CD163high group. In subgroups with the final TIMI-3 flow
(CD163high-Reflow, n = 15 and CD163low-Reflow, n = 20), the time to reperfusion, 
infarct size, LV dimensions and fractional shortening (%FS) before PCI were
similar. Significant correlation was observed between %IL10 and changes in LV
dimensions (diastole, r = -0.49, P = 0.01; systole, r = -0.65, P < 0.01) or %FS
(r = 0.51, P < 0.01) at 6 months after PCI. Plaque with CD163(+)-macrophages
could impair distal flow after primary PCI. However, CD163(+)-macrophages enhance
the anti-inflammatory cytokine expression that aids in ventricular functional
recovery if distal flow can be achieved by successful reperfusion.

PMID: 23873589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Diabetes. 2013 Dec;62(12):4179-83. doi: 10.2337/db13-0656. Epub 2013 Jul 17.

Acceleration of the loss of the first-phase insulin response during the
progression to type 1 diabetes in diabetes prevention trial-type 1 participants.

Sosenko JM(1), Skyler JS, Beam CA, Krischer JP, Greenbaum CJ, Mahon J, Rafkin LE,
Matheson D, Herold KC, Palmer JP; Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet and Diabetes
Prevention TrialType 1 Study Groups.

Collaborators: Skyler JS, Anderson M, Bourcier K, Becker D, Bingley P, Blum J,
Bosi E, Buckner J, Chase H, Clare-Salzler M, Colman P, DiMeglio L, Eisenbarth GS,
Fathman C, Gitelman S, Goland R, Gottlieb P, Greenbaum C, Harrison L, Herold K,
Insel R, Krischer JP, Mahon J, Marks J, Moran A, Palmer JP, Peakman M, Pugliese
A, Raskin P, Roncarolo MG, Russell W, Savage P, Schatz D, Sherwin R, Siegelman M,
Simell O, Thomas J, Trucco M, Wagner J, Wherrett D, Wilson DM, Winter W, Fradkin 
J, Leschek E, Spain L, Benoist C, Bluestone J, Brown D, Cowie C, Hering B, Jordan
S, Kaufman FR, Lachin JM, Nanto-Salonen K, Nepom G, Orban T, Parkman R, Pescovitz
M, Peyman J, Ridge J, Rodriguez H, Ziegler A, Skyler JS, Bourcier K, Greenbaum
CJ, Krischer JP, Leschek E, Rafkin L, Savage P, Cowie C, Foulkes M, Krause H,
Lachin JM, Malozowski S, Peyman J, Ridge J, Zafonte SJ, Skyler JS, Greenbaum CJ, 
Kenyon NS, Rafkin L, Santiago I, Sosenko JM, Krischer JP, Bundy B, Qesha A,
Ritzie L, Abbondondolo M, Adams T, Alies P, Badias F, Beam C, Boonstra M,
Boulware D, Cuthbertson D, Eberhard C, Ford J, Ginem J, Guillette H, Hays B,
Henry M, Law P, Linton C, Liu S, Lloyd J, Muller S, O'Donnell R, Parrimon Y,
Paulus K, Pilger J, Ramiro J, Roberts A, Sadler K, Terry A, Wootten M, Xu P,
Young K, Bassi M, Freeman D, Granger M, Kieffer M, Nallamshetty L, Shor A, Lachin
JM, Foulkes M, Harding P, Krause-Steinrauf H, McDonough S, McGee PF, Hess KO,
Phoebus D, Quinlan S, Raiden E, Fradkin J, Leschek E, Savage P, Spain L, Blumberg
E, Braun J, Laffel L, Naji A, Nerup J, Orchard T, Tsiatis A, Veatch R, Wallace D,
Lernmark A, Lo B, Mitchell H, Steffes M, Zinman B, Loechelt B, Baden L, Green M, 
Weinberg A, Eisenbarth GS, Marcovina S, Palmer JP, Weinberg A, Winter W, Yu L,
Babu S, Orban T, Gottlieb P, Greenbaum C, Krause-Steinrauf H, Lachin JM, Leschek 
E, Loechelt B, Parkman R, Rafkin L, Rigby A, Skyler JS, Spain L, Wagner J,
Greenbaum C, Bollyky J, Sanda S, Tridgell D, McCulloch-Olson M, Vendettuoli H,
Hefty D, Ramey M, Webber C, Kuhns K, Hilderman N, Dove A, Hammond M, Klein J,
Batts E, Monzavi R, Halvorson M, Bock M, Fisher L, Jeandron D, Wood J, Kaufman
FR, Goland R, Greenberg E, Gallagher MP, Trast J, Chan M, Rodriguez H, Pescovitz 
M, DiMeglio L, Christner L, Nicholson M, Mendez M, Orban T, Benoist C, Wolfsdorf 
J, Ricker A, Jalahej H, Conboy D, Farkas K, Kis J, Zhang H, Fay S, Wilson DM,
Buckingham BA, Aye T, Esrey T, Soto A, Perry J, Baker B, Rigby A, Berry B,
Gitelman SE, Rosenthal SM, Anderson M, Adi S, Breen K, Hamilton C, Gottlieb P,
Chase H, Michels A, Kastelic W, Weiner L, Schatz D, Haller M, Clare-Salzler M,
Cook R, Mancini D, Abraham A, Hicks E, Cole G, Marks JB, Pugliese A, Matheson D, 
Blaschke C, Arazo L, Cisneros M, Acosta B, Moran A, Nathan B, Wagner J, Boes MA, 
Gibson C, Finney L, Albright-Fischer T, Smith J, Becker D, Toledo F, Libman I,
Riley K, Delallo K, Smith K, Gwynn D, Wohlers G, Raskin P, White P, Dickson B,
Adhikari S, Siegelman M, Alford M, Torres N, Harden T, Pruneda L, Cordova E,
Davis R, Fernandez S, Arthur J, Wherrett D, Eisel LA, Ahenkorah B, Razack N,
Sriskandarajah M, Russell WE, Thomas JW, Moore DJ, Brown A, Black M, Pittel E,
Brendle F, Bosi E, Battaglia M, Belloni C, Bianconi E, Falqui L, Grogan P,
Lombardoni C, Grogan SM, Bingley P, Aitken R, Castleden H, Farthing N, Matthews
C, McGee J, Wheaton C, Harrison LC, Andaloro E, Breen C, Colman P, Fourlanos S,
Gellert S, Healy F, Wentworth J, Simell OG, Jokipuu S, Kallio T, Mantymaki E,
Nanto-Salonen K, Niininen T, Nurmi B, Romo M, Ruohonen E, Sarma M, Simell T,
Suomenrinne S, Torma M, Skyler JS, Brown D, Chase H, Davis B, Collier E, Cowie C,
Eisenbarth GS, Davis B, Fradkin J, Grave G, Greenbaum C, Jackson RA, Kaufman FR, 
Krischer JP, Marks JB, Palmer JP, Ricker A, Schatz DA, Wilson D, Winter WE,
Wolfsdorf J, Zeidler A, Dickler H, Eastman RC, Maclaren NK, Malone JI, Robertson 
R, Skyler JS, Krischer JP, Wolfsdorf J, Cowie C, Palmer JP, Greenbaum C,
Cuthbertson D, Rafkin-Mervis LE, Chase H, Leschek E, Palmer JP, Chase H, Cowie C,
Fradkin J, Eisenbarth GS, Greenbaum C, Herold K, Kaufman FR, Krischer JP, Marks
JB, Rafkin-Mervis LE, Schatz DA, Skyler JS, Aneju B, Conboy D, Cook R, Dennis MA,
Finney L, Harris S, Davis B, Matheson D, McCulloch-Olsen M, Smith T, Valenzuela
J, Vega N, Crofford OB, DeMets D, Lachin JM, Nerup J, Rossini A, Schiffrin A,
Steffes M, Tsiatis A, Zinman B, Haider A, Haas J, Busch R, Marshilok K, Toleno N,
Schade D, Katz P, Hornbeck D, Foster S, Roberts W, Vercher M, Foster C, Bower C, 
Hansen I, Burcell D, Anderson S, Shultz R, Sparks C, Wray J, Goldman L, Holt R,
Counts D, Ostrowski D, Plotnick L, Fechner P, Donnelly C, Bourgeios P, Prosser P,
Bowden B, Gunville F, McClave C, Heldt P, Ovalle F, Atchison J, Trull P,
Bottomlee A, Betting S, Davis T, Wetzstein J, Clinkingbeard C, Davis J, Roosevelt
T, Shamoon H, Duffy H, Anhalt H, Brussard L, Capotorto J, Sheehan P, Quyyumi S,
Cohen N, Recker B, Castells S, Bastian W, AvRuskin T, Verdia V, Quattrin T,
Dwigun K, Cefalu W, Clark N, Tilton L, Corenblum B, Harries S, Whitty A, McInroy 
R, Smith S, Willi S, Key L Jr, O'Rear D, Willi S, O'Rear D, Grubb S, Taylor K,
Adams P, Reeves M, Reeves P, Marshall R, Tessmann E, Dwarakanathan A, Beebe C,
Weintraub-Yohay I, O'Donnell P, Rich B, Imperial J, Silverman B, Edidin D,
Goodman S, Brodsky I, Brodsky L, Klein D, Dolan L, Standiford D, Rogers D,
Switzer C, Goldstein D, Eichelberger D, Smith A, Ganong C, Zipf W, Dyas M, Sotos 
J, Young C, Christi C, Riley W, Salai S, Raskin P, Marks J, Alford M, Sachson R, 
Lebowitz C, Cook J, Stedman J, Indra D, Gutai J, Vinuya B, McGraw-Maly M, Feng W,
Williams C, Krygsman C, Pierce M, Freemark M, Litton J, Ryan E, Todd K, Aboud D, 
Pacillas M, Hines J, Walczak A, Aparicio L, Harbaugh D, Bergeson M, Rozell M,
Mahan E, Brooks H, Ginier P, Hensley P, Ellyn G, Heymann M, Johnson B, Tack J,
Sondrol L, Hjelle T, Perry D, Albert J, Flory L, Gerrity N, Naab C, Heck J, Weber
S, Mulhall P, Lansden B, Cummings E, Salisbury S, Armour C, Ratzan S, Trahiotis
M, Nemery R, Carney H, Shorkey D, Fitz-Patrick D, Taniguchi A, Gunn S, Copeland
K, McGirk S, Liljenquist J, Fielding C, Richards S, Best V, Rodriguez H,
Freidenberg G, Amstutz L, Weir C, Tsalikian E, Hoffman R, Bayless M, Hare J, Hare
K, Kyner J, Eaks G, Howard C, Moore W, Woodford B, Salyer T, Wannarachue N,
Meridith R, Squires D, Deubler D, Bruschetta H, Nickels D, Dothard C, Courtney A,
Marcus A, Beisswenger J, Kairys S, Boyle W, Christiano A, O'Dell R, Touchette A, 
Thrailkill K, Karounos D, Webb S, Moore L, Allweiss P, Anderson F, Mahon J,
McCallum J, Raffel L, Rotter J, Verne A, Davidson M, Keppler G, Banerjee S, Simon
M, MacDonald M, Mokrohisky S, Speiser P, Fort P, Corrigan J, Pelkola S, Kitabchi 
A, Murphy M, Lambeth H, Burghen G, McGlendon P, Bondani J, LeNoye P, Alemzadeh R,
Koppen M, Canas J, Lamerson M, Spencer M, Etzwiler D, Reynolds K, Eyler N, Allen 
P, Warner B, Rettig K, Levens K, Davis M, Polychronakos C, Laforte D, Zeller W,
McKernan J, Finn S, Powers A, Lipps J, Raghavan S, Broadstone V, Raake P,
Weissberg K, Tamborlane W, Gatcomb P, Blonde L, Zimmerman T, Zimmerman R, Liebel 
C, Chalew S, Vargas A, Rao J, Ascani J, Compton T, Cerame B, Harbison M, Newfield
R, New M, Wajnrajch M, Vargas I, Herold K, Schachner H, Feberes G, Maclaren N,
Golub D, Rappaport R, McEvoy R, Thomas, Pi-Sunyer X, Saltiel-Berzin R, Rappaport 
R, Koblish J, Blackett P, Comp C, Beck J, Hassing J, Hahn L, Lane J, Corley K,
Larson L, Fiallo-Sharer R, Lee P, Cortez A, Varni N, Speer H, Crockett S,
McDaniel W, Roberts V, Weinzimer S, Cohen P, Baker L, De Paul D, Rebecca E,
Dolinar R, Block M, Krametbauer P, Frazer T, Veray G, Ahmann A, LaFranchi S,
Jennings P, Kelleher A, Kummer M, Hansen J, Hunter M, LaMorticella K, Eckert K,
Klaff L, Brazg R, Springs J, Wilson B, Isaacson E, Kuhn H, Willis D, Kaplowitz P,
Genther K, Bourdony C Jr, Rivera A, Basu R, Rizza R, Whannel P, Jospe N, Utzman
A, Sheikholisham B, Hiner C, Hardin D, Lindsay R, Swinyard M, Rallison M, Jarrett
L, Sirstins J, Pierson K, Trevino S, Schwartz S, Dickens K, Clark S, Scroggin P, 
Greene G, Linarelli L, Camuro E, Hermosillo S, Estrada R, Bailey W, Fuqua J,
Gitelman S, Fountaine M, Colon G, de Pijem L, Nieves-Rivera F, Rivera A, Perez R,
Jovanovic L, Vesterfelt S, Saenz C, Kletter G, Pihoker K, Kearns S, Keppen L,
Johnson P, Krell E, Duck S, Noble M, Thompson S, Wilson K, Soler N, McCall L,
Allen H, Roumeliotis G, Chase L, Braden-Moll D, White N, Levandoski L, Malone J, 
Steinbrueck J, Ulbrecht J, Lambert N, Mulhall P, Wilson T, Lane A, Smaldone A,
Modilevsky T, Izquierdo R, Weinstock R, Mackowiak S, Brindak K, Wherrett D,
Daneman D, Pearlman K, McLellan C, Rogers A, Ipp E, Mao C, Rushovich E, Thorne I,
Jelley D, Greer D, Metzger D, Austin A, Turek J, Archer J, Nunlee-BlaND G,
Johnson K, Harris J, Driedbart S, Noto R, Romano A, Herl W, Guthrie R, Tatpati O,
Brenner A, Lippert D, Reeves G, Swenson C, Murphy L, Dean H, Berard L, Werbel S, 
Bell-Farrow A, Mauseth R, Hanson J, Mishr S, DiCaria L, Wilson B, Wischmeier C,
Moosa M, Levy R, Desemone J, Bentson L, Lando H, Hoelscher J, Biggs W, Carano R, 
Nostrand P, Achee L, Kelly J, Nolan P, Otsuka T, Heyrmann K, Autio N, Gohl K,
Prendergast J, Delcher H, Reed C, Mellman M, Herskowitz I, Hoffman W, Naas M,
Dubois S, Chaykin L, Pershadsingh H, Shah H, Ettinger V, Reiner B, McLaughlin J, 
Levin P, Boniface A, Leigh H, Ginsberg G, Weiss D, Rosecan M, Doyle P, McAfee J, 
Goldfogel G, Henschel J, Gorson D, Ramos J, Bush M, Martin K, Birch B, Reimer S, 
Neil J, Saenger P, Dimartino-Nardi J, Capotorto J, Sheehan P, Quyyumi S, Cohen N,
Stein R, Klonoff D, de Souza J, McCarthy D, Salisbury J, Edstrom C, William MF,
Brown M, Vigersky R, Smith C, Krishna A, Benson R, Murphy F, Pruchno C, Davenport
M, Clarke W, McDuffie M, Melinkovich G, Bell V, Ravanam A, W W, Leonard D, Dahms 
W, Scott K, Bowyer F, Leichter S, Kaplan R, Lewis S, Miller R, Upmanyu M,
Goldberg N, Savino R, Wentworth S, Langdon D, Weideman C, Urban M, Transue D,
Whitehouse F, Cara J, Shaw S, Price W, Iverson R, Slag M, Hutt J, McLean N, Moore
R, Christenson R, Valika K, Nayak N, Bloch C, Strom L, Bailey T, Varma C, Calder 
D, Bilger M, Larson K, Papenhausen M, Shlesinger Y, Kenien A, Wright E, Jabbar M,
Lorber D, Berkett J, Robinson R, Kadambi A, Sullivan W, Meyer E, Bautista J,
Norwood P, Biederman E, Nassberg S, Goscin L, Mata M, Thompson N, Harrell R,
Cabral J, Pietri A, Scott C, Flannery T, Wilson D, Rogers B, Campos M, Montero M,
Beals B, Mair D, Rood R, Taylor J, Sevier R, Harris G, Pfeifer M, Blechman M,
Giangola J, Creech R, Lathrop M, Dunaif A, Miceli G, Lewy-Alterbaum L, Jellinger 
P, Novak S, Gellman K, Lerman S, Waxman S, Hamilton D, Driscoll H, Schneier R,
Casey J, Boyce P, Meachum J, Milburn J, Pomeroy D, Moll G, Macyko K, Fox L,
Mauras N, Ledereich P, Gill C, Rossetto B, Houlden R, Heck P, Korducki J, Winston
J, Geffner D, Edelman S, Henry B, Einhorn D, Fink R, Leidlein J, Arul K, Henry D,
Donaldson D, Middlestadt K, Grande-Luke L, Guest J, Wermers R, Bells B, Frindik
P, Gewirtz G, Blyfeld C, Brakin M, Borut D, Geffner D, Winston J, Geffner M,
Rodriguez M, Gura V, Rodriguez M, Shough C, Bays H, Varma S, Bourgeios M, Sloan
L, Guthrow CE Jr, Shaw S, Ruby R, Motzkin-Kava B, Jebsen D, Zador I, Maby S,
Crantz F, Zietlow D, Kudzma D, Levy E, Shapiro ET, Jacobi J, Abelove W,
Perez-Rodriguez J, Gonzalez-Mendoza L, Richton S, Weissman P, Stein N,
Sherman-Adcock L, Fergeson D, Jacobson M, Sennett J, Jain R, Etzwiler D, Ramsay
R, Holland M, Carrington S, Seagraves S, Yue G, Downs-Colby J, Flores H, Weinrib 
S, Jones E, Starkman H, White D, Doberne L, Greenfield M, Alexander K, O'Sullivan
C, Duncan R, Barandiaran G, Yunis J, Nunez L, Ramos V, Holland E, Balash W, Sher 
J, Agrin R, Frentz J, Fennoy I, Baron S, Door J, Vinik A, Savery F, Gareis F,
Mack R, Devoe D, Fan Y, Domek D, Kelley D, Roberts T, Gutshall B, Madu I, Poucher
R, Mengel M, Desrosiers P, Banks R, Kopp B, Fishman I, Geller D, Smith W, Duncan 
J, Nyman O, Vaccarello-Cruz M, Schwartz F, Olambiwonnu O, Ortiz M, Freedman S,
Merrill S, Rezvani I, Doyle D, Hale P, Singer-Granick C, Fore W, Perelman A,
Clemmons R, Johnsonbaugh R, Gonzalez A, Baker M, Field C, Walker K, Reddy S,
Pillote K, Borchelt M, Bommer D, Curosh N, Karl D, Phillipson B, Iverson W,
Krosnick A, Kahn C, Blodgett B, Iverson N, Jacobson C, Haynes M, Moore D, Alston 
R, Eachempati R, Becker D, Weide L, Decker M, Greaves J, Curry M, Radcliffe J,
Schauf V, Childs D, Crawford R, Charnogursky G, Stesin M, Schneider M, Rodbard H,
Dempsey M, Brummer R, Elston L, Marseters D, Lapp P, Glaser N, Soeldner J,
Chaurasia V, Michaels R, King A, Olson R, Hale D, Danney M, Miller S, Madan S,
Dudl J, Bohannon N, Berlund M, Jackson T, Kitzmiller J, Price D, Ehsanipoor K,
Homan M, Olshan J, Sorensen T, Nepom G, McCulloch D, Hirsch I, Kanter R, Niles N,
Vogiatzi M, Kerpe V, McVie R, Aniszewski J, Carroll T, Bacon R, Hudson M, Simpson
A, Fili M, Krieger D, Golob D, Carney J, Khardori R, Peitso M, Lane J, Katz H,
Warhol R, Rothman J, Jensen D, Rooke J, Fogel H, Hotes L, Lilavivat U, Gauthier
T, Deeb L, Sherradan T, Lavin N, Shuey K, Horner J, Tsao J, Scrogin A, Greenlee
C, Insel J, Wheeler M, Kamal T, Wiertz L, Bucholtz H, Dunn J, Wilson K, Frey M,
Noto R, Chochinov R, Bridges JM, Amar M, Weinstein R, Poore T, Brink S, Moltz K, 
Sobel D, Francis G, Sveck R, Ramey J, Haque N, Villafria A, Villafria R, Madagame
J, Stone L, Cech R, Schnelbach J, Dreidbart S, Noto R, Lebinger T, Shane L, Reece
E, Harris R, Welsh W, Whitesides P Jr, Scoma A, Ziel F, Alter C, Lock P, Treece
G.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2013 Dec;62(12):3990-2.

We studied the change in the first-phase insulin response (FPIR) during the
progression to type 1 diabetes (T1D). Seventy-four oral insulin trial progressors
to T1D from the Diabetes Prevention Trial-Type 1 with at least one FPIR
measurement after baseline and before diagnosis were studied. The FPIR was
examined longitudinally in 26 progressors who had FPIR measurements during each
of the 3 years before diagnosis. The association between the change from the
baseline FPIR to the last FPIR and time to diagnosis was studied in the remainder
(n = 48). The 74 progressors had lower baseline FPIR values than nonprogressors
(n = 270), with adjustments made for age and BMI. In the longitudinal analysis of
the 26 progressors, there was a greater decline in the FPIR from 1.5 to 0.5 years
before diagnosis than from 2.5 to 1.5 years before diagnosis. This accelerated
decline was also evident in a regression analysis of the 48 remaining progressors
in whom the rate of decline became more marked with the approaching diagnosis.
The patterns of decline were similar between the longitudinal and regression
analyses. There is an acceleration of decline in the FPIR during the progression 
to T1D, which becomes especially marked between 1.5 and 0.5 years before
diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC3837047
PMID: 23863814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013 Jul 15;188(2):128-30. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201304-0802ED.

Mechanical ventilation, clinical trials, and glaciers.

Noto MJ, Wheeler AP.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013 Jul 15;188(2):220-30.

PMID: 23855689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Ital J Pediatr. 2013 Jul 10;39:45. doi: 10.1186/1824-7288-39-45.

Esophageal atresia in newborns: a wide spectrum from the isolated forms to a full
VACTERL phenotype?

La Placa S(1), Giuffrè M, Gangemi A, Di Noto S, Matina F, Nociforo F, Antona V,
Di Pace MR, Piccione M, Corsello G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sciences for Health Promotion and Mother and Child Care,
Università di Palermo, Via Alfonso Giordano 3, 90127 Palermo, Italy.
simonalaplaca@libero.it

BACKGROUND: VATER association was first described in 1972 by Quan and Smith as an
acronym which identifies a non-random co-occurrence of Vertebral anomalies, Anal 
atresia, Tracheoesophageal fistula and/or Esophageal atresia, Radial dysplasia.
It is even possible to find out Cardiovascular, Renal and Limb anomalies and the 
acronym VACTERL was adopted, also, embodying Vascular, as single umbilical
artery, and external genitalia anomalies.
METHODS: Data on patients with esophageal atresia (EA) with or without
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) admitted in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit
(NICU) between January 2003 and January 2013 were evaluated for the contingent
occurrence of typical VACTERL anomalies (VACTERL-type) and non tipical VACTERL
anomalies (non-VACTERL-type). The inclusion criterion was the presence of EA with
or without TEF plus two or more of the following additional malformations:
vertebral defects, anal atresia, cardiovascular defects, renal anomalies and
lower limb deformities, like radial dysplasia.
RESULTS: Among 52 patients with EA/TEF, 20 (38,4%) had isolated EA and 7 (21,8%) 
had a recognized etiology such a syndrome and therefore were excluded. Among 32
infants with EA and associated malformations, 15 (46,8%) had VACTERL association.
The most common anomalies were congenital heart defects (73,3%), followed by
vertebral anomalies (66,6%). Many patients also had additional non-VACTERL-type
defects. Single umbilical artery was the most common one followed by nervous
system abnormalities and anomalies of toes. Between the groups of infants with
VACTERL type and non-VACTERL-type anomalies, there are several overlapping data
regarding both the tipically described spectrum and the most frequently reported 
non-VACTERL-type malformations. Thus, it is possible to differentiate infants
with a full phenotype (VACTERL full phenotype) and patients that do not meet all 
the criteria mentioned above, but with some homologies with the first group
(VACTERL partial phenotype).
CONCLUSION: The high frequency of non-VACTERL-type anomalies encountered in full 
and partial phenotype patients would suggest the need for an extension of the
clinical criteria for the diagnosis of VACTERL association and also for pre- and 
post-operative management and follow-up in the short and long term.

PMCID: PMC3726359
PMID: 23842449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Diabetes Care. 2013 Sep;36(9):2615-20. doi: 10.2337/dc13-0425. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

The prediction of type 1 diabetes by multiple autoantibody levels and their
incorporation into an autoantibody risk score in relatives of type 1 diabetic
patients.

Sosenko JM(1), Skyler JS, Palmer JP, Krischer JP, Yu L, Mahon J, Beam CA,
Boulware DC, Rafkin L, Schatz D, Eisenbarth G; Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet Study
Group; Diabetes Prevention Trial-Type 1 Study Group.

Collaborators: Skyler JS, Anderson M, Bourcier K, Becker D, Bingley P, Blum J,
Bosi E, Buckner J, Chase H, Clare-Salzler M, Colman P, DiMeglio L, Eisenbarth GS,
Garrison Fathman C, Gitelman S, Goland R, Gottlieb P, Grave G, Greenbaum C,
Harrison L, Herold K, Insel R, Krischer JP, Mahon J, Marks J, Moran A, Palmer JP,
Peakman M, Winter W, Pugliese A, Raskin P, Roncarolo MG, Russell W, Savage P,
Schatz D, Sherwin R, Siegelman M, Simell O, Thomas J, Trucco M, Wagner J,
Wherrett D, Wilson DM, Fradkin J, Leschek E, Spain L, Benoist C, Bluestone J,
Brown D, Cowie C, Hering B, Jordan S, Kaufman FR, Lachin JM, Nanto-Salonen K,
Nepom G, Orban T, Parkman R, Pescovitz M, Peyman J, Ridge J, Rodriguez H, Ziegler
A, Skyler JS, Bourcier K, Greenbaum CJ, Krischer JP, Leschek E, Rafkin L, Savage 
P, Spain L, Cowie C, Foulkes M, Krause-Steinrauf H, Lachin JM, Malozowski S,
Peyman J, Ridge J, Zafonte SJ, Skyler JS, Greenbaum CJ, Kenyon NS, Rafkin L,
Santiago I, Sosenko JM, Krischer JP, Bundy B, Ritzie AQ, Abbondondolo M, Adams T,
Alies P, Badias F, Beam C, Boonstra M, Boulware D, Cuthbertson D, Eberhard C,
Ford J, Ginem J, Guillette H, Hays B, Henry M, Law P, Linton C, Liu S, Lloyd J,
Muller S, O'Donnell R, Parrimon Y, Paulus K, Pilger J, Ramiro J, Roberts A,
Sadler K, Terry A, Wootten M, Xu P, Young K, Bassi M, Freeman D, Granger M,
Kieffer M, Nallamshetty L, Shor A, Lachin JM, Foulkes M, Harding P,
Krause-Steinrauf H, McDonough S, McGee PF, Hess KO, Phoebus D, Quinlan S, Raiden 
E, Fradkin J, Leschek E, Savage P, Spain L, Blumberg E, Braun J, Laffel L, Naji
A, Nerup J, Orchard T, Tsiatis A, Veatch R, Wallace D, Lernmark A, Lo B, Mitchell
H, Steffes M, Zinman B, Loechelt B, Baden L, Green M, Weinberg A, Eisenbarth GS, 
Marcovina S, Palmer JP, Winter W, Yu L, Babu S, Orban T, Gottlieb P, Greenbaum C,
Krause H, Leschek E, Loechelt B, Parkman R, Rafkin L, Spain L, Wagner J,
Greenbaum C, Krause-Steinrauf H, Lachin JM, Leschek E, Loechelt B, Parkman R,
Rafkin L, Rigby A, Skyler JS, Spain L, Wagner J, Greenbaum C, Bollyky J, Sanda S,
Tridgell D, McCulloch-Olson M, Vendettuoli H, Hefty D, Ramey M, Webber C, Kuhns
K, Hilderman N, Dove A, Hammond M, Klein J, Batts E, Monzavi R, Halvorson M, Bock
M, Fisher L, Jeandron D, Wood J, Kaufman FR, Goland R, Greenberg E, Gallagher MP,
Trast J, Chan M, Rodriguez H, Pescovitz M, DiMeglio L, Christner L, Nicholson M, 
Mendez M, Orban T, Benoist C, Wolfsdorf J, Ricker A, Jalahej H, Conboy D, Farkas 
K, Kis J, Zhang H, Fay S, Wilson DM, Buckingham BA, Aye T, Esrey T, Soto A, Perry
J, Baker B, Rigby A, Berry B, Gitelman SE, Rosenthal SM, Anderson M, Adi S, Breen
K, Hamilton C, Gottlieb P, Chase H, Michels A, Kastelic W, Weiner L, Schatz D,
Haller M, Clare-Salzler M, Cook R, Mancini D, Abraham A, Hicks E, Cole G, Marks
JB, Pugliese A, Matheson D, Blaschke C, Cisneros M, Acosta B, Moran A, Nathan B, 
Wagner J, Boes MA, Finney L, Albright-Fischer T, Smith J, Becker D, Toledo F,
Libman I, Riley K, Delallo K, Smith K, Gwynn D, Wohlers G, Raskin P, White P,
Dickson B, Adhikari S, Siegelman M, Alford M, Torres N, Harden T, Pruneda L,
Cordova E, Davis R, Fernandez S, Arthur J, Wherrett D, Eisel LA, Ahenkorah B,
Razack N, Russell WE, Sriskandarajah M, Thomas JW, Moore DJ, Brown A, Black M,
Pittel E, Brendle F, Bosi E, Battaglia M, Belloni C, Bianconi E, Falqui L, Grogan
P, Lombardoni C, Martinenghi S, Bingley P, Aitken R, Castleden H, Farthing N,
Matthews C, McGee J, Wheaton C, Harrison LC, Andaloro E, Breen C, Colman P,
Fourlanos S, Gellert S, Healy F, Wentworth J, Simell OG, Jokipuu S, Kallio T,
Mantymaki E, Nanto-Salonen K, Niininen T, Nurmi B, Romo M, Ruohonen E, Sarma M,
Simell T, Suomenrinne S, Torma M, Skyler JS, Brown D, Chase HP, Collier E, Cowie 
C, Eisenbarth GS, Grave G, Fradkin J, Greenbaum C, Jackson RA, Kaufman FR,
Krischer JP, Marks JB, Palmer JP, Ricker A, Schatz DA, Wilson D, Winter WE,
Wolfsdorf J, Zeidler A, Dickler H, Eastman RC, Maclaren NK, Malone JI, Robertson 
R, Skyler JS, Krischer JP, Wolfsdorf J, Cowie C, Palmer JP, Greenbaum C,
Cuthbertson D, Rafkin-Mervis LE, Chase H, Leschek E, Palmer JP, Chase H, Cowie C,
Fradkin J, Eisenbarth GS, Greenbaum C, Herold K, Kaufman FR, Krischer JP, Marks
JB, Rafkin-Mervis LE, Schatz DA, Skyler JS, Aneju B, Conboy D, Cook R, Dennis MA,
Finney L, Harris S, Matheson D, McCulloch-Olsen M, Smith T, Valenzuela J, Vega N,
Crofford OB, DeMets D, Lachin JM, Nerup J, Rossini A, Schiffrin A, Steffes M,
Tsiatis A, Zinman B, Haider A, Haas J, Busch R, Marshilok K, Toleno N, Schade D, 
Katz P, Hornbeck D, Foster S, Roberts W, Vercher M, Foster C, Bower C, Hansen I, 
Burcell D, Anderson S, Shultz R, Sparks C, Wray J, Goldman L, Holt R, Counts D,
Ostrowski D, Plotnick L, Fechner P, Donnelly C, Bourgeios P, Prosser P, Bowden B,
Gunville F, McClave C, Heldt P, Ovalle F, Atchison J, Trull P, Bottomlee A,
Betting S, Davis T, Wetzstein J, Clinkingbeard C, Davis J, Roosevelt T, Shamoon
H, Duffy H, Anhalt H, Brussard L, Capotorto J, Sheehan P, Quyyumi S, Cohen N,
Recker B, Castells S, Bastian W, AvRuskin TW, Verdia V, Quattrin T, Dwigun K,
Cefalu W, Clark N, Tilton L, Corenblum B, Harries S, Whitty A, McInroy R, Smith
S, Willi S, Key LA Jr, O'Rear D, Willi S, O'Rear D, Grubb R, Taylor K, Adams P,
Reeves M, Reeves P, Marshall R, Tessmann E, Dwarakanathan A, Beebe C,
Weintraub-Yohay I, O'Donnell P, Rich B, Imperial J, Silverman B, Edidin D,
Goodman S, Brodsky I, Brodsky L, Klein D, Dolan L, Standiford D, Rogers D,
Switzer C, Goldstein DE, Eichelberger D, Smith A, Ganong C, Zipf W, Dyas M, Sotos
JF, Young C, Alford M, Riley W, Salai S, Raskin P, Marks J, Sachson R, Lebowitz
C, Cook J, Stedman J, Indra D, Gutai J, Vinuya B, McGraw-Maly M, Feng W, Williams
C, Krygsman C, Pierce M, Freemark M, Litton J, Ryan E, Todd K, Aboud D, Pacillas 
M, Hines J, Walczak A, Aparicio L, Harbaugh D, Bergeson M, Rozell M, Mahan E,
Brooks H, Ginier P, Hensley P, Ellyn G, Heymann M, Johnson B, Tack J, Sondrol L, 
Hjelle T, Perry D, Albert J, Flory L, Gerrity N, Naab C, Heck J, Weber S, Mulhall
P, Lansden B, Cummings E, Salisbury S, Armour C, Ratzan S, Trahiotis M, Nemery R,
Carney H, Shorkey D, Fitz-Patrick D, Taniguchi A, Gunn S, Copeland K, McGirk S,
Liljenquist J, Fielding C, Richards S, Best V, Rodriguez H, Freidenberg G,
Amstutz L, Weir C, Tsalikian E, Hoffman R, Bayless M, Hare J, Hare K, Kyner J,
Eaks G, Howard C, Moore W, Woodford B, Salyer T, Wannarachue N, Meridith R,
Squires D, Deubler D, Bruschetta H, Nickels D, Dothard C, Courtney A, Marcus A,
Beisswenger J, Kairys S, Boyle W, Christiano A, O'Dell R, Touchette A, Thrailkill
K, Karounos D, Webb S, Moore L, Allweiss P, Anderson F, Mahon JL, McCallum J,
Raffel L, Rotter J, Verne A, Davidson M, Keppler G, Banerjee S, Simon M,
MacDonald M, Mokrohisky S, Speiser P, Fort P, Corrigan J, Pelkola S, Kitabchi A, 
Murphy M, Lambeth H, Burghen G, McGlendon P, Bondani J, LeNoye P, Alemzadeh R,
Koppen M, Canas J, Lamerson M, Spencer M, Etzwiler R, Reynolds K, Eyler N, Allen 
P, Warner B, Rettig K, Levens KL, Davis M, Polychronakos C, Laforte D, Zeller W, 
McKernan J, Finn S, Powers A, Lipps J, Raghavan S, Broadstone V, Raake P,
Weissberg K, Tamborlane W, Gatcomb P, Blonde L, Zimmerman T, Zimmerman R, Liebel 
C, Chalew S, Vargas A, Rao J, Ascani J, Compton T, Cerame B, Harbison M, Newfield
R, New M, Wajnrajch M, Vargas I, Herold K, Schachner H, Feberes G, Maclaren N,
Golub D, Rappaport R, McEvoy R, Thomas N, Pi-Sunyer X, Saltiel-Berzin R,
Rappaport R, Koblish J, Blackett P, Comp C, Beck J, Hassing J, Hahn L, Lane J,
Corley K, Larson L, Fiallo-Sharer R, Lee P, Cortez A, Varni N, Speer H, Crockett 
S, McDaniel W, Roberts V, Weinzimer S, Cohen P, Baker L, De Paul D, Rebecca E,
Dolinar R, Block M, Krametbauer P, Frazer T, Veray G, Ahmann A, LaFranchi S,
Jennings P, Kelleher A, Kummer M, Hansen J, Hunter M, LaMorticella K, Bergstrom, 
Rigdon M, Eckert K, Klaff L, Brazg R, Springs J, Wilson B, Isaacson E, Kuhn H,
Willis D, Kaplowitz P, Genther K, Bourdony C Jr, Rivera A, Basu R, Rizza R,
Whannel P, Jospe N, Utzman A, Sheikholisham B, Hiner C, Hardin D, Lindsay R,
Swinyard M, Rallison M, Jarrett L, Sirstins J, Pierson K, Trevino S, Schwartz S, 
Dickens K, Clark S, Scroggin P, Greene G, Linarelli L, Camuro E, Hermosillo S,
Estrada R, Bailey W, Fuqua J, Gitelman SE, Fountaine M, Colon G, Gonzalez de
Pijem L, Nieves-Rivera F, Rivera A, Perez R, Jovanovic L, Vesterfelt S, Saenz C, 
Kletter G, Pihoker K, Kearns S, Keppen L, Johnson P, Krell E, Duck SC, Noble M,
Thompson S, Wilson K, Soler N, McCall L, Allen H, Roumeliotis G, Chase L,
Braden-Moll D, White N, Levandoski L, Malone J, Steinbrueck J, Ulbrecht JS,
Lambert N, Mulhall P, Wilson T, Lane A, Smaldone A, Modilevsky T, Izquierdo R,
Weinstock R, Mackowiak S, Brindak K, Wherrett D, Daneman D, Pearlman K, McLellan 
C, Rogers A, Ipp E, Mao C, Rushovich EH, Thorne I, Jelley D, Greer D, Metzger D, 
Austin A, Glasgow A, Turek J, Archer J, Nunlee-Bla G, Johnson K, Harris J,
Driedbart S, Noto R, Romano A, Herl W, Guthrie R, Tatpati O, Brenner A, Lippert
D, Reeves G, Swenson C, Murphy L, Dean H, Berard L, Werbel S, Bell-Farrow A,
Mauseth R, Hanson J, Mishr S, DiCaria L, Wilson B, Wischmeier C, Moosa M, Levy R,
Desemone J, Bentson L, Lando H, Hoelscher J, Biggs W, Carano R, Nostrand P, Achee
L, Kelly J, Nolan P, Otsuka T, Heyrmann K, Autio N, Gohl K, Prendergast J,
Delcher H, Hamilton Reed C, Mellman M, Herskowitz I, Hoffman W, Naas M, Dubois S,
Chaykin L, Pershadsingh H, Shah H, Ettinger V, Reiner B, McLaughlin J, Levin P,
Boniface A, Leigh H, Ginsberg G, Weiss D, Rosecan M, Doyle P, McAfee J, Goldfogel
G, Henschel J, Gorson D, Ramos J, Bush M, Martin K, Birch B, Reimer S, Neil J,
Saenger P, Dimartino-Nardi J, Capotorto J, Sheehan P, Quyyumi SA, Cohen N, Stein 
R, Klonoff D, de Souza J, McCarthy D, Salisbury J, Edstrom C, William MF, Brown
M, Vigersky R, Smith C, Krishna A, Benson R, Murphy F, Pruchno C, Davenport M,
Clarke W, McDuffie M, Melinkovich G, Bell V, Ravanam A, Will W, Leonard D, Dahms 
W, Scott K, Bowyer F, Leichter S, Kaplan R, Lewis S, Miller R, Cristi C, Upmanyu 
M, Goldberg N, Savino R, Wentworth S, Langdon D, Weideman C, Urban M, Transue D, 
Whitehouse F, Cara J, Shaw S, Price W, Iverson R, Slag M, Hutt J, McLean N, Moore
R, Christenson R, Valika K, Nayak N, Bloch C, Strom L, Bailey TS, Varma C, Calder
D, Bilger M, Larson K, Papenhausen M, Shlesinger Y, Kenien A, Wright E, Lorber D,
Jabbar MA, Berkett J, Bautista JL, Robinson R, Kadambi A, Sullivan W, Meyer E,
Norwood PC, Biederman E, Nassberg S, Goscin L, Mata M, Bautista JL, Norwood PC,
Cabral J, Pietri A, Scott C, Flannery TK, Wilson DB, Rogers B, Campos M, Montero 
M, Beals B, Mair D, Long A, Rood R, Taylor J, Sevier R, Harris G, Pfeifer M,
Blechman M, Giangola J, Creech R, Lathrop M, Dunaif A, Miceli G, Lewy-Alterbaum
L, Jellinger P, Novak S, Gellman K, Lerman S, Waxman S, Hamilton D, Driscoll H,
Schneier R, Casey J, Boyce P, Meachum J, Milburn J, Pomeroy D, Moll G, Macyko K, 
Fox L, Mauras N, Ledereich P, Novotney D, Gill C, Rossetto B, Houlden R, Heck P, 
Korducki J, Winston J, Geffner D, Edelman S, Henry B, Einhorn D, Fink R, Gold E, 
Calhoun RW, Leidlein J, Arul K, Henry D, Donaldson D, Middlestadt K, Grande-Luke 
L, Guest J, Wise J, Wermers R, Bells B, Frindik P, Gewirtz G, Blyfeld C, Brakin
M, Borut D, Geffner D, Winston J, Geffner M, Rodriguez M, Gura V, Rodriguez M,
Shough C, Bays H, Shenouda H, Varma S, Bourgeios M, Sloan L, Guthrow CE, Shaw S, 
Ruby R, Motzkin-Kava B, Jebsen D, Zador I, Maby S, Crantz F, Zietlow D, Kudzma D,
Levy E, Shapiro ET, Jacobi J, Pita J, Abelove W, Perez-Rodriguez J,
Gonzalez-Mendoza L, Richton S, Weissman P, Stein N, Sherman-Adcock L, Fergeson D,
Jacobson M, Sennett J, Jain R, Etzwiler D, Ramsay R, Holland M, Carrington R,
Seagraves S, Yue G, Downs-Colby J, Flores H, Weinrib S, Jones E, Starkman H,
White D, Doberne L, Greenfield M, Alexander K, O'Sullivan C, Duncan R,
Barandiaran G, Yunis J, Nunez L, Ramos V, Holland E, Balash W, Sher J, Agrin R,
Frentz J, Fennoy I, Baron S, Door J, Vinik A, Savery F, Gareis F, Mack R, Devoe
D, Fan Y, Domek D, Kelley D, Roberts T, Gutshall B, Madu I, Poucher R, Mengel M, 
Desrosiers P, Banks R, Kopp B, Fishman I, Geller D, Smith W, Duncan J, Nyman O,
Vaccarello-Cruz M, Schwartz F, Olambiwonnu O, Ortiz M, Merrill S, Freedman S,
Rezvani I, Doyle D, Hale P, Singer-Granick C, Fore W, Perelman A, Clemmons R,
Johnsonbaugh R, Gonzalez A, Baker M, Field C, Shields C, Walker K, Reddy S,
Pillote K, Borchelt M, Phillipson B, Bommer D, Curosh N, Karl D, Iverson W,
Krosnick A, Kahn C, Blodgett B, Iverson N, Jacobson C, Haynes M, Moore D, Alston 
R, Eachempati R, Becker D, Weide L, Decker M, Greaves J, Curry M, Radcliffe J,
Schauf V, Childs D, Crawford R, Charnogursky G, Stesin M, Schneider M, Rodbard H,
Dempsey M, Brummer R, Elston L, Marseters D, Lapp P, Glaser N, Soeldner J,
Chaurasia V, Michaels R, King A, Olson R, Hale D, Danney M, Miller S, Madan S,
Dudl JR, Bohannon N, Berlund M, Jackson T, Kitzmiller J, Price D, Ehsanipoor K,
Homan M, Olshan J, Sorensen T, Perry A, Nepom G, McCulloch D, Hirsch I, Kanter R,
Niles N, Vogiatzi M, Kerpe V, McVie R, Aniszewski J, Carroll T, Bacon R, Hudson
M, Simpson A, Fili M, Krieger D, Golob D, Carney J, Khardori R, Peitso M, Lane
JT, Jensen DF, Katz H, Warhol R, Rothman J, Rooke J, Fogel H, Hotes L, Lilavivat 
U, Gauthier T, Deeb L, Sherradan T, Lavin N, Shuey K, Horner J, Tsao J, Scrogin
A, Greenlee C, Insel J, Wheeler M, Kamal T, Wiertz L, Bucholtz H, Dunn J, Wilson 
K, Frey M, Noto R, Chochinov R, Bridges JM, Amar M, Weinstein R, Poore TE, Brink 
S, Moltz K, Sobel D, Francis G, Sveck R, Ramey J, Haque N, Villafria A, Villafria
R, Madagame J, Stone L, Cech R, Schnelbach J, Dreidbart S, Noto R, Lebinger T,
Shane L, Reece E, Harris R, Welsh W, Whitesides PC, Scoma A, Ziel F, Alter C,
Lock P, Treece G.

OBJECTIVE: We assessed whether a risk score that incorporates levels of multiple 
islet autoantibodies could enhance the prediction of type 1 diabetes (T1D).
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: TrialNet Natural History Study participants (n =
784) were tested for three autoantibodies (GADA, IA-2A, and mIAA) at their
initial screening. Samples from those positive for at least one autoantibody were
subsequently tested for ICA and ZnT8A. An autoantibody risk score (ABRS) was
developed from a proportional hazards model that combined autoantibody levels
from each autoantibody along with their designations of positivity and
negativity.
RESULTS: The ABRS was strongly predictive of T1D (hazard ratio [with 95% CI] 2.72
[2.23-3.31], P < 0.001). Receiver operating characteristic curve areas (with 95% 
CI) for the ABRS revealed good predictability (0.84 [0.78-0.90] at 2 years, 0.81 
[0.74-0.89] at 3 years, P < 0.001 for both). The composite of levels from the
five autoantibodies was predictive of T1D before and after an adjustment for the 
positivity or negativity of autoantibodies (P < 0.001). The findings were almost 
identical when ICA was excluded from the risk score model. The combination of the
ABRS and the previously validated Diabetes Prevention Trial-Type 1 Risk Score
(DPTRS) predicted T1D more accurately (0.93 [0.88-0.98] at 2 years, 0.91
[0.83-0.99] at 3 years) than either the DPTRS or the ABRS alone (P = 0.01 for all
comparisons).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings show the importance of considering autoantibody
levels in assessing the risk of T1D. Moreover, levels of multiple autoantibodies 
can be incorporated into an ABRS that accurately predicts T1D.

PMCID: PMC3747899
PMID: 23818528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Int J Obes (Lond). 2014 Mar;38(3):466-9. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2013.121. Epub 2013 Jul
2.

Characterization and predicted role of the microRNA expression profile in amnion 
from obese pregnant women.

Nardelli C(1), Iaffaldano L(1), Ferrigno M(2), Labruna G(3), Maruotti GM(4),
Quaglia F(4), Capobianco V(1), Di Noto R(1), Del Vecchio L(1), Martinelli P(4),
Pastore L(1), Sacchetti L(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università
degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy [2] CEINGE-Biotecnologie
Avanzate SCa RL, Naples, Italy. (2)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate SCa RL, Naples, 
Italy. (3)IRCCS Fondazione SDN-Istituto di Ricerca Diagnostica e Nucleare,
Naples, Italy. (4)Dipartimento di Neuroscienze e Scienze Riproduttive ed
Odontostomatologiche, Naples, Italy. (5)Laboratori misti, IRCCS Fondazione
SDN-CEINGE, CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy.

Maternal obesity and nutrient excess in utero increase the risk of future
metabolic diseases. The mechanisms underlying this process are poorly understood,
but probably include genetic, epigenetic alterations and changes in fetal
nutrient supply. We have studied the microRNA (miRNA) expression profile in
amnion from obese and control women at delivery to investigate if a specific
miRNA signature is associated with obesity. The expression profile of 365 human
miRNAs was evaluated with the TaqMan Array in amnion from 10 obese and 5 control 
(prepregnancy body mass index (BMI) >30 and <25<U+2009>kg<U+2009>m(-2), respectively) women at 
delivery. Target genes and miRNA-regulated pathways were predicted by
bioinformatics. Anthropometric and biochemical parameters were also measured in
mothers and newborns. Seven miRNAs were expressed only in obese women (miR-422b, 
miR-219, miR-575, miR-523, miR-579, miR-618 and miR-659), whereas 13 miRNAs were 
expressed at a higher level and 12 miRNAs at a lower level in obese women than in
controls. MicroRNAs significantly downregulated the neurotrophin, cancer/ErbB,
mammalian target of rapamycin, insulin, adipocytokine, actin cytoskeleton and
mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways. In conclusion, we show that 
the miRNA profile is altered in amnion during obesity and hypothesize that this
could affect pathways important for placental growth and function, thereby
contributing to an increase in the newborn's risk of future metabolic diseases.

PMID: 23817051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Addict Dis. 2013;32(2):217-26. doi: 10.1080/10550887.2013.795472.

Inhalants as intermediate drugs between legal and illegal drugs among middle and 
high school students.

Sanchez ZM(1), Ribeiro LA, Moura YG, Noto AR, Martins SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil. zila.sanchez@unifesp.br

The aims of this study are to: (1) describe the prevalence and sociodemographic
characteristics of inhalant use among middle and high school students in Brazil, 
and (2) test the hypothesis of inhalants being intermediate drugs between legal
and illegal drug use. A representative sample of 5226 students from private
schools in São Paulo, Brazil, was selected to answer a self-report questionnaire.
Weighted data was analyzed through Cox proportional hazards models. In the
overall sample, inhalants seems to be an intermediate drug, since prior inhalant 
initiation was associated with first marijuana use, adjusted for previous alcohol
and tobacco initiation.

PMID: 23815428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Early Hum Dev. 2013 Jun;89 Suppl 1:S7-10. doi: 10.1016/S0378-3782(13)70003-3.

Metabolomics in neonatal life.

Fanos V(1), Iacovidou N, Puddu M, Ottonello G, Noto A, Atzori L.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section,
University of Cagliari, Italy. vafanos@tiscali.it

Metabolomics (or metabonomics) is based on the systematic study of the complete
set of metabolites in a biological sample and is considered the most innovative
of the 'omics' sciences. The metabolome is currently regarded as the 'new
clinical biochemistry' it is the most predictive phenotype, through consideration
of epigenetic differences. Among more than 5000 papers listed in PubMed on this
topic in the last three years, less than 60 refer to neonatal life. Aim of this
review is to present the clinical applications of metabolomics in neonatology,
including results of recent studies performed in experimental models and
newborns.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23809357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Early Hum Dev. 2013 Jun;89 Suppl 1:S58-61. doi: 10.1016/S0378-3782(13)70017-3.

Urinary metabolomics in newborns infected by human cytomegalovirus: a preliminary
investigation.

Fanos V(1), Locci E, Noto A, Lazzarotto T, Manzoni P, Atzori L, Lanari M.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section,
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. vafanos@tiscali.it

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) represents one of the most significant viral risks
of birth defects and long-term sequelae. The severity of the infection depends on
the form of the disease, which can be symptomatic or asymptomatic with or without
sequelae. The aim of this study was to investigate in a population of newborns
the impact of HCMV infection on the urine metabolome by using (1)H-nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy combined with multivariate statistical
analysis. Twenty-three children born from women with a primary HCMV infection
during pregnancy were recruited. Twelve were HCMV infected at birth whereas
eleven were not infected (control). The (1)H-NMR spectra were analyzed using a
PLS-DA mathematical model in order to identify the discriminant metabolites
between the asymptomatic and the control group. The most important metabolites
characterizing the clustering of the samples were: myoinositol, glycine,
3-hydroxybutyrate, 3-aminoisobutyrate, creatine, taurine and betaine. These
findings suggest the use of metabolomics as a useful new tool in the
investigation of HCMV congenital infection.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23809353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Psychiatr Res. 2013 Oct;47(10):1376-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.05.032. 
Epub 2013 Jun 25.

Impact of peripheral levels of chemokines, BDNF and oxidative markers on
cognition in individuals with schizophrenia.

Asevedo E(1), Gadelha A, Noto C, Mansur RB, Zugman A, Belangero SI, Berberian AA,
Scarpato BS, Leclerc E, Teixeira AL, Gama CS, Bressan RA, Brietzke E.

Author information: 
(1)Schizophrenia Program (PROESQ), Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal
de São Paulo, Rua Machado Bittencourt, 222, São Paulo, SP CEP 04044-000, Brazil. 
elsonmed@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate possible differences in peripheral levels of
chemokines, BDNF and oxidative markers between patients with Schizophrenia (SZ)
and matched healthy controls, and investigate the correlation of these biomarkers
with cognitive performance.
METHODS: Thirty individuals with SZ and 27 healthy controls were included and the
following plasmatic biomarkers' levels were determined according to
manufacturers' instructions: BDNF, TBARS, protein carbonyl content (PCC) and the 
chemokines CXCL-10/IP-10, CXCL-8/IL-8, CCL-11, CCL-24/Eotaxin-2, CCL-2/MCP-1,
CCL-3/MIP-1. Selected neuropsychological tasks were administered to assess verbal
learning (Hopkins Verbal Learning Test), verbal fluency (FAS test), working
memory (Visual Working Memory Task, Keep Track Task, Letter Memory Task), set
shifting (Plus-minus task, Number-letter task), inhibition (Computerized Stroop
Task, Semantic Generation Task) and complex executive function tasks (Tower of
London and the shortened version of the WCST-64).
RESULTS: Compared with the healthy control group, individuals with SZ presented
significantly higher levels of BDNF and the chemokine CCL-11, and lower levels of
TBARS and the chemokine CXCL-10/IP-10. When we examined only the SZ group, BDNF
levels were positively correlated with semantic generation tasks. Working memory 
ability was negatively correlated with PCC. Regarding chemokines, CCL-11 was
negatively correlated to performance in working memory test, and positively
correlated with cognitive flexibility task. CXCL-8/IL-8 was positively correlated
with verbal fluency. CCL-24/Eotaxin-2 was positively correlated with semantic
generation ability and letter memory task.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that cognitive performance in SZ is associated 
with mediators of neuroplasticity that can be measured peripherally.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23806580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Ann Occup Hyg. 2013 Oct;57(8):1054-64. doi: 10.1093/annhyg/met025. Epub 2013 Jun 
22.

Intersampler field comparison of Respicon(R), IOM, and closed-face 25-mm personal
aerosol samplers during primary production of aluminium.

Skaugset NP(1), Ellingsen DG, Notø H, Jordbekken L, Thomassen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical and Biological Work Environment, National Institute of Occupational
Health, PO Box 8149 DEP., 0033 Oslo, Norway;

Intersampler field comparison of Respicon(®), 25-mm closed-face 'total dust'
cassette (CFC), and IOM inhalable aerosol sampler was conducted in pot rooms at
seven aluminium smelters. The aerosol mass and water-soluble fluoride were
selected as airborne contaminants for the comparisons. The aerosol masses of 889 
sample pairs of IOM and Respicon(®) inhalable aerosol sub-fraction, 165 of IOM
and 25-mm CFC, and 194 of CFC and Respicon(®) thoracic aerosol sub-fraction were 
compared. The number of sample pairs for the comparison of water-soluble fluoride
was 906, 170, and 195, respectively. The geometric mean aerosol mass collected
with the inhalable Respicon(®) was 2.91 mg m(-3) compared with 3.38 mg m(-3) with
the IOM. The overall ratio between IOM and Respicon(®) inhalable sub-fraction was
1.16 [95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.11-1.21] for aerosol mass and 1.13 (95% CI
= 1.08-1.18) for water-soluble fluoride. The results indicate that Respicon(®)
undersampled the aerosol mass and water-soluble fluoride in the inhalable
sub-fraction compared with the IOM. The results indicated undersampling of the
Respicon(®) at mass concentrations higher than 1.35 mg m(-3) and oversampling at 
lower mass concentrations. The overall ratio between aerosol mass collected with 
IOM and CFC was 4.19 (95% CI = 3.79-4.64) and 1.61 (95% CI = 1.51-1.72) for
water-soluble fluoride. Thus, for this industry, a correction factor of 4.2 is
suggested for the conversion of CFC to inhalable aerosol masses and a conversion 
factor of 1.6 for water-soluble fluoride if wall deposits in the CFC are
included. CFC and thoracic Respicon(®) collected similar aerosol masses (ratio = 
1.04; 95% CI = 0.97-1.12), whereas the ratio was 1.19 (95% CI = 1.11-1.28) for
water-soluble fluoride. The variability of the exposure is substantial; thus,
large data sets are required in sampler performance field comparisons.

PMID: 23792971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Nihon Naika Gakkai Zasshi. 2013 Apr 10;102(4):869-74.

[Diabetes mellitus related common medical disorders: recent progress in diagnosis
and treatment. Topics: I. Pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment; 6. Diabetes
and cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto H(1), Goto A, Tsujimoto T, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine, National Center for Global
Health and Medicine, Japan.

PMID: 23772500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Immunol. 2013 Jul 15;191(2):540-4. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203161. Epub 2013 Jun
14.

Cutting edge: Prolonged exposure to HIV reinforces a poised epigenetic program
for PD-1 expression in virus-specific CD8 T cells.

Youngblood B(1), Noto A, Porichis F, Akondy RS, Ndhlovu ZM, Austin JW, Bordi R,
Procopio FA, Miura T, Allen TM, Sidney J, Sette A, Walker BD, Ahmed R, Boss JM,
Sékaly RP, Kaufmann DE.

Author information: 
(1)Emory Vaccine Center, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, 
USA.

Ag-specific CD8 T cells play a critical role in controlling HIV infection but
eventually lose antiviral functions in part because of expression and signaling
through the inhibitory programmed death-1 (PD-1) receptor. To better understand
the impact of prolonged TCR ligation on regulation of PD-1 expression in
HIV-specific CD8 T cells, we investigated the capacity of virus-specific CD8 T
cells to modify the PD-1 epigenetic program after reduction in viral load. We
observed that the transcriptional regulatory region was unmethylated in the
PD-1(hi) HIV-specific CD8 T cells, whereas it remained methylated in
donor-matched naive cells at acute and chronic stages of infection. Surprisingly,
the PD-1 promoter remained unmethylated in HIV-specific CD8 T cells from subjects
with a viral load controlled by antiviral therapy for >2 y or from elite
controllers. Together, these data demonstrate that the epigenetic program at the 
PD-1 locus becomes fixed after prolonged exposure to HIV virus.

PMCID: PMC3702641
PMID: 23772031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Oral Oncol. 2013 Aug;49(8):787-95. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.04.012. Epub 
2013 Jun 13.

CD44 and SSEA-4 positive cells in an oral cancer cell line HSC-4 possess cancer
stem-like cell characteristics.

Noto Z(1), Yoshida T, Okabe M, Koike C, Fathy M, Tsuno H, Tomihara K, Arai N,
Noguchi M, Nikaido T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences for Research, University of Toyama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Cancer may be derived from cancer stem-like cells (CSCs), which are
tumor-initiating cells that have properties similar to those of stem cells.
Identification and isolation of CSCs needs to be improved further.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: CSCs markers were examined in human oral cancer cell lines
by flow cytometry. The stem cell properties of subpopulations expressing
different markers were assessed further by in vitro sphere formation assays,
expression of stemness genes, drug resistance assays, and the ability to form
tumors in nude mice.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that CSCs could be isolated by the cell surface markers 
CD44 and stage-specific embryonic antigen-4 (SSEA-4). CD44+SSEA-4+ cells
exhibited cancer stem-like properties, including extensive self-renewal into the 
bulk of cancer cells. In vivo xenograft experiments indicated that CD44+SSEA-4+
cells exhibit the highest tumorigenic capacity compared with the remaining
subpopulations and parental cells. Double-positive cells for CD44 and SSEA-4
exhibited preferential expression of some stemness genes and were more resistant 
to the anticancer drugs, cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). In addition, cells 
expressing CD44 and SSEA-4 were detected in all tumor specimens analyzed, while
coexpression of CD44 and SSEA-4 was not detectable in normal oral mucosa.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that CD44+SSEA-4+ cells exhibit the
characteristics of CSCs in oral squamous cell carcinoma and provide a target for 
the development of more effective therapies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23768762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Nov;114(11):2577-87. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24600.

The secretome signature of colon cancer cell lines.

Imperlini E(1), Colavita I, Caterino M, Mirabelli P, Pagnozzi D, Del Vecchio L,
Di Noto R, Ruoppolo M, Orrù S.

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione IRCCS SDN, Naples, Italy.

The definition of the secretome signature of a cancer cell line can be considered
a potential tool to investigate tumor aggressiveness and a preclinical
exploratory study required to optimize the search of cancer biomarkers. Dealing
with a cell-specific secretome limits the contamination by the major components
of the human serum and reduces the range of dynamic concentrations among the
secreted proteins, thus favouring under-represented tissue-specific species. The 
aim of the present study is to characterize the secretome of two human colon
carcinoma cell lines, CaCo-2 and HCT-GEO, in order to evaluate differences and
similarities of two colorectal cancer model systems. In this study, we identified
more than 170 protein species, 64 more expressed in the secretome of CaCo-2 cells
and 54 more expressed in the secretome of HCT-GEO cells; 58 proteins were shared 
by the two systems. Among them, more than 50% were deemed to be secretory
according to their Gene Ontology annotation and/or to their SignalP or SecretomeP
scores. Such a characterization allowed corroborating the potential of a cell
culture-based model in order to describe the cell-specific invasive properties
and to provide a list of putative cancer biomarkers.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23744648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Magn Reson Chem. 2013 Aug;51(8):454-62. doi: 10.1002/mrc.3966. Epub 2013 Jun 4.

1H NMR metabolite fingerprinting as a new tool for body fluid identification in
forensic science.

Scano P(1), Locci E, Noto A, Navarra G, Murgia F, Lussu M, Barberini L, Atzori L,
De Giorgio F, Rosa MF, d'Aloja E.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Università di Cagliari, Cittadella
Universitaria di Monserrato, SS 554 Bivio per Sestu, 09042, Monserrato (CA),
Italy. scano@unica.it

In this feasibility study, we propose, for the first time, (1)H NMR spectroscopy 
coupled with mathematical strategies as a valid tool for body fluid (BF) trace
identification in forensic science. In order to assess the ability of this
approach to identify traces composed either by a single or by two different BFs, 
samples of blood, urine, saliva, and semen were collected from different donors, 
and binary mixtures were prepared. (1)H NMR analyses were carried out for all
samples. Spectral data of the whole set were firstly submitted to unsupervised
principal component analysis (PCA); it showed that samples of the same BF cluster
well on the basis of their characterizing molecular components and that mixtures 
exhibit intermediate characteristics among BF typologies. Furthermore, samples
were divided into a training set and a test set. An average NMR spectral profile 
for each typology of BF was obtained from the training set and validated as
representative of each BF class. Finally, a fitting procedure, based on a system 
of linear equations with the four obtained average spectral profiles, was applied
to the test set and the mixture samples; it showed that BFs can be unambiguously 
identified, even as components of a mixture. The successful use of this
mathematical procedure has the advantage, in forensics, of overcoming bias due to
the analyst's personal judgment. We therefore propose this combined approach as a
valid, fast, and non-destructive tool for addressing the challenges in the
identification of composite traces in forensics.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 23737349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Zygote. 2014 Nov;22(4):476-82. doi: 10.1017/S0967199413000105. Epub 2013 Apr 26.

Microtubule assembly and in vitro development of bovine oocytes with increased
intracellular glutathione level prior to vitrification and in vitro
fertilization.

Hara H(1), Yamane I(2), Noto I(2), Kagawa N(3), Kuwayama M(4), Hirabayashi M(5), 
Hochi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Science and Technology,Shinshu
University,Ueda,Nagano 386-8567,Japan. (2)Graduate School of Science and
Technology,Shinshu University,Ueda,Nagano 386-8567,Japan. (3)Kato Ladies
Clinic,Shinjuku,Tokyo 160-0023,Japan. (4)Repro-Support Medical Research
Centre,Shinjuku,Tokyo 160-0022,Japan. (5)National Institute for Physiological
Sciences,Okazaki,Aichi 444-8787,Japan.

Although vitrification is a useful technique for preservation of bovine oocytes, 
the yield of blastocysts derived from the vitrified oocytes is still low. We have
recently reported a new type of cryoinjury, multiple aster formation, by which
pronuclear migration and development of vitrified-warmed and in vitro-fertilized 
bovine oocytes are impaired. The aim of the present study was to investigate the 
effect of glutathione (GSH) content of vitrified bovine oocytes on multiple aster
formation and subsequent in vitro development. Treatment of bovine cumulus-oocyte
complexes with ß-mercaptoethanol (ßME) and L-cysteine (Cys) during in vitro
maturation resulted in 2.5-fold higher GSH content not only in fresh control but 
also in vitrified-warmed oocytes. The percentage of normally fertilized zygotes
exhibiting sperm aster(s) was >95% in all four groups (with or without ßME/Cys × 
fresh control or vitrified). The frequency of multiple aster formation in
vitrified oocytes (three-fold higher than that in fresh control oocytes) was not 
affected by the increased level of intracellular GSH with ßME/Cys. Consequently, 
the migration and development of pronuclei as well as the yield of blastocysts
from vitrified-warmed oocytes (17 versus 41%) were not improved. In addition,
there was no effect of increased GSH level on the yield of blastocysts in fresh
control groups.

PMID: 23731802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Chemistry. 2013 Jul 8;19(28):9381-7. doi: 10.1002/chem.201200604. Epub 2013 May
31.

Synthesis of nanocomposites from Pd(0) and a hyper-cross-linked functional resin 
obtained from a conventional gel-type precursor.

Jerábek K(1), Zecca M, Centomo P, Marchionda F, Peruzzo L, Canton P, Negro E, Di 
Noto V, Corain B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Process Fundamentals, Academy of Sciences of the Czech
Republic, Rozvojova 2/135, CZ-16502 Prague 6-Suchdol, Czech Republic.
jerabek@icpf.cas.cz

Hyper-cross-linked resins stemming from a gel-type poly-chloromethylated
poly(styrene-co-divinylbenzene) resin (GT) have been investigated by a
multi-methodological approach based on elemental analysis, scanning electron
microscopy, X-ray microanalysis, and solvent absorption. The hyper-cross-linking 
of the parent resin was accomplished by Friedel-Crafts alkylation of the phenyl
rings of the resins with the chloromethyl groups. This produced a permanent pore 
system comprising both micropores (<2.0 nm in diameter) and mesopores (2.2 nm).
The chloromethyl groups that did not react in the hyper-cross-linking step were
transformed into methylmercaptan groups and the latter were then converted into
sulfonic groups by oxidation with hydrogen peroxide. By this procedure the
extensive permanent porosity of the parent unsulfonated hyper-cross-linked
polymer (HGT) was retained by the sulfonated polymer (HGTS). The final exchange
capacity of HGTS was determined to be 0.36 mmol g(-1). HGTS was easily metalated 
with Pd(II) and the subsequent reduction of the metal centers with either aqueous
sodium borohydride, formaldehyde, or dihydrogen produced three Pd(0)/HGTS
nanocomposites. The metal nanoparticles had diameters in the 1-6 nm range for all
the nanocomposites, as determined by TEM, but with somewhat different
distributions. When formaldehyde was used, more than 90% of the nanoparticles
were less than 3 nm and their radial distribution throughout the polymer beads
was quite homogeneous. These findings show that with this reducing agent the
metal nanoparticles are generated within the pore system of the polymer matrix,
hence their size is controlled by the dimensions of the pores of the polymeric
support.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23728964  [PubMed]


339. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Aug;33(8):2021-5. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.301101. Epub 2013 May 30.

A novel APOB mutation identified by exome sequencing cosegregates with steatosis,
liver cancer, and hypocholesterolemia.

Cefalù AB(1), Pirruccello JP, Noto D, Gabriel S, Valenti V, Gupta N, Spina R,
Tarugi P, Kathiresan S, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento Biomedico di Medicina Interna e Specialistica, Università degli
Studi di Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: In familial hypobetalipoproteinemia, fatty liver is a characteristic
feature, and there are several reports of associated cirrhosis and
hepatocarcinoma. We investigated a large kindred in which low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol, fatty liver, and hepatocarcinoma displayed an autosomal dominant
pattern of inheritance.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: The proband was a 25-year-old female with low plasma
cholesterol and hepatic steatosis. Low plasma levels of total cholesterol and
fatty liver were observed in 10 more family members; 1 member was affected by
liver cirrhosis, and 4 more subjects died of either hepatocarcinoma or carcinoma 
on cirrhosis. To identify the causal mutation in this family, we performed exome 
sequencing in 2 participants with hypocholesterolemia and fatty liver.
Approximately 22<U+2009>400 single nucleotide variants were identified in each sample.
After variant filtering, 300 novel shared variants remained. A nonsense variant, 
p.K2240X, attributable to an A>T mutation in exon 26 of APOB (c.6718A>T) was
identified, and this variant was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The gentotypic
analysis of 16 family members in total showed that this mutation segregated with 
the low cholesterol trait. In addition, genotyping of the PNPLA3 p.I148M did not 
show significant frequency differences between carriers and noncarriers of the
c.6718A>T APOB gene mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: We used exome sequencing to discover a novel nonsense mutation in
exon 26 of APOB (p.K2240X) responsible for low cholesterol and fatty liver in a
large kindred. This mutation may also be responsible for cirrhosis and liver
cancer in this family.

PMCID: PMC3870266
PMID: 23723369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Int J Biol Markers. 2013 Sep 27;28(3):267-73. doi: 10.5301/JBM.5000020.

Cytometric profiling of CD133+ cells in human colon <U+2028>carcinoma cell lines
identifies a common core phenotype <U+2028>and cell type-specific mosaics.

Gemei M(1), Di Noto R, Mirabelli P, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE - Biotecnologie Avanzate di Napoli, Naples - Italy.

In colorectal cancer, CD133+ cells from fresh biopsies proved to be more
tumorigenic than their CD133- counterparts. Nevertheless, the function of CD133
protein in tumorigenic cells seems only marginal. Moreover, CD133 expression
alone is insufficient to isolate true cancer stem cells, since only 1 out of 262 
CD133+ cells actually displays stem-cell capacity. Thus, new markers for
colorectal cancer stem cells are needed. Here, we show the extensive
characterization of CD133+ cells in 5 different colon carcinoma continuous cell
lines (HT29, HCT116, Caco2, GEO and LS174T), each representing a different
maturation level of colorectal cancer cells. Markers associated with stemness,
tumorigenesis and metastatic potential were selected. We identified 6 molecules
consistently present on CD133+ cells: CD9, CD29, CD49b, CD59, CD151, and CD326.
By contrast, CD24, CD26, CD54, CD66c, CD81, CD90, CD99, CD112, CD164, CD166, and 
CD200 showed a discontinuous behavior, which led us to identify cell
type-specific surface antigen mosaics. Finally, some antigens, e.g. CD227,
indicated the possibility of classifying the CD133+ cells into 2 subsets likely
exhibiting specific features. This study reports, for the first time, an extended
characterization of the CD133+ cells in colon carcinoma cell lines and provides a
"dictionary" of antigens to be used in colorectal cancer research.

PMID: 23709346  [PubMed - in process]


341. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol. 2013 Jun;115(6):833-8. doi:
10.1016/j.oooo.2013.03.014.

Reduction of dark-band-like metal artifacts caused by dental implant bodies using
hypothetical monoenergetic imaging after dual-energy computed tomography.

Tanaka R(1), Hayashi T, Ike M, Noto Y, Goto TK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Radiology, Department of Tissue
Regeneration and Reconstruction, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical
and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the usefulness of hypothetical
monoenergetic images after dual-energy computed tomography (DECT) for assessment 
of the bone encircling dental implant bodies.
STUDY DESIGN: Seventy-two axial images of implantation sites clipped out from
image data scanned using DECT in dual-energy mode were used. Subjective
assessment on reduction of dark-band-like artifacts (R-DBAs) and diagnosability
of adjacent bone condition (D-ABC) in 3 sets of DECT images-a fused image set
(DE120) and 2 sets of hypothetical monoenergetic images (ME100, ME190)-was
performed and the results were statistically analyzed.
RESULTS: With regards to R-DBAs and D-ABC, significant differences among DE120,
ME100, and ME190 were observed. The ME100 and ME190 images revealed more artifact
reduction and diagnosability than those of DE120.
CONCLUSIONS: DECT imaging followed by hypothetical monoenergetic image
construction can cause R-DBAs and increase D-ABC and may be potentially used for 
the evaluation of postoperative changes in the bone encircling implant bodies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23706923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. BMC Public Health. 2013 May 24;13:504. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-13-504.

Prevalence of chronic diseases by immigrant status and disparities in chronic
disease management in immigrants: a population-based cohort study, Valore
Project.

Buja A(1), Gini R, Visca M, Damiani G, Federico B, Francesconi P, Donato D,
Marini A, Donatini A, Brugaletta S, Baldo V, Bellentani M; Valore Project.

Collaborators: Brambilla A, Correani M, Cosentino N, Cricelli C, Fulvi S, Gallina
P, Marini A, Mazzaglia G, Noto G, Palumbo F, Pasqua A, Romeo D, Rubin R, Sforza
S, Silvestrini G, Verdini E, Viola G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Laboratory for Public Health and Population 
Studies, University of Padova, Via Loredan 18, Padova 35128, Italy.
alessandra.buja@unipd.it

BACKGROUND: For chronic conditions, disparities can take effect cumulatively at
various times as the disease progresses, even when care is provided. The aim of
this study was to quantify the prevalence of diabetes, congestive heart failure
(CHF) and coronary heart disease (CHD) in adults by citizenship, and to compare
the performance of primary care services in managing these chronic conditions,
again by citizenship.
METHODS: This is a population-based retrospective cohort study on 1,948,622
people aged 16 years or more residing in Italy. A multilevel regression model was
applied to analyze adherence to care processes using explanatory variables at
both patient and district level.
RESULTS: The age-adjusted prevalence of diabetes was found higher among
immigrants from high migratory pressure countries (HMPC) than among Italians,
while the age-adjusted prevalence of CHD and CHF was higher for Italians than for
HMPC immigrants or those from highly-developed countries (HDC). Our results
indicate lower levels in all quality management indicators for citizens from HMPC
than for Italians, for all the chronic conditions considered. Patients from HDC
did not differ from Italian in their adherence to disease management schemes.
CONCLUSION: This study revealed a different prevalence of chronic diseases by
citizenship, implying a different burden of primary care by citizenship. Our
findings show that more effort is needed to guarantee migrant-sensitive primary
health care.

PMCID: PMC3673842
PMID: 23706129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. BMC Public Health. 2013 May 24;13:499. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-13-499.

Nonprescribed use of tranquilizers or sedatives by adolescents: a Brazilian
national survey.

Opaleye ES(1), Noto AR, Sanchez ZM, Amato TC, Locatelli DP, Gossop M, Ferri CP.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Psicobiologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua
Botucatu, 862- 1° andar, São Paulo CEP 04023-062, Brasil.

BACKGROUND: Although the nonprescribed use of tranquilizers or sedatives by
adolescents is a cause for concern in many countries, there is a shortage of data
from low and middle income countries (LAMIC). The present study aims to estimate 
the prevalence of nonprescribed use of tranquilizers/sedatives by adolescents in 
Brazil, and to assess how socioeconomic and demographic circumstances, as well as
indicators of access to these substances are associated with their use and with
risk perception.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted using a multi-stage probability
sample of 18131 high school students from public and private schools from all 27 
Brazilian state capitals. A self-reporting questionnaire was used to obtain
information on social and economic circumstances, nonprescribed use of
tranquilizers or sedatives and risk perception of their use.
RESULTS: Lifetime nonprescribed use of tranquilizers or sedatives was reported by
5% of respondents, more commonly among females (OR: 2.19, 95% CI: 1.75-2.75) and 
those attending private schools (OR: 1.47, 95% CI: 1.17-1.84). The use of
tranquilizers/sedatives by relatives or friends was associated with nonprescribed
use by the participant (OR: 4.26, 95% CI: 3.46-5.23) and a majority of lifetime
users obtained these substances from a family environment (82%). Previous medical
prescription was independently associated with nonprescribed use (OR: 6.61, 95%
CI: 4.87-8.98) and with low risk perception (OR: 2.42, 95% CI: 1.12-5.24).
CONCLUSIONS: A substantial proportion of Brazilian adolescents use nonprescribed 
tranquilizers/sedatives. Easy access to these substances seems to play an
important role in this use and should be tackled by preventive and treatment
interventions.

PMCID: PMC3664606
PMID: 23705991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Int Nurs Rev. 2013 Jun;60(2):201-4. doi: 10.1111/inr.12021. Epub 2013 May 8.

Courage and selflessness in professional actions: but are they enough?

Alder-Collins JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Health Promotion Centre, Fukuoka Prefectural University, Tagawa, Japan.
jekan@rose.ocn.ne.jp

Comment on
    Int Nurs Rev. 2013 Jun;60(2):196-200.

BACKGROUND: The Great East Japan Earthquake on 11 March 2011 caused considerable 
loss of life, destruction of livelihood and infrastructure. Linked to this event 
but not its cause, was the meltdown and radioactive contamination of the
environment from Fukishima Dai-ichi power plant. This disaster, in turn, led to
the enforced evacuation of populations at risk. Japanese nurses, physicians,
paramedical staff and faculty from nearby universities all volunteered to staff
decontamination centres for evacuees and survivors.
AIM: This commentary critically reflects on the insights provided in this issue
by Noto, Kitamiya, Itaki, Urushizaka & Yamabe (pp. 196-200) on the role of nurses
in the Fukishima Dai-ichi disaster, extending that critique to evidence that has 
emerged through official and unofficial sources.
DISCUSSION: Disaster planning is not a popular subject for societies in general
nor is it a finite art or process. Civil authorities often work under restricted 
or reducing budgets and resources while serving increasing demands. Disaster
planning requires multidisciplinary skills sets to be able to work across the
many different departments, agencies, interest groups and budgets. Planners need 
to think outside the box, allocate resources and training to a level that
justifies known and/or projected threats in preparing first responders with the
correct tools, training and time to practise skills they may never be called upon
to use.
CONCLUSION: Disasters will always happen be they natural or man-made. To rely on 
the courage and selflessness of professionals is not enough. Training and
learning from previous disasters can help in responsible planning.

© 2013 The Author. International Nursing Review © 2013 International Council of
Nurses.

PMID: 23692003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Int Nurs Rev. 2013 Jun;60(2):196-200. doi: 10.1111/inr.12014. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Role of nurses in a nuclear disaster: experience in the Fukushima Dai-ichi
nuclear power plant accident.

Noto Y(1), Kitamiya C, Itaki C, Urushizaka M, Kidachi R, Yamabe H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Health Sciences, Hirosaki University, Aomori, Japan.
noto@cc.hirosaki-u.ac.jp

Comment in
    Int Nurs Rev. 2013 Jun;60(2):201-4.

BACKGROUND: A severe earthquake occurred in Japan on 11 March 2011. The giant
tsunami devastated many coastal communities in eastern Japan and caused the
Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power plant incident. The Japanese government
conducted a large-scale survey of residents affected by the nuclear and natural
disasters in Fukushima prefecture and in response to the government's request, H 
University dispatched a Radiation Exposure Research Team to Fukushima.
PURPOSE: This article explains the activities of the Radiation Exposure Research 
Team and the role of nurses in a nuclear disaster.
CONCLUSION: As a nurse in the field of radiation medicine, our role is to protect
the health of those affected and to reduce their anxiety. In addition, as the
persons responsible for implementing these projects, it is also necessary that we
educate and foster the development of medical care personnel with the appropriate
knowledge and skills to carry out the measures required.

© 2013 The Authors. International Nursing Review © 2013 International Council of 
Nurses.

PMID: 23692002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Eur J Intern Med. 2013 Jun;24(4):324-32. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2013.04.008. Epub
2013 May 16.

Decision making for oral anticoagulants in atrial fibrillation: the ATA-AF study.

Gussoni G(1), Di Pasquale G, Vescovo G, Gulizia M, Mathieu G, Scherillo M,
Panuccio D, Lucci D, Nozzoli C, Fabbri G, Colombo F, Riva L, Baldo CI, Maggioni
AP, Mazzone A; ATA-AF Steering Committee and Investigators.

Collaborators: Siciliano R, Boffa M, Bazzanini F, Di Nucci G, Fonti S, De
Franceschi T, Davio P, Alagna G, Cipollini F, Gunnellini MG, Dottori M, Moramarco
MC, Giudice M, Sicuro M, Lenti S, Iannelli G, Notarstefano P, Galiotto M,
Apolloni E, Molini G, Massarelli L, Di Iorio P, Di Pasquale P, Scandurra F,
Candelmo F, Iodice P, Laureano R, Perlangeli S, Praticò A, Rinaldi GA, Conese V, 
Scalera G, Palma F, De Antoni ME, Beltramello G, Carbonella M, Capone A, Bianchi 
V, Zerella F, Masina M, Boggian G, Pancaldi LG, Brucato AL, Ferrari P, Gavazzi A,
Santoro E, Bertinieri G, Caragnano V, Zaccaroni S, Marchetti G, Urbinati S,
Belmonte G, Giannoni C, Panuccio D, Pedone V, Colletta M, Di Pasquale G, Cemin R,
Pezzotti C, Capretti M, Lamari AL, Maugeri S, Moretti R, Ganga R, Mascia P,
Caddori A, Cusumano S, Alletto M, De Vincenzo C, Musacchio E, Stendardo A,
Cantarellaì SA, Di Donato C, Bassano F, Perrone C, Melissano D, Catanzaro M,
Vinciguerra A, Lusiani L, De Caro G, Scarcia M, Scarcia A, Losi E, Gaddi O, Lo
Sciuto A, Ingurgio Cascio N, Vignai E, Romano M, Borzì V, Bellanuova IA, Felis S,
Gulizia MM, Artale S, Mazzuca S, Galiano Leone G, Tirotta D, Talini E, Ventrella 
F, Iosa G, Musca G, Bertello PD, Benemio G, Garognoli O, Arcelli G, Prosciutti L,
de Matthaeis G, Quattrini C, Calcagno S, Canestrini S, Franco A, Pastorelli R,
Acquati F, Botto GL, Sitta N, Migliacci R, Cosmi F, Noto A, Sprovieri MF, Macrì
G, Bertolazzi S, Spotti A, Pirelli S, Marasco MF, Elia M, Parodi M, Fenoglio L,
Gelmini GP, Ziacchi V, Rigon N, Petix NR, Zipoli A, Caiolo A, Marino E, Scattolin
G, Gerini S, Parisi G, Fortini A, Conti A, Ferrante F, Morettini A, Alterini B,
Rocchi F, Nozzoli C, Goedecke L, Landini G, Cuomo A, Panettieri I, Pellegrino P, 
Di Biase M, Savarese G, Patriarchi F, Nizzoli M, Rossini E, Nello S, Ranieri AT, 
Gelonesi FN, Costantini M, Dugnani M, Ria L, Mussardo V, Zanini G, Iacono MA, Lo 
Pinto G, Castello C, Moroni LA, Costa S, Domenicucci S, Venzano C, Loiacono L,
Ortuso R, Esposito L, Cuzzucrea DG, Donada C, Selva E, Politi A, Alessandri M,
Nuzzi G, Porrino L, Parise P, Capponi EA, Mandorla S, Politi C, Olivieri C,
Gurioli L, Agostinelli P, Striuli R, Petrarca M, Corsini F, Orlandini F, Badolati
S, Colarusso D, Vertullo V, Pelaggi P, Campagna G, Haupt E, Parente F, Milanese
G, Magliari F, Bolomini L, Morando G, Mazzone A, Palumbo G, Lambelet P, Camaiti
A, Cei M, Frediani L, Vituliano A, Brunelleschi G, Lisi C, Rimoldi A, Russo V,
Reggiani A, Raimondo FC, Disalvo D, Borrello VM, Scandiffio T, Stellitano E,
Procopio L, Franculli F, Serafini F, Tondo C, Fiorentini C, Manfredini R,
Robbiolo L, Pizzimenti G, Vasquez L, Piangiamore A, Tosi P, Donà G, Bertaglia E, 
Malavasi V, Modena MG, Divella C, Marengo C, Montanari P, Manicardi V, Abate L,
Cuccuini A, Magni S, Vincenti A, Grieco A, Mortara A, Specchia G, Silvestri N,
Silvestri O, Rabitti PG, Muscherà R, Uomo G, Mayer MC, Bresciani A, Perrone
Filardi P, Fontanella A, Lucà S, Zuccoli A, Rinaldi P, Ferri G, Barbieri E,
Grasselli S, Campanini M, Agosti S, Sanna P, Casu G, Orecchioni G, Da Silva
Carvalho PC, Pozzi R, Salvati F, Bendini MG, Giordano G, Pellegrini F, Pighini G,
Tremolada F, Ledda A, Canonico A, Di Stefano G, Nicolosi G, Ingrillì F, D'Angelo 
A, Musacchio D, Savastano S, Magnani L, Capitelli M, Cioni G, Aloisi B, De Finis 
A, Vacri A, Costantini V, Agnelli G, Zingarini G, Cavallini C, Teghini L,
Panigada G, Di Marco S, Vergoni W, Paonessa K, Artom A, Bigliardi M, Riccardi R, 
Marandino A, Barsotti L, Ginocchio G, Marchese D, Passaglia C, Annese M, Pettinà 
G, Cipollini F, Manini M, Scopelliti G, Pastore A, Spirito G, Amato A, Del Bianco
F, Ongari M, Fiorencis R, Querci F, Martone VD, Molero U, Fiusti R, Giovannini T,
D'Arienzo E, Cellamare G, Placci A, Gulli G, Ruggeri A, Pulitanò G, Ingianni N,
Saporito D, Marconi M, Grossi A, Grosseto D, Ballardini G, Mete F, Russo F,
Uguccioni M, Costantino S, Manfellotto D, Risa MP, Azzolini P, Berti F, Santini
M, Francia P, Pietrantonio F, Biscione F, Magliano G, Brasolin B, Salituri S,
Zamboni S, Piergentili C, Delucchi M, De Benedictis M, Vitolo A, Anselmi M,
Moretti V, Cuccurullo M, Castelli G, Martino G, Pierandrei G, Antonucci G,
Tonizzo M, Nassi R, Tarducci R, Commisso B, Lazzarini D, Matarazzo MM, Novati P, 
Petacchi R, Maninchedda P, Melandri F, Sacchetti C, Grandi M, Cattana A, Tassara 
R, Menardo G, Aykut V, Chesi G, Galgano A, Bartone B, Stornello M, Muscio G,
Gemmiti MP, Mainella A, Fontana D, Astarita C, Gaspardo G, La Brocca A, Rillo M, 
Pascente T, Pirozzi MR, Addis L, De Siati P, Beato E, Iannaccone V, Allegra A,
Castronuovo M, Battaia L, Biscottini B, Marinone C, Marengo S, Cottino A, Diana
A, Coser A, Pauletto P, Calzolari V, Olivari Z, De Masi De Luca G, Accogli M,
Gerloni R, Cattin L, Vitali Serdoz L, Sinagra G, Bulfoni A, De Biasio M,
Proclemer A, Miserocchi F, Marazzi R, Salerno JA, Levantesi G, Olivetti P,
Capuano A, Bertoncelli MC, Molinaro N, Anastasio L, Teti G, Vescovo GA, Incao F, 
Lettica GV, Ippoliti G, Osti R, Tafi A.

BACKGROUND: Oral anticoagulants offer the best long-term protection against
ischemic stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation (AF). However, vitamin K
antagonists (VKA) are cumbersome to use and their prescription is far from
guidelines recommendations. We report the results of a large survey on the
attitudes of prescription of VKA in patients with AF.
METHODS: 7148 patients were enrolled by 196 Internal Medicine (MED) and 164
Cardiology (CARD) centers, and VKA specifically analyzed. Thrombotic and
hemorrhagic risks were evaluated by means of CHADS2 and CHA2DS2VASc scores, and a
study-specific bleeding score (modified HAS-BLED).
RESULTS: 63.9% of non-valvular patients had a CHADS2 score=2 (MED: 75.3%-CARD:
53.1%), and 28.4% a bleeding score=3 (41.9% MED-15.8% CARD). VKA were prescribed 
in 55.5% of non-valvular patients (46.3% MED and 64.2% CARD), in 81% of high-risk
valvular patients and in 58.8% of the overall study population. Among patients at
high risk of bleeding (score=3), VKA were prescribed in 26.9% of subjects, while,
in the subgroup at high risk of thrombosis (CHADS2 Score<2), these were
prescribed in 54.4%. Age=75, paroxysmal AF, cognitive impairment, need for
assistance, CHADS2<2 and bleeding score=3 were independent predictors of non-use 
of VKA.
CONCLUSIONS: Oral anticoagulants are more frequently used in CARD than in MED,
plausibly due to greater complexity of MED patients. Stratification of thrombotic
and hemorrhagic risk significantly drives the choice for VKA. However the
fraction of patients in whom prescription or non-prescription is based on other
individual characteristics is not negligible.

Copyright © 2013 European Federation of Internal Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23684591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Cien Saude Colet. 2013 Apr;18(4):1131-40.

[Contexts and patterns of undue use benzodiazepine among women].

[Article in Portuguese]

Souza AR(1), Opaleye ES, Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Psicobiologia, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
04023-062. anarosa1ls@yahoo.com.br

The undue use of benzodiazepines particularly among women has raised concern in
the public health area. This qualitative study aimed at understanding the beliefs
and values associated with undue use of benzodiazepines among women. Thirty-three
participants (aged between 18 and 60) with a history of undue use of
benzodiazepines in the past year were selected intentionally using specific
criteria. The interviews were fully transcribed and subjected to content analysis
using NVivo software. The majority of respondents reported use for longer than
the recommended duration (median 7 years) and they purchased the drug with a
medical prescription. Reasons for use most given were to deal with anxiety, to
improve sleep and to "flee from problems." Even those who acknowledged the
possibility of being addicted were not motivated to stop taking the drug. Medical
supervision did not necessarily seem to influence the perception of risk of undue
use of benzodiazepines and it appears as a factor favoring the maintenance of
prolonged use.

PMID: 23670390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Endocr J. 2013;60(8):951-7. Epub 2013 May 11.

A case of malignant insulinoma: successful control of glycemic fluctuation by
replacing octreotide injections with octreotide LAR injections.

Okamoto M(1), Kishimoto M, Takahashi Y, Osame K, Noto H, Yamamoto-Honda R, Kajio 
H, Tokuhara M, Edamoto Y, Endo H, Igari T, Kubota K, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine, Center Hospital, National
Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo 162-8655, Japan.

A 73-year-old woman with malignant insulinoma was treated with 100 µg/day
octreotide for unresected insulinoma and liver metastases. The daily
administration of the drug induced hyperglycemia after dinner in addition to
existing fasting hypoglycemia possibly because this drug suppressed both insulin 
and glucagon secretion and its blood concentration was unstable. After replacing 
a daily injection of octreotide with a monthly injection of octreotide
long-acting repeatable (LAR), blood glucose levels stabilized within the normal
range. The findings of the present study showed that octreotide LAR could be
useful for the long-term treatment of unresectable insulinomas.

PMID: 23665775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Investig Med. 2013 Aug;61(6):978-83. doi: 10.231/JIM.0b013e318294e9da.

Gelatinases and their tissue inhibitors in a group of subjects with metabolic
syndrome.

Hopps E(1), Lo Presti R, Montana M, Noto D, Averna MR, Caimi G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento Biomedico di Medicina Interna e Specialistica, Università degli
Studi di Palermo, Italy. euhopps@libero.it

AIM: To evaluate matrix metalloproteases (MMP)-2 and MMP-9 and tissue inhibitor
of metalloproteases (TIMP)-1 and TIMP-2 in a group of subjects with metabolic
syndrome (MS) subdivided according to the presence or absence of diabetes
mellitus.
METHODS: We examined in 90 subjects (51 men and 39 women) with MS, defined
following the International Diabetes Federation criteria, and subsequently
subdivided into diabetic subjects (22 men and 11 women) and nondiabetic subjects 
s (29 men and 28 women), the plasma concentrations of MMP-2 and MMP-9 and of
TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 using specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits.
RESULTS: We found a significant increase in plasma concentrations of MMP-2,
MMP-9, TIMP-1, and TIMP-2 in the whole group of MS subjects (P < 0.001) and in
both subgroups of MS subjects with diabetes mellitus (P < 0.001) and without
diabetes mellitus (P < 0.001) in comparison with healthy controls. We also noted 
higher concentrations of all the examined parameters in the MS subjects with
diabetes mellitus in comparison with the MS subjects without diabetes mellitus.
Matrix metalloproteases and TIMPs showed some significant correlations with body 
mass index and waist circumference and with metabolic parameters in the whole
group of MS subjects.
CONCLUSION: An altered pattern of MMPs and their inhibitors is demonstrated in
MS; the presence of diabetes mellitus strongly influences the concentration of
MMP and TIMP, contributing probably to the increased cardiovascular risk of MS
subjects.

PMID: 23661104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Cell Cycle. 2013 Jun 1;12(11):1696-703. doi: 10.4161/cc.24759. Epub 2013 May 2.

TrkB is responsible for EMT transition in malignant pleural effusions derived
cultures from adenocarcinoma of the lung.

Ricci A(1), De Vitis C, Noto A, Fattore L, Mariotta S, Cherubini E, Roscilli G,
Liguori G, Scognamiglio G, Rocco G, Botti G, Giarnieri E, Giovagnoli MR, De Toma 
G, Ciliberto G, Mancini R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine; University "La Sapienza"; Rome,
Italy.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide. Recent
evidence indicates that tumors contain a subpopulation of cancer stem cells
(CSCs) that are responsible for tumor maintenance and spread. CSCs have recently 
been linked to the occurrence of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
Neurotrophins (NTs) are growth factors that regulate the biology of embryonic
stem cells and cancer cells, but still little is known about the role NTs in the 
progression of lung cancer. In this work, we investigated the role of the NTs and
their receptors using as a study system primary cell cultures derived from
malignant pleural effusions (MPEs) of patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung.
We assessed the expression of NTs and their receptors in MPE-derived adherent
cultures vs. spheroids enriched in CSC markers. We observed in spheroids a
selectively enhanced expression of TrkB, both at the mRNA and protein levels.
Both K252a, a known inhibitor of Trk activity, and a siRNA against TrkB strongly 
affected spheroid morphology, induced anoikis and decreased spheroid forming
efficiency. Treatment with neurotrophins reversed the inhibitory effect of K252a.
Importantly, TrkB inhibition caused loss of vimentin expression as well as that
of a set of transcription factors known to be linked to EMT. These ex vivo
results nicely correlated with an inverse relationship between TrkB and
E-cadherin expression measured by immunohistochemistry in a panel of lung
adenocarcinoma samples. We conclude that TrkB is involved in full acquisition of 
EMT in lung cancer, and that its inhibition results in a less aggressive
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3713128
PMID: 23656788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Clin Neurophysiol. 2013 Sep;124(9):1893-8. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2012.12.053.
Epub 2013 Apr 30.

Prominent fatigue in spinal muscular atrophy and spinal and bulbar muscular
atrophy: evidence of activity-dependent conduction block.

Noto Y(1), Misawa S, Mori M, Kawaguchi N, Kanai K, Shibuya K, Isose S, Nasu S,
Sekiguchi Y, Beppu M, Ohmori S, Nakagawa M, Kuwabara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba,
Japan. y-noto@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

Comment in
    Clin Neurophysiol. 2013 Sep;124(9):1714-5.

OBJECTIVES: To clarify whether patients with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) or
spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) suffer disabling muscle fatigue, and
whether activity-dependent conduction block (ADCB) contributes to their fatigue. 
ADCB is usually caused by reduced safety factor for impulse transmission in
demyelinating diseases, whereas markedly increased axonal branching associated
with collateral sprouting may reduce the safety factor in chronic lower motor
neuron disorders.
METHODS: We assessed the fatigue severity scale (FSS) in 22 patients with
SMA/SBMA, and in 100 disease controls (multiple sclerosis, myasthenia gravis,
chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP), and axonal neuropathy).
We then performed stimulated-single fibre electromyography (s-SFEMG) in the
extensor digitorum communis (EDC) muscle of 21 SMA/SBMA patients, 6 CIDP
patients, and 10 normal subjects.
RESULTS: The FSS score was the highest in SMA/SBMA patients [4.9 ± 1.1 (mean ±
SD)], with 81% of them complaining of disabling fatigue, compared with normal
controls (3.5 ± 1.0), whereas patients with multiple sclerosis (4.3 ± 1.6),
myasthenia gravis (4.0 ± 1.6) or CIDP (4.3 ± 1.4) also showed higher FSS score.
When 2000 stimuli were delivered at 20 Hz in s-SFEMG, conduction block of single 
motor axons developed in 46% of patients with SMA/SBMA, and 40% of CIDP patients,
but in none of the normal controls.
CONCLUSION: SMA/SBMA patients frequently suffer from disabling fatigue presumably
caused by ADCB induced by voluntary activity.
SIGNIFICANCE: ADCB could be the mechanism for muscle fatigue in chronic lower
motor neuron diseases.

Copyright © 2013 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Published 
by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23643309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Tree Physiol. 2013 May;33(5):550-8. doi: 10.1093/treephys/tpt029. Epub 2013 May
2.

Azimuthal and radial variations in sap flux density and effects on stand-scale
transpiration estimates in a Japanese cedar forest.

Shinohara Y(1), Tsuruta K, Ogura A, Noto F, Komatsu H, Otsuki K, Maruyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agriculture, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8581, Japan.
shinohara@agr.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Understanding radial and azimuthal variation, and tree-to-tree variation, in sap 
flux density (Fd) as sources of uncertainty is important for estimating
transpiration using sap flow techniques. In a Japanese cedar (Cryptomeria
japonica D. Don.) forest, Fd was measured at several depths and aspects for 18
trees, using heat dissipation (Granier-type) sensors. We observed considerable
azimuthal variation in Fd. The coefficient of variation (CV) calculated from Fd
at a depth of 0-20 mm (Fd1) and Fd at a depth of 20-40 mm (Fd2) ranged from 6.7
to 37.6% (mean<U+2009>=<U+2009>28.3%) and from 19.6 to 62.5% (mean<U+2009>=<U+2009>34.6%) for the -azimuthal 
directions. Fd at the north aspect averaged for nine trees, for which azimuthal
measurements were made, was -obviously smaller than Fd at the other three aspects
(i.e., west, south and east) averaged for the nine trees. Fd1 averaged for the
nine trees was significantly larger than Fd2 averaged for the nine trees. The
error for stand-scale transpiration (E) estimates caused by ignoring the
azimuthal variation was larger than that caused by ignoring the radial variation.
The error caused by ignoring tree-to-tree variation was larger than that caused
by ignoring both radial and azimuthal variations. Thus, tree-to-tree variation in
Fd would be more important than both radial and azimuthal variations in Fd for E 
estimation. However, Fd for each tree should not be measured at a consistent
aspect but should be measured at various aspects to make accurate E estimates and
to avoid a risk of error caused by the relationship of Fd to aspect.

PMID: 23640874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Diabetes Care. 2013 Sep;36(9):2850-6. doi: 10.2337/dc12-2337. Epub 2013 May 1.

The atrial natriuretic peptide genetic variant rs5068 is associated with a
favorable cardiometabolic phenotype in a Mediterranean population.

Cannone V(1), Cefalu' AB, Noto D, Scott CG, Bailey KR, Cavera G, Pagano M,
Sapienza M, Averna MR, Burnett JC Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiorenal Research Laboratory, Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA. cannone.valentina@mayo.edu

OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that the minor allele of the atrial natriuretic
peptide (ANP) genetic variant rs5068 is associated with a favorable
cardiometabolic phenotype in a general Mediterranean population.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We genotyped a random sample of the residents of
Ventimiglia di Sicilia, Sicily, for rs5068.
RESULTS: Genotype frequencies of rs5068 are AA, 93.5%; AG, 6.4%; and GG, 0.1%.
All subsequent analyses are AA versus AG+GG. After adjusting for age and sex, the
minor G allele is associated with lower BMI (estimate [SE]: -1.7 kg/m(2) [0.8], P
= 0.04). In the AG+GG group, males with HDL cholesterol levels <40 mg/dL are less
frequent (P = 0.05) and obesity tends to be less prevalent (P = 0.07).
Importantly, the G allele is associated with a lower prevalence of metabolic
syndrome (P = 0.02). After adjusting for BMI, the above associations were
attenuated. Independently of age, sex, and BMI, the minor allele is also
associated with lower systolic blood pressure (-6.0 mmHg [2.5], P = 0.02) and
lower prevalence of hypertension (odds ratio 0.41 [95% CI 0.20-0.83], P = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The association between the minor allele of rs5068 and a favorable
cardiometabolic phenotype that we previously reported in a U.S. population is now
replicated in a Mediterranean population in which the G allele of rs5068 is
associated with lower blood pressure, BMI, and prevalence of hypertension and
metabolic syndrome. These findings may lead to a diagnostic strategy to assess
cardiometabolic risk and lay the foundation for the future development of an ANP 
or ANP-like therapy for metabolic syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3747944
PMID: 23637347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Molecules. 2013 Apr 24;18(5):4844-57. doi: 10.3390/molecules18054844.

Metabolomics in adult and pediatric nephrology.

Fanos V(1), Fanni C, Ottonello G, Noto A, Dessì A, Mussap M.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria, Cagliari 09131, Italy. vafanos@tiscali.it

Metabolomics, the latest of the "omics" sciences, has a non-selective approach
and can thus lead to the identification of all the metabolites (molecules < 1
kDa) in a biological system. The metabolomic profile can be considered the most
predictive phenotype capable of evaluating epigenetic modifications determined by
external factors. It is so close to the phenotype as to be considered the
phenotype itself in its unique individuality (fingerprinting), both in health
(phenome), and disease (diseasome). Urine, compared to other biological liquids, 
has the advantage of being a complex fluid with many components, including
intermediate metabolites. Metabolomics may thus play a role in the study of
different kidney diseases and overcome diagnostic difficulties. We shall present 
the studies that to our knowledge have been published on Nephrology and Pediatric
Nephrology. Some are experimental while others are clinical. We have not
considered carcinomas and transplantations. Although scarce, the data on adults
and the very few ones in pediatrics are quite interesting. Further studies on
kidneys are needed to determine the practical clinical impact of metabolomics in 
kidney renal pathologies. The "multiplatform" "omic" study of urine and namely
metabolomics can contribute to improving early diagnosis and the outcome of
kidney diseases.

PMID: 23615531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Lepr Rev. 2012 Dec;83(4):331-4.

The leprosy mailing list.

Deepak S, Noto S, Naafs B, Schreuder P.

PMID: 23614249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:612032. doi: 10.1155/2013/612032. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

NGAL and metabolomics: the single biomarker to reveal the metabolome alterations 
in kidney injury.

Noto A(1), Cibecchini F, Fanos V, Mussap M.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section,
University of Cagliari, Via Ospedale 119, 09124 Cagliari, Italy.

Conditions affecting kidney structure and function can be considered acute or
chronic, depending on their duration. Acute kidney injury (AKI) is one of a
number of acute kidney diseases and consists of an abrupt decline in kidney
function after an injury leading to functional and structural changes. The
widespread availability of enabling technologies has accelerated the rate of
novel biomarker discovery for kidney injury. The introduction of novel biomarkers
in clinical practice will lead to better preventative and therapeutic
interventions and to improve outcomes of critically ill patients. A number of
biomarkers of functional change and cellular damage are under evaluation for
early diagnosis, risk assessment, and prognosis of AKI. Neutrophil
gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) has emerged as the most promising
biomarker of kidney injury; this protein can be measured by commercially
available methods in whole blood, plasma, serum, and urine. Concomitantly,
metabolomics appears to be a snapshot of the chemical fingerprints identifying
specific cellular processes. In this paper, we describe the role of NGAL for
managing AKI and the potential benefits deriving from the combined clinical use
of urine NGAL and metabolomics in kidney disease.

PMCID: PMC3625560
PMID: 23607092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Chemistry. 2013 Jun 17;19(25):8100-10. doi: 10.1002/chem.201300664. Epub 2013 Apr
19.

Concise synthesis and biological assessment of (+)-neopeltolide and a 16-member
stereoisomer library of 8,9-dehydroneopeltolide: identification of pharmacophoric
elements.

Fuwa H(1), Kawakami M, Noto K, Muto T, Suga Y, Konoki K, Yotsu-Yamashita M,
Sasaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-ku, 
Sendai 980-8577, Japan. hfuwa@m.tohoku.ac.jp

We describe herein a concise synthesis of (+)-neopeltolide, a marine macrolide
natural product that elicits a highly potent antiproliferative activity against
several human cancer cell lines. Our synthesis exploited the powerful
bond-forming ability and high functional group compatibility of olefin metathesis
and esterification reactions to minimize manipulations of oxygen functionalities 
and to maximize synthetic convergency. Our findings include a chemoselective
olefin cross-metathesis reaction directed by H-bonding, and a ring-closing
metathesis conducted under non-high dilution conditions. Moreover, we developed a
16-member stereoisomer library of 8,9-dehydroneopeltolide to systematically
explore the stereostructure-activity relationships. Assessment of the
antiproliferative activity of the stereoisomers against A549 human lung
adenocarcinoma, MCF-7 human breast adenocarcinoma, HT-1080 human fibrosarcoma,
and P388 murine leukemia cell lines has revealed marked differences in potency
between the stereoisomers. This study provides comprehensive insights into the
structure-activity relationship of this important antiproliferative agent,
leading to the identification of the pharmacophoric structural elements and the
development of truncated analogues with nanomolar potency.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23606326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2013 Jul;15(7):580-5. doi: 10.1089/dia.2013.0030. Epub
2013 Apr 17.

Prognostic accuracy of continuous glucose monitoring in the prediction of
diabetes mellitus in children with incidental hyperglycemia: receiver operating
characteristic analysis.

Brancato D(1), Saura G, Fleres M, Ferrara L, Scorsone A, Aiello V, Di Noto A,
Spano L, Provenzano V.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Reference Center for Diabetology and Insulin Pumps, Department of
Internal Medicine and Diabetology, Hospital of Partinico, Palermo, Italy.
davide.brancato@libero.it

AIM: The purpose of this study is to evaluate continuous glucose monitoring (CGM)
in predicting diabetes mellitus in children with incident hyperglycemia (IH) and 
negativity for some insular autoantibodies.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Thirty-one autoantibody-negative children who presented at 
our center with IH underwent a baseline assessment and were followed up for 23.8 
months (range, 6-48 months). At the end of the follow-up, we compared the
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) areas under the curve (AUCs) of metabolic
markers from 17 children who developed diabetes (Group A; n=17) and 14 children
who did not develop diabetes (Group B; n=14).
RESULTS: Only two oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)-derived markers and three
CGM-derived markers showed a good prognostic performance, with ROC AUCs
indicating significant results (P<0.0001) for the following markers: 2-h glucose,
OGTT (0.813; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.621-0.954); AUC glucose, OGTT (0.832;
95% CI 0.611-0.950); CGM glucose measurement peak (0.803; 95% CI 0.621-0.923);
percentage of CGM glucose measurements inside the range 70-125<U+2009>mg/dL (0.866; 95% 
CI 0.695-0.961); and percentage of CGM measurements =126<U+2009>mg/dL (0.889; 95% CI
0.724-0.973). The combination of the OGTT-derived markers did not increase the
predictive value, but the combination of CGM markers with each other or with the 
OGTT markers yielded higher ROC AUCs (ranging from 0.828 to 0.945).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study showing that CGM is useful in predicting
diabetes mellitus in children with IH.

PMID: 23594031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 31;288(22):16085-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.445551. Epub
2013 Apr 15.

The hyaluronic acid receptor CD44 coordinates normal and metaplastic gastric
epithelial progenitor cell proliferation.

Khurana SS(1), Riehl TE, Moore BD, Fassan M, Rugge M, Romero-Gallo J, Noto J,
Peek RM Jr, Stenson WF, Mills JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The stem cell in the isthmus of gastric units continually replenishes the
epithelium. Atrophy of acid-secreting parietal cells (PCs) frequently occurs
during infection with Helicobacter pylori, predisposing patients to cancer.
Atrophy causes increased proliferation of stem cells, yet little is known about
how this process is regulated. Here we show that CD44 labels a population of
small, undifferentiated cells in the gastric unit isthmus where stem cells are
known to reside. Loss of CD44 in vivo results in decreased proliferation of the
gastric epithelium. When we induce PC atrophy by Helicobacter infection or
tamoxifen treatment, this CD44(+) population expands from the isthmus toward the 
base of the unit. CD44 blockade during PC atrophy abrogates the expansion. We
find that CD44 binds STAT3, and inhibition of either CD44 or STAT3 signaling
causes decreased proliferation. Atrophy-induced CD44 expansion depends on pERK,
which labels isthmal cells in mice and humans. Our studies delineate an in vivo
signaling pathway, ERK <U+2192> CD44 <U+2192> STAT3, that regulates normal and atrophy-induced 
gastric stem/progenitor-cell proliferation. We further show that we can intervene
pharmacologically at each signaling step in vivo to modulate proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3668764
PMID: 23589310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Bioresour Technol. 2013 Jun;137:196-201. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2013.03.130.
Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Stability of autotrophic nitrogen removal system under four non-steady
operations.

Kimura Y(1), Itokawa H, Noto K, Murakami T, Isaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Hitachi Plant Technologies Ltd., Matsudo, Chiba 271-0064, Japan.
yuuya.kimura.kv@hitachi-pt.com

Stable nitrogen removal from the digester supernatant for sludge via the
nitritation-anammox process under steady operations of ammonium concentration and
flow rate has been often reported. In this study, the effects of four non-steady 
operations, intentional fluctuations of influent concentration from 890 to 650
mg-N/L and hydraulic load of the 10% increase, temporally shutdown for 3-d and
maximum capacity of each reactor, were evaluated in the nitritation-anammox
process treating digester supernatant for sludge. No serious effects were
observed in the anammox reactor because the aeration-control system in the
nitritation reactor responded and controlled the nitritation efficiency
satisfactorily against intentional fluctuations and temporally shutdown. Finally,
the maximum capacity of each reactor was evaluated, and the nitritation rate was 
found to be 2.3 kg-N/m(3)/d at a DO of 4.0mg/L, and the nitrogen-conversion rate 
was 9.0 kg-N/m(3)/d.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23587820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Phys Med Biol. 2013 May 7;58(9):N135-44. doi: 10.1088/0031-9155/58/9/N135. Epub
2013 Apr 10.

Conversion of the energy-subtracted CT number to electron density based on a
single linear relationship: an experimental verification using a clinical
dual-source CT scanner.

Tsukihara M(1), Noto Y, Hayakawa T, Saito M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiological Technology, Graduate School of Health Sciences,
Niigata University, Niigata 951-8518, Japan.

In radiotherapy treatment planning, the conversion of the computed tomography
(CT) number to electron density is one of the main processes that determine the
accuracy of patient dose calculations. However, in general, the CT number and
electron density of tissues cannot be interrelated using a simple one-to-one
correspondence. This study aims to experimentally verify the clinical feasibility
of an existing novel conversion method proposed by the author of this note, which
converts the energy-subtracted CT number (<U+0394>HU) to the relative electron density
(<U+03C1>e) via a single linear relationship by using a dual-energy CT (DECT). The
<U+0394>HU-<U+03C1>e conversion was performed using a clinical second-generation dual-source CT
scanner operated in the dual-energy mode with tube potentials of 80 kV and 140 kV
with and without an additional tin filter. The <U+0394>HU-<U+03C1>e calibration line was
obtained from the DECT image acquisition for tissue substitutes in an electron
density phantom. In addition, the effect of object size on <U+0394>HU-<U+03C1>e conversion was 
also experimentally investigated. The plot of the measured <U+0394>HU versus nominal
<U+03C1>e values exhibited a single linear relationship over a wide <U+03C1>e range from 0.00
(air) to 2.35 (aluminum). The <U+0394>HU-<U+03C1>e conversion performed with the tin filter
yielded a lower dose and more reliable <U+03C1>e values that were less affected by the
object-size variation when compared to the corresponding values obtained for the 
case without the tin filter.

PMID: 23571116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Am Heart Assoc. 2013 Apr 4;2(2):e000063. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.113.000063.

Enhanced lipid peroxidation and platelet activation as potential contributors to 
increased cardiovascular risk in the low-HDL phenotype.

Vazzana N(1), Ganci A, Cefalù AB, Lattanzio S, Noto D, Santoro N, Saggini R,
Puccetti L, Averna M, Davì G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Center of Excellence on Aging, G.
d'Annunzio University of Chieti, Chieti, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels are major predictors of
cardiovascular (CV) events, even in patients on statin treatment with low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) at target. In animal models HDLs protect LDL from oxidation and
blunt platelet activation. Our study aimed to examine whether HDL levels are
related to in vivo oxidative stress and platelet activation, as determinants of
atherothrombosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Urinary 8-iso-PGF2a and 11-dehydro-TXB2, in vivo markers of 
oxidative stress and platelet activation, respectively, were measured in 65
coronary heart disease (CHD) normocholesterolemic patients with HDL =35 mg/dL,
and in 47 CHD patients with HDL >35 mg/dL. The 2 eicosanoids were also measured
before and after an intensive exercise program in sedentary people (n=18) and
before and after fenofibrate treatment in otherwise healthy subjects with low HDL
(n=10). Patients with HDL =35 mg/dL showed significantly higher urinary
8-iso-PGF2a (median [25th to 75th percentiles]: 289 [189 to 380] versus 216 [171 
to 321] pg/mg creatinine, P=0.019) and 11-dehydro-TXB2 (563 [421 to 767] versus
372 [249 to 465] pg/mg creatinine, P=0.0001) than patients with higher HDL. A
direct correlation was found between urinary 8-iso-PGF2a and 11-dehydro-TXB2 in
the entire group of patients (<U+03C1>=0.77, P<0.0001). HDL levels were inversely
related to both 8-iso-PGF2a (<U+03C1>=-0.32, P=0.001) and 11-dehydro-TXB2 (<U+03C1>=-0.52,
P<0.0001). On multiple regression, only 8-iso-PGF2a (ß=0.68, P<0.0001) and HDL
level (ß=-0.29, P<0.0001) were associated with urinary 11-dehydro-TXB2 excretion,
independent of sex, age, smoking, hypertension, diabetes, previous myocardial
infarction, total cholesterol, LDL, and triglycerides. Both intensive exercise
and fenofibrate treatment significantly reduced the 2 eicosanoids in healthy
subjects, in parallel with an HDL increase.
CONCLUSIONS: A low HDL phenotype, both in CHD patients and in healthy subjects,
is associated with increased lipid peroxidation and platelet activation. These
data provide novel insight into the mechanisms linking low HDL with increased CV 
risk.

PMCID: PMC3647282
PMID: 23557750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. BMC Infect Dis. 2013 Apr 4;13:162. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-13-162.

Left thigh phlegmon caused by Nocardia farcinica identified by 16S rRNA
sequencing in a patient with leprosy: a case report.

De Nardo P(1), Giancola ML, Noto S, Gentilotti E, Ghirga P, Tommasi C, Bellagamba
R, Paglia MG, Nicastri E, Antinori A, Corpolongo A.

Author information: 
(1)Lazzaro Spallanzani National Institute for Infectious Diseases-IRCCS, Via
Portuense 292, Rome, 00149, Italy. dr.pasqualedenardo@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: In recent years, Nocardia farcinica has been reported to be an
increasingly frequent cause of localized and disseminated infections in the
immunocompromised patient. However, recent literature is limited. We report a
case of left thigh phlegmon caused by N. farcinica that occurred in a patient
with leprosy undergoing treatment with prednisone for leprosy reaction.
CASE PRESENTATION: We describe the case of left thigh phlegmon caused by Nocardia
farcinica in a 54-year-old Italian man affected by multi-bacillary leprosy. The
patient had worked in South America for 11 years. Seven months after his return
to Italy, he was diagnosed with leprosy and started multi-drug antibiotic therapy
plus thalidomide and steroids. Then, during therapy with rifampicin monthly,
minocycline 100 mg daily, moxifloxacin 400 mg daily, and prednisone (the latter
to treat type 2 leprosy reaction), the patient complained of high fever
associated with erythema, swelling, and pain in the left thigh. Therefore, he was
admitted to our hospital with the clinical suspicion of cellulitis. Ultrasound
examination and Magnetic Resonance Imaging showed left thigh phlegmon. He was
treated with drainage and antibiotic therapy (meropenem and vancomycin replaced
by daptomycin). The responsible organism, Nocardia farcinica, was identified by
16S rRNA sequencing in the purulent fluid taken out by aspiration. The patient
continued treatment with intravenous trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and imipenem
followed by oral trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and moxifloxacin. A whole-body
computed tomography did not reveal dissemination to other organs like the lung or
brain.The patient was discharged after complete remission. Oral therapy with
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, moxifloxacin, rifampicin monthly, clofazimine and 
thalidomide was prescribed to be taken at home. One month after discharge from
the hospital the patient is in good clinical condition with complete resolution
of the phlegmon.
CONCLUSION: N. farcinica is a rare infectious agent that mainly affects
immunocompromised patients. Presentation of phlegmon only without disseminated
infection is unusual, even in these kinds of patients. In any case, a higher
index of suspicion is needed, as diagnosis can easily be missed due to the
absence of characteristic symptoms and the several difficulties usually
encountered in identifying the pathogen.

PMCID: PMC3626577
PMID: 23556433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Trials. 2013 Apr 3;14:92. doi: 10.1186/1745-6215-14-92.

Enteral vs. intravenous ICU sedation management: study protocol for a randomized 
controlled trial.

Mistraletti G(1), Mantovani ES, Cadringher P, Cerri B, Corbella D, Umbrello M,
Anania S, Andrighi E, Barello S, Di Carlo A, Martinetti F, Formenti P, Spanu P,
Iapichino G; SedaEN investigators.

Collaborators: Noto A, Cappello G, Sabatelli B, Brenna G, Astori M, Villa C,
Placido P, Gattinoni L, Protti A, Russo R, Pagan F, Berto V, Sparacino CC,
Roselli P, Ronzoni G, Francesconi S, Beck E, Gaiotto M, Radrizzani D, Ferla L,
Valdambrini F, Giudici R, Merlini L, Pesenti A, Bellani G, Rezoagli E, La Bruna
A, Lucchini A, Braschi A, Palo A, Niebel T, Selvini M, Cortesi S, Quaini A, Iotti
G, Riccardi F, Sacchi A, Livigni S, Ferretti E, Naretto G, Deprado A, Casalicchio
T, degli Esposti VV, Radeschi G, Festa M, Odetto L, Ferrero D, Cognolato S, Penso
R, Vacchelli R, Cardellino S, Bosco E, Gado AM, Bresciani A, Pozzo I, Alessio A, 
Rodrigues VC, Biase E, Vivaldi N, Nava A, Rambaldi M, Pinna C, Ponzetta F,
Bavutti L, Martina P, Palacios B, Bergonzini G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia medico-chirurgica e dei trapianti, Università
degli Studi di Milano, A.O. San Paolo - Polo Universitario, Via A. Di Rudinì,
8-20142, Milan, Italy. giovanni.mistraletti@unimi.it

BACKGROUND: A relevant innovation about sedation of long-term Intensive Care Unit
(ICU) patients is the 'conscious target': patients should be awake even during
the critical phases of illness. Enteral sedative administration is nowadays
unusual, even though the gastrointestinal tract works soon after ICU admission.
The enteral approach cannot produce deep sedation; however, it is as adequate as 
the intravenous one, if the target is to keep patients awake and adapted to the
environment, and has fewer side effects and lower costs.
METHODS/DESIGN: A randomized, controlled, multicenter, single-blind trial
comparing enteral and intravenous sedative treatments has been done in 12 Italian
ICUs. The main objective was to achieve and maintain the desired sedation level: 
observed RASS = target RASS ± 1. Three hundred high-risk patients were planned to
be randomly assigned to receive either intravenous propofol/midazolam or enteral 
melatonin/hydroxyzine/lorazepam. Group assignment occurred through online
minimization process, in order to balance variables potentially influencing the
outcomes (age, sex, SAPS II, type of admission, kidney failure, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, sepsis) between groups. Once per shift, the staff 
recorded neurological monitoring using validated tools. Three flowcharts for
pain, sedation, and delirium have been proposed; they have been designed to treat
potentially correctable factors first, and, only once excluded, to administer
neuroactive drugs. The study lasted from January 24 to December 31, 2012. A total
of 348 patients have been randomized, through a centralized website, using a
specific software expressly designed for this study. The created network of ICUs 
included a mix of both university and non-university hospitals, with different
experience in managing enteral sedation. A dedicated free-access website was also
created, in both Italian and English, for continuous education of ICU staff
through CME courses.
DISCUSSION: This 'educational research' project aims both to compare two sedative
strategies and to highlight the need for a profound cultural change, improving
outcomes by keeping critically-ill patients awake.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Clinicaltrials.gov #NCT01360346.

PMCID: PMC3651718
PMID: 23551983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2013 May;23(5):e17-8. doi:
10.1016/j.numecd.2013.01.010. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

Oxidative status in nondiabetic middle-aged subjects with metabolic syndrome:
preliminary data.

Hopps E, Lo Presti R, Noto D, Averna MR, Caimi G.

PMID: 23541170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Manag Care Pharm. 2013 Apr;19(3):218-27.

Assessment of the effectiveness of pharmacotherapy follow-up in patients treated 
for depression.

Marques LA(1), Galduróz JC, Fernandes MR, Oliveira CC, Beijo LA, Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)Federal University of Alfenas, Alfenas, MG, Brazil. lualvesmarques@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Several studies have established the effectiveness of pharmaceutical 
care (PC) in patients with heart failure, diabetes, hypertension, and
dyslipidemia. However, there are few studies using standardized methods, e.g.,
randomized controlled trials, to assess the effectiveness of pharmacotherapy
follow-up (PF) in patients with depression.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the effectiveness of PC via PF according to the Dáder Method
in female patients diagnosed with depression.
METHODS: Sixty-eight patients were selected and randomly allocated to groups,
stratified by age, type of medication, severity of depression, and presence of
recurrence and/or relapse. Patients in the intervention group (IG) received
clinical pharmacy intervention at monthly visits over a 3-month follow-up period.
The control group (CG) also received monthly visits from the pharmacist, but PF
intervention was not performed.
RESULTS: A comparison of the effects of usual treatment (CG) and PC (IG) on
depressive symptoms showed a statistically significant difference between groups,
with a median reduction in Beck Depression Inventory score (<U+0394>) of 2.5 points in
the CG and 13.5 points in the IG. Similarly, statistically significant results
were observed for anxiety symptoms, with a median reduction in Beck Anxiety
Inventory score (<U+0394>) of 3.5 points in the CG and 13.0 points in the IG. The
patients who underwent PF showed a high level of satisfaction with the service.
CONCLUSION: The PF is well accepted and effective in treating depressed patients,
as indicated by the reduction of the depressive and anxious symptoms.

PMID: 23537456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59244. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059244. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Eye exercises enhance accuracy and letter recognition, but not reaction time, in 
a modified rapid serial visual presentation task.

Di Noto P(1), Uta S, DeSouza JF.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vision Research, York University, Toronto, Canada.

Eye exercises have been prescribed to resolve a multitude of eye-related
problems. However, studies on the efficacy of eye exercises are lacking, mainly
due to the absence of simple assessment tools in the clinic. Because similar
regions of the brain are responsible for eye movements and visual attention, we
used a modified rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) to assess any measurable 
effect of short-term eye exercise in improvements within these domains. In the
present study, twenty subjects were equally divided into control and experimental
groups, each of which performed a pre-training RSVP assessment where target
letters, to which subjects were asked to respond to by pressing a spacebar, were 
serially and rapidly presented. Response time to target letters, accuracy of
correctly responding to target letters, and correct identification of target
letters in each of 12 sessions was measured. The experimental group then
performed active eye exercises, while the control group performed a task that
minimized eye movements for 18.5 minutes. A final post-training RSVP assessment
was performed by both groups and response time, accuracy, and letter
identification were compared between and within subject groups both pre- and
post-training. Subjects who performed eye exercises were more accurate in
responding to target letters separated by one distractor and in letter
identification in the post-training RSVP assessment, while latency of responses
were unchanged between and within groups. This suggests that eye exercises may
prove useful in enhancing cognitive performance on tasks related to attention and
memory over a very brief course of training, and RSVP may be a useful measure of 
this efficacy. Further research is needed on eye exercises to determine whether
they are an effective treatment for patients with cognitive and eye-related
disorders.

PMCID: PMC3602039
PMID: 23527146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Jpn J Radiol. 2013 May;31(5):357-63. doi: 10.1007/s11604-013-0199-3. Epub 2013
Mar 23.

Reproducibility of diaphragm position assessed with a voluntary breath-holding
device.

Takamatsu S(1), Takanaka T, Kumano T, Mizuno E, Shibata S, Ohashi S, Kurata Y,
Ueda S, Hori N, Shouji S, Noto K, Kojima H, Matsui O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiotherapy, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa
University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa City, Ishikawa 920-8641, Japan.
shigerad@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

PURPOSE: To evaluate the reproducibility of diaphragm position in our new
breath-holding radiotherapy for abdominal tumors using image-guided radiation
therapy (IGRT) and a voluntary breath-holding device, Abches.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients treated with abdominal tumors using IGRT with
Abches were enrolled. Twenty patients without dementia or severe lung disease
were analyzed. Each fraction of all patients was set up with kV cone-beam CT with
reference to the vertebral bodies. Before daily treatment, electronic portal
imaging device (EPID) images of the diaphragm at breath-holding exhale phase were
acquired. The difference in the diaphragm position relative to the vertebral body
was analyzed by comparing EPID images and the digitally reconstructed radiograph 
of the planning CT. We evaluated the reproducibility of two axes:
superior-inferior (S-I) and right-left (R-L) with the EPID measurements.
RESULTS: The 443 irradiation data sets were analyzed. The interfractional
reproducibility of the diaphragm relative to vertebral bodies was 1.7 ± 1.4 mm in
the S-I and 1.4 ± 1.2 mm in the R-L direction.
CONCLUSION: This technique has good interfractional reproducibility and
visibility of the diaphragm during irradiation. Its use is feasible in the
routine clinical setting and irradiation.

PMID: 23526485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Antimicrob Resist Infect Control. 2013 Mar 21;2(1):8. doi: 10.1186/2047-2994-2-8.

Outbreak of colonizations by extended-spectrum ß-lactamase-producing Escherichia 
coli sequence type 131 in a neonatal intensive care unit, Italy.

Giuffrè M(1), Cipolla D, Bonura C, Geraci DM, Aleo A, Di Noto S, Nociforo F,
Corsello G, Mammina C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sciences for Health Promotion and Mother-Child Care "G,
D'Alessandro", University of Palermo, Via del Vespro 133, I-90127, Palermo,
Italy. caterina.mammina@unipa.it.

BACKGROUND: Extended spectrum ß-lactamases (ESBLs) often associated with
resistance to aminoglycosides and fluoroquinolones have recently emerged in
community-associated Escherichia coli. The worldwide clonal dissemination of E.
coli sequence type (ST)131 is playing a prominent role.We describe an outbreak of
colonizations by ESBL-producing E. coli (ESBL-E. coli) in the neonatal intensive 
care unit (NICU) of the University Hospital, Palermo, Italy.
METHODS: An epidemiological investigation was conducted with the support of
molecular typing. All children admitted to the NICU and colonized by ESBL-E. coli
between January and June 2012, were included in the study. Cases were defined as 
infants colonized by E. coli resistant to third generation cephalosporins and
fluoroquinolones. A case-control study was also performed to identify possible
risk factors.
RESULTS: During the outbreak period, 15 infants were found to be colonized by
ESBL-E. coli. The epidemic strain demonstrated continuous transmission throughout
the outbreak period. Case-control study identified a lower birth weight as the
only risk factor for colonization. The strain belonged to the sequence-type 131
community-associated clone. Transmission control interventions, including contact
precautions and cohorting, restriction of the new admissions, sanitization of
surfaces and equipment and targeted training sessions of the NICU staff, were
successful in interrupting the outbreak.
CONCLUSIONS: Although invasive infections did not develop in any of the 15
colonized neonates, our report highlights the need to strictly monitor the spill 
in the NICU setting of multidrug resistant community-associated organisms. Our
findings confirm also the role of active surveillance in detecting the silent
spread of ESBL-producing Gram negatives in a critical healthcare setting and
trigging the implementation of infection control measures. As ß-lactam and
fluoroquinolone resistant E. coli strains are increasingly spreading in the
community, this event could become a more serious challenge.

PMCID: PMC3614428
PMID: 23517816  [PubMed]


370. Diabetes Metab Syndr. 2013 Jan-Mar;7(1):38-41. doi: 10.1016/j.dsx.2013.02.013.
Epub 2013 Mar 13.

Protein oxidation in a group of subjects with metabolic syndrome.

Caimi G(1), Hopps E, Noto D, Canino B, Montana M, Lucido D, Lo Presti R, Averna
MR.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Specialistica, Università di Palermo,
Italy.

AIMS: To examine the protein oxidation, marker of the oxidative stress, in
metabolic syndrome (MS).
METHODS: We enrolled 106 subjects (45 women and 61 men) with MS of which 43 (14
women and 27 men) were with diabetes mellitus and 63 (31 women and 32 men) were
without diabetes mellitus, and 54 subjects (19 women and 35 men) as control
group. The protein oxidation, expressed as carbonyl groups, was measured by an
enzyme-like immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit (BioCell PC test kit, Enzo Life
Sciences AG, Switzerland).
RESULTS: In the whole group of MS subjects, in comparison with control group, a
significant increase in carbonyl groups was present. The same datum was also
evident between control group and diabetic subjects with MS and between control
group and nondiabetic subjects with MS. No difference was observed between the
two subgroups (diabetic and nondiabetic subjects with MS) about NOx. Few
information were obtained examining the linear regression among carbonyl groups, 
age, BMI, waist circumference, blood pressure values and metabolic pattern of MS 
subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: In MS subject we observed an increase of protein oxidation not
influenced by diabetes mellitus. Several strategies may be employed to reduce
this parameter.

Copyright © 2013 Diabetes India. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23517795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. BMC Public Health. 2013 Mar 20;13:247. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-13-247.

Heavy episodic drinking and soccer practice among high school students in Brazil:
the contextual aspects of this relationship.

Bedendo A(1), Opaleye ES, Andrade AL, Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Psicobiologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo UNIFESP, Rua 
Botucatu, 862 1º andar Ed, Ciências Médicas, CEP 04023-062, São Paulo, Brasil.

BACKGROUND: Heavy episodic drinking (HED) (consumption of five or more drinks on 
the same occasion) among adolescents is related to several problems and partaking
in sport or physical activities has been suggested as an option to prevent or
reduce alcohol consumption among this population. The aim of this study was to
investigate the relationship between soccer practice and heavy episodic drinking 
among high school students from Brazil.
METHODS: Data were obtained from a cross-sectional study among a representative
sample of public and private high school students from all Brazilian state
capitals (N=19,132). Only students aged from 14 to 18 who reported having taken
part in soccer practice, other team sports or non-practicing sports in the last
month were included. Characteristics of sport practice (frequency and motivation)
and HED in the last month (type of drink; where and with whom they drank;
frequency of HED) were also considered. Regression models were controlled for
sociodemographic variables.
RESULTS: For all groups studied most of the students reported drinking beer, with
friends and at nightclubs or bars. Soccer practice was associated to HED when
compared to non-practicing sports and to other team sports. Compared to other
team sports, playing soccer for pleasure or profession, but not for keep fit or
health reasons, were more associated to HED. Frequency of soccer practice from 1 
to 5 days per month and 20 or more days per month, but not from 6 to 19 days per 
month, were also more associated to HED.
CONCLUSIONS: The relationship between soccer and HED appears to be particularly
stronger than in other team sports among adolescents in Brazil. Induced
sociability of team sports practice cannot be assumed as the main reason for HED 
among soccer players. Possibly these results reflect the importance of a strong
cultural association between soccer and beer in Brazil and these findings should 
be integrated to future prevention or intervention programs.

PMCID: PMC3610150
PMID: 23514566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Aug 15;22(16):2287-97. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0499. Epub 2013
Apr 23.

High aminopeptidase N/CD13 levels characterize human amniotic mesenchymal stem
cells and drive their increased adipogenic potential in obese women.

Iaffaldano L(1), Nardelli C, Raia M, Mariotti E, Ferrigno M, Quaglia F, Labruna
G, Capobianco V, Capone A, Maruotti GM, Pastore L, Di Noto R, Martinelli P,
Sacchetti L, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate S.C.a R.L., Naples, Italy.

Maternal obesity is associated to increased fetal risk of obesity and other
metabolic diseases. Human amniotic mesenchymal stem cells (hA-MSCs) have not been
characterized in obese women. The aim of this study was to isolate and compare
hA-MSC immunophenotypes from obese (Ob-) and normal weight control (Co-) women,
to identify alterations possibly predisposing the fetus to obesity. We enrolled
16 Ob- and 7 Co-women at delivery (mean/SEM prepregnancy body mass index:
40.3/1.8 and 22.4/1.0 kg/m2, respectively), and 32 not pregnant women. hA-MSCs
were phenotyped by flow cytometry; several maternal and newborn clinical and
biochemical parameters were also measured. The expression of membrane antigen
CD13 was higher on Ob-hA-MSCs than on Co-hA-MSCs (P = 0.005). Also, serum levels 
of CD13 at delivery were higher in Ob- versus Co-pregnant women and correlated
with CD13 antigen expression on Ob-hA-MSCs (r2 = 0.84, P < 0.0001). Adipogenesis 
induction experiments revealed that Ob-hA-MSCs had a higher adipogenic potential 
than Co-hA-MSCs as witnessed by higher peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma and aP2 mRNA levels (P = 0.05 and P = 0.05, respectively), at postinduction
day 14 associated with increased CD13 mRNA levels from baseline to day 4
postinduction (P < 0.05). Adipogenesis was similar in the two sets of hA-MSCs
after CD13 silencing, whereas it was increased in Co-hA-MSCs after CD13
overexpression. CD13 expression was high also in Ob-h-MSCs from umbilical cords
or visceral adipose tissue of not pregnant women. In conclusion, antigen CD13, by
influencing the adipogenic potential of hA-MSCs, could be an in utero risk factor
for obesity. Our data strengthen the hypothesis that high levels of serum and MSC
CD13 are obesity markers.

PMCID: PMC3730375
PMID: 23488598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 May 1;268(3):264-77. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2013.01.027. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Persistent fibrosis in the liver of choline-deficient and iron-supplemented
L-amino acid-defined diet-induced nonalcoholic steatohepatitis rat due to
continuing oxidative stress after choline supplementation.

Takeuchi-Yorimoto A(1), Noto T, Yamada A, Miyamae Y, Oishi Y, Matsumoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Safety Research Labs, Astellas Pharma Inc., Osaka 532-8514, Japan.
ayano.takeuchi@astellas.com

Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is characterized by combined pathology of
steatosis, lobular inflammation, fibrosis, and hepatocellular degeneration, with 
systemic symptoms of diabetes or hyperlipidemia, all in the absence of alcohol
abuse. Given the therapeutic importance and conflicting findings regarding the
potential for healing the histopathologic features of NASH in humans,
particularly fibrosis, we investigated the reversibility of NASH-related findings
in Wistar rats fed a choline-deficient and iron-supplemented l-amino acid-defined
(CDAA) diet for 12weeks, with a recovery period of 7weeks, during which the diets
were switched to a choline-sufficient and iron-supplemented l-amino acid-defined 
(CSAA) one. Analysis showed that steatosis and inflammation were significantly
resolved by the end of the recovery period, along with decreases in AST and ALT
activities within 4weeks. In contrast, fibrosis remained even after the recovery 
period, to an extent similar to that in continuously CDAA-fed animals. Real-time 
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, Western blot, and
immunohistochemical investigations revealed that expression of some factors
indicating oxidative stress (CYP2E1, 4-HNE, and iNOS) were elevated, whereas
catalase and SOD1 were decreased, and a hypoxic state and CD34-positive
neovascularization were evident even after the recovery period, although the
fibrogenesis pathway by activated a-SMA-positive hepatic stellate cells via TGF-ß
and TIMPs decreased to the CSAA group level. In conclusion, persistent fibrosis
was noted after the recovery period of 7weeks, possibly due to sustained hypoxia 
and oxidative stress supposedly caused by capillarization. Otherwise,
histopathological features of steatosis and inflammation, as well as serum AST
and ALT activities, were recovered.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23481610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Cancer. 2013;4(3):172-92. doi: 10.7150/jca.5834. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

Evidence-based Guidelines for Precision Risk Stratification-Based Screening
(PRSBS) for Colorectal Cancer: Lessons learned from the US Armed Forces:
Consensus and Future Directions.

Avital I(1), Langan RC, Summers TA, Steele SR, Waldman SA, Backman V, Yee J,
Nissan A, Young P, Womeldorph C, Mancusco P, Mueller R, Noto K, Grundfest W,
Bilchik AJ, Protic M, Daumer M, Eberhardt J, Man YG, Brücher BL, Stojadinovic A.

Author information: 
(1)1. Bon Secours Cancer Institute, Richmond VA ; 2. Department of Surgery,
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD ; 3. United
States Military Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD ; 4. INCORE, International
Consortium of Research Excellence of the Theodor-Billroth-Academy, Munich,
Germany.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cause of cancer-related death in
the United States (U.S.), with estimates of 143,460 new cases and 51,690 deaths
for the year 2012. Numerous organizations have published guidelines for CRC
screening; however, these numerical estimates of incidence and disease-specific
mortality have remained stable from years prior. Technological, genetic
profiling, molecular and surgical advances in our modern era should allow us to
improve risk stratification of patients with CRC and identify those who may
benefit from preventive measures, early aggressive treatment, alternative
treatment strategies, and/or frequent surveillance for the early detection of
disease recurrence. To better negotiate future economic constraints and enhance
patient outcomes, ultimately, we propose to apply the principals of personalized 
and precise cancer care to risk-stratify patients for CRC screening (Precision
Risk Stratification-Based Screening, PRSBS). We believe that genetic, molecular, 
ethnic and socioeconomic disparities impact oncological outcomes in general,
those related to CRC, in particular. This document highlights evidence-based
screening recommendations and risk stratification methods in response to our CRC 
working group private-public consensus meeting held in March 2012. Our aim was to
address how we could improve CRC risk stratification-based screening, and to
provide a vision for the future to achieving superior survival rates for patients
diagnosed with CRC.

PMCID: PMC3584831
PMID: 23459409  [PubMed]


375. J Immigr Minor Health. 2014 Feb;16(1):68-76. doi: 10.1007/s10903-013-9797-5.

Acculturation factors and metabolic syndrome among Japanese-Brazilian men in
Japan: a cross-sectional descriptive study.

Tashiro M(1), Yasuoka J, Poudel KC, Noto H, Masuo M, Jimba M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community and Global Health, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan,
m-tashiro@baika.ac.jp.

This study examines the acculturation effects on metabolic syndrome (MetS), and
its related factors, among immigrant Japanese-Brazilian men in Japan.
Quantitative and qualitative approaches were utilized. In the quantitative study 
(n = 149), multiple logistic regression analyses estimated the impact of length
of residence and arrival age on MetS. For the qualitative study, five focus group
discussions were conducted with participants (n = 26) from the quantitative study
sample. The oldest arrival age group was more likely to have MetS (OR, 95% CI
4.41, 1.09-17.78) after adjusting for covariates; whereas, length of residence
had no association with MetS. The oldest arrival age group, with shorter
residence period, was also associated with increased MetS prevalence. Qualitative
results identified participants' Brazilian dietary habits as being potential risk
factors for MetS. Japanese-Brazilian immigrant men with older arrival age in
Japan were more likely to suffer from MetS, especially shortly after arrival.

PMID: 23430465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Minerva Anestesiol. 2013 Apr;79(4):349-59. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

Intensive care of patients requiring open abdomen treatment: a case-series
analysis.

Spanu P(1), Zanforlin G, Noto A, Pezzi A, Marzorati S, Reali-Forster C, Di Mauro 
P, Bassi G, Oldani S, Destrebecq A, Iapichino G.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Anestesia e Rianimazione Polo Universitario San Paolo, Milano,
Italy.

Comment in
    Minerva Anestesiol. 2013 Apr;79(4):339-41.

BACKGROUND: This retrospective overview examines the management of patients with 
temporary open abdomen (OA).
METHODS: The clinical characteristics and intensive care treatment of 34
consecutive patients with OA (1996-2012) were reviewed.
RESULTS: Average age was 61 years, SAPS II score 43, SOFA 8. Two patients had
non-contaminated abdomen; 12 had intact gut (only 8 later during stay); 7
repaired gut (only later 4); 13 cutaneous stoma (later 14), and 2
entero-atmospheric fistula (later 8+1 entero-enteral). The median ICU stay was 48
[36-94] days. One quarter of the 2376 ICU-days were classified as severe
sepsis/septic shock (antibiotics were given for two thirds of the stay); three
quarters were with ventilation; in 95% of days sedatives were given (mainly
enterally). Continuous cavity lavage was done in three quarters of days; in 3% of
days patients were fasted whereas >20 kcal/kg was given for 74% of days; we fed
the gut in 95% of fed-days, in half of them combined with parenteral nutrition.
Complications are discussed; mortality was 32.4%, limited to the ICU stay.
CONCLUSION: The intensive care of patients with OA is challenging but can achieve
better outcomes than expected. Continuous abdominal lavage improves the
evacuation of contaminated fluid or debris and, coupled with antiseptics and low 
antibiotic pressure, reinforces the control of infection. The gut can be used for
nutrition (even without gastrointestinal continuity), and long-term light
sedation (mainly enteral) with minimal impact on perfusion, ventilation and gut
motility.

PMID: 23419332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Crit Care. 2013 Feb 12;17(1):R29. doi: 10.1186/cc12510.

Additive value of blood neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin to clinical
judgement in acute kidney injury diagnosis and mortality prediction in patients
hospitalized from the emergency department.

Di Somma S, Magrini L, De Berardinis B, Marino R, Ferri E, Moscatelli P,
Ballarino P, Carpinteri G, Noto P, Gliozzo B, Paladino L, Di Stasio E.

Comment in
    Crit Care. 2013;17(2):132.

INTRODUCTION: Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a common complication among
hospitalized patients. The aim of this study was to evaluate the utility of blood
neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) assessment as an aid in the
early risk evaluation for AKI development in admitted patients.
METHODS: This is a multicenter Italian prospective emergency department (ED)
cohort study in which we enrolled 665 patients admitted to hospital from the ED.
RESULTS: Blood NGAL and serum creatinine (sCr) were determined at ED presentation
(T0), and at: 6 (T6), 12 (T12), 24 (T24) and 72 (T72) hours after
hospitalization. A preliminary assessment of AKI by the treating ED physician
occurred in 218 out of 665 patients (33%), while RIFLE AKI by expert
nephrologists was confirmed in 49 out of 665 patients (7%). The ED physician's
initial judgement lacked sensitivity and specificity, overpredicting the
diagnosis of AKI in 27% of the cohort, while missing 20% of those with AKI as a
final diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrated that assessment of a patient's initial blood 
NGAL when admitted to hospital from the ED improved the initial clinical
diagnosis of AKI and predicted in-hospital mortality. Blood NGAL assessment
coupled with the ED physician's clinical judgment may prove useful in deciding
the appropriate strategies for patients at risk for the development of AKI.See
related commentary by Legrand et al., http://ccforum.com/content/17/2/132.

PMCID: PMC4056001
PMID: 23402494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Atherosclerosis. 2013 Apr;227(2):342-8. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2013.01.007. Epub 2013 Jan 19.

Spectrum of mutations and phenotypic expression in patients with autosomal
dominant hypercholesterolemia identified in Italy.

Bertolini S(1), Pisciotta L, Rabacchi C, Cefalù AB, Noto D, Fasano T, Signori A, 
Fresa R, Averna M, Calandra S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genova, Viale Benedetto XV, no.
6, I-16132 Genova, Italy. stefbert@unige.it

OBJECTIVE: To determine the spectrum of gene mutations and the genotype-phenotype
correlations in patients with Autosomal Dominant Hypercholesterolemia (ADH)
identified in Italy.
METHODS: The resequencing of LDLR, PCSK9 genes and a selected region of APOB gene
were conducted in 1018 index subjects clinically heterozygous ADH and in 52
patients clinically homozygous ADH. The analysis was also extended to 1008 family
members of mutation positive subjects.
RESULTS: Mutations were detected in 832 individuals: 97.4% with LDLR mutations,
2.2% with APOB mutations and 0.36% with PCSK9 mutations. Among the patients with 
homozygous ADH, 51 were carriers of LDLR mutations and one was an LDLR/PCSK9
double heterozygote. We identified 237 LDLR mutations (45 not previously
reported), 4 APOB and 3 PCSK9 mutations. The phenotypic characterization of 1769 
LDLR mutation carriers (ADH-1) revealed that in both sexes independent predictors
of the presence of tendon xanthomas were age, the quintiles of LDL cholesterol,
the presence of coronary heart disease (CHD) and of receptor negative mutations. 
Independent predictors of CHD were male gender, age, the presence of arterial
hypertension, smoking, tendon xanthomas, the scalar increase of LDL cholesterol
and the scalar decrease of HDL cholesterol. We identified 13 LDLR mutation
clusters, which allowed us to compare the phenotypic impact of different
mutations. The LDL cholesterol raising potential of these mutations was found to 
vary over a wide range.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the genetic and allelic heterogeneity of ADH and
underscores that the variability in phenotypic expression of ADH-1 is greatly
affected by the type of LDLR mutation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23375686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55030. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055030. Epub 2013 Jan 25.

Low-carbohydrate diets and all-cause mortality: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of observational studies.

Noto H(1), Goto A, Tsujimoto T, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine, Center Hospital, National
Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. noto-tky@umin.net

OBJECTIVE: Low-carbohydrate diets and their combination with high-protein diets
have been gaining widespread popularity to control weight. In addition to weight 
loss, they may have favorable short-term effects on the risk factors of
cardiovascular disease (CVD). Our objective was to elucidate their long-term
effects on mortality and CVD incidence.
DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE, EMBASE, ISI Web of Science, Cochrane Library, and
ClinicalTrials.gov for relevant articles published as of September 2012. Cohort
studies of at least one year's follow-up period were included.
REVIEW METHODS: Identified articles were systematically reviewed and those with
pertinent data were selected for meta-analysis. Pooled risk ratios (RRs) with 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) for all-cause mortality, CVD mortality and CVD
incidence were calculated using the random-effects model with inverse-variance
weighting.
RESULTS: We included 17 studies for a systematic review, followed by a
meta-analysis using pertinent data. Of the 272,216 people in 4 cohort studies
using the low-carbohydrate score, 15,981 (5.9%) cases of death from all-cause
were reported. The risk of all-cause mortality among those with high
low-carbohydrate score was significantly elevated: the pooled RR (95% CI) was
1.31 (1.07-1.59). A total of 3,214 (1.3%) cases of CVD death among 249,272
subjects in 3 cohort studies and 5,081 (2.3%) incident CVD cases among 220,691
people in different 4 cohort studies were reported. The risks of CVD mortality
and incidence were not statistically increased: the pooled RRs (95% CIs) were
1.10 (0.98-1.24) and 0.98 (0.78-1.24), respectively. Analyses using
low-carbohydrate/high-protein score yielded similar results.
CONCLUSION: Low-carbohydrate diets were associated with a significantly higher
risk of all-cause mortality and they were not significantly associated with a
risk of CVD mortality and incidence. However, this analysis is based on limited
observational studies and large-scale trials on the complex interactions between 
low-carbohydrate diets and long-term outcomes are needed.

PMCID: PMC3555979
PMID: 23372809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54344. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054344. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Helicobacter pylori promotes the expression of Krüppel-like factor 5, a mediator 
of carcinogenesis, in vitro and in vivo.

Noto JM(1), Khizanishvili T, Chaturvedi R, Piazuelo MB, Romero-Gallo J, Delgado
AG, Khurana SS, Sierra JC, Krishna US, Suarez G, Powell AE, Goldenring JR, Coffey
RJ, Yang VW, Correa P, Mills JC, Wilson KT, Peek RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.
jennifer.noto@vanderbilt.edu

Helicobacter pylori is the strongest known risk factor for the development of
gastric adenocarcinoma. H. pylori expresses a repertoire of virulence factors
that increase gastric cancer risk, including the cag pathogenicity island and the
vacuolating cytotoxin (VacA). One host element that promotes carcinogenesis
within the gastrointestinal tract is Krüppel-like factor 5 (KLF5), a
transcription factor that mediates key cellular functions. To define the role of 
KLF5 within the context of H. pylori-induced inflammation and injury, human
gastric epithelial cells were co-cultured with the wild-type cag(+) H. pylori
strain 60190. KLF5 expression was significantly upregulated following co-culture 
with H. pylori, but increased expression was independent of the cag island or
VacA. To translate these findings into an in vivo model, C57BL/6 mice were
challenged with the wild-type rodent-adapted cag(+) H. pylori strain PMSS1 or a
PMSS1 cagE(-) isogenic mutant. Similar to findings in vitro, KLF5 staining was
significantly enhanced in gastric epithelium of H. pylori-infected compared to
uninfected mice and this was independent of the cag island. Flow cytometry
revealed that the majority of KLF5(+) cells also stained positively for the stem 
cell marker, Lrig1, and KLF5(+)/Lrig1(+) cells were significantly increased in H.
pylori-infected versus uninfected tissue. To extend these results into the
natural niche of this pathogen, levels of KLF5 expression were assessed in human 
gastric biopsies isolated from patients with or without premalignant lesions.
Levels of KLF5 expression increased in parallel with advancing stages of
neoplastic progression, being significantly elevated in gastritis, intestinal
metaplasia, and dysplasia compared to normal gastric tissue. These results
indicate that H. pylori induces expression of KLF5 in gastric epithelial cells in
vitro and in vivo, and that the degree of KLF5 expression parallels the severity 
of premalignant lesions in human gastric carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3553174
PMID: 23372710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Psychiatr Res. 2013 Apr;47(4):467-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2012.12.010.
Epub 2013 Jan 26.

Circulating levels of sTNFR1 as a marker of severe clinical course in
schizophrenia.

Noto C(1), Gadelha A, Belangero SI, Spindola LM, Rocha NP, de Miranda AS,
Teixeira AL, Cardoso Smith MA, de Jesus Mari J, Bressan RA, Brietzke E.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Schizophrenia (PROESQ), Department of Psychiatry, Universidade
Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. csnoto@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia (SZ) has been associated with an imbalance in the
inflammatory cytokine TNF-a. The objectives of this study were to compare TNF-a
and its soluble receptors' serum levels in individuals with SZ with the levels
found in a group of healthy volunteers and to investigate the possible
association between these biomarkers and the dimensions and severity of symptoms,
clinical outcomes and response to treatment in patients with SZ.
METHODS: Fifty-four chronically medicated SZ outpatients and 118 healthy controls
were included in the study. TNF-a levels were measured by Cytometric Bead Assay
(CBA), and serum levels of soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (sTNFR1) and 
soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (sTNFR2) were measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: sTNFR1 and sTNFR2 were significantly elevated in patients with SZ as
compared to the healthy control group. In the group of individuals with SZ, the
levels of both types of soluble TNF receptors showed a negative correlation with 
global functioning. sTNFR1 levels were higher in the treatment-resistant patients
as compared to the non-treatment-resistant patients and the controls. sTNFR1
levels were also heightened in patients with SZ and concomitant depression.
CONCLUSION: Our findings reinforce that SZ is associated with an inflammatory
profile and suggest that sTNFR1 is a marker of a treatment-resistance and severe 
clinical course in SZ.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23360651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Apr;57(4):1701-8. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00934-12.
Epub 2013 Jan 28.

Chimeric beta-defensin analogs, including the novel 3NI analog, display
salt-resistant antimicrobial activity and lack toxicity in human epithelial cell 
lines.

Scudiero O(1), Galdiero S, Nigro E, Del Vecchio L, Di Noto R, Cantisani M,
Colavita I, Galdiero M, Cassiman JJ, Daniele A, Pedone C, Salvatore F.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate Scarl, Naples, Italy.

Human beta-defensins (hBDs) are crucial peptides for the innate immune response
and are thus prime candidates as therapeutic agents directed against infective
diseases. Based on the properties of wild-type hBD1 and hBD3 and of previously
synthesized analogs (1C, 3I, and 3N), we have designed a new analog, 3NI, and
investigated its potential as an antimicrobial drug. Specifically, we evaluated
the antimicrobial activities of 3NI versus those of hBD1, hBD3, 1C, 3I, and 3N.
Our results show that 3NI exerted greater antibacterial activity against
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, and Enterococcus faecalis than did hBD1
and hBD3, even with elevated salt concentrations. Moreover, its antiviral
activity against herpes simplex virus 1 was greater than that of hBD1 and similar
to that of hBD3. Subsequently, we investigated the cytotoxic effects of all
peptides in three human epithelial carcinoma cell lines: A549 from lung, CaCo-2
from colon, and Capan-1 from pancreas. None of the analogs significantly reduced 
cell viability versus wild-type hBD1 and hBD3. They did not induce genotoxicity
or cause an increase in the number of apoptotic cells. Using confocal microscopy,
we also investigated the localization of the peptides during their incubation
with epithelial cells and found that they were distributed on the cell surface,
from which they were internalized. Finally, we show that hBD1 and hBD3 are
characterized by high resistance to serum degradation. In conclusion, the new
analog 3NI seems to be a promising anti-infective agent, particularly given its
high salt resistance--a feature that is relevant in diseases such as cystic
fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC3623310
PMID: 23357761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Urol. 2013 Aug;190(2):799-806. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2013.01.017. Epub 2013 Jan
12.

Avanafil, a highly selective phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor for erectile
dysfunction, shows good safety profiles for retinal function and hemodynamics in 
anesthetized dogs.

Mochida H(1), Yano K, Inoue H, Yee S, Noto T, Kikkawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Research Laboratories II, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corp.,
Saitama, Japan.

PURPOSE: We evaluated the effects of the highly selective phosphodiesterase type 
5 inhibitor avanafil on electroretinogram and hemodynamics in dogs, and compared 
the effects with those of sildenafil.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Three experiments were performed in anesthetized dogs,
including determination of the 1) influence on electroretinogram induced by a
light adapted 30 Hz flicker stimulation, 2) direct hemodynamic changes and 3)
potentiation of nitroglycerin induced hypotension. Avanafil was administered at
doses that were pharmacologically equipotent to or higher than those of
sildenafil for penile tumescence.
RESULTS: 1) Intraduodenal doses of avanafil did not influence the
electroretinogram waveform. In contrast, sildenafil changed the waveform shape
and significantly delayed time to the peak of the electroretinogram positive
waveform (vs vehicle p <0.05). 2) Intravenous infusion of avanafil or sildenafil 
(1 to 300 µg/kg per minute) significantly decreased systemic blood pressure,
total peripheral resistance and pulmonary arterial pressure (vs vehicle p <0.05).
Administration of sildenafil but not avanafil significantly decreased the
resistance of common carotid and vertebral arteries (vs vehicle p <0.05). 3)
Intraduodenal doses of avanafil or sildenafil (0.1 and 1 mg/kg) potentiated the
AUC of nitroglycerin induced hypotension. However, the potentiating effect of
avanafil at 1 mg/kg was significantly weaker than that of sildenafil (p <0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Data suggest that avanafil has a favorable safety profile for
erectile dysfunction, which is attributable to its high inhibitory selectivity
for phosphodiesterase type 5 against type 6 (retina) and 1 (vessels, etc),
respectively, and its short acting pharmacodynamic property.

Copyright © 2013 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23321580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2013 Jan;40(1):67-9.

[Our experience with panitumumab used for patients with metastatic colorectal
cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Ishii K(1), Kanou S, Takei R, Haba Y, Ohbatake Y, Noto M, Takeda T, Tani T, Yagi 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery, Public Central Hospital of Matto Ishikawa, Japan.

We report having treated patients with metastatic colorectal cancer with
panitumumab in our department. Ten patients were treated. The mean age was 65. 7 
years-old with 7 males and 3 females. Seven patients were treated with only
panitumumab, and three patients were treated with panitumumab and another drug.
The median number of infusions was 8 times. In the 9 cases that could be
evaluated, the disease control rate was 66. 6%. Skin toxicity was observed in all
patients. A low serum magnesium value of grade 3 was observed in one patient. We 
consider that treatment with panitumumab for patients with metastatic colorectal 
cancer was a safe option.

PMID: 23306920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2013 Jan 9;12:10. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-12-10.

Metabolic predictors of ischemic heart disease and cerebrovascular attack in
elderly diabetic individuals: difference in risk by age.

Hayashi T(1), Araki A, Kawashima S, Sone H, Watanabe H, Ohrui T, Yokote K,
Takemoto M, Kubota K, Noda M, Noto H, Ina K, Nomura H; Japan CDM group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 65
Tsuruma-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Japan. hayashi@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: High LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C) and glucose levels are risk factors for 
ischemic heart disease (IHD) in middle-aged diabetic individuals; however, the
risk among the elderly, especially the very elderly, is not well known. The aim
of this study was to identify factors that predict IHD and cerebrovascular attack
(CVA) in the elderly and to investigate their differences by age.
METHODS: We performed a prospective cohort study (Japan Cholesterol and Diabetes 
Mellitus Study) with 5.5<U+2009>years of follow-up. A total of 4,014 patients with type 
2 diabetes and without previous IHD or CVA (1,936 women; age 67.4<U+2009>±<U+2009>9.5<U+2009>years,
median 70<U+2009>years; <65<U+2009>years old, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1,261; 65 to 74<U+2009>years old, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1,731;
and<U+2009>=<U+2009>75<U+2009>years old, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1,016) were recruited on a consecutive outpatient basis
from 40 hospitals throughout Japan. Lipids, glucose, and other factors related to
IHD or CVA risk, such as blood pressure (BP), were investigated using the
multivariate Cox hazard model.
RESULTS: One hundred fifty-three cases of IHD and 104 CVAs (7.8 and 5.7/1,000
people per year, respectively) occurred over 5.5<U+2009>years. Lower HDL-cholesterol
(HDL-C) and female gender were correlated with IHD in patients =75<U+2009>years old
(hazard ratio (HR):0.629, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01 and 1.132, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05, respectively). In
contrast, systolic BP (SBP), HbA1C, LDL-C and non-HDL-C were correlated with IHD 
in subjects <65<U+2009>years old (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), and the LDL-C/HDL-C ratio was correlated
with IHD in all subjects. HDL-C was correlated with CVA in patients =75<U+2009>years old
(HR: 0.536, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). Kaplan-Meier estimator curves showed that IHD occurred
more frequently in patients <65<U+2009>years old in the highest quartile of the
LDL-C/HDL-C ratio. In patients =75<U+2009>years old, IHD and CVA were both the most
frequent among those with the lowest HDL-C levels.
CONCLUSIONS: IHD and CVA in late elderly diabetic patients were predicted by
HDL-C. LDL-C, HbA1C, SBP and non-HDL-C are risk factors for IHD in the
non-elderly. The LDL-C/HDL-C ratio may represent the effects of both LDL-C and
HDL-C. These age-dependent differences in risk are important for developing
individualized strategies to prevent atherosclerotic disease.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: UMIN-CTR, UMIN00000516.

PMCID: PMC3598716
PMID: 23302697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Leuk Res. 2013 Mar;37(3):231-7. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2012.11.016. Epub 2013 Jan
1.

Diagnostic strategies to investigate cerebrospinal fluid involvement in
haematological malignancies.

Galati D(1), Di Noto R, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento Ematologico, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, IRCCS "Fondazione
Pascale", Naples, Italy.

Central nervous system (CNS) involvement is a fatal complication of certain
haematological malignancies with an incidence as high as 25% in specific
leukaemia/lymphoma subtypes. It is often accompanied by 'occult' cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) involvement at diagnosis, which is frequently missed by conventional 
cytology examination. Unfortunately, a diagnostic gold standard is yet
unavailable since CSF morphology may be negative for malignant cells in up to 45%
of patients with suspected meningeal involvement. New technologies such as flow
cytometry, molecular genetics and newer biomarkers may improve sensitivity and
specificity facilitating the diagnosis of CNS involvement as well as effective
prophylaxis and successful treatment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23287431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2013 Jul 1;131(1-2):92-9. doi:
10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2012.12.001. Epub 2012 Dec 29.

Social rank and inhalant drug use: the case of lança perfume use in São Paulo,
Brazil.

Sanchez ZM(1), Noto AR, Anthony JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, Rua
Borges Lagoa 1341, Sao Paulo, Brazil. zila.sanchez@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Lanca perfume (chloroform/ether) is an inhalant used mainly by higher
social class students in Brazil. In light of the social and epidemiological
features of lanca use, supply, and distribution, this investigation tests
hypotheses about the degree to which use of inhalant lanca might be occurring in 
clusters, consistent with social sharing and diffusion, and might show a direct
association with social rank even within the relatively privileged social context
of private schools in a large mega-city of Latin America.
METHODS: Epidemiologic self-report survey data were from a large representative
sample of urban post-primary private school students in São Paulo city, Brazil,
in 2008. Newly incident lanca use was studied, first with estimates of clustering
from the alternating logistic regressions (ALR) and then with conditional
logistic regressions to probe into the hypothesized direct social rank
association.
RESULTS: ALR disclosed a clustering of newly incident lanca users within private 
school classrooms (pairwise odds ratio (PWOR)=2.1; 95% CI=1.3, 3.3; p=0.002) as
well as clusters of recently active lanca use (PWOR=1.9; 95% CI=1.1, 3.3;
p=0.02). Occurrence of lanca use within private school classrooms was directly
associated with social rank (odds ratio (OR)=0.2; 95% CI=0.1, 0.8; p=0.03 in the 
contrast of lowest socio-economic status (SES) versus highest SES strata within
classrooms). Thereafter, study of other drugs disclosed similar patterns.
CONCLUSIONS: The clustering estimates are consistent with concepts of
person-to-person sharing of lanca within private school classrooms as well as
other dynamic processes that might promote lanca clusters in this context. An
observed direct association with social rank is not specific to lanca use. Direct
SES estimates across a broad profile of drug compounds suggests causal processes 
over and above the more specific initially hypothesized social rank gradients in 
the lanca diffusion process. A novel facet of the evidence is greater occurrence 
of drug use among the higher social rank private school students, which should be
of interest in the social science community.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23279923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Vaccines (Basel). 2013 Oct 28;1(4):481-96. doi: 10.3390/vaccines1040481.

Developing Combined HIV Vaccine Strategies for a Functional Cure.

Noto A(1), Trautmann L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute of Florida, Port Saint Lucie, Florida, FL
34987, USA. (2)Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute of Florida, Port Saint Lucie,
Florida, FL 34987, USA. ltrautmann@vgtifl.org.

Increasing numbers of HIV-infected individuals have access to potent
antiretroviral drugs that control viral replication and decrease the risk of
transmission. However, there is no cure for HIV and new strategies have to be
developed to reach an eradication of the virus or a natural control of viral
replication in the absence of drugs (functional cure). Therapeutic vaccines
against HIV have been evaluated in many trials over the last 20 years and
important knowledge has been gained from these trials. However, the major
obstacle to HIV eradication is the persistence of latent proviral reservoirs.
Different molecules are currently tested in ART-treated subjects to reactivate
these latent reservoirs. Such anti-latency agents should be combined with a
vaccination regimen in order to control or eradicate reactivated
latently-infected cells. New in vitro assays should also be developed to assess
the success of tested therapeutic vaccines by measuring the immune-mediated
killing of replication-competent HIV reservoir cells. This review provides an
overview of the current strategies to combine HIV vaccines with anti-latency
agents that could act as adjuvant on the vaccine-induced immune response as well 
as new tools to assess the efficacy of these approaches.

PMCID: PMC4494210
PMID: 26344343  [PubMed]


389. Trends Psychiatry Psychother. 2013;35(1):62-75.

Translation and adaptation of the Bipolar Prodrome Symptom Scale-Retrospective:
Patient Version to Brazilian portuguese.

Pan PM(1), Jesus DR(2), Gadelha A(1), Bressan RA(1), Correll CU(3), Mansur RB(1),
Zugman A(1), Noto C(1), Asevedo Ede M(1), Brietzke E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program for Recognition and Intervention in Individuals in At-Risk Mental
States, Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo,
SP, Brazil. (2)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)North Shore - Long Island Jewish Health System, The 
Zucker Hillside Hospital, Glen Oaks, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Bipolar disorder (BD) is a chronic and often severe mental disease,
associated with a significant burden in affected individuals. The
characterization of a premorbid (prodromal) period and possible development of
preventive interventions are recent advances in this field. Attempts to
characterize high-risk stages in BD, identifying symptoms prior to the emergence 
of a first manic/hypomanic episode, have been limited by a lack of standardized
criteria and instruments for assessment. The Bipolar Prodrome Symptom
Scale-Retrospective (BPSS-R), developed by Correll and collaborators,
retrospectively evaluates symptoms that occur prior to a first full mood episode 
in individuals with BD.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the translation and adaptation process of the BPSS-R to
Brazilian Portuguese.
METHOD: Translation was conducted as follows: 1) translation of the scale from
English to Brazilian Portuguese by authors who have Portuguese as their first
language; 2) merging of the two versions by a committee of specialists; 3)
back-translation to English by a translator who is an English native speaker; 4) 
correction of the new version in English by the author of the original scale; 5) 
finalization of the new version in Brazilian Portuguese.
RESULTS: All the steps of the translation process were successfully accomplished,
resulting in a final version of the instrument.
CONCLUSIONS: The Brazilian Portuguese version of the BPSS-R is a potentially
useful instrument to investigate prodromal period of BD in Brazil.

PMID: 25923187  [PubMed]


390. Version 2. F1000Res. 2013 Jan 23 [revised 2013 Jun 6];2:20. doi:
10.12688/f1000research.2-20.v2. eCollection 2013.

A flexible user-interface for audiovisual presentation and interactive control in
neurobehavioral experiments.

Noto CT(1), Mahzar S(2), Gnadt J(3), Kanwal JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Georgetown University, Washington DC, 20057, USA ;
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Georgetown University, Washington DC,
20057, USA. (2)Department of Neurology, Georgetown University, Washington DC,
20057, USA ; Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Georgetown University,
Washington DC, 20057, USA ; Current address: Faculty of Computer Science and
Engineering, GIK Institute, Topi, 23640, Pakistan. (3)Department of Physiology
and Biophysics, Georgetown University, Washington DC, 20057, USA ; Current
address: NINDS/NIH, Systems and Cognitive Neuroscience, Neuroscience Center,
Bethesda MD, 20892, USA.

A major problem facing behavioral neuroscientists is a lack of unified,
vendor-distributed data acquisition systems that allow stimulus presentation and 
behavioral monitoring while recording neural activity. Numerous systems perform
one of these tasks well independently, but to our knowledge, a useful package
with a straightforward user interface does not exist. Here we describe the
development of a flexible, script-based user interface that enables customization
for real-time stimulus presentation, behavioral monitoring and data acquisition. 
The experimental design can also incorporate neural microstimulation paradigms.
We used this interface to deliver multimodal, auditory and visual (images or
video) stimuli to a nonhuman primate and acquire single-unit data. Our design is 
cost-effective and works well with commercially available hardware and software. 
Our design incorporates a script, providing high-level control of data
acquisition via a sequencer running on a digital signal processor to enable
behaviorally triggered control of the presentation of visual and auditory
stimuli. Our experiments were conducted in combination with eye-tracking
hardware. The script, however, is designed to be broadly useful to
neuroscientists who may want to deliver stimuli of different modalities using any
animal model.

PMCID: PMC3907162
PMID: 24627768  [PubMed]


391. Science. 2012 Dec 21;338(6114):1569-75. doi: 10.1126/science.1230816.

A new boson with a mass of 125 GeV observed with the CMS experiment at the Large 
Hadron Collider.

CMS Collaboration.

Collaborators: Abbaneo D, Abbiendi G, Abbrescia M, Abdullin S, Abdulsalam A,
Acharya BS, Acosta D, Acosta JG, Adair A, Adam W, Adam N, Adamczyk D, Adams T,
Adams MR, Adiguzel A, Adler V, Adolphi R, Adzic P, Afanasiev S, Agostino L, Agram
JL, Aguilar-Benitez M, Aguilo E, Ahmad M, Ahmad MK, Ahuja S, Akchurin N, Akgun U,
Akgun B, Akin IV, Alagoz E, Albajar C, Albayrak EA, Albergo S, Albert M, Albrow
M, Alcaraz Maestre J, Aldá Júnior WL, Aldaya Martin M, Alemany-Fernandez R,
Alexander J, Aliev T, Alimena J, Allfrey P, Almeida N, Alverson G, Alves GA, Aly 
A, Amaglobeli N, Amapane N, Ambroglini F, Amsler C, Anagnostou G, Anastassov A,
Andelin D, Anderson J, Anderson M, Andrea J, Andreev Y, Andreev V, Andreev V,
Andrews W, Anfreville M, Angelini F, Anghel IM, Anisimov A, Anjos TS, Ansari MH, 
Antonelli L, Anttila E, Antunovic Z, Apanasevich L, Apollinari G, Appelt E,
Apresyan A, Apyan A, Arce P, Arcidiacono R, Ardalan F, Arenton MW, Arezzini S,
Arfaei H, Argiro S, Arisaka K, Arndt K, Arneodo M, Arora S, Asavapibhop B,
Asawatangtrakuldee C, Asghar MI, Askew A, Aspell P, Assran Y, Ata M, Atac M,
Attebury G, Attikis A, Auffray E, Autermann C, Auzinger G, Avdeeva E, Avery P,
Avetisyan A, Avila C, Awad A, Ayan AS, Azarkin M, Azhgirey I, Aziz T, Azzi P,
Azzolini V, Azzurri P, Baarmand MM, Babb J, Baccaro S, Bacchetta N, Bachtis M,
Baden A, Badgett W, Badier J, Baechler J, Baffioni S, Bagaturia I, Bagliesi G,
Bai Y, Bailleux D, Baillon P, Bainbridge R, Bakhshiansohi H, Bakirci MN, Bakken
JA, Balazs M, Baldin B, Ball AH, Ball G, Ballin J, Ban Y, Banerjee S, Banerjee S,
Bäni L, Banicz K, Bansal M, Bansal S, Banzuzi K, Barashko V, Barbagli G, Barberis
E, Barbone L, Barczyk A, Bard R, Barfuss AF, Bargassa P, Barge D, Baringer P,
Barker A, Barnes VE, Barnett BA, Barney D, Barone L, Barrass T, Bartalini P,
Barth C, Bartoloni A, Basegmez S, Basso L, Basti A, Bateman E, Battilana C, Bauer
J, Bauer D, Bauer G, Bauerdick LA, Baulieu G, Baumbaugh B, Baumgartel D, Baur U, 
Bayshev I, Bazterra VE, Bean A, Beauceron S, Beaudette F, Beaumont W, Beaupere N,
Becheva E, Bedjidian M, Beernaert K, Behner F, Behr J, Behrenhoff W, Behrens U,
Belforte S, Beliy N, Belknap D, Bell AJ, Bell KW, Bellan R, Bellato M, Bellazzini
R, Bellinger JN, Belotelov I, Belyaev A, Belyaev A, Benaglia A, Bencze G,
Bendavid J, Benedetti D, Benelli G, Benettoni M, Benhabib L, Beni N, Benitez JF, 
Benussi L, Benvenuti AC, Beranek S, Beretvas A, Bergauer T, Berger J, Bergholz M,
Beri SB, Bernardes CA, Bernardini J, Bernardino Rodrigues N, Bernet C, Berry D,
Berry E, Berryhill J, Bertl W, Bertoldi M, Berzano U, Besancon M, Besson A,
Betchart B, Betev B, Bethani A, Betts RR, Beuselinck R, Bhandari V, Bhardwaj A,
Bhat PC, Bhatnagar V, Bhattacharya S, Bhattacharya S, Bhatti A, Bheesette S,
Bialas W, Bialkowska H, Biallass P, Bian JG, Bianchi G, Bianchini L, Bianco S,
Biasini M, Biasotto M, Biino C, Bilei GM, Bilin B, Bilki B, Binkley M, Bisello D,
Bitioukov S, Blau B, Blekman F, Blobel V, Bloch D, Bloch P, Bloom K, Bluj M, Blüm
P, Blumenfeld B, Blyweert S, Boccali T, Bocci A, Bochenek J, Bockelman B, Bodek
A, Bodin D, Boimska B, Bolla G, Bolognesi S, Bolton T, Bonacorsi D, Bonato A,
Bondu O, Bonnett Del Alamo M, Bontenackels M, Boos E, Borcherding F, Bornheim A, 
Borras K, Borrello L, Bortignon P, Bortoletto D, Bose T, Bose S, Böser C, Bosi F,
Bostock F, Botta C, Boudoul G, Bouhali O, Boulahouache C, Bourilkov D, Boutemeur 
M, Boutigny D, Boutle S, Bradley D, Braibant-Giacomelli S, Branca A, Branson A,
Branson JG, Brauer R, Braunschweig W, Breedon R, Breto G, Breuker H, Brew C, Brez
A, Brigliadori L, Brigljevic V, Brinkerhoff A, Brito L, Broccolo G, Brochero
Cifuentes JA, Brochet S, Brom JM, Brona G, Brooke JJ, Broutin C, Brown RM,
Brownson E, Brun H, Bruno G, Buchmann MA, Buchmuller O, Bucinskaite I, Budd H,
Buege V, Bujak A, Bunichev V, Bunin P, Bunkowski K, Bunn J, Buontempo S,
Burgmeier A, Burkett K, Busson P, Busza W, Butler AP, Butler PH, Butler JN, Butt 
J, Butz E, Bylsma B, Cabrillo IJ, Caebergs T, Cai J, Cakir A, Calabria C, Calamba
A, Calderon A, Calderon De La Barca Sanchez M, Cali IA, Calligaris L, Callner J, 
Calpas B, Calvert B, Calvo E, Calzolari F, Camanzi B, Campagnari C, Campbell A,
Campi D, Camporesi T, Candelise V, Cankocak K, Cano E, Capiluppi P, Cappello G,
Carbone L, Carboni A, Cardaci M, Carlin R, Carlsmith D, Carrera Jarrin E,
Carrillo Montoya CA, Carrillo Moreno S, Carroll R, Cartiglia N, Carvalho W, Casal
B, Casarsa M, Case M, Casimiro Linares E, Castaldi R, Castello R, Castilla-Valdez
H, Castro E, Castro A, Caudron J, Cavallari F, Cavallo FR, Cavallo N, Cavanaugh
R, Ceard L, Cepeda M, Cerati GB, Cerci S, Cerizza G, Cerminara G, Cerrada M,
Cerri C, Cerutti M, Chabert EC, Chadwick M, Chakaberia I, Chamizo Llatas M,
Chamont D, Chan M, Chan KM, Chang S, Chang YH, Chang P, Chang YH, Chang YW,
Chanon N, Chao Y, Charaf O, Charkiewicz A, Charlot C, Chasco M, Chasserat J,
Chatrchyan S, Chatterjee A, Chatterji S, Chauhan S, Checchia P, Chekhovsky V,
Chen GM, Chen HS, Chen ZY, Chen Z, Chen KH, Chen WT, Chen KF, Chen Y, Chen M,
Chen J, Chendvankar S, Cheng T, Cherepanov V, Chertok M, Chetluru V, Cheung HW,
Chhibra SS, Chierici R, Chiladze B, Chiochia V, Chiorboli M, Chlebana F, Choi S, 
Choi M, Choi Y, Choi YK, Chou JP, Choudhary BC, Choudhury S, Choudhury RK,
Chowdhury S, Christiansen T, Chuang SH, Chung J, Chung MH, Chung YS, Chwalek T,
Ciampa A, Ciesielski R, Cihangir S, Cimmino A, Cinquilli M, Cittolin S, Ciulli V,
Civinini C, Claes DR, Clare R, Clarida W, Clement E, Clerbaux B, Cline D, Coarasa
Perez JA, Cockerill DJ, Codispoti G, Colafranceschi S, Colaleo A, Cole JE, Colino
N, Collard C, Colling D, Combaret C, Conetti S, Connolly JF, Contardo D, Conte E,
Contreras-Campana C, Contreras-Campana E, Conway J, Conway R, Cooper SI, Coppage 
D, Cornelis T, Correa Martins Junior M, Cossutti F, Costa S, Costa M, Costantini 
S, Costanza F, Coughlan JA, Cousins R, Covarelli R, Cox PT, Cox B, Creanza D,
Cremaldi LM, Cripps N, Crotty I, Cuevas J, Cuffiani M, Cumalat JP, Cuplov V, Curé
B, Cushman P, Cussans D, Custódio A, Cutajar M, Cutts D, Cwiok M, Czellar S,
Czyrkowski H, Da Costa EM, Da Silva Di Calafiori DR, Dabrowski R, Dabrowski A,
Daci N, Daeuwel D, Dafinei I, Dagenhart W, D'Agnolo RT, Daguin J, Dahmes B, Dahms
T, Dalchenko M, D'Alessandro R, D'Alfonso M, Dallavalle GM, Dambach S, Damgov J, 
Dammann D, D'Angelo P, Danielson T, Das S, Daskalakis G, Dasu S, Daubie E,
Dauncey P, Davatz G, David A, Davies G, de Barbaro P, De Benedetti A, De Boer W, 
De Cosa A, De Favereau De Jeneret J, De Filippis N, De Gruttola M, De Guio F, De 
Jesus Damiao D, De La Cruz B, De La Cruz-Burelo E, De Lentdecker G, De Mattia M, 
De Oliveira Martins C, De Palma M, De Robertis G, De Roeck A, de Trocóniz JF, De 
Visscher S, De Wolf EA, Debbins P, Deisher A, Deiters K, Dejardin M, Del Re D,
Delaere C, Delannoy AG, Delgado Peris A, Deliomeroglu M, Della Negra M, Della
Ricca G, Dell'orso R, Demaria N, Demin P, Demina R, Demiragli Z, Demiyanov A,
Demortier L, Denegri D, Denis G, Deniz M, D'Enterria D, Denton LG, Depasse P,
Dermenev A, Dero V, Derylo G, Descroix A, Deshpande PV, Devroede O, Dewulf JP,
Dharmaratna WG, Dhingra N, D'Hondt J, Di Giovanni GP, Di Guida S, Di Marco E, Di 
Matteo L, Diamond B, Dias FA, Diemoz M, Dierlamm A, Dietz C, Dietz-Laursonn E,
Diez Pardos C, Dimitrov L, Dimitrov A, Dinardo ME, Dini P, Dirkes G, Dissertori
G, Dittmann J, Dittmar M, Djambazov L, Djordjevic M, Dobrzynski L, Dobson M,
Dobur D, Doesburg R, Dogangun O, Dolen J, Dolinsky S, Dominguez A, Domínguez
Vázquez D, Dominik W, Donegà M, Donvito G, Dorigo T, Dorney B, Doroba K, Dosselli
U, Dozen C, Draeger J, Dragicevic M, Dragoiu C, Drell BR, Dremin I, Drouhin F,
Drozdetskiy A, Druzhkin D, du Pree T, Duarte J, Duarte Campderros J, Dubinin M,
Duchardt D, Dudero PR, Dudko L, Dugad S, Duggan D, Dumanoglu I, Dumitrescu C,
Dünser M, Dupont-Sagorin N, Duric S, Duris J, Durkin LS, Duru F, Dutta S, Dutta
D, Dutta V, Dykstra D, Eads M, Eartly DP, Eckerlin G, Ecklund KM, Eckstein D,
Edelhoff M, Eerola P, Egeland R, Eggel C, Eggert N, Ekmedzic M, El Mamouni H,
Elgammal S, Elias JE, Elliott-Peisert A, Ellison J, Ellithi Kamel A, Elmer P,
Elvira VD, Emeliantchik I, Enderle H, Engh D, Eno SC, Eppard M, Epshteyn V,
Erbacher R, Erdmann M, Erdmann W, Erdogan Y, Erfle J, Erhan S, Erö J, Erofeeva M,
Ershov Y, Ershov A, Eshaq Y, Eskut E, Etesami SM, Eugster J, Eulisse G, Eusebi R,
Evangelou I, Evans D, Evans D, Evdokimov O, Everaerts P, Everett A, Evstyukhin S,
Fabbri F, Fabbri F, Fabbricatore P, Fabbro B, Faber G, Fabjan C, Fabozzi F,
Faccioli P, Fagan D, Fahim A, Fahrer M, Fanelli C, Fanfani A, Fanò L, Fantasia C,
Fanzago F, Farina FM, Farinon S, Farrell C, Fasanella D, Faure JL, Favaro C,
Favart D, Fay J, Fedi G, Fedorov A, Fehling D, Feichtinger D, Feindt M, Felcini
M, Feld L, Felzmann U, Fenyvesi A, Ferapontov A, Ferbel T, Ferencek D, Ferguson
W, Ferguson T, Fernandez M, Fernandez Bedoya C, Fernandez Menendez J, Fernandez
Perez Tomei TR, Fernández Ramos JP, Ferrando A, Ferreira Parracho PG, Ferri F,
Ferro C, Feyzi F, Field RD, Finger M, Finger M, Fiore L, Fiorendi S, Fiori F,
Fischer R, Fisher M, Fisk I, Flacher H, Flanagan W, Flix J, Florez C, Flossdorf
A, Flower PS, Flowers K, Flucke G, Flügge G, Foà L, Focardi E, Folgueras S,
Fonseca De Souza S, Fontaine JC, Ford WT, Forthomme L, Foudas C, Foulkes S, Fouz 
MC, Francis B, Franzoni G, Frazier R, Freeman J, French MJ, Freudenreich K, Frey 
M, Friedl M, Friis E, Frisch B, Frosali S, Frueboes T, Frühwirth R, Fu Y, Fulcher
J, Funk W, Furgeri A, Furic IK, Futyan D, Gabathuler K, Gabella W, Gabusi M,
Gaddi A, Gaines I, Galanti M, Gallinaro M, Gallo E, Galvez P, Gamsizkan H,
Ganguli SN, Ganguly S, Ganjour S, Gao Z, Gao Y, Garabedian A, Garcia G,
Garcia-Abia P, Garcia-Bellido A, Garcia-Solis EJ, Gardner M, Gartner J, Gartung
P, Gary JW, Gascon S, Gasparini F, Gasparini U, Gastal M, Gataullin M, Gaultney
V, Gauthier L, Gavrilenko M, Gavrilov V, Gay AP, Gaz A, Gebauer I, Gebbert U,
Geenen H, Geerebaert Y, Geffert P, Geiser A, Geisler M, Gelé D, Genchev V, Gennai
S, Genta C, Gentit FX, Georgiou G, Geralis T, Gerbaudo D, Gerber CE, Gershtein Y,
Gerwig H, Gessler A, Geurts FJ, Ghete VM, Ghezzi A, Ghodgaonkar M, Giacchetti L, 
Giacomelli P, Giammanco A, Giassi A, Gibbons LK, Giffels M, Gigi D, Gilbert A,
Gill K, Gilmore J, Ginther G, Giordano D, Giordano F, Giraud N, Girgis S, Girone 
M, Giubilato P, Giunta M, Giurgiu G, Giusti S, Givernaud A, Glege F, Gleyzer SV, 
Glushkov I, Gninenko S, Go A, Gobbi B, Gobbo B, Godinovic N, Godshalk A, Goerlach
U, Goettlicher P, Goetzmann C, Goh J, Gokbulut G, Gokieli R, Goldenzweig P,
Goldstein J, Golf F, Gollapinni S, Golovtsov V, Golubev N, Golunov A, Golutvin I,
Gomber B, Gomez JP, Gomez G, Gomez JA, Gomez Ceballos G, Gomez Moreno B,
Gomez-Reino Garrido R, Goncharov M, Gonella F, Gonzalez Caballero I, Gonzalez
Lopez O, Gonzalez Sanchez J, Gonzalez Suarez R, Gonzi S, Goodell J, Goorens R,
Gorbounov N, Gorbunov I, Gorbunov D, Gorn L, Görner M, Gorski T, Górski M,
Goscilo L, Gotra Y, Gottschalk E, Goudard R, Goulianos K, Gouskos L, Gouzevitch
M, Govoni P, Gowdy S, Goy Lopez S, Gozzelino A, Grab C, Grachov O, Gramenitski I,
Grandi C, Granier de Cassagnac R, Gras P, Grassi T, Grassi M, Gray R, Gray L,
Graziano A, Grebenyuk A, Greco M, Green D, Greene S, Greenhalgh RJ, Grégoire G,
Gregores EM, Gribushin A, Grim G, Grimes M, Grishin V, Gritsan AV, Grogg KS,
Gronberg J, Gross L, Grothe M, Grundler U, Grunewald M, Gruschke J, Grynyov B,
Guchait M, Gude A, Guida R, Guiducci L, Guler AM, Gülmez E, Gulmini M, Guneratne 
Bryer A, Gunion J, Gunnellini P, Guo S, Guo Y, Guo Y, Guo ZJ, Gupta R, Gupta P,
Guragain S, Gurpinar E, Gurrola A, Gurtu A, Gutay L, Güth A, Guthoff M, Gutleber 
J, Gutsche O, Gyun D, Haas J, Habib S, Hackstein C, Hadjiiska R, Hadley NJ,
Hagopian S, Hagopian V, Haguenauer M, Hahn G, Hahn A, Hahn KA, Haj Ahmad W, Hajdu
C, Haley J, Halkiadakis E, Hall G, Hall-Wilton R, Halsall RN, Halyo V, Ham SW,
Hamel de Monchenault G, Hammad GH, Hammarstrom R, Hammer J, Han D, Han J, Hanlon 
J, Hansen M, Hanson G, Harder K, Harel A, Härkönen J, Haroutunian R, Harper S,
Harr R, Harris P, Harris RM, Hartl C, Hartmann F, Harvey J, Hashemi M, Hatakeyama
K, Hatherell Z, Hauk J, Hauler F, Haupt J, Hauser J, Hauth T, Hays J, Hazen E, He
KL, Heath GP, Heath HF, Hebbeker T, Hebda P, Heering AH, Hegeman J, Hegner B,
Heidemann C, Heier S, Heikkinen A, Heindl SM, Heinrich M, Heintz U, Heiss A,
Heister A, Hektor A, Held H, Hellwig G, Heltsley B, Henderson C, Hennion P,
Heracleous N, Heredia-de La Cruz I, Hermanns T, Hernandez JM, Herndon M, Hervé A,
Hewamanage S, Heyburn B, Hidas P, Hidas D, Hildreth M, Hilgers G, Hill JA, Hill
C, Hindrichs O, Hintz W, Hinzmann A, Hirosky R, Hirschauer J, Hits D, Hobson PR, 
Hoch M, Hoehle F, Hoepfner K, Hof C, Hofer H, Hoffmann KH, Hofman DJ, Hohlmann M,
Höing RS, Holbrook B, Hollar J, Hollingsworth M, Hollis R, Holme O, Holmes D,
Holzman B, Holzner A, Honc S, Hong B, Honma A, Hooberman B, Hooper R, Hoorani HR,
Horisberger R, Hörmann N, Horvath D, Horvath I, Hos I, Hou WS, Howell J, Hreus T,
Hrubec J, Hsiung Y, Hu G, Hu Z, Huang CH, Huang XT, Hufnagel D, Hughes R, Hugon
J, Hunt A, Husemann U, Huss D, Iaselli G, Iashvili I, Iaydjiev P, Ignatenko M,
Iiyama Y, Iles G, Ille B, Ilyin V, Imhof M, Incandela J, Ingram Q, Ingram FD,
Innocente V, Inyakin A, Iope RL, Iordanova A, Iorio AO, Isildak B, Ivanov Y,
Ivanov A, Ivova Rikova M, Jabeen S, Jackson J, Jafari A, Jain S, Jain Sh, Jain S,
Jang DW, Janot P, Janssen X, Janulis M, Jarry P, Jarvis M, Jarvis C, Jeitler M,
Jeng GY, Jenkins M, Jeong C, Jessop C, Jiang CH, Jindal P, Jindariani S, Jo M, Jo
Y, Johns W, Johnson D, Johnson M, Johnson KF, Jones J, Jones CD, Jones M, Jorda
C, Josa MI, Joshi U, Juillot P, Jun SY, Jung H, Jung C, Junghans S, Juodagalvis
A, Juska E, Jussen R, Justus C, Kaadze K, Kachanov V, Kadastik M, Kadija K,
Kaestli HC, Kaftanov V, Kailas S, Kalagin V, Kalakhety H, Kalavase P, Kalinin A, 
Kalinowski A, Kalmani SD, Kalogeropoulos A, Kamenev A, Kaminskiy A, Kamon T, Kang
J, Kang M, Kang S, Kangal EE, Kanishchev K, Kannike K, Kao KY, Kao SC, Karaman T,
Karancsi J, Karapinar G, Karapostoli G, Karavakis E, Karchin PE, Kargoll B,
Karimäki V, Karjalainen A, Karjavin V, Karmgard DJ, Karneyeu A, Karpinski W,
Kaschube K, Kasemann M, Kasprowicz G, Katajisto HM, Kataria SK, Katkov I, Katsas 
P, Kaur M, Kaussen G, Kavka C, Kaya M, Kaya O, Kayis Topaksu A, Kazana M, Kcira
D, Kellams N, Keller J, Kelley R, Kellogg RG, Kennedy BW, Kenny Iii RP, Kenzie M,
Kerzel U, Kesisoglou S, Khachatryan V, Khakzad M, Khalatyan S, Khalid S, Khalil
S, Khalil S, Khan WA, Khan A, Kharchilava A, Khotilovich V, Khukhunaishvili A,
Khurana R, Khurshid T, Kieffer E, Kiesenhofer W, Kilminster B, Kim TY, Kim DH,
Kim GN, Kim JE, Kim KS, Kim JY, Kim ZJ, Kim H, Kim TJ, Kim H, Kim JH, Kim MS, Kim
V, Kim B, Kim Y, Kinnunen R, Kirakosyan M, Kircher F, Kirn M, Kirsanov M,
Kirschenmann H, Kiselevich I, Klabbers P, Klanner R, Klapoetke K, Klein B, Klein 
K, Kleinwort C, Klima B, Klimkovich T, Klingebiel D, Kloukinas K, Kluge H, Klukas
J, Klute M, Klyukhin V, Knoblauch D, Knünz V, Knutsson A, Ko W, Koay SA, Kodolova
O, Kohli JM, Kokkas P, Kolb J, Kolberg T, Kolosov V, Komaragiri JR, Konecki M,
Kong DJ, König S, Konigsberg J, Konoplyanikov V, Konoplyannikov A, Konstantinov
D, Kopecky A, Korablev A, Korenkov V, Korjenevski S, Korotkikh V, Korpela A,
Kortelainen MJ, Korytov A, Korzhik M, Kossov M, Kotamäki M, Kotlinski D, Kotov K,
Kottachchi Kankanamge Don C, Kousouris K, Kovac M, Kovalskyi D, Kovitanggoon K,
Koybasi O, Kozhuharov V, Kozlov G, Kozlov Y, Kraan A, Kräber M, Krajczar K,
Krämer M, Krammer M, Krasnikov N, Krätschmer I, Kravchenko I, Kreczko L, Kreis B,
Kress T, Kress M, Kreuzer P, Krishnaswamy MR, Kroeger R, Krofcheck D, Krokhotin
A, Krolikowski J, Kropivnitskaya A, Krpic D, Krücker D, Krutelyov V, Krychkine V,
Kryukov A, Kubic J, Kubik A, Kubota Y, Kudla IM, Kuessel Y, Kuhr T, Kukartsev G, 
Kumar A, Kumar A, Kumar V, Kumar A, Kunde GJ, Kunori S, Kuo CM, Kurca T, Kurenkov
A, Kurt P, Kuznetsov V, Kuznetsova E, Kvatadze R, Kwan S, Kwon E, Kyberd P,
Kypreos T, Kyre S, Kyriakis A, Laasanen AT, Lacaprara S, Lacesso W, Lackey J,
Lacroix F, Lagana C, Laird E, Lakkireddi VR, Lamichhane P, Lampén T, Lanaro A,
Lander R, Landsberg G, Lanev A, Lange W, Lange J, Lange D, Langenegger U, Lannon 
K, Lariccia P, Larson K, Lassila-Perini K, Lath A, Latronico L, Lawson P, Layter 
JG, Lazaridis C, Lazic D, Lazo-Flores J, Lazzizzera I, Le Bihan AC, Leaver J,
Lebeau M, Lebolo LM, Lebourgeois M, Lecomte P, Lecoq P, Ledovskoy A, Lee MW, Lee 
KS, Lee B, Lee J, Lee S, Lee YJ, Lee J, Lee SJ, Lee SW, Leggat D, Legrand I,
Lehti S, Lei YJ, Lelas D, Lellouch J, Lemaire MC, Lemaitre V, Lenzi P, Leonard J,
Léonard A, Leonardo N, Leonidopoulos C, Leonidov A, Leslie D, Lethuillier M,
Letts J, Levchenko P, Levchuk L, Levin A, Levine A, Lewendel B, Li WG, Li W, Li
SW, Li W, Liamsuwan T, Liang D, Liang S, Liao J, Liau JJ, Libeiro T, Lietti SM,
Ligabue F, Liko D, Lin W, Lin SW, Lin FC, Lin C, Linacre J, Linari S, Lincoln D, 
Lindén T, Ling TY, Lingemann J, Linn S, Lintern AL, Lipton R, Lista L, Litomin A,
Litov L, Litvine V, Litvintsev D, Liu HT, Liu S, Liu MH, Liu ZK, Liu H, Liu H,
Liu YF, Liu C, Liu JH, Lloret Iglesias L, Lobelle Pardo P, Locci E, Loddo F,
Lodge AB, Lohmann W, Lokhtin I, Lomidze D, Lomtadze T, Long OR, Longo E, Loos R, 
Lopes Pegna D, Lopez A, Lopez Perez JA, Lopez Virto A, Lopez-Fernandez R, Loreti 
M, Los S, Loukas D, Lourenço C, Loveless R, Low JF, Lowette S, Lu YJ, Lu RS, Lu
Y, Lübelsmeyer K, Lucaroni A, Luckey PD, Luetic J, Luiggi Lopez E, Lujan P, Luk
M, Lukyanenko S, Lumb N, Lundstedt C, Lungu G, Luo W, Lusin S, Lusito L,
Lustermann W, Luthra A, Lutz B, Luukka P, Luyckx S, Lychkovskaya N, Lykken J,
Lynch S, Lyons L, Ma Y, Ma T, Macneill I, Macpherson A, Madorsky A, Mäenpää T,
Maes M, Maeshima K, Magaña Villalba R, Magass C, Magazzu G, Maggi M, Maggi G,
Magini N, Magnan AM, Magrans de Abril M, Maguire C, Mahmoud MA, Mahrous A, Maier 
W, Maity M, Majerotto W, Majumder D, Makankin A, Makarenko V, Mäki T, Makouski M,
Maksimovic P, Malakhov A, Malberti M, Malbouisson H, Malcles J, Malek M, Malgeri 
L, Malhotra S, Malik S, Malik S, Malvezzi S, Mandjavidze I, Mangano B, Mankel R, 
Manna N, Mannelli M, Manolakos I, Mans J, Manthos N, Mantovani G, Manzoni RA, Mao
Y, Marage PE, Marangelli B, Maravin Y, Marcellini S, Marchica C, Marchioro A,
Marco J, Marco R, Marfin I, Margoni M, Marienfeld M, Marinelli N, Marinho F,
Marini AC, Marinov A, Marionneau M, Mariotti C, Markina A, Markou A, Markou C,
Markowitz P, Marlow D, Maron G, Marone M, Maroussov V, Marques Pinho Noite J,
Marraffino JM, Marrouche J, Martelli A, Martin W, Martin T, Martinez G, Martinez 
Rivero C, Martinez Ruiz del Arbol P, Martínez-Ortega J, Martini L, Martins T,
Martschei D, Maruyama S, Maselli S, Masetti L, Masetti G, Mason D, Massa M,
Massai MM, Massironi A, Matchev K, Mathez H, Mathias B, Matorras F, Matos
Figueiredo D, Mattson M, Matveev V, Matveev M, Mavromanolakis G, Mavrommatis C,
Maxa Z, Mazumdar K, Mazzoni E, Mazzucato M, McBride P, McCartin J, McCauley T,
McClatchey R, McCliment E, McColl N, Medvedeva T, Mehta MZ, Mehta P, Meier B,
Meier F, Meijers F, Mekterovic D, Melnitchenko I, Melo A, Melzer-Pellmann IA,
Menasce D, Menchikov A, Mendez H, Meneghelli M, Meneguzzo AT, Meng X, Menichelli 
M, Meola S, Mercadante PG, Mercier D, Meridiani P, Merino G, Merkel P, Merlo JP, 
Mermerkaya H, Merola M, Merschmeyer M, Mersi S, Merz J, Meschi E, Meschini M,
Mesropian C, Messineo A, Mestvirishvili A, Mesyats G, Metson S, Meyer A, Meyer
AB, Miceli T, Micheli F, Migliore E, Mignerey AC, Mikulec I, Milenovic P,
Militaru O, Millan Mejias B, Miller DG, Miller MJ, Miller DH, Milleret G,
Milosevic J, Milstène C, Miné P, Miner DC, Mirabito L, Mirman N, Mironov C,
Mishra K, Missevitch O, Mitselmakher G, Mitsyn VV, Miyamoto J, Mnich J, Moccia S,
Moeller A, Moggi A, Mohammadi A, Mohammadi Najafabadi M, Mohanty AK, Mohanty GB, 
Mohapatra A, Mohr N, Moisenz P, Mol X, Molnar J, Mommsen RK, Monaco V, Mondal NK,
Moneta L, Montalvo R, Montanari A, Montanino D, Montecassiano F, Moon DH, Mooney 
M, Moortgat F, Morelos Pineda A, Mörmann D, Moromisato J, Moroni L, Morovic S,
Morse DM, Mossolov V, Mott A, Mousa J, Mozer MU, Mrak-Tadel A, Mrenna S,
Mucibello L, Mueller S, Mughal A, Muhl C, Mulders M, Müller T, Mundim L, Muniz L,
Munoz Sanchez FJ, Müntel M, Mura B, Murray P, Murray SJ, Murray M, Murzin V,
Musella P, Musenich R, Musich M, Musienko Y, Mussgiller A, Muzaffar S, My S,
Nachtman J, Nae D, Nägeli C, Nahn S, Naimuddin M, Nam SK, Nandi R, Nappi A,
Narain M, Naranjo IN, Narasimham VS, Nash J, Nash D, Natali S, Nauenberg U,
Naujikas R, Naumann-Emme S, Navarria FL, Nawrocki K, Nayak A, Nef P, Negri P,
Nessi-Tedaldi F, Neu C, Neuberger D, Neuland MB, Neumeister N, Newbold DM, Newman
HB, Newman-Holmes C, Newsom CR, Nguyen M, Nguyen D, Nguyen H, Nguyen CN, Nicolaou
C, Nicolas Kaufman G, Niegel M, Nikitenko A, Nikolic M, Nirunpong K, Nishu N,
Nogima H, Noonan D, Norbeck E, Noto F, Nourbakhsh S, Novaes SF, Novgorodova O,
Nowack A, Nowak F, Noy M, Ntomari E, Nürnberg A, Nuttens C, Nuzzo S, Oberst O,
Obertino MM, Obraztsov S, O'Brien C, Ocalan K, Ocampo Rios AA, Ochando C,
Ochesanu S, Odeh M, Odell N, O'Dell V, Odorici F, Oehler A, Ofierzynski RA, Oguri
V, Oh YD, Ojalvo I, Oklinski W, Olaiya E, Olbrechts A, Oleynik D, Oliveros S,
Olschewski M, Olsen J, Olson J, Olzem J, Onel Y, Onengut G, Onnela A, Orbaker D, 
Oreshkin V, Organtini G, Orimoto T, Orlov A, Orsini L, Ortega Gomez T, Osborne
JA, Osborne I, Osipenkov I, Osorio Oliveros AF, Ostapchuk A, Otiougova P, Ott J, 
Otwinowski S, Oulianov A, Ozdemir K, Ozkorucuklu S, Ozok F, Ozpineci A, Ozturk S,
Pacifico N, Padhi S, Padley BP, Padula SS, Paganini P, Pagano D, Paganoni M,
Pakhotin Y, Paktinat Mehdiabadi S, Palencia Cortezon E, Palichik V, Palinkas J,
Palla F, Palmer C, Palmonari F, Panagiotou A, Pandolfi F, Pandoulas D, Pansanel
J, Pansart JP, Pant LM, Panwalkar S, Panyam N, Paoletti S, Paolucci P, Papacz P, 
Papadopoulos I, Papageorgiou A, Pape L, Paramatti R, Paramesvaran S, Parashar N, 
Parenti A, Parida B, Park H, Park SK, Park C, Park IC, Park S, Park M, Park M,
Parrini G, Pashenkov A, Passaseo M, Passeri D, Pastika N, Pastrone N, Patel R,
Patil MR, Patois Y, Patras V, Patterson JR, Paulini M, Paus C, Pauss F, Pavlov B,
Pavlunin V, Pazzini J, Pearson MR, Pearson T, Pedrini D, Pedro K, Pegoraro M,
Peiffer T, Pela J, Pellett D, Pelliccioni M, Peltola T, Penzo A, Perchalla L,
Perelygin V, Perera L, Perez E, Perfilov M, Perieanu A, Perloff A, Pernicka M,
Peroni C, Perrey H, Perries S, Perrotta A, Perrozzi L, Peruzzi M, Pesaresi M,
Petagna P, Peterman A, Petkov P, Petrakou E, Petridis K, Petrilli A, Petrosyan A,
Petrov V, Petrucci A, Petrucciani G, Petrukhin A, Petrushanko S, Petyt D,
Pfeiffer D, Pfeiffer A, Philipps B, Phillips D, Piasecki C, Piccolo D, Piedra
Gomez J, Pieri M, Pierini M, Pierro GA, Pieta H, Pietsch N, Pimiä M, Pin A,
Pioppi M, Piotrzkowski K, Piparo D, Piperov S, Piroué P, Pitzl D, Pivarski J,
Pivovarov G, Placidi P, Plager C, Planer M, Plestina R, Pol ME, Polatoz A, Polese
G, Polic D, Poll A, Pollack B, Pompili A, Pooth O, Popescu S, Popov V, Popov A,
Pordes R, Poschlad A, Postema H, Postoev VE, Potenza R, Potenza A, Pozdnyakov A, 
Pozniak K, Pozzobon N, Prado Da Silva WL, Primavera F, Prokofyev O, Proskuryakov 
A, Prosper H, Ptochos F, Puerta Pelayo J, Pugliese G, Puigh D, Puljak I, Pullia
A, Punz T, Qazi S, Qian SJ, Quan X, Quast G, Quertenmont L, Quintario Olmeda A,
Rabbertz K, Racz A, Radburn-Smith BC, Radi A, Radicci V, Raffaelli F, Ragazzi S, 
Ragghianti G, Raghavan R, Rahatlou S, Rahbaran B, Rahmat R, Raics P, Raidal M,
Rakness G, Ralich R, Ralph D, Ramirez Vargas JE, Rand D, Rander J, Ranieri A,
Ranieri R, Ranjan K, Rappoccio S, Rapsevicius V, Raspereza A, Rathjens D,
Ratnikov F, Ratnikova N, Ratti SP, Raupach F, Raval A, Ravot S, Raymond DM, Razis
PA, Rebane L, Rebassoo F, Redaelli N, Redjimi R, Redondo I, Reece W, Reeder D,
Reid ID, Reidy J, Reis T, Reithler H, Rekovic V, Remington R, Renker D, Renz M,
Reucroft S, Reyes-Santos MA, Reymond JM, Ribeiro PQ, Ribeiro Cipriano PM, Ribnik 
J, Riccardi C, Ricci D, Ricci-Tam F, Richman J, Riedl C, Riley D, Rinkevicius A, 
Rizzi A, Ro SR, Roberts J, Robles J, Robmann P, Röcker S, Rodenburg M, Rodozov M,
Rodrigo T, Rodrigues Antunes J, Rodriguez JL, Rodríguez-Marrero AY, Roe J,
Roederer F, Rogan C, Rogerson S, Roh Y, Rohe T, Rohlf J, Rohringer C, Rohringer
H, Roinishvili V, Roland B, Roland C, Roland G, Rolandi G, Romaniuk R, Romano F, 
Romanowska-Rybinska K, Romanteau T, Romeo F, Romero L, Romero A, Ron E, Ronchese 
P, Ronga FJ, Ronzhin A, Rose A, Rose K, Rosemann C, Röser U, Rosin M, Rosowsky A,
Ross I, Rossato K, Rossi AM, Rossin R, Rossini M, Rossman P, Rott C, Rougny R,
Roumenin C, Rovelli C, Rovelli T, Rovere M, Rowe J, Roy A, Rozsa SG, Rubakov V,
Ruchti R, Rudolph M, Rugovac S, Ruiz-Jimeno A, Rumerio P, Rurua L, Rusack R,
Rusakov SV, Rush CJ, Ruspa M, Russ J, Rutherford B, Ryabov A, Ryan MJ, Ryckbosch 
D, Ryd A, Ryjov V, Ryu G, Ryu S, Ryutin R, Sabellek A, Sabes D, Sacchi R,
Safarzadeh B, Safonov A, Safronov G, Saha A, Saini LK, Saizu MA, Saka H, Sakharov
A, Sakhelashvili T, Sakulin H, Sakuma T, Sakumoto W, Sala L, Sala S, Salazar
Ibarguen HA, Salerno R, Salfeld-Nebgen J, Salur S, Salvati E, Sammet J, Samyn D, 
Sanabria JC, Sanchez AK, Sánchez-Hernández A, Sander C, Sanders S, Sanders DA,
Sanguinetti G, Sani M, Santanastasio F, Santaolalla J, Santocchia A, Santoro A,
Saoulidou N, Saout C, Sarkar S, Sartirana A, Sarycheva L, Sauerland P, Savin A,
Savina M, Savrin V, Sawley MC, Scarborough T, Schael S, Schäfer C, Schettler H,
Scheurer A, Schieferdecker D, Schieferdecker P, Schilling FP, Schinzel D, Schizzi
A, Schlein P, Schleper P, Schlieckau E, Schmanau M, Schmidt R, Schmidt A, Schmidt
I, Schmitt M, Schmitz D, Schmitz SA, Schnetzer S, Schoerner-Sadenius T, Schöfbeck
R, Schott G, Schröder M, Schul N, Schultz von Dratzig A, Schum T, Schwerdtfeger
W, Schwick C, Sciaba A, Scodellaro L, Scurlock B, Searle M, Seez C, Segala M,
Segneri G, Segoni I, Sehgal V, Seidel M, Seitz C, Seixas J, Sekmen S, Selvaggi M,
Selvaggi G, Semenov R, Semenov S, Sen N, Sen S, Sengupta S, Senkin S, Seo H,
Serban AT, Serin M, Servoli L, Sever R, Sexton-Kennedy E, Sfiligoi I, Sgandurra
L, Sguazzoni G, Shah MA, Shamdasani J, Shanidze R, Sharan M, Sharma A, Sharma V, 
Sharma A, Sharma V, Sharma S, Sharma M, Sharp P, Shaw TM, Sheldon P, Shen BC,
Shepherd-Themistocleous CH, Shevchenko S, Shi X, Shin K, Shipkowski SP, Shipsey
I, Shirinyants V, Shiu JG, Shivpuri RK, Shmatov S, Shoaib M, Shrestha S, Shreyber
I, Shukla P, Shulha S, Shumeiko N, Sibille J, Siedling R, Siegrist P, Sigamani M,
Sikler F, Silkworth C, Sill A, Silva J, Silva P, Silvers D, Silverwood H,
Silvestre C, Silvestris L, Sim KS, Simon M, Simon S, Simonetto F, Simonis HJ,
Singh JB, Singh AP, Singh G, Singovsky A, Sinthuprasith T, Sirois Y, Siroli GP,
Sirunyan AM, Skachkova A, Skatchkov N, Skhirtladze N, Skiba A, Skuja A, Slattery 
P, Slaunwhite J, Smetannikov V, Smiljkovic N, Smirnov V, Smirnov I, Smith VJ,
Smith BJ, Smith J, Smith JG, Smith RP, Smith K, Smith WH, Smolin D, Smoron A,
Snigirev A, Snihur R, Snoek H, Snook B, Snow GR, Snowball M, Soares MS, Sobol A, 
Sobron Sanudo M, Soffi L, Sogut K, Soha A, Sola V, Solano A, Solin A, Solovey A, 
Somalwar S, Son D, Son DC, Song S, Sonmez N, Sonnenschein L, Soomro K, Sordini V,
Soroka D, Sorokin P, Souza MH, Sowa M, Spagnolo P, Spalding WJ, Spandre G,
Spanier S, Sparrow A, Speer T, Sperka D, Sphicas P, Spiegel L, Spiezia A, Spiga
D, Spinoso V, Spiridonov A, Spiropulu M, Sprenger D, Sproston M, Squillacioti P, 
Squires M, Srimanobhas N, Stadie H, Stahl A, Staiano A, Starodumov A, Stasko J,
Staykova Z, Steenberg C, Stefanovitch R, Steggemann J, Stein M, Steinbrück G,
Stenson K, Stepanov N, Stephans GS, Stephenson R, Stickland D, Stieger B, Stober 
FM, Stöckli F, Stolin V, Stone R, Stoye M, Stoykova S, Stoynev S, Strauss J,
Stringer R, Strobbe N, Stroiney S, Strom D, Strumia A, Stuart D, Sturdy J, Suarez
I, Suarez Gonzalez J, Sudano E, Sudhakar K, Suh JS, Sulak L, Sulimov V, Sultanov 
G, Summers D, Sumorok K, Sumowidagdo S, Sun G, Sun HS, Sun W, Sunar Cerci D, Sung
K, Surat UE, Suter H, Svintradze I, Svyatkovskiy A, Swain J, Swanson D, Swanson
J, Swartz M, Symonds P, Szillasi Z, Szleper M, Sznajder A, Szoncsó F, Tabarelli
de Fatis T, Tadel M, Takahashi M, Talamo IG, Tali B, Talov V, Tambe N, Tan P,
Tanenbaum W, Tao J, Tapper A, Taroni S, Tatarinov A, Taurok A, Tauscher L,
Tavernier S, Taylor BG, Taylor L, Tcholakov V, Teller O, Temple J, Tenchini R,
Teng H, Tentindo S, Teo WD, Teodorescu L, Terentyev N, Teyssier D, Thea A, Theel 
A, Theofilatos K, Thiebaux C, Thom J, Thomas L, Thomas M, Thomas S, Thompson J,
Thompson R, Thomsen J, Thümmel WH, Thyssen F, Tikhonenko E, Tiko A, Timciuc V,
Timlin C, Tinti G, Tiradani A, Tiras E, Titov M, Tkaczyk S, Tlisov D, To W,
Toback D, Tomalin IR, Tomaszewska J, Tonelli G, Tonjes MB, Tonwar SC, Toole T,
Topakli H, Topkar A, Torassa E, Torbet MJ, Toropin A, Torre P, Tosi S, Tosi M,
Tourneur S, Tourtchanovitch L, Traczyk P, Tran NV, Travaglini R, Trayanov R,
Treille D, Triantis FA, Tricomi A, Tripathi M, Trocino D, Trocsanyi ZL, Troendle 
D, Troitsky S, Tropea P, Tropiano A, Troshin S, Troska J, Trüb P, Trunov A,
Tsamalaidze Z, Tsang KV, Tschudi Y, Tsesmelis E, Tsirou A, Tu Y, Tucker J, Tully 
C, Tumanov A, Tumasyan A, Tuo S, Tuominen E, Tuominiemi J, Tuovinen E, Tupputi S,
Turkewitz J, Turner M, Turner P, Tuura L, Tuuva T, Tuve C, Twedt E, Tytgat M,
Tyurin N, Tzeng YM, Udriot S, Ueno K, Ujvari B, Ulmer KA, Ulrich R, Unalan Z,
Ungaro D, Uplegger L, Urscheler C, Uvarov L, Uzunian A, Uzunova D, Vaandering EW,
Valdata M, Valls N, Valuev V, Van Doninck W, Van Haevermaet H, Van Hove P, Van
Lancker L, van Lingen F, Van Mechelen P, Van Mulders P, Van Onsem GP, Van
Remortel N, Van Spilbeeck A, Vander Donckt M, Vander Velde C, Vanelderen L,
Vanhala TP, Vanini S, Vankov I, Vanlaer P, Vardanyan I, Varela J, Varela
Rodriguez F, Varelas N, Vartak A, Vasey F, Vasil'ev S, Vasquez Sierra R, Vaughan 
J, Vavilov S, Vazquez Acosta M, Vazquez Valencia F, Veelken C, Veeraraghavan V,
Veillet L, Velasco M, Velicanu D, Velikzhanin Y, Velkovska J, Venditti R, Ventura
S, Venturi A, Verdier P, Verdini PG, Veres GI, Vergili LN, Vergili M, Verma P,
Verrecchia P, Verwilligen P, Verzetti M, Veszpremi V, Vesztergombi G, Veverka J, 
Vichoudis P, Vidal R, Vidal Marono M, Viertel G, Vila I, Vilar Cortabitarte R,
Vilela Pereira A, Villasenor-Cendejas LM, Villella I, Vinogradov A, Virdee T,
Viret S, Vischia P, Vishnevskiy D, Vitulo P, Vizan Garcia JM, Vlasov E, Vlimant
JR, Vodopiyanov I, Vogel H, Voicu BR, Volkov A, Volobouev I, Volodko A, Volpe R, 
Volyanskyy D, Von Goeler E, von Gunten HP, Vorobiev I, Vorobyev A, Vorobyev A,
Voutilainen M, Vuosalo C, Vutova M, Wagner SR, Wagner-Kuhr J, Wakefield S, Wallny
R, Walsh S, Walsh R, Waltenberger W, Walzel G, Wan X, Wang J, Wang J, Wang X,
Wang Z, Wang D, Wang CC, Wang M, Wardle N, Wasserbaech S, Wayand S, Wayne M,
Weber H, Weber M, Weber M, Weber HA, Weber M, Wehrli L, Wei JT, Weiler T,
Weinberg M, Wendland L, Weng J, Weng Y, Wenger EA, Wenman D, Werner JS,
Wertelaers P, West C, Wetzel J, Whitbeck A, White D, Whitmore J, Whyntie T,
Wickens J, Wickramage N, Widl E, Wigmans R, Wildish T, Wilken R, Wilkinson R,
Williams JC, Williams T, Williams JH, Williams G, Willmott C, Wimpenny S, Winer
BL, Wingham M, Winn D, Winstrom L, Wissing C, Wittich P, Wittmer B, Wlochal M,
Wöhri HK, Wolf R, Wolf M, Womersley WJ, Won S, Wood JS, Wood D, Wood J, Woodard
A, Worm SD, Wright D, Wrochna G, Wu JH, Wu S, Wu W, Wulz CE, Würthwein F,
Wyslouch B, Xiao H, Xie S, Xie Z, Xu M, Yagil A, Yang M, Yang X, Yang Y, Yang F, 
Yang M, Yang ZC, Yarba J, Yazgan E, Ye YL, Yeh P, Yelton J, Yepes P, Yetkin T, Yi
K, Yilmaz Y, Yohay R, Yoo J, Yoo HD, Yoon AS, York A, Youngman C, Yu I, Yu SS,
Yumiceva F, Yun JC, Zabel J, Zabi A, Zablocki J, Zabolotny W, Zaganidis N,
Zahariev R, Zakaria M, Zalan P, Zalewski P, Zanetti M, Zang J, Zang SL, Zarubin
A, Zatserklyaniy A, Zaytsev V, Zeinali M, Zeise M, Zelepoukine S, Zenz SC, Zeuner
WD, Zeyrek M, Zhang X, Zhang Z, Zhang Z, Zhang L, Zhang L, Zhang J, Zhao WR,
Zheng Y, Zheng Y, Zhiltsov V, Zhokin A, Zhu Z, Zhu B, Zhu K, Zhu RY, Zhukov V,
Zhukova V, Ziebarth EB, Zielinski M, Zilizi G, Zimmerman T, Zito G, Zoeller MH,
Zorba O, Zotto P, Zou W, Zumerle G, Zupan M, Zuranski A, Zuyeuski R, Zvada M,
Zych P.

Erratum in
    Science. 2013 Mar 15;339(6125):1275.

The Higgs boson was postulated nearly five decades ago within the framework of
the standard model of particle physics and has been the subject of numerous
searches at accelerators around the world. Its discovery would verify the
existence of a complex scalar field thought to give mass to three of the carriers
of the electroweak force-the W(+), W(-), and Z(0) bosons-as well as to the
fundamental quarks and leptons. The CMS Collaboration has observed, with a
statistical significance of five standard deviations, a new particle produced in 
proton-proton collisions at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. The evidence is
strongest in the diphoton and four-lepton (electrons and/or muons) final states, 
which provide the best mass resolution in the CMS detector. The probability of
the observed signal being due to a random fluctuation of the background is about 
1 in 3 × 10(6). The new particle is a boson with spin not equal to 1 and has a
mass of about 125 [corrected] giga-electron volts. Although its measured
properties are, within the uncertainties of the present data, consistent with
those expected of the Higgs boson, more data are needed to elucidate the precise 
nature of the new particle.

PMID: 23258887  [PubMed]


392. J Clin Invest. 2013 Jan;123(1):479-92. doi: 10.1172/JCI64373. Epub 2012 Dec 21.

Iron deficiency accelerates Helicobacter pylori-induced carcinogenesis in rodents
and humans.

Noto JM(1), Gaddy JA, Lee JY, Piazuelo MB, Friedman DB, Colvin DC, Romero-Gallo
J, Suarez G, Loh J, Slaughter JC, Tan S, Morgan DR, Wilson KT, Bravo LE, Correa
P, Cover TL, Amieva MR, Peek RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2013 Jan;123(1):113-4.

Gastric adenocarcinoma is strongly associated with Helicobacter pylori infection;
however, most infected persons never develop this malignancy. H. pylori strains
harboring the cag pathogenicity island (cag+), which encodes CagA and a type IV
secretion system (T4SS), induce more severe disease outcomes. H. pylori infection
is also associated with iron deficiency, which similarly augments gastric cancer 
risk. To define the influence of iron deficiency on microbial virulence in
gastric carcinogenesis, Mongolian gerbils were maintained on iron-depleted diets 
and infected with an oncogenic H. pylori cag+ strain. Iron depletion accelerated 
the development of H. pylori-induced premalignant and malignant lesions in a
cagA-dependent manner. H. pylori strains harvested from iron-depleted gerbils or 
grown under iron-limiting conditions exhibited enhanced virulence and induction
of inflammatory factors. Further, in a human population at high risk for gastric 
cancer, H. pylori strains isolated from patients with the lowest ferritin levels 
induced more robust proinflammatory responses compared with strains isolated from
patients with the highest ferritin levels, irrespective of histologic status.
These data demonstrate that iron deficiency enhances H. pylori virulence and
represents a measurable biomarker to identify populations of infected persons at 
high risk for gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC3533289
PMID: 23257361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Aug;228(8):1720-6. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24300.

EMT markers in lung adenocarcinoma pleural effusion spheroid cells.

Giarnieri E(1), De Vitis C, Noto A, Roscilli G, Salerno G, Mariotta S, Ricci A,
Bruno P, Russo G, Laurenzi A, Giovagnoli MR, Ciliberto G, Mancini R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, University of Rome La Sapienza,
S Andrea Hospital, Rome, Italy. enrico.giarnieri@uniroma1.it

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a process in which cells undergo a 
developmental switch from epithelial to mesenchymal phenotype. This process has
been related to embryologic morphogenesis but also to cancer progression and
metastasis. The aim of the current study was to investigate the expression of
EMT-related markers in adherent and spheroid cell cultures derived from malignant
pleural effusions (MPEs) of patients affected by lung adenocarcinoma. On the
basis of efficient in vitro propagation, six cases of MPEs were selected and
analyzed by immunocytochemistry staining for EMT markers and by RT-PCR for
transcription factors known to orchestrate EMT. EMT markers immunostaining showed
in spheroids a statistically significant correlation between the loss of
E-cadherin immunoreactivity and overexpression of N-cadherin (P < 0.001).
Likewise loss of EpCAM epithelial marker was coincident with Vimentin
overexpression (P < 0.001). RT-PCR analysis of transcription factors Snail, Slug,
and Twist showed a highly variable expression, although a general trend to
increase was observed. Importantly, in some selected cases it was possible to
establish a precise relationship between spheroid formation, EMT switch and
increased upregulation of the marker related to cancer stemness such as ALDH
positivity. Therefore, MPE-derived cell cultures, while recapitulating the
heterogeneity of lung cancer, are a suitable system to study the mechanisms at
the basis of EMT and to understand its relationship with the generation of cancer
stem cells.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23255165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Jan 16;135(2):822-34. doi: 10.1021/ja3099799. Epub 2013 Jan
4.

Interplay between structure and relaxations in perfluorosulfonic acid proton
conducting membranes.

Giffin GA(1), Haugen GM, Hamrock SJ, Di Noto V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Padova, Via Marzolo 1, I-35131 
Padova, Italy.

This study focuses on changes in the structure of ionomer membranes, provided by 
the 3M Fuel Cells Component Group, as a function of the equivalent weight (EW)
and the relationship between the structure and the properties of the membrane.
Wide-angle X-ray diffraction results showed evidence of both non-crystalline and 
crystalline ordered hydrophobic regions in all the EW membranes except the 700 EW
membrane. The spectral changes evident in the vibrational spectra of the 3M
membranes can be associated with two major phenomena: (1) dissociation of the
proton from the sulfonic acid groups even in the presence of small amounts of
water; and (2) changes in the conformation or the degree of crystallinity of the 
poly(tetrafluoroethylene) hydrophobic domains both as a function of EW and
membrane water content. All the membranes, regardless of EW, are thermally stable
up to 360 °C. The wet membranes have conductivities between 7 and 20 mS/cm at 125
°C. In this condition, the conductivity values follow VTF behavior, which
suggests that the proton migration occurs via proton exchange processes between
delocalization bodies (DBs) that are facilitated by the dynamics of the host
polymer. The conductivity along the interface between the hydrophobic and
hydrophilic domains makes a larger contribution in the smaller EW membranes
likely due to the existence of a greater number of interfaces in the membrane.
The larger crystalline domains present in the higher EW membranes provide
percolation pathways for charge migration between DBs, which reduces the
probability of charge transfer along the interface. Therefore, at higher EWs
although there is charge migration along the interface within the
hydrophobic-hydrophilic domains, the exchange of protons between different DBs is
likely the rate-limiting step of the overall conduction process.

PMID: 23249300  [PubMed]


395. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2014 May;21(10):6365-72. doi:
10.1007/s11356-012-1347-5. Epub 2012 Dec 18.

Polychlorinated biphenyl (118) activates osteoclasts and induces bone resorption 
in goldfish.

Yachiguchi K(1), Matsumoto N, Haga Y, Suzuki M, Matsumura C, Tsurukawa M, Okuno
T, Nakano T, Kawabe K, Kitamura K, Toriba A, Hayakawa K, Chowdhury VS, Endo M,
Chiba A, Sekiguchi T, Nakano M, Tabuchi Y, Kondo T, Wada S, Mishima H, Hattori A,
Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University, Ogi, Noto-cho, Housu-gun, Ishikawa, 927-0553, Japan.

To analyze the effect of polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) 118 on fish bone
metabolism, we examined osteoclastic and osteoblastic activities, as well as
plasma calcium levels, in the scales of PCB (118)-injected goldfish. In addition,
effect of PCB (118) on osteoclasts and osteoblasts was investigated in vitro.
Immature goldfish, in which the endogenous effects of sex steroids are
negligible, were used. PCB (118) was solubilized in dimethyl sulfoxide at a
concentration of 10 ppm. At 1 and 2 days after PCB (118) injection (100 ng/g body
weight), both osteoclastic and osteoblastic activities, and plasma calcium levels
were measured. In an in vitro study, then, both osteoclastic and osteoblastic
activities as well as each marker mRNA expression were examined. At 2 days, scale
osteoclastic activity in PCB (118)-injected goldfish increased significantly,
while osteoblastic activity did not change significantly. Corresponding to
osteoclastic activity, plasma calcium levels increased significantly at 2 days
after PCB (118) administration. Osteoclastic activation also occurred in the
marker enzyme activities and mRNA expressions in vitro. Thus, we conclude that
PCB (118) disrupts bone metabolism in goldfish both in vivo and in vitro
experiments.

PMCID: PMC4021165
PMID: 23247518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2013 Feb;18(1):3-12. doi: 10.1016/j.siny.2012.10.014.
Epub 2012 Nov 26.

Metabolomics in neonatology: fact or fiction?

Fanos V(1), Van den Anker J, Noto A, Mussap M, Atzori L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Section of Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture
Institute and Neonatal Section, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
vafanos@tin.it

The newest 'omics' science is metabolomics, the latest offspring of genomics,
considered the most innovative of the 'omics' sciences. Metabolomics, also called
the 'new clinical biochemistry', is an approach based on the systematic study of 
the complete set of metabolites in a biological sample. The metabolome is
considered the most predictive phenotype and is capable of considering epigenetic
differences. It is so close to the phenotype that it can be considered the
phenotype itself. In the last three years about 5000 papers have been listed in
PubMed on this topic, but few data are available in the newborn. The aim of this 
review, after a description of background and technical procedures, is to analyse
the clinical applications of metabolomics in neonatology, covering the following 
points: gestational age, postnatal age, type of delivery, zygosity, perinatal
asphyxia, intrauterine growth restriction, prenatal inflammation and brain
injury, respiratory, cardiovascular renal, metabolic diseases; sepsis,
necrotizing enterocolitis and antibiotic treatment; nutritional studies on
maternal milk and formula, pharma-metabolomics, long-term diseases. Pros and cons
of metabolomics are also discussed. All this comes about with the non-invasive
collection of a few drops of urine (exceptionally important for the neonate,
especially those of low birth weight). Only time and large-scale studies to
validate initial results will place metabolomics within neonatology. In any case,
it is important for perinatologists to learn and understand this new technology
to offer their patients the utmost in diagnostic and therapeutic opportunities.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23195852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 11;109(50):20173-4. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1218345110. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

Gastric-to-intestinal transdifferentiation and cancer.

Noto JM(1), Peek RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 11;109(50):20584-9.

PMCID: PMC3528517
PMID: 23184987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Transl Med. 2012 Nov 21;10:235. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-10-235.

Prothrombotic gene variants as risk factors of acute myocardial infarction in
young women.

Tomaiuolo R(1), Bellia C, Caruso A, Di Fiore R, Quaranta S, Noto D, Cefalù AB, Di
Micco P, Zarrilli F, Castaldo G, Averna MR, Ciaccio M.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate, Via Gaetano Salvatore 486, Naples, 80145,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) in young women represent an extreme
phenotype associated with a higher mortality compared with similarly aged men.
Prothrombotic gene variants could play a role as risk factors for AMI at young
age.
METHODS: We studied Factor V Leiden, FII G20210A, MTHFR C677T and beta-fibrinogen
-455G>A variants by real-time PCR in 955 young AMI (362 females) and in 698 AMI
(245 females) patients. The data were compared to those obtained in 909 unrelated
subjects (458 females) from the general population of the same geographical area 
(southern Italy).
RESULTS: In young AMI females, the allelic frequency of either FV Leiden and of
FII G20210A was significantly higher versus the general population (O.R.: 3.67
for FV Leiden and O.R.: 3.84 for FII G20210A; p<0.001). Among AMI patients we
showed only in males that the allelic frequency of the MTHFR C677T variant was
significantly higher as compared to the general population. Such difference was
due to a significantly higher frequency in AMI males of the MTHFR C677T variant
homozygous genotype (O.R. 3.05).
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Our data confirm that young AMI in females is a
peculiar phenotype with specific risk factors as the increased plasma
procoagulant activity of FV and FII. On the contrary, the homozygous state for
the 677T MTHFR variant may cause increased levels of homocysteine and/or an
altered folate status and thus an increased risk for AMI, particularly in males. 
The knowledge of such risk factors (that may be easily identified by molecular
analysis) may help to improve prevention strategies for acute coronary diseases
in specific risk-group subjects.

PMCID: PMC3543285
PMID: 23171482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Oncotarget. 2012 Oct;3(10):1057-8.

Regulation of the p53 by Helicobacter pylori.

Zaika A, Wei J, Noto J, Peek R Jr.

PMCID: PMC3717956
PMID: 23165367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2013 Feb;18(1):56-64. doi: 10.1016/j.siny.2012.10.006. 
Epub 2012 Nov 17.

The importance of biomarkers in neonatology.

Mussap M(1), Noto A, Cibecchini F, Fanos V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, IRCCS San Martino-IST, University Hospital,
National Institute for Cancer Research, Genoa 16132, Italy.
michele.mussap@hsanmartino.it

Despite a 35% decline in the mortality rate for infants aged <5 years over the
past two decades, every year nearly 40% of all deaths in this age group occur in 
the neonatal period, defined as the first 28 days of life. New knowledge on
molecular and biochemical pathways in neonatal diseases will lead to the
discovery of new candidate biomarkers potentially useful in clinical practice. In
the era of personalized medicine, biomarkers may play a strategic role in
accelerating the decline in neonatal mortality by assessing the risk of
developing neonatal diseases, by implementing tailored therapeutic treatment, and
by predicting the clinical outcome. However, there is an urgent need to reduce
the gap in translating newly acquired knowledge from bench to bedside.
Traditional and candidate biomarkers for neonatal sepsis and necrotizing
enterocolitis will be discussed in this review, such as C-reactive protein (CRP),
procalcitonin (PCT), serum amyloid A (SAA), soluble form of CD14 subtype
presepsin (sCD14-ST), lipolysaccharide binding protein (LBP), angiopoietins
(Ang)-1 and -2, soluble form of triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells
(sTREM-1), soluble form of urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (suPAR),
platelet-activating factor (PAF) and calprotectin. New frontiers in managing
critically ill newborns may be opened by metabolomics, a diagnostic tool based on
the recognition of metabolites contained in biological fluids. Metabolomics
represents the passage from a descriptive science to a predictive science, having
the potential to translate benchtop research to real clinical benefits.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23164809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Diabetes Metab Syndr. 2012 Jul-Sep;6(3):132-5. doi: 10.1016/j.dsx.2012.09.012.
Epub 2012 Nov 2.

Evaluation of nitric oxide metabolites in a group of subjects with metabolic
syndrome.

Caimi G(1), Hopps E, Montana M, Noto D, Canino B, Lo Presti R, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Specialistica, Università di Palermo,
Italy.

AIM: To evaluate the concentration of metabolites (NO(2)(-), NO(3)(-)) of nitric 
oxide (NO) in metabolic syndrome (MS).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We enrolled 106 subjects (45 women and 61 men) with MS of 
which 43 (14 women and 27 men) with diabetes mellitus and 63 (31 women and 32
men) without diabetes mellitus, and 54 subjects (19 women and 35 men) as control 
group. The nitric oxide metabolites (nitrite+nitrate=NOx) were evaluated
employing the Griess reagent.
RESULTS: In the whole group of MS subjects was evident, in comparison with
control group, a significant increase in NOx. The same finding was also present
between control group and diabetic subjects with MS and between control group and
nondiabetic subjects with MS. No difference was observed between the two
subgroups (diabetic and nondiabetic subjects with MS) about NOx. Contrasting
information were obtained examining the linear regression among NOx, age,
anthropometric profile, blood pressure values and glycometabolic pattern of
subjects with MS.
CONCLUSIONS: In MS subjects we found a significant increase in NOx not influenced
by diabetes mellitus. The NOx is a parameter that must be considered in MS
keeping in mind that its behavior is related to chronic inflammation that
accompanies this clinical condition.

Copyright © 2012 Diabetes India. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23158975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Nihon Rinsho. 2012 Jul;70 Suppl 5:542-5.

[Systematic review of cancer risk in diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine, National Center for Global
Health and Medicine.

PMID: 23156455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2013 Jan;19(1):E23-30. doi: 10.1111/1469-0691.12070. Epub 
2012 Nov 9.

High rate of colistin resistance among patients with carbapenem-resistant
Klebsiella pneumoniae infection accounts for an excess of mortality.

Capone A(1), Giannella M, Fortini D, Giordano A, Meledandri M, Ballardini M,
Venditti M, Bordi E, Capozzi D, Balice MP, Tarasi A, Parisi G, Lappa A, Carattoli
A, Petrosillo N; SEERBIO-GRAB network.

Collaborators: Petrosillo N, Capone A, Giannella M, Di Bella S, Musso M,
Taglietti F, Topino S, Chinello P, Noto P, Galati V, Campoli C, Bordi E, D'Arezzo
S, Di Caro A, Mazzarelli A, Venditti M, Vena A, Falcone M, Giordano A, Carattoli 
A, Fortini D, Venditti C, Meledandri M, Ballardini M, Tamburro A, Maiorano S,
Ferrari A, Tronci M, Parisi G, Mariani B, Valmarin M, Natili S, Lappa A, Tarasi
A, Placanica P, Bormioli Q, Halgass M, Sbardella L, Balice MP, Salvia A, Capozzi 
D, Carletti M, Gesu B.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Division of Infectious Diseases, National Institute for Infectious
Diseases Lazzaro Spallanzani, Rome, Italy.

Carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae (CR-KP) is becoming a common cause of 
healthcare-associated infection in Italy, with high morbidity and mortality.
Prevalent CR-KP clones and resistance mechanisms vary between regions and over
time. Therapeutic approaches and their impact on mortality have to be
investigated. We performed a prospective study of patients with CR-KP isolation, 
hospitalized in nine hospitals of Rome, Italy, from December 2010 to May 2011, to
describe the molecular epidemiology, antibiotic treatment and risk factors for
mortality. Overall, 97 patients (60% male, median age 69 years) were enrolled.
Strains producing blaKPC-3 were identified in 89 patients, blaVIM in three
patients and blaCTX-M-15 plus porin defects in the remaining five patients.
Inter-hospital spread of two major clones, ST512 and ST258, was found. Overall,
36.1% and 20.4% of strains were also resistant to colistin and tigecycline,
respectively. Infection was diagnosed in 91 patients who received appropriate
antibiotic treatment, combination therapy and removal of the infectious source in
73.6%, 59.3% and 28.5% of cases, respectively. Overall, 23 different antibiotic
regimens were prescribed. In-hospital mortality was 25.8%. Multivariate analysis 
adjusted for appropriate treatment, combination therapy and infectious-source
removal, showed that Charlson comorbidity score, intensive-care unit onset of
infection, bacteraemia and infection due to a colistin-resistant CR-KP strain
were independent risk factors for mortality. The spread of clones producing
K. pneumoniae carbapenemases, mainly ST258, is currently the major cause of CR-KP
infection in central Italy. We observed a high rate of resistance to colistin
that is independently associated with worse outcome.

© 2012 The Authors Clinical Microbiology and Infection © 2012 European Society of
Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.

PMID: 23137235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Environ Health Prev Med. 2013 Mar;18(2):151-64. doi: 10.1007/s12199-012-0305-7.
Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Relationship between the degree of property damage and changes in red blood
cells, hematocrit, and hemoglobin among victims of the Noto Peninsula Earthquake.

Omote S(1), Kato M, Kido T, Okamoto R, Ichimori A, Sakakibara C, Tsukasaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, Institute of Medical,
Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences, Kanazawa University, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno,
Kanazawa 920-0942, Japan. omotes@mhs.mp.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to assess the impact of the Noto Peninsula 
Earthquake on various hematologic parameters. We studied the relationships
between the degree of property damage and changes in red blood cells (RBCs),
hemoglobin (Hb), and hematocrit (Ht) among residents before and after the March
2007 Noto Peninsula Earthquake.
METHODS: A total of 5,563 residents of Wajima City who were not receiving oral
treatment for anemia and who had received basic health screenings for fiscal
years (FYs) 2006 and 2007, before and after the earthquake. We analyzed changes
in their RBCs, Hb, and Ht levels by gender, age, body mass index (BMI), level of 
property damage, and evaluation standards.
RESULTS: RBCs, Hb, and Ht for FY2007 showed a trend of decreasing values compared
to FY2006 in both male and female subjects. RBCs and Hb significantly decreased
in females aged between 65 and 74 years who experienced total property damage,
and Ht significantly increased for those younger than 65 years who experienced
the same level of damage. In addition, significant differences by degree of
property damage and FY2007/FY2006 ratio were seen only among subjects with a BMI 
ratio <1. Furthermore, we found a significant relationship between reduction of
RBCs or Hb and increasing age in females; however, no significant relationship to
property damage was found. No significant relationships were found for males.
CONCLUSIONS: A significant association between property damage and changes in
RBCs, Hb, and Ht was not found in this population of residents who experienced
the Noto Peninsula Earthquake.

PMCID: PMC3590323
PMID: 23132633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2012 May;3(2):83-8. doi: 10.4103/2229-5178.96690.

On the clinical significance of cutaneous melanoma's precursors.

Noto G(1).

Author information: 
(1)U. O. Dermatology, Oncological Department, La Maddalena, Palermo, Italy.

WE CAN IDENTIFY THREE MAIN GROUPS OF CUTANEOUS PIGMENTED LESIONS THAT COULD BE
REPRESENTED AS MELANOMA PRECURSORS: (a) congenital melanocytic nevi, (b)
dysplastic or atypical nevi, and (c) acquired melanocytic nevi. The occurrence of
melanoma in small and intermediate congenital melanocytic nevi is very uncommon, 
but there is a high risk in large congenital melanocytic nevi, in particular
those arising in the so-called "bathing trunk" distribution. It is very important
to distinguish the familial dysplastic nevus syndrome, which is a strong risk
factor for cutaneous melanoma, from not familial (sporadic) dysplastic nevus, in 
which the risk for melanoma would depend on the total number of melanocytic nevi,
phototype, and on the relationship to environmental factors.

PMCID: PMC3481870
PMID: 23130279  [PubMed]


406. Lancet. 2013 Jan 5;381(9860):40-6. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61731-0. Epub 2012 
Nov 2.

Efficacy and safety of a microsomal triglyceride transfer protein inhibitor in
patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia: a single-arm,
open-label, phase 3 study.

Cuchel M(1), Meagher EA, du Toit Theron H, Blom DJ, Marais AD, Hegele RA, Averna 
MR, Sirtori CR, Shah PK, Gaudet D, Stefanutti C, Vigna GB, Du Plessis AM, Propert
KJ, Sasiela WJ, Bloedon LT, Rader DJ; Phase 3 HoFH Lomitapide Study
investigators.

Collaborators: Cuchel M, Meagher EA, Kolansky DM, Sachais BS, Shah PK, Blom DJ,
Marais AD, Theron Hdu T, du Plessis AM, Gaudet D, Hegele RA, Cefalù AB, Noto D,
Averna MR, Sirtori CR, Bondioli A, Triolo M, Mombelli G, Vigna GB, Lodi E,
Menegatti E, Tosini E, Stefanutti C, Di Giacomo S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, Cardiovascular
Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
mcuchel@mail.med.upenn.edu

Comment in
    Lancet. 2013 Apr 6;381(9873):1183.
    Lancet. 2013 Jan 5;381(9860):7-8.
    Lancet. 2013 Apr 6;381(9873):1182.

BACKGROUND: Patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia respond
inadequately to existing drugs. We aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of the
microsomal triglyceride transfer protein inhibitor lomitapide in adults with this
disease.
METHODS: We did a single-arm, open-label, phase 3 study of lomitapide for
treatment of patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. Current
lipid lowering therapy was maintained from 6 weeks before baseline through to at 
least week 26. Lomitapide dose was escalated on the basis of safety and
tolerability from 5 mg to a maximum of 60 mg a day. The primary endpoint was mean
percent change in levels of LDL cholesterol from baseline to week 26, after which
patients remained on lomitapide through to week 78 for safety assessment. Percent
change from baseline to week 26 was assessed with a mixed linear model.
FINDINGS: 29 men and women with homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia, aged
18 years or older, were recruited from 11 centres in four countries (USA, Canada,
South Africa, and Italy). 23 of 29 enrolled patients completed both the efficacy 
phase (26 weeks) and the full study (78 weeks). The median dose of lomitapide was
40 mg a day. LDL cholesterol was reduced by 50% (95% CI -62 to -39) from baseline
(mean 8·7 mmol/L [SD 2·9]) to week 26 (4·3 mmol/L [2·5]; p<0·0001). Levels of LDL
cholesterol were lower than 2·6 mmol/L in eight patients at 26 weeks.
Concentrations of LDL cholesterol remained reduced by 44% (95% CI -57 to -31;
p<0·0001) at week 56 and 38% (-52 to -24; p<0·0001) at week 78. Gastrointestinal 
symptoms were the most common adverse event. Four patients had aminotransaminase 
levels of more than five times the upper limit of normal, which resolved after
dose reduction or temporary interruption of lomitapide. No patient permanently
discontinued treatment because of liver abnormalities.
INTERPRETATION: Our study suggests that treatment with lomitapide could be a
valuable drug in the management of homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia.
FUNDING: FDA Office of the Orphan Product Development, Aegerion Pharmaceuticals.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4587657
PMID: 23122768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47785. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047785. Epub 2012 Oct 22.

A novel mammal-specific three partite enhancer element regulates node and
notochord-specific Noto expression.

Alten L(1), Schuster-Gossler K, Eichenlaub MP, Wittbrodt B, Wittbrodt J, Gossler 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Germany.

The vertebrate organizer and notochord have conserved, essential functions for
embryonic development and patterning. The restricted expression of developmental 
regulators in these tissues is directed by specific cis-regulatory modules (CRMs)
whose sequence conservation varies considerably. Some CRMs have been conserved
throughout vertebrates and likely represent ancestral regulatory networks, while 
others have diverged beyond recognition but still function over a wide
evolutionary range. Here we identify and characterize a mammalian-specific CRM
required for node and notochord specific (NNC) expression of NOTO, a
transcription factor essential for node morphogenesis, nodal cilia movement and
establishment of laterality in mouse. A 523 bp enhancer region (NOCE) upstream
the Noto promoter was necessary and sufficient for NNC expression from the
endogenous Noto locus. Three subregions in NOCE together mediated full activity
in vivo. Binding sites for known transcription factors in NOCE were functional in
vitro but dispensable for NOCE activity in vivo. A FOXA2 site in combination with
a novel motif was necessary for NOCE activity in vivo. Strikingly, syntenic
regions in non-mammalian vertebrates showed no recognizable sequence
similarities. In contrast to its activity in mouse NOCE did not drive NNC
expression in transgenic fish. NOCE represents a novel, mammal-specific CRM
required for the highly restricted Noto expression in the node and nascent
notochord and thus regulates normal node development and function.

PMCID: PMC3478275
PMID: 23110100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Nov 21;134(46):19099-107. doi: 10.1021/ja3071336. Epub 2012
Nov 6.

Interplay between mechanical, electrical, and thermal relaxations in
nanocomposite proton conducting membranes based on Nafion and a
[(ZrO2)·(Ta2O5)(0.119)] core-shell nanofiller.

Di Noto V(1), Piga M, Giffin GA, Vezzù K, Zawodzinski TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Padova, Via Marzolo 1, I-35131,
Padova (PD), Italy. vito.dinoto@unipd.it

The thermal, mechanical, and electric properties of hybrid membranes based on
Nafion that contain a [(ZrO(2))·(Ta(2)O(5))(0.119)] "core-shell" nanofiller are
elucidated. DSC investigations reveal the presence of four endothermic
transitions between 50 and 300 °C. The DMA results indicate improved mechanical
stability of the hybrid materials. The DSC and DMA results are consistent with
our previous suggestion of dynamic R-SO(3)H···[ZrTa] cross-links in the material.
These increase the thermal stability of the -SO(3)H groups and the temperature of
thermal relaxation events occurring in hydrophobic domains of Nafion. The
broadband electrical spectroscopic analysis reveals two electric relaxations
associated with the material's interfacial (s(IP)) and bulk proton conductivities
(s(EP)). The wet [Nafion/(ZrTa)(1.042)] membrane has a conductivity of 7.0 ×
10(-2) S cm(-1) at 115 °C, while Nafion has a conductivity of 3.3 × 10(-2) S
cm(-1) at the same temperature and humidification conditions. s(EP) shows VTF
behavior, suggesting that the long-range conductivity is closely related to the
segmental motion of the Nafion host matrix. Long-range conduction (s(EP)) occurs 
when the dynamics of the fluorocarbon matrix induces contact between different
delocalization bodies (DB), which results in proton exchange processes between
these DBs.

PMID: 23102554  [PubMed]


409. Intern Emerg Med. 2012 Oct;7 Suppl 3:S263-70. doi: 10.1007/s11739-012-0830-9.

Clinical utility of novel biomarkers for cardiovascular disease risk
stratification.

Averna M(1), Noto D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties-DIMIS, University of
Palermo, Palermo, Italy. notoddd@alice.it

Over the past few decades, a number of coronary artery disease (CAD) and
cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk factors have been identified. The predictive
power of "conventional" risk factors have been validated by observational,
prospective and intervention studies. Nevertheless, all attempts to exactly
predict the individual risk for CAD have failed, biased by a large number of
incorrectly risk-classified subjects. To improve cardiovascular (CV) risk
prediction, a large number of genetic and/or non-genetic biomarkers have been
discovered and tested against the "classical" risk factors for their power to
predict CV risk. Only few of them had a significant improvement over the
predictive models. In this paper, the most investigated biomarkers will be
discussed and the evidence of their use as predictors of CV will be questioned.

PMID: 23073867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Clin Rheumatol. 2013 Feb;32(2):211-7. doi: 10.1007/s10067-012-2101-6. Epub 2012
Oct 13.

Classical test theory and Rasch analysis validation of the Recent-Onset Arthritis
Disability questionnaire in rheumatoid arthritis patients.

Salaffi F(1), Franchignoni F, Giordano A, Ciapetti A, Gasparini S, Ottonello M;
NEW INDICES Study Group.

Collaborators: Laganà B, Varcasia G, Pomponio G, Mozzani F, Scarpa R, Maier A,
Romeo N, Migliore A, Scarpellini M, Corsaro SM, Pusceddu M, Foti R, Rotondi M,
Marasini B, Ferraccioli G, Malavolta N, Sabadini L, Cimmino M, Ricioppo A, Triolo
G, Mascia M, Minisola G, Botsios K, Pellerito R, Noto A, Cazzato M, Bombardieri
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Polytechnic University of Marche, Ospedale "C.
Urbani", Via dei Colli 52, 60035 Jesi, Ancona, Italy. fsalaff@tin.it

Disability has been identified as a core outcome measure in rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA). The aim of this study was to perform a comprehensive psychometric analysis 
of the Recent-Onset Arthritis Disability (ROAD) questionnaire in patients with
RA. The questionnaire was completed by 583 patients with RA: 196 subjects
participating in the NEW INDICES study and 387 subjects who were taking part in a
long-term observational study. At confirmatory factor analysis for categorical
data, data fit for a three-factor model was adequate to good (non-normed fit
index<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.98, comparative fit index<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.99, root mean square error of
approximation<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.079, standardized root mean square residual<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.047), with
standardized item-to-factor loadings ranging from 0.60 to 0.90 and a cumulative
explained variance of 83 %. The bifactor model of ROAD presented a clean
independent cluster structure. The loadings in the unidimensional model were very
similar to those on the general factor in the bifactor model. Rasch analysis
showed a correct functioning of rating categories, a good fit of the data to the 
model for all three subscales, and satisfactory separation indexes and respective
reliability (for both persons and items). This study, using both classical test
theory and Rasch analysis methods, provides psychometric evidence of the
reliability and internal and structural validity of ROAD in RA patients. Our
results support the use of separate subscores for upper limb function, lower limb
function, and activities of daily living/work, and the appropriateness of
reporting an overall score (i.e., the mean of the three subscales).

PMID: 23065133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2012 Nov;67(5):e230-1. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2012.04.034.

Extraordinarily large protruding accessory breast cancer in a man.

Yoshida Y, Sakakibara A, Watanabe T, Noto K, Sakita K, Sakai Y, Amemiya T,
Akiyama M.

PMID: 23062931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Oncotarget. 2012 Oct 8. [Epub ahead of print]

Regulation of the p53 tumor suppressor by gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori
pathogen.

Zaika A(1), Wei J, Noto J, Peek R Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN.

PMID: 23060526  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


413. Minerva Anestesiol. 2012 Oct;78(10):1126-35.

The sensibility and specificity of cerebral oximetry, measured by INVOS - 4100,
in patients undergoing carotid endarterectomy compared with awake testing.

Stilo F(1), Spinelli F, Martelli E, Pipitó N, Barillà D, De Caridi G, Benedetto
F, Risitano D, Noto A, Messina R, David A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic
Sciences, University of Messina, Italy. frastilo@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Selective shunting during carotid endarterectomy (CEA) is advocated
to reduce shunt-related stroke. Cerebral monitoring is essential for temporary
carotid shunting. Many techniques are available for cerebral monitoring; however,
none is superior to monitoring the patient's neurological status (awake testing) 
while performing the procedure under local anesthesia (LA). Cerebral oximetry
(CO) has previously been used to show the adequacy of cerebral circulation in
patients undergoing CEA. This investigation was designed to compare the
performance of the INVOS-4100 cerebral oximeter and the neurologic functions, by 
means of detecting cerebral ischemia induced by carotid cross-clamping, in
patients undergoing CEA under LA, namely cervical plexus block.
METHODS: Patients scheduled for CEA under LA were included. Patients converted to
general anesthesia (GA) or other types of operations other than CEA were excluded
from this study. We enrolled 100 consecutive patients from January 2009 to
December 2010. Bilateral regional cerebrovascular oxygen saturation (rSO(2)) was 
monitored in all patients, in addition to the awake testing. Changes in rSO(2)
following carotid artery clamping were recorded. A drop greater than 20% was
considered as an indicator of cerebral ischemia that might predict the need for
carotid shunting. Patients were only shunted based on the awake testing.
RESULTS: Of the 100 patients undergoing CEA under LA, 9 showed a significant drop
in rSO(2) (range: 22.6-32.8%, mean: 26.4%): only three of them required shunting,
while the remaining 6 had no changes in consciousness after internal carotid
artery (ICA) cross-clamping and it was not necessary to place a shunt (false
positive). Compared to the preclamping values, a significant decrease in rSO(2)
was found on the hemisphere of the operated side, while no significant change was
observed contralaterally. Ninety-one patients had no significant changes of CO
values: in 89 of them there was no consciousness deterioration, so we didn't
place a shunt (true negative), but 2 patients showing a non-significant
post-clamping decline in CO saturation (1.5% and 18.2%) required shunting based
on the awake testing (2 false negative). In the current study, the median drop in
rSO(2) was 19% (range: 1.5-26.4%) in the 5 patients that required shunting. This 
represents a sensitivity of 60% and a specificity of 25% for CO in comparison to 
the awake testing.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study suggest that the usefulness of CO in
predicting cerebral ischemia is modest. Cerebral monitoring with INVOS-4100 has a
high negative predictive value, but the positive predictive value is low.

PMID: 23059517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2012 Oct;24(5):489-98. doi: 10.3109/09540261.2012.703643.

Pharmacological treatment of schizophrenia.

Gadelha A(1), Noto CS, de Jesus Mari J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: A lack of human and financial resources, as well as effective health 
systems, leads to a worldwide treatment gap for schizophrenia. The aim of this
paper is to propose evidence-based antipsychotics interventions for people with
schizophrenia with special focus in low and middle income countries (LAMIC)
reality.
METHOD: A comprehensive search was conducted to locate the main clinical trials, 
reviews and relevant meta-analyses, and a number of the main recent international
clinical practice guidelines.
RESULTS: First- and second-generation antipsychotics are similarly effective in
the acute treatment of psychotic symptoms. In LAMIC, the treatment of choice for 
medical treatment of psychotic conditions is the group of so-called 'first
generation antipsychotics' (FGAs) preferentially delivered in a community-based
service model.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the symptomatic control is essential, it is not the
ultimate goal of treatment. The main aim of treatment is to improve functional
recovery and social reintegration of patients.

PMID: 23057985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Cancer. 2013 Feb 15;119(4):729-38. doi: 10.1002/cncr.27794. Epub 2012 Oct 1.

CD66c is a novel marker for colorectal cancer stem cell isolation, and its
silencing halts tumor growth in vivo.

Gemei M(1), Mirabelli P, Di Noto R, Corbo C, Iaccarino A, Zamboli A, Troncone G, 
Galizia G, Lieto E, Del Vecchio L, Salvatore F.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE-Advanced Biotechnology, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Despite the well recognized expression of the cell surface markers
cluster of differentiation 44 (homing cell adhesion molecule) and CD133 (Prominin
1) on human colorectal cancer stem cells (CCSCs), these molecules do not appear
to be effective targets for stem cell-directed therapies. Because the surface
marker CD66c (also known as carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion
molecule 6) has demonstrated promise as a therapeutic target in pancreatic
malignancy, the authors evaluated its potential as a target for stem
cell-directed treatment of colorectal cancer.
METHODS: First, the authors characterized CD66c expression by flow cytometry and 
immunohistochemistry in colon cancer samples and in normal colon tissues. Then,
the coexpression of CD66c and CD133 was evaluated on putative CCSCs. CD66c
expression also was measured in stem cell-enriched colon spheres. Finally, the
effects of small-interfering RNA-mediated CD66c silencing on the in vitro and in 
vivo growth of Caco2 colon cancer cells were evaluated.
RESULTS: CD66c expression was significantly higher in colon cancers than in
contiguous normal colon tissues and paralleled cancer stage. CD66c was absent in 
CD133-positive cells that were isolated from normal colon, whereas its expression
was brightest (CD66c(bright) ) in CD133-positive cells from colon cancer samples.
In vitro experiments demonstrated that colon spheres were considerably enriched
in a CD66c(bright) population in a fashion comparable to the enrichment observed 
in fresh liver metastases. In vitro proliferation and clonogenic potential were
hampered when CD66c was silenced in Caco2 cells. Finally, in vivo xenograft
experiments demonstrated that CD66c silencing almost completely abrogated the
tumorigenic potential of Caco2 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: CD66c(bright) expression was associated with colon cancer stem cells
and CD66c silencing blocked tumor growth, thereby opening the way to a potential 
new treatment for colon cancer.

Copyright © 2012 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 23027178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2012 Oct;25(Suppl 5):62-7. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2012.715436.

A metabolomic study of preterm human and formula milk by high resolution NMR and 
GC/MS analysis: preliminary results.

Marincola FC(1), Noto A, Caboni P, Reali A, Barberini L, Lussu M, Murgia F,
Santoru ML, Atzori L, Fanos V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Geological Science, University of Cagliari,
Cagliari, Italy. flaminia@unica.it

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to investigate the metabolic profile 
of preterm human breast milk (HBM) by using a metabolomic approach.
METHODS: NMR spectroscopy and GC/MS were used to analyze the water-soluble and
lipid fractions extracted from milk samples obtained from mothers giving birth at
26-36 weeks of gestation. For the sake of comparison, preterm formula milk was
also studied.
RESULTS: The multivariate statistical analysis of the data evidenced biochemical 
variability both between preterm HBM and commercial milk and within the group of 
HBM samples.
CONCLUSIONS: The preliminary results of this study suggest that metabolomics may 
provide a promising tool to study aspects related to the nutrition and health of 
preterm infant.

PMID: 23025771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2012 Oct;25(Suppl 5):51-3. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2012.717462.

Soluble CD14 subtype (sCD14-ST) presepsin in critically ill preterm newborns:
preliminary reference ranges.

Mussap M(1), Puxeddu E, Burrai P, Noto A, Cibecchini F, Testa M, Puddu M,
Ottonello G, Dessì A, Irmesi R, Gassa ED, Fanni C, Fanos V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, IRCCS University-Hospital San Martino-IST, 
National Institute for Cancer Research, Largo Rosanna Benzi 11, Genoa, Italy.
michele.mussap@hsanmartino.it

Soluble CD14 subtype (sCD14-ST), also named presepsin, is a 13<U+2009>kDa truncated form
of soluble CD14 (sCD14), consisting of 64 amino acid residues. Systemic
inflammation and sepsis are characterized by an early, significant increase in
sCD14-ST presepsin blood concentration and thus, this small polypeptide has been 
proposed as a novel, reliable biomarker for the management of sepsis. We enrolled
twenty-six consecutive non-septic preterm newborns with gestational age (GA)
between 26 and 36 weeks) admitted to NICU after the first day of life for various
severe diseases. sCD14-ST presepsin was measure on whole blood samples by a rapid
commercial available chemiluminescent enzyme immunoassay (CLEIA) based on a
non-competitive CLEIA. The mean sCD14-ST presepsin blood level in 26 preterm
newborns was 643.1<U+2009>ng/L, with a standard deviation (SD) of 303.8<U+2009>ng/L; the median
value was 578<U+2009>ng/L. Our results clearly suggest no correlation between GA and
sCD14-ST presepsin blood level between 26 and 36 weeks and thus it is reasonable 
to adopt a unique reference range for preterm newborns.

PMID: 23025769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. ChemSusChem. 2012 Dec;5(12):2451-9. doi: 10.1002/cssc.201200517. Epub 2012 Sep
28.

Synthesis-structure-morphology interplay of bimetallic "core-shell" carbon
nitride nano-electrocatalysts.

Di Noto V(1), Negro E, Polizzi S, Agresti F, Giffin GA.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Università di Padova, Via Marzolo 1,
I-35131, Padova, PD, Italy. vito.dinoto@unipd.it

An extensive morphological and structural study of two bimetallic "core-shell"
carbon nitride nano-electrocatalysts with active sites based on Pt and Ni or on
Pt and Fe is reported. The core-shell electrocatalysts are obtained by the
pyrolysis of a precursor obtained by decorating a support composed of conducting 
particles with a hybrid inorganic-organic material. The electrocatalysts were
investigated by high-resolution TEM, powder X-ray diffraction, and µ-Raman
spectroscopy. The morphological and structural information presented here
provides 1) insight into the microscopic features, affecting the electrochemical 
performance of the electrocatalyst materials determined in both ex situ
measurements and single-cell configurations; and 2) an opportunity to study the
effect of the different precursor chemistries on the structure and morphology of 
the bimetallic core-shell carbon nitride nano-electrocatalysts.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23019172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;921:51-9.

Genetic manipulation of a naturally competent bacterium, Helicobacter pylori.

Noto JM(1), Peek RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, MRB IV 1030C MRB IV, Nashville, TN, USA.
jennifer.noto@vanderbilt.edu

Genetic manipulation of Helicobacter pylori facilitates characterization and
functional analysis of individual H. pylori genes. This chapter discusses the
methods involved in H. pylori chromosomal DNA isolation, mutagenesis of
individual genes, and natural transformation.

PMCID: PMC3544407
PMID: 23015491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;921:41-50.

The Helicobacter pylori cag Pathogenicity Island.

Noto JM(1), Peek RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, MRB IV 1030C MRB IV, Nashville, TN, USA.
jennifer.noto@vanderbilt.edu

The cag pathogenicity island is a well-characterized virulence determinant. It is
composed of 32 genes that encode a type IV bacterial secretion system and is
linked with a more severe clinical outcome. The following chapters will explore
the manipulation of bacterial factors in order to understand their role in
gastric mucosal disease.

PMCID: PMC3547679
PMID: 23015490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;921:7-10.

Helicobacter pylori: an overview.

Noto JM(1), Peek RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, MRB IV 1030C MRB IV, Nashville, TN, USA.
jennifer.noto@vanderbilt.edu

Infection with Helicobacter pylori is directly responsible for substantial
morbidity and mortality worldwide. This ubiquitous organism causes disease
through the interaction of multiple factors including bacterial factors, host
immune responses, and environmental factors. The following chapters address the
bacterial specific contributions to disease.

PMID: 23015485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2012 Aug;147(4):357-71.

Legal aspects of sexually transmitted diseases: abuse, partner notification and
prosecution.

Argo A(1), Zerbo S, Triolo V, Averna L, D'Anna T, Nicosia A, Procaccianti P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopathology, Biotechnology and Forensic Medicine, University of
Palermo, Palermo, Italy. antonella.argo@unipa.it

Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), with special emphasis to HIV infection,
involve legal and ethical issues regarding informed consent to submit to a
diagnostic, observance of professional secrecy in regard to partner(s) and
community; legal troubles of particular difficulties are related to STD involving
minors; lastly, physicians must be able to recognize the state of so called
medical necessity. Knowledge and awareness of these related obligations are
crucial to STD in medical practice; it is also important to allow for proper
protection of victims of suspected sexual abuse under observation of healthcare. 
With regard to this aspect should be emphasized that violence against women and
minors is a worldwide problem that has not yet been sufficiently acknowledged.
Italian legislation (Law n. 96/1996) against rapes finally gave significant
relevance to sex crimes. When sexual abusers have to be evaluated some obstacles 
may arise for lack of appropriate interdisciplinary approach, with insurance of
the collection of biological samples, also related to STD diagnosis and alerts of
legal authorities. Personal preconceptions may interfere with investigation if
the biological evidences in children are few. In this regard, rules of document
"Carta di Noto" drafted in 1996 and reviewed in July 2002 include some specific
indications aiming to grant the reliability of the results of technical
investigations and authenticity of the statements of the alleged victims.

PMID: 23007211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Lancet. 2012 Sep 22;380(9847):1059-65. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61148-9.

Mortality after surgery in Europe: a 7 day cohort study.

Pearse RM(1), Moreno RP, Bauer P, Pelosi P, Metnitz P, Spies C, Vallet B, Vincent
JL, Hoeft A, Rhodes A; European Surgical Outcomes Study (EuSOS) group for the
Trials groups of the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine and the European
Society of Anaesthesiology.

Collaborators: Bauer P, Hoeft A, Metnitz P, Moreno R, Pearse R, Pelosi P, Rhodes 
A, Spies C, Vallet B, Vincent JL, Damster S, Golder K, Hewson R, Januszewska M,
Leva B, Moreno R, Pearse R, Ramos V, Rhodes A, Hoste E, Huyghens L, Jacobs R, Van
Mossevelde V, Opdenacker G, Poelaert J, Spapen H, Leleu K, Rijckaert D, De Decker
K, Foubert L, De Neve N, Biston P, Piagnerelli M, Collin V, Blauwen Nd, Clauwaert
C, De Crop L, Verbeke A, Roeselare HH, Derumeaux P, Gardin C, Kindt S, Louage S, 
Verhamme B, Druwé P, Lahaye I, Rosseel F, Rutsaert R, Vanlinthout L, De Kock M,
Forget P, Georges P, Grosu I, Kahn D, Lois F, Momeni M, Pospiech A, Yemnga B,
Jadoul JL, Malbrain M, Bosinceanu D, Collard E, Jorens P, Reyntiens D, Smitz C,
Vercauteren M, Fagnoul D, van Obbergh L, Vincent JL, Goranovic T, Mazul-Sunko B, 
Toplice K, Oremu K, Belic G, Duzel V, Hauptman A, Peremin S, ribar A, upcic
M, Brod S, Mirkovic I, Bauer Z, Belavic M, Blaanin B, Katuin ML, Krijan AB,
Mikovic P, imic-Korac N, Topic J, ilic A, uni J, Acan I, Adanic M, Ivanov N, 
aric JP, Tomulic K, Viskovic N, Bonjak S, Drenjancevic IH, Kristek G, Kvolik S,
Markic S, Rakipovic AS, Tot OK, Venzera- Azenic D, Fabris LK, Bacak-Kocman I,
Balenovic I, Bandic D, Deutsch PA, Divjak L, Filipovic IG, Guvinec Z, Krznaric
Z, Loncaric Y, Maga JV, Mitrovic M, Okic M, Pavlek M, Ramov E, Rezek K, Sekulic 
A, Tomasevic B, Miric M, Tomaevic A, Mahecic TT, Vrbanovic V, Bobinac M, Boic
A, Debelic D, Frkovic V, Batinica IM, Baranovic S, Gavranovic , Kikec M, Maldini
B, Maric S, Agnic I, Delic N, Dropulic N, Gapic TK, Ilic D, Ivancev B, Karanovic
N, Kucevic D, Marovic Z, Milic M, Nevecanin A, Petkovic T, Smoje M, Brozovic G,
Goranovic T, Jelisavac M, Matolic M, Mazul-Sunko B, Oberhofer D, Pavicic AM,
akic K, Bozovic MD, Krecek ZK, Krobot R, Andabaka T, Bratanic M, Dzepina O,
Kraljev M, eric J, imurina T, Grujic R, Nacevski-Bulaja B, Barion M, Danira V,
Draen B, Duanka K, Haluan MB, Joko , Katica R, Labor M, Marinkovic TG,
Mihovilcevic D, Marija B, Srecko M, Vrankovic S, Kyprianou T, Neophytou K, Cerny 
V, Cvachovec K, Belikova B, Drab M, Hudacek K, Krikava I, Stourac P, Zadrazilova 
K, Bicek V, Brabcová M, Klozová R, Vajter J, Vymazal T, Toft P, Blichfeldt L,
Hansen BD, Moller K, Nielsen JS, Frederiksen J, Andersen JD, Kühne JP, Leivdal S,
Stendell L, Simonsen M, Zoltowski MK, Ali ZS, Freundlich M, Pilypaite J, Clausen 
NG, Toft P, Thorup L, Hansen F, Bestle M, Hansen CS, Afshari A, Bille AB, Lefort 
M, Secher EL, Liboriussen L, Herodes V, Härma E, Marvet K, Pool K, Kallas P, Mägi
TK, Sütt J, Vijar K, Visk E, Vinnal M, Ellermaa J, Liibusk L, Tikkerberi A, Falk 
I, Mällo E, Talving J, Pettilä V, Hovilehto S, Kirsi A, Mustola S, Tiainen P,
Toivonen J, Dabnell S, Kaminski T, Sysimetsa A, Kaukonen M, Silvasti P, Vainio K,
Lund V, Sjövall S, Saarinen K, Viitanen M, Ahonen T, Alaspää A, Zittling R,
Saarinen A, Moisander A, Wagner B, Laru-Sompa R, Elomaa E, Lavonen L, Nevantaus
J, Geier K, Kavasmaa T, Koorits U, Kubjas M, Lauritsalo S, Ottelin L, Palve M,
Pynnönen J, Rääbis I, Saarelainen M, Heikkilä T, Kontula T, Lehtimäki M,
Liimatainen J, Moilanen-Oikarinen M, Pakarinen M, Palanne R, Seppänen H,
Pulkkinen A, Vääräniemi H, Paananen S, Koskenkari J, Sälkiö S, Vakkala M, Koskue 
T, Loisa P, Laitio R, Hautamäki R, Koivisto SP, Futier E, Lefrant JY, Leon A,
Bonnet F, Marret E, Spielvogel C, Papageorgiou C, Szymkiewicz O, Tounou-Akue F,
Aubrun F, Bonnet A, Gazon M, Guiraud M, Laurent V, Béclère A, Tachon G, Demars N,
Dumenil AS, Mercier F, Landais A, Mentec H, Bazin M, Futier E, Gonnu S, Petit A, 
Albaladejo P, Almeras L, Bataillard A, Rossi-Blancher M, Lefrant JY, Barthel F,
Hallel D, Sbai H, Khalifeh P, Lidzborski L, Jully M, Platon E, Pottecher J,
Baumgarten R, Schultz C, ElMiloudi F, Lefebvre J, Waton K, Sprunck A, Steib A,
Thibaud A, Thuet V, Kieffer V, Dubois-Vallaud D, Jacob L, Becanne X, Cherfaoui S,
Gauzit R, Godier A, Lakhdari M, Samma C, Bigeon JY, Burtin P, Halchini C, Lacroix
M, Pinna F, Barbes A, Just B, Mateu P, Benayoun L, Berger P, Granier N,
Perrigault PF, Libert N, De Rudnicki S, Merat S, Bourdet B, Ferré F, Minville V, 
Piriou V, Rague P, Wallet F, Lebuffe G, Desbordes J, Robin E, Ichai C, Orban JC, 
Marx G, Sander M, Gottschalk A, Piontek A, Unterberg M, Hilpert J, Kees M,
Triltsch A, Wiegand-Löhnert C, Glöckner C, Hohn A, Rose E, Schröder S, Wiese O,
Awlakpui E, Hoeft A, Scheidemann M, Wittmann M, Ramminger A, Dresden C, de Abreu 
MG, Heller A, Marx C, Neidel J, Goldmann A, von Heymann C, Laetsch B, Maahs E,
Scholz L, Frenzel D, Massarat K, Lenhart FP, Reichle F, Rudlof K, Borchers F,
Buettner C, Schmutzler M, Burgard G, Lucht A, Wagner J, Pilge S, Schneider G,
Untergehrer G, Bis B, Krassler J, Dittmann J, Haberkorn J, Eberitsch J, Eberitsch
K, Nippraschk T, Wepler U, Engelen WC, Nau C, Scholler A, Schüttler J,
Wintzheimer S, Bloos F, Braune A, Fergen D, Ludewig K, Paxian M, Reinhart K, Graf
N, Schwarzkopf K, Berger K, Habicher M, Kasperiunaite R, Savelsberg S, Krep H,
Reindl M, Weber M, Bauer W, Bingold F, Christ S, Friederich P, Kaviani R, Auer P,
Bonnländer G, Drescher J, Braun R, Eichenauer T, Kerner J, Bierbaum K, Brünner H,
Grond S, Perez-Platz U, Andresen B, Linstedt U, Stegmann N, Erkens U, Kopcke J,
Meyer A, Brestrich H, Ernst S, Merkel S, Krieger L, Luers F, Weyland A,
Noeldge-Schomburg G, Menckie T, Wasmund C, Bredtmann RD, Erler I, Raufhake C,
Haumann C, Möllemann A, Oehmichen U, Sergejewa O, Lehning B, Czeslick E, Geyer M,
Malcharek M, Sablotzki A, Stier M, Feld F, Marx G, Rossaint R, Simon V,
Armaganidis A, Koulenti D, Kotanidou A, Nanas S, Papastylianou A, Psevdi A,
Stathopoulos A, Voulas A, Kanna E, Koutsikou A, Moustaka A, Chovas A, Komnos A,
Zafiridis T, Franses J, Lavrentieva A, Koraki E, Katsenos C, Kasianidou MF,
Nasopoulou P, Spyropoulou E, Gousia C, Katsanoulas C, Lathyris D, Kyriazopoulos
G, Sfyras D, Tsirogianni A, Armaganidis A, Kostopanagiotou G, Koulenti D, Lignos 
M, Matsota P, Christopoulos C, Mouratidou A, Vrettou E, Boufidis S, Moka E,
Arnaoutoglou E, Koulouras V, Nakos G, Papathanakos G, Anthopoulos G, Choutas G,
Karapanos D, Tzani V, Gkiokas G, Nastos K, Nikolakopoulos F, Dragoumanis C,
Nikitidis N, Pneumatikos I, Theodorou V, Zacharouli D, Kandi S, Tasopoulos K,
Arvaniti K, Matamis D, Mplougoura E, Petropoulou P, Soumpasis I, Amaniti E,
Giannakou-Peftoulidou M, Gkeka E, Soultati I, Kokinou M, Papatheodorou L,
Stafylaraki M, Giasnetsova T, Gritsi-Gerogianni N, Kydona C, Kiskira O, Koulentis
I, Apsokardos A, Dimitropoulos K, Soldatou O, Nathanail C, Papazotos A, Tsakas P,
Clouva-Molyvdas PM, Kolotoura A, Sartzi M, Papanikolaou S, Polakis P, Karatzas S,
Kyparissi A, Papavasilopoulou T, Koukoubani T, Mastora E, Spyropoulou-Pagdatoglou
K, Nyktari V, Malliotakis P, Papaioannou A, Bekos V, Maragkou E, Spring A,
Evagelatos S, Ioakeimidou A, Noulas N, Molnár Z, Csüllög E, Elekes E, Molnár T,
Katona Z, Kremer I, Miko A, Csomos A, Galambos Z, Szucs A, Nyikos G, Szekeres G, 
Szabo E, Kranitz K, Simon M, Szigeti J, Gaál E, Havas A, Ille A, Bráz K, Nagy G, 
Sigurdsson G, Sigurbjörnsson FT, Sigurdsson GH, Kárason S, Sigurdardottir EE,
Blöndal Á, Gunnarsson B, Westbrook A, Broderick A, Hafeez P, Hanumanthaiah D,
Brohan J, O'Chroinin D, Bailey K, Ramamoorthy K, Doyle Y, Freir N, O'Rourke J,
Jonson P, Saeed S, Hayes I, Loughrey J, Frohlich S, McCauley N, Ryan D,
Fitzpatrick G, Kevin L, Thomas J, Warde B, Woolhead A, Duggan M, Egan C, Crowley 
S, Lebese S, Bergin A, Westbrook A, Page R, Collins D, McKenny M, Della Rocca G, 
Grasso S, Bresciani A, Carmino L, Ghelfi S, Lorenzelli L, Novelli MT, Pescarmona 
C, Roasio A, Gatta A, Nastasi M, Sanseverino M, Tinti C, Bianchin A, Tormena M,
Franco A, Marini F, Di Mauro P, Rapido F, Tommasino C, Bellotti F, Boninsegna D, 
Castellani G, Sances D, Spano G, Tredici S, Vezzoli D, Fucecchio I, Bacci A,
Coppini R, Dell'unto S, Mori E, Stanzani MR, Tosi M, Collareta M, Forfori F,
Franchi M, Mancino G, Battistella M, Baricocchi E, Bona F, Debernardi F,
Giacoletto G, Iacobellis A, Massucco P, Moselli N, Muratore A, Palomba G, Sardo
E, De Simone M, Suita L, Zocca E, Bucci B, Della Corte F, Piciucco T, Viarengo V,
Bettelli G, Cantarini E, Giampieri M, Tanfani A, Recchia E, Milano S, Bignami E, 
Bruno G, Costagliola R, Gandolfi A, Greco M, Lembo R, Monti G, Nicelli E,
Pasculli N, Turi S, Della Rocca G, Baroselli A, Brazzoni M, Buttazzoni M, Buttera
S, Centonze C, Serena G, Spagnesi L, Toretti I, Vilardi A, Zearo E, Arpino I,
Baraldi S, Guarnerio C, Molene V, Monea MC, Vaccarisi E, Vicari L, Albante A,
Aversano M, Loiacono C, Marandola M, Fusari M, Petrucci N, Galla A, Mascia A,
Primieri P, Di Noto A, Gratarola A, Molin A, Pelosi P, Spagnolo L, Spena C,
Calligaro P, Marchiotto S, Merlini A, Pedrazzoli E, Perina G, Visentin R,
Fumagalli R, Garbagnati A, Manetti B, Snaier C, Somaini M, Farnia A, Nani R,
Pierantonio N, De Michele M, Grasso S, Gazzanelli S, Marandola M, Pugliese F,
Ruberto F, Anna US, Bergamini E, Tassinati T, Capuzzo M, Cirillo V, Tufano R,
Oggioni R, Parrini V, Brunori E, Capone M, Carbone L, Corradetti F, Elisei D,
Fiorentino S, Francesconi M, Gattari D, Gorgoglione M, Lacobone E, Minnucci F,
Montironi C, Riccioni G, Tappata G, Zompanti V, Verdenelli P, Cerutti E, Ranieri 
VM, Golubovska I, Grigorjevs S, Rikmane M, Rozkalne D, Stepanovs J, Suba O,
Golubovska I, Kazune S, Miscuk A, Nemme J, Oss P, Sipylaite J, Macas A, Ragaisis 
V, Kontrimaviciute E, Tomkute G, Boerma C, Kramer IF, Poeze M, Ziekenhuis A,
Maria J, Pelzer G, Winsser L, Nijsten M, Schoorl M, Spanjersberg R, Buhre W,
Dieleman S, van Klei W, Bouw M, Pickkers P, van der A M, Schreiner F, Zandvliet
R, van den Berg R, De Wit E, Keijzer C, Hollmann M, Preckel B, van Acker G,
Dennesen P, Veld B, Kuijpers-Visser A, Inan T, Koopman-van Gemert A, Ponssen H,
Boerma C, Brouwer T, Koopmans M, van Bommel J, van Duijn D, van der Hoven B,
Ormskerk P, Beck O, Schiere S, Reidinga A, Venema A, Hoogendoorn M, Olthof K,
Flaatten H, Jammer I, Dokka V, Monsen SA, Ytrebo LM, Noursadeghi M, Shahzad A,
Boksasp OD, Roiss C, Strietzel HF, Gina A, Berntsen S, Haugland H, Vingsnes SO,
Axelsson P, Olsen T, Katre S, Aakeroey K, Mikstacki A, Tamowicz B, Bozilow D,
Goch R, Grabowski P, Kupisiak J, Mallek M, Szyca R, Kostyrka W, Choma R,
Jankowski G, Koscielniak W, Pietraszek P, Szarowar B, Matos R, França C, Lacerda 
AP, Ormonde L, Rosa R, Pereira I, Vitor P, Bento HC, Lopes MR, Carvalho M, Faria 
M, de Sousa AC, de Freitas P, Almeida E, Mealha R, Vicente R, Monte R, Rua F,
Barros N, Esteves F, Gouveia Pinheiro CM, Real V, Oliveira VM, Oliveira MF,
Martins I, Saraiva JP, Assunção JP, Bártolo A, Carvalho A, Correia C, Martins S, 
Milheiro R, Diaz A, Gonçalves MI, Ribeiro R, Estilita J, Glória C, de Almeida J, 
Barros F, Ramos A, Camara M, Maul ER, Nobrega J, Langner A, Maia D, Afonso O,
Faria F, Serra S, Botelho MM, Ferreira P, Mourão L, Oliveira AV, Resende M,
Aleman M, Fonseca J, Isidoro M, de Meneses H, Pêgas A, Pereira J, Pereira L,
Ramos B, Matos F, Matos R, Castro Mde L, Martins A, Ramos C, de Sousa M, Bento L,
Botas C, Lopes V, Mendes R, Grigoras I, Blaj M, Damian M, Lupusoru A, Ristescu I,
Codreanu M, Diaconescu C, Nistor A, Stelian DS, Streanga L, Berneanu M, Bordeianu
C, Florenta C, Iacob A, Lupu MN, Mocanu I, Moraru C, Meran C, Nicolae B, Sandu M,
Turcanu R, Epure F, Grigore M, Hotaranu C, Popescu N, Baban O, Baciu M, Ciobanu
A, Denciu CI, Gurau V, Maftei I, Moldovan I, Ungureanu L, Bogdan P, Corneci D,
Dinu M, Madalina D, Rely M, Silvius N, Tomescu D, Gabriela D, Dinescu SA, Calin
M, Ionescu D, Margarit S, Vasian H, Albu C, Balasa C, Cadrigati A, Dragulescu D, 
Gavra L, Hentia C, Macarie C, Manescu M, Nediglea I, Ocica D, Ovidiu B, Papurica 
M, Plavat C, Popa C, Ramneantu M, Sandesc D, Sandici Z, Sarandan M, Belciu I,
Tincu E, Ursu I, Aignatoaie M, Huzuneanu M, Cocu S, Hagau N, Ciubotaru R,
Copotoiu SM, Copotoiu R, Ioana G, Kovacs J, Leonard A, Szederjesi I, Genoveva V, 
Mosnegutu S, Surbatovic M, Djordjevic D, Djordjevic B, Grujic K, Jovanovic D,
Krstic-Lecic I, Obradovic J, Zeba S, Jevdjic J, Miletic M, Zunic F, Bulasevic A, 
Brko R, Gazibegovic N, Kendrisic M, Vojinovic R, Firment J, Zahorec R, Capková J,
Firment J, Grochova M, Trenkler S, Griger M, Zahorec R, Bakosova E, Kvasnica M,
Saniova B, Sulaj M, Zacharovska A, Simkova A, Cíková A, Gebhardtova A,
Hanuljaková S, Koutun J, Martonová A, ilincárová V, Galkova K, Krbila S, Sobona 
V, Ocenasova M, Novak-Jankovic V, Novak-Jankovic V, Stecher A, Stivan F, Grynyuk 
A, Damjanovska M, Kostadinov I, Knezevic M, Malivojevic M, Borovsak Z, Kamenik M,
Meki D, Osojnik I, Kosec L, Kap SO, Aleksic D, Gerjevic B, Kalan K, Ursic T,
Aldecoa C, González JM, Artigas A, Garcia A, Lisi A, Perez I, Perez G, Poch N,
Vaquer S, Balciscueta G, Barrasa H, Cabanes S, Maynar J, Poveda Y, Rodero AQ,
Vallejo A, Duque P, Garcia-Bunger B, Elvira MA, Lajara AM, Palencia M, Ramos R,
Fernandez AS, León JT, López JI, Murillo FY, Ramirez ET, Rico PU, Patricia M,
Vizcaíno M, Bernat Álvarez MJ, Real KP, Serra AM, Aracil N, Bodega BM, García RF,
García MÁ, Gordon Bde L, Jodrá AG, López Ade S, Ros JJ, Soto RA, Sepúlveda I,
Díez EP, Fernández LF, Gulina CS, Arviza LP, Fernandez LM, Gómez AR, Martínez CA,
Rodríguez AB, Soto CL, Aldecoa C, Garcia C, Lorenzo M, Pinilla E, Rico J, Ruperez
I, Alonso E, Leira F, Maseda DP, Royo C, Villagran J, Candi GM, Esteva GE,
Folgado RM, Fornaguera NJ, Montse PC, Prat AS, Sintes D, Arteta DA, Delgado HG,
López-Cuervo JF, López MC, Ramírez A, Saldaña FJ, Aliste P, Anchuelo AH, Campos
AG, Catalán M, Gómez MG, Gonzalaez OG, López EL, Navacerrada IR, de Quevedo SA,
Serrano MG, Silvestre FP, Torrente FM, Arocas B, Martinez EP, Soro M, Maroto F,
Algarra RR, Aleixandre IS, Argente GR, Lleó AB, Rubio AV, Sánchez JL, Valcárcel
IE, Balust C, Balust J, Borrat X, Carretero MJ, Gracia I, Matute P, Mercadal J,
Pujol R, Tena B, Ubre M, Albalad DD, Alcaide CM, Caballero J, Cervantes AC,
Clanchet M, Estruch NM, Ferrer MB, Fornells AL, Galera ET, Martinez IG, Muñoz SM,
Pelavski A, Perez PT, Posada MA, de Prat IC, Rello J, Serrano LG, Sieiro JM,
Silva L, Sole MJ, Suñé AB, Villach IR, Herreras JI, Poves R, Rafael BM, Almeida
IM, Collates AF, Bartolomé MJ, Cimadevilla B, González AM, Llevot JM, Mira JC,
Molina BG, Pardo S, Sánchez CL, Williams M, Zaldibar E, Corsini LM, Fraile JR, de
la Lastra M, Sacramento MK, Saña FJ, Ålvarez JT, Bulnes ML, Carrasco VG, Crespo
Mdel R, Cubillos DN, Laza EL, Pérez M, Seisdedos ÁA, Torres BF, Ampuero MS, Llano
MC, Mata E, Munoz M, Orts M, Planas A, Ramasco F, Roman C, Durán MV, Fernandez
Sdel R, Otero YS, Pineiro SL, Pardal CB, Alcantud JF, Antolinos MA, Barrios F,
Casanova AC, Castro MR, Crespo BI, Felipe UL, Fuster ML, García MS, Garrote BH,
Gonzalez RM, Granero MJ, de la Guía CL, López RC, López Sde F, Martinez JJ,
Mostaza AG, Moreno AJ, Osado IR, Pastor AB, Peña R, Pérez MR, Piña MA, Romero CA,
Rodríguez ER, Sáez VP, Safatle F, Salvan JH, Sampedro MG, de la Torre PA, Toro
JP, Unzúe CL, Vargas MJ, Bernal DG, Echevarria M, Iglesias AU, Loza A, Morillo
AR, Serrano PD, Sevilla FC, Cacho E, Calderón R, Dufur M, Marginet C, Monedero P,
Yepes MJ, Alvarez LR, Carballal FF, Castiñeiras AP, García PD, López LR, Maceiras
PR, Puente MS, Rilo MT, Alonso AE, Fernández SR, García RO, García AP, Puentes
RB, Aguado DN, Carballo CL, Fernandez RF, Presedo AT, de Rabago RB, Velasco AR,
Capel YJ, Cortés AF, García EM, Gimeno LM, Klamburg J, Omedas RC, Núñez MG,
Maristany CL, Ruiz EM, Artigas X, Castrillón S, Espinosa N, Gomez-Caro AM, Illa
S, India I, Martín-Huerta B, Moral V, Moreno M, Fernández CI, García VF,
Hernández PP, Checa AA, Diaz DS, Noguera ML, Varela IP, Gallego MG, García OM,
Irujo JJ, Perrino CG, Picazo JR, Timoneda FL, Arroyo MM, Blanco IA, Borja MM,
Burcio SM, Castro NM, Cerdeiriña AP, Concostrina Mde L, Cristina MV, Díaz TD,
Esteruelas JA, Ingelmo II, Insuga PD, Llamas EC, Lopez JJ, Martín MB, Martín EE, 
Mesa EU, Monterde ML, Montoiro PA, Móstoles ML, Olarte EV, Pérez AM, Perez FD,
Romero AS, Rous DP, Ruiz NM, Ruiz JA, Saiz AR, Terol Ade L, Toha AC, Utrera FA,
Alberdi F, Elósegui I, García J, Garde PM, Mintegui EI, Sáez IG, Salas E, Zabarte
M, Diaz-Boladeras RM, Mora-Guevara E, Zamora JF, Bonet A, Salo L, Salinas U,
Zaballos J, Alvarez AA, Garrido CJ, Roa JR, Vidal FG, Garcia-Egea J, Elson MZ,
Seron-Arbeloa C, Asensio MA, Simeón RG, Alameda LE, Angulo GO, Aranzubia M, Arcas
JJ, Arevalo J, Belvert BQ, Calvo CP, Cremades M, Crespo P, Cuarental A, Del Olmo 
M, Fernández PT, Vega JL, Herrera E, Llorente MA, Rabes CM, de Maeyer AG, Marquez
MP, Mendoza DL, Muñoz JM, Martínez NA, Oviedo AS, Garrigues PB, Íñigo JA,
Ferrandiz ST, Sanchez-Morcillo S, Sánchez ML, Parra AM, Vidal SG, Allué RM, Etayo
BZ, Rodriguez RB, Villen LM, Jimenez CM, de Zayas RS, Moreno CD, Pacheco FS,
Pascual JL, Gude FT, Riestra EM, Delgado FC, Prados MV, Barrios J, Cervera-Montes
M, García-Sanz M, García V, Sanmiguel G, Álvaro JL, Barrachima BB, Bermejo FJ,
Pilar AG, Garcia M, Ramírez CN, Ramos JG, Samaniego LA, Belenguer-Muncharaz A,
Ferrándiz-Selles A, Mateu-Campos ML, Domínguez D, Espinosa E, León T, Betancor
NO, Cortes JG, Díaz JJ, Canalechevarria AM, Novales BF, Peña JM, Delgado TR,
Roquerio BS, Sainz JJ, Soto TT, Chew M, Seeman-Lodding H, Dahm P, Hergès HO,
Lundborg C, Seeman-Lodding H, Söndergaard S, Rylander C, Sari F, Tibblin AO,
Adolfsson A, Klarin B, Schrey S, Merisson E, Rydén J, Divander MB, Hedin A,
Hedlund D, Lindkvist MA, Jawad M, Layous L, Wernerman J, Björne H, Brattström O, 
Olheden S, Oldner A, Sellden E, Walder B, Wickboldt N, Rossi A, Steiner L,
Djurdjevic M, Lussmann R, Geisen M, Hofer C, Turina M, Grocott M, Goldhill D,
Everett L, Harris K, Wright M, Adams D, Alderson L, Baker J, Christie I, Ferguson
C, Hill M, Holmes K, Hutton A, Minto G, Moor P, Porter A, Struthers R, Akotia N, 
Belhaj A, Chang S, Collantes E, Eigener K, Husband M, Khan A, Kong ML, McAlees
EJ, MacDonald N, Niebrzegowska E, Parnell W, Smith A, Pearse R, Chhatwal A,
Jhingan S, Muswell R, Poon Y, Singh N, Stephens R, Vasan R, Waife N, Weda T,
Clarke A, Szakmany T, Fletcher S, Rosbergen M, Blunt M, Prince L, Wong K,
Goldhill D, Kumar R, Stilwell S, Couper K, Crooks N, Gao-Smith F, Melody T,
Snaith C, Patel J, Parekh D, Yeung J, Loughnan B, Moosajee V, Rope T, Edger L,
Dawson J, Hadfield D, Hopkins P, McDonald L, Willars C, Campbell G, Craig J,
Smith A, Ladipo K, Lockwood G, Moreno J, Ballington R, Hamandishe S, Rogerson D, 
Cowman S, Hayden P, Pinto N, Sandhar T, Arawwawala D, Brotherston L,
Mitchell-Inwang C, Walsh H, Alagarsamy F, Goon S, Karcheva S, Krepska A, McKinney
B, Patil V, Batchelor N, Day C, Finch L, Gibson C, Grayling M, Hubble S, Key W,
Knight T, Loosley A, Margetts P, Stewart H, Bewley J, Hurley K, Murphy R,
Philpott C, Pollock K, Sweet K, Thomas M, Tucker K, Windsor D, Conway D, Gold S, 
Quraishi T, Cupitt J, Baddeley S, Brown JD, Foo I, Mantle D, Carvalho P, Huddart 
S, Kirk-Bayley J, Smith R, Milligan L, Poulose S, Sarkar S, Nolan J, Pedley E,
Padkin A, Pesian S, Rajamanickam S, Ramkumar K, Thomas J, Crayford A, Turner A,
Bottrill F, Webb S, Jhanji S, MacCallum N, Wessels K, Wigmore T, Meikle A, Wilson
S, White S, Bonnett A, Rushton A, Williams C, Zuzan O, Hall A, Montgomery J,
Piggot A, Read R, Stocker M, Tamm T, Agarwal B, Ward S, Brown L, Joy M, Venkatesh
S, Hughes T, Mitchell-Inwang C, Zsisku L, Roy A, Hooper V, Mouland J, Nightingale
J, Rose S, Chiam P, Chohan H, Dickson C, Gibb S, Higham C, Harvey C, Janarthanan 
C, Jones L, Kapoor A, Moll M, Roberts L, Saunders D, Arnold G, Gibbs C,
Jhurgursing M, Pierro D, Pritchard F, Doyle P, Templeton M, Wilson R, Zantua K,
Collyer T, Featherstone J, Worton R, Bruce J, McGuigan K, Price G, Moreton S,
Pulletz M, Anderson H, Baxter I, Beckingsale A, Callaghan M, Datta A, Dawson J,
Gollogly J, Izod C, Lobaz S, MacFie C, Patel M, Payne H, Singh R, Timms G, McLeod
S, O'Brian P, Horner E, Joshi V, Stuart-Smith K, Seale T, Bolger C, Collins H,
Ekins E, Golder K, Hawkins L, Jonas M, Linford K, Wadams B, Beach M, Vizcaychipi 
M, Jewsbury W, Davies S, Balaji P, Kangaraj M, Pissay N, Smith N, Gopalakrishnan 
S, MacKinnon J, Strandvik G, Francis R, Jennings A, Keating M, Kumar S, Leese S, 
Magee C, Pilsbury J, Ralph J, Riddington D, Sachdeva R, Snelson C, Vasanth S,
Wilde J, Lavender B, Lyons R, Watters M, Adams T, Dyer S, Tindall L, Claxton A,
Netke M, Akouds E, Bates D, Gallagher H, Hatton J, Holroyd W, Mitra A, Nurse T,
Reed D, Desikan S, Barber R, Childs S, O'Carroll-Kuehn B, Wyldbore M, Al-Abdaly
A, Amatya S, Bhaskaran S, Chandan G, Chaudhry S, Chikungwa M, Earnshaw G, Grewal 
M, Haque S, Hawkins J, Javaid A, Jackson C, Kamel M, Marla R, Mculloch DA, Parker
T, Salib Y, Saravanmuthu R, Secker C, Sockalingam S, Taylor A, Austine P, Kanade 
V, Paal D, Mok MU, Burtenshaw A, Davis L, Ellahee P, Freeman D, Pierson R,
Wollaston J, Karmarkar A, Ball C, Calton E, Maxwell L, Walker R, Bland M, Bullock
L, Harrison-Briggs D, Hodge P, Krige A, Dempsey G, Hammell C, Loveridge R, Parker
R, Snell J, Wright C, Baker A, Barr K, Belcher A, Bonnington S, Bougeard AM,
Fitzgerald E, Ford R, Gillard C, Griffiths L, Greenberg L, Huber J, Mathieu S,
Richardson N, Tompsett L, White N, Patel S, Corner V, Thomas R, Trodd D, Wilson
J, Copley E, Flutter L, Hulme J, Susarla J, Thwaites A, Jayasundera S, McAfee S, 
Chantler J, McKechnie S, Neely J, Mouton R, Scarth E, Soar J, Buss J, Currie V,
Sange M, Kuttler A, Power F, Alexander D, Dunne K, Shinner G, Black E, Haldane G,
Kerr J, Saran T, Ward G, Jefferies F, Alexander P, Royle A, Nahla F, Bowles T,
Gregory M, Ahern R, Cartlidge D, Craker L, Thompson C, Bidd H, Giles J, Manser A,
Parry G, Chan P, Das D, Fahmy N, Higgins D, Khader A, Stone A, Leonardi S, Rose
O, Bright E, Ercole A, Rafi MA, Ramasamy R, Sheshgiri B, Merrill C, Page V,
Walker E, Harris S, Hughes S, Morrison A, Razouk K, Ayman M, Al-Subaie N, Arif F,
Cashman J, Cecconi M, Edsell M, Fossati N, Hammond SJ, Hamilton M, Lonsdale D,
Moran C, Rhodes A, Siegmueller C, Velzeboer F, Wong P, Jakeman A, Mowatt C.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2013 Dec 21;382(9910):2063-4.
    Lancet. 2013 Feb 2;381(9864):369-70.
    Lancet. 2013 Feb 2;381(9864):370.
    Lancet. 2013 Feb 2;381(9864):369.
    Orthopade. 2013 Aug;42(8):663.
    Lancet. 2013 Feb 2;381(9864):370-1.
    Lancet. 2013 Feb 2;381(9864):370.
    Lancet. 2013 Dec 21;382(9910):2063.
    Lancet. 2012 Sep 22;380(9847):1034-6.
    Lancet. 2013 Feb 2;381(9864):369.

BACKGROUND: Clinical outcomes after major surgery are poorly described at the
national level. Evidence of heterogeneity between hospitals and health-care
systems suggests potential to improve care for patients but this potential
remains unconfirmed. The European Surgical Outcomes Study was an international
study designed to assess outcomes after non-cardiac surgery in Europe.
METHODS: We did this 7 day cohort study between April 4 and April 11, 2011. We
collected data describing consecutive patients aged 16 years and older undergoing
inpatient non-cardiac surgery in 498 hospitals across 28 European nations.
Patients were followed up for a maximum of 60 days. The primary endpoint was
in-hospital mortality. Secondary outcome measures were duration of hospital stay 
and admission to critical care. We used <U+03C7>(2) and Fisher's exact tests to compare 
categorical variables and the t test or the Mann-Whitney U test to compare
continuous variables. Significance was set at p<0·05. We constructed multilevel
logistic regression models to adjust for the differences in mortality rates
between countries.
FINDINGS: We included 46,539 patients, of whom 1855 (4%) died before hospital
discharge. 3599 (8%) patients were admitted to critical care after surgery with a
median length of stay of 1·2 days (IQR 0·9-3·6). 1358 (73%) patients who died
were not admitted to critical care at any stage after surgery. Crude mortality
rates varied widely between countries (from 1·2% [95% CI 0·0-3·0] for Iceland to 
21·5% [16·9-26·2] for Latvia). After adjustment for confounding variables,
important differences remained between countries when compared with the UK, the
country with the largest dataset (OR range from 0·44 [95% CI 0·19-1·05; p=0·06]
for Finland to 6·92 [2·37-20·27; p=0·0004] for Poland).
INTERPRETATION: The mortality rate for patients undergoing inpatient non-cardiac 
surgery was higher than anticipated. Variations in mortality between countries
suggest the need for national and international strategies to improve care for
this group of patients.
FUNDING: European Society of Intensive Care Medicine, European Society of
Anaesthesiology.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3493988
PMID: 22998715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Feb;28(2):395-403. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1755.

Cost-effectiveness of alendronate for the treatment of osteopenic postmenopausal 
women in Japan.

Moriwaki K(1), Komaba H, Noto S, Yanagisawa S, Takiguchi T, Inoue H, Toujo T,
Fukagawa M, Takahashi HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Informatics, Niigata University of Health and Welfare,
Niigata, Japan. moriwaki@nuhw.ac.jp

Many postmenopausal women have osteopenia, a condition characterized by loss of
bone mineral density (BMD) that is not as severe as in osteoporosis. The
objective of this study was to estimate the cost-effectiveness of alendronate to 
prevent fractures in osteopenic postmenopausal women without a history of
fracture in Japan. An individual simulation model was developed to predict
lifetime costs and quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) of 5 years of preventive
alendronate therapy versus no preventive therapy. The risk of hip and vertebral
fracture associated with age and BMD was derived from epidemiologic studies in
Japan. We ran the model with different combinations of age (65, 70, and 75
years), BMD (70%, 75%, and 80% of young adult mean [YAM]), and additional
clinical risk factors. For 70-year-old women with a BMD of 70% of the YAM having 
one of the following risk factors: a family history of hip fracture, high alcohol
intake, or current smoking, the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of
alendronate was $92,937, $126,251, and $129,067 per QALY, respectively. These
results were sensitive to age, BMD, and number of clinical risk factors.
Probabilistic sensitivity analysis for the base case showed that in the presence 
of one, two, and three risk factors, alendronate was cost-effective in 0.2% to
2.6%, 13.1% to 56.1%, and 99.1% of the simulations, respectively, if society is
willing to pay $50,000 per QALY. Additional analysis indicated that alendronate
can be a good value in osteopenic women if the 10-year probability for a
osteoporotic hip or vertebral fracture is more than 26.2%. Our results indicate
that whether to treat osteopenia with alendronate should be determined on the
basis of age, BMD, and number of clinical risk factors in terms of
cost-effectiveness.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 22991163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Intern Med. 2012;51(17):2307-12. Epub 2012 Sep 1.

Demyelinating features in sensory nerve conduction in Fisher syndrome.

Shiga K(1), Tsuji Y, Fujii C, Noto Y, Nakagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: A significant number of patients with Fisher syndrome (FS) exhibit
sensory symptoms in addition to the classical triad of opthalmoplegia, ataxia and
areflexia. Previous studies have shown the amplitudes of sensory nerve action
potentials (SNAPs) to decrease in patients with FS, thus implying the presence of
an axonal pathology in the sensory nerves.
METHODS: We included ten consecutive patients with FS who were divided into the
following two groups: those with hypesthesia (group H) and those without
hypesthesia (group NS). The parameters obtained from nerve conduction studies
(amplitudes of compound muscle action potentials, motor conduction velocities,
amplitudes/duration of SNAPs and sensory conduction velocities) were
retrospectively compared between the two groups. In addition, follow-up sensory
nerve conduction studies were conducted in one representative patient from each
group.
RESULTS: Of the 10 patients with FS, four (40%) showed hypesthesia and eight
(80%) showed distal paresthesia. The amplitudes of the SNAPs of both the median
and sural nerves were lower in group H than in group NS. Moreover, the duration
of the sural SNAPs was longer in group H than in group NS. Desynchronization of
SNAPs in the acute phase was observed during follow-up in both patients who
underwent follow-up studies.
CONCLUSION: The prolonged duration of SNAPs in group H and the desynchronization 
of SNAPs in the two patients who underwent follow-up studies suggest the presence
of a concomitant demyelinating process in the sensory nerves.

PMID: 22975539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Intern Med. 2012;51(17):2285-90. Epub 2012 Sep 1.

Short-term effects of ß-adrenergic antagonists and methimazole in new-onset
thyrotoxicosis caused by Graves' disease.

Tagami T(1), Yambe Y, Tanaka T, Tanaka T, Ogo A, Yoshizumi H, Kaise K, Higashi K,
Tanabe M, Shimazu S, Usui T, Shimatsu A, Naruse M; BBGD Study Group.

Collaborators: Kobayashi K, Koyama K, Ujihara M, Noto H, Kato Y, Araki R, Noma K,
Koide J, Satoh Y, Ohyama T, Okajima T, Iino K, Kimura H, Aoki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Institute, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
National Hospital Organization Kyoto Medical Center, Japan.
ttagami@kyotolan.hosp.go.jp

OBJECTIVE: ß-adrenergic antagonists (ß-blockers) are often used to attenuate the 
hyperadrenergic symptoms of Graves' disease (GD), including palpitation. Although
ß-blockers reduce the heart rate, cardiac output and oxygen consumption, no firm 
evidence exists regarding the effects of combined therapy with ß-blockers and
anti-thyroid drugs. The objective is to elucidate the effects of ß-blockers on
anti-thyroid drug therapy in GD.
METHODS: Patients newly diagnosed with mild GD were randomly assigned to receive 
methimazole with or without ß-blockers in a prospective multi-center survey. The 
heart rate and thyroid function were measured and the quality of life was
assessed using original and SF-36 questionnaires at 0 and 4 weeks.
RESULTS: A total of 28 patients were enrolled in the study. Fourteen patients
(one man, 13 women) were randomly assigned to the group treated with ß-blockers
and 14 patients (one man, 13 women) were randomly assigned to the group not
treated with ß-blockers. Although no significant differences in the improvement
of thyroid function were observed between the two groups, the heart rates
improved more significantly in the group treated with ß-blockers. Specific
symptoms, such as easy fatigability and shortness of breath, also improved more
significantly with the ß-blocker treatment. In addition, 'physical functioning'
assessed with the SF-36 questionnaires significantly improved only in the group
treated with ß-blockers.
CONCLUSION: Although ß-blockers may not reinforce the effects of anti-thyroid
drugs on thyroid function, at least during the course of one month, they are
effective in reducing heart rates and ameliorating specific symptoms in patients 
with mild GD.

PMID: 22975536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Org Biomol Chem. 2012 Oct 28;10(40):8108-12.

Tandem catalysis in domino olefin cross-metathesis/intramolecular oxa-conjugate
cyclization: concise synthesis of 2,6-cis-substituted tetrahydropyran
derivatives.

Fuwa H(1), Noguchi T, Noto K, Sasaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-ku, 
Sendai 980-8577, Japan. hfuwa@bios.tohoku.ac.jp

Herein, we describe the concise synthesis of 2,6-cis-substituted tetrahydropyran 
derivatives based on a domino olefin cross-metathesis/intramolecular
oxa-conjugate cyclization (CM/IOCC) reaction. We have found that the domino
CM/IOCC of d-hydroxy olefins with a,ß-unsaturated carbonyl compounds (e.g.,
trans-crotonaldehyde or N-acryloyl-2,5-dimethylpyrrole) could be efficiently
achieved in the presence of the second-generation Hoveyda-Grubbs catalyst under
elevated temperature conditions, directly affording 2,6-cis-substituted
tetrahydropyrans in excellent yields with synthetically useful
diastereoselectivity ("auto-tandem catalysis"). In addition, we have found that
the domino CM/IOCC of d-hydroxy olefins with a,ß-unsaturated carbonyl compounds
could be achieved simply by performing CM in the presence of a Brønsted acid in
CH(2)Cl(2) at 25-35 °C, which delivered 2,6-cis-substituted tetrahydropyrans in
good yields with excellent diastereoselectivity ("orthogonal-tandem catalysis"). 
To understand the mechanism of auto-tandem catalysis in the domino CM/IOCC
reaction, we have investigated the role of ruthenium hydride complexes in the
IOCC of a <U+03B6>-hydroxy a,ß-unsaturated ketone as a model case.

PMID: 22948791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Int J Angiol. 2011 Sep;20(3):149-56. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1283218.

Carotid intima-media thickness and liver histology in hemodialysis patients with 
nonalcoholic Fatty liver disease.

Neri S, Signorelli SS, Scuderi R, Bruno M, Bertino G, Clementi A, Torrisi I,
Fidone F, Pagano AB, Malaguarnera M, Noto R.

The prevalence of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in chronic hemodialysis 
(HD) patients has been demonstrated to be higher than in healthy people. Severe
liver fibrosis is strongly associated with early carotid atherosclerosis and it
might reduce the survival of patients who undergo both renal replacement therapy 
and transplantation. We wanted to assess whether nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD) was associated with altered intima-media thickness (IMT) in HD patients
as an independent marker of subclinical atherosclerosis. We enrolled 42 patients 
undergoing HD and 48 patients with normal renal function, all of them with high
levels of aminotransferases and an ultrasonographic diagnosis of liver steatosis.
The control group consisted of 60 healthy subjects. Laboratory tests for
inflammatory and oxidative markers, ultrasonographic liver evaluation, carotid
IMT measurement, and liver biopsy were performed. Different degrees of fibrosis
were detected in our study cohort. Worse liver histopathological scores and
higher plasmatic levels of C-reactive protein, reactive oxygen species, and
vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 were found in HD patients. Carotid IMT was
significantly higher (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.005) in patients with histological steatosis. HD
patients may develop active and progressive chronic hepatitis faster than
patients with normal renal function and the thickness of their carotid
intima-media might be markedly increased. These two conditions seem to be
independent on classical risk factors and on metabolic syndrome. They might be
related to the high levels of oxidants and to the inflammatory state, which are
typical of patients undergoing HD. Independently related with the traditional
risk factors for cardiovascular disease, nonspecific inflammation and
oxide-reductive imbalance may play an important role in the progression of NAFLD 
and atherosclerotic disease in HD patients.

PMCID: PMC3331655
PMID: 22942630  [PubMed]


429. Coron Artery Dis. 2012 Nov;23(7):432-7.

Impact of preinterventional plaque composition and eccentricity on late-acquired 
incomplete stent apposition after sirolimus-eluting stent implantation: an
intravascular ultrasound radiofrequency analysis.

Sato T(1), Kameyama T, Noto T, Nozawa T, Inoue H.

Author information: 
(1)The Second Department of Internal Medicine, University of Toyama, Toyama,
Japan.

OBJECTIVES: The present study aimed to investigate differences in plaque
morphology and components in between the target coronary artery lesion with and
without late-acquired incomplete stent apposition (LISA) using radiofrequency
analysis (virtual histology) of intravascular ultrasound data.
BACKGROUND: Incomplete stent apposition is frequently observed in patients with
very late stent thrombosis after sirolimus-eluting stent implantation.
METHODS: The study group consisted of 70 coronary artery lesions in 43 patients
who underwent elective coronary stenting for stable angina pectoris. Virtual
histology intravascular ultrasound was performed at the implantation of stent and
12-month follow-up. LISA was defined as a separation of stent struts from the
intimal surface of the arterial wall that had not been present at the time of
stent implantation. The plaque eccentricity index (EI) was calculated as (lumen
radius+maximal plaque thickness)/(lumen radius+minimal plaque thickness).
RESULTS: At 12-month follow-up, LISA occurred in 15 plaques (LISA group).
Compared with the non-LISA group, the LISA group had significantly longer stents,
a higher EI, smaller amount of fibro-fatty component (7.7±4.2 vs. 12.5±7.0%,
P=0.01) and larger amount of necrotic core component (16.6±9.8 vs. 11.1±6.4%,
P=0.06). Multivariate logistic regression analysis revealed that amount of
necrotic core and plaque EI were independent positive predictors for LISA (odds
ratio=1.4, 95% confidence interval=1.1-1.6, P=0.04 and 11.2, 1.9-64.9, P<0.01,
respectively).
CONCLUSION: Plaques with increased amounts of necrotic core and higher
eccentricity are associated with subsequent LISA after sirolimus-eluting stent
implantation.

© 2012 Wolters Kluwer Health | Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

PMID: 22936019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2012 Nov-Dec;30(6):912-21. Epub 2012 Dec 17.

The comparative responsiveness of the patient self-report questionnaires and
composite disease indices for assessing rheumatoid arthritis activity in routine 
care.

Salaffi F(1), Ciapetti A, Gasparini S, Carotti M, Bombardieri S; New Indices
study group.

Collaborators: Lagana B, Varcasia G, Pomponio G, Mozzani F, Scarpa R, Maier A,
Romeo N, Migliore A, Scarpellini M, Corsaro SM, Pusceddu M, Foti R, Rotondi M,
Marasini B, Ferraccioli G, Malavolta N, Sabadini L, Cimmino M, Ricioppo A, Triolo
G, Mascia MT, Botsios K, Pellerito R, Noto A, Cazzato M.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Clinic, Department of Clinical and Molecular Sciences Università 
Politecnica delle Marche, Ancona, Italy. fsalaff@tin.it

OBJECTIVES: This paper aims to evaluate the internal and external responsiveness 
of the patient self-report questionnaires, comparatively to the traditional
composite indices to assess the activity of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in everyday
practice.
METHODS: One hundred and ninety-one RA out-patients completed the clinical
arthritis activity (PRO-CLARA) index, the rheumatoid arthritis disease activity
index (RADAI), the routine assessment of patient index data (RAPID3), and the
patient activity score (PAS). Simultaneously, the disease activity score-28
joints based on CRP (DAS28-CRP) and ESR (DAS28-ESR), the simplified disease
activity index (SDAI), the clinical disease activity index (CDAI), and the mean
overall index for RA (MOI-RA) were computed for each patient. Sensitivity to
change was assessed after 6 months of treatment with disease-modifying
anti-rheumatic drugs or biologics. Internal responsiveness was evaluated with the
effect size (ES) and standardised response mean (SRM). External responsiveness
was investigated by receiver operating characteristic (ROC), in categories of
respondents, stratified according to the response on an item on change in overall
health. In addition, change scores were compared by calculating correlation
coefficients.
RESULTS: No significant differences in internal and external responsiveness were 
found between self-report questionnaires and composite indices. The internal
responsiveness of the self-report questionnaires and composite measures was wide,
with SRM and ES ranging from 1.03 (RADAI) to 1.80 (DAS28-ESR) and higher than
that of the each individual measures. The responsiveness of the PRO-CLARA was
equal to the DAS28-ESR, DAS28-CRP, SDAI or MOI-RA, but better than the CDAI. The 
RADAI and PAS were less responsive than the PRO-CLARA and RAPID3. The area under 
ROC curve of the PRO-CLARA gives identical results to those provided by other
comparator composite indices. The score changes of all combinations were highly
correlated (p<0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: The self-report questionnaires showed comparable internal and
external responsiveness to the composite activity scores and allow for the
detection of rheumatoid disease activity. They appear suitable for clinical
decision making, epidemiologic research and clinical trials. Further longitudinal
studies are needed to validate these encouraging results.

PMID: 22935335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Case Rep Endocrinol. 2012;2012:280319. doi: 10.1155/2012/280319. Epub 2012 Jun 3.

Thyroglobulin gene mutation with cold nodule on thyroid scintigraphy.

Kahara T(1), Igarashi N, Hishinuma A, Nakanishi Y, Uchiyama A, Miwa A, Ishizawa
S, Yamamoto Y, Noto H, Sumiya H, Ishikura K, Usuda R, Iida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Prefectural Central Hospital, 2-2-78
Nishinagae, Toyama, Toyama 930-8550, Japan.

Thyroglobulin gene mutation is a rare cause of congenital hypothyroidism, but
thyroglobulin gene mutations are thought to be associated with thyroid cancer
development. A 21-year-old Japanese man treated with levothyroxine for congenital
hypothyroidism had an enlarged thyroid gland with undetectable serum
thyroglobulin despite elevated serum TSH level. The patient was diagnosed with
thyroglobulin gene mutation, with compound heterozygosity for Gly304Cys missense 
mutation and Arg432X nonsense mutation. Ultrasonography showed a hypovascular
large tumor in the left lobe that appeared as a cold nodule on thyroid
scintigraphy. He underwent total thyroidectomy, but pathological study did not
reveal findings of thyroid carcinoma, but rather a hyperplastic nodule with
hemorrhage. Strong cytoplasmic thyroglobulin immunostaining was observed, but
sodium iodide symporter immunostaining was hardly detected in the hyperplastic
nodule. The clinical characteristics of patients with thyroglobulin gene
mutations are diverse, and some patients are diagnosed by chance on examination
of goiter in adults. The presence of thyroid tumors that appear as cold nodules
on thyroid scintigraphy should consider the potential for thyroid carcinoma, if
the patient has relatively low serum thyroglobulin concentration in relation to
the degree of TSH without thyroglobulin autoantibody.

PMCID: PMC3420384
PMID: 22934199  [PubMed]


432. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Sep 18;109(38):E2543-50. Epub 2012 Aug 27.

Pathogenic bacterium Helicobacter pylori alters the expression profile of p53
protein isoforms and p53 response to cellular stresses.

Wei J(1), Noto J, Zaika E, Romero-Gallo J, Correa P, El-Rifai W, Peek RM, Zaika
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center and Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

The p53 protein plays a central role in the prevention of tumorigenesis. Cellular
stresses, such as DNA damage and aberrant oncogene activation, trigger induction 
of p53 that halts cellular proliferation and allows cells to be repaired. If
cellular damage is beyond the capability of the repair mechanisms, p53 induces
apoptosis or cell cycle arrest, preventing damaged cells from becoming cancerous.
However, emerging evidence suggests that the function of p53 needs to be
considered as isoform-specific. Here, we report that the expression profile of
p53 can be shifted toward inhibitory p53 isoforms by the pathogenic bacterium
Helicobacter pylori, which is known for its strong association with gastric
cancer and gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. We found that
interaction of H. pylori with gastric epithelial cells, mediated via the cag
pathogenicity island, induces N-terminally truncated <U+0394>133p53 and <U+0394>160p53 isoforms
in human cells. Induction of an orthologous p53 isoform, <U+0394>153p53, was also found 
in H. pylori-infected Mongolian gerbils. The p53 isoforms inhibit p53 and p73
activities, induce NF-<U+03BA>B, and increase survival of infected cells. Expression of 
<U+0394>133p53, in response to H. pylori infection, is regulated by phosphorylation of
c-Jun and activation of activator protein-1-dependent transcription. Together,
these results provide unique insights into the regulation of p53 protein and may 
contribute to the understanding of tumorigenesis associated with H. pylori.

PMCID: PMC3458371
PMID: 22927405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Hypertens Res. 2012 Nov;35(11):1102-10. doi: 10.1038/hr.2012.125. Epub 2012 Aug
16.

Cardiovascular outcomes in the first trial of antihypertensive therapy guided by 
self-measured home blood pressure.

Asayama K(1), Ohkubo T, Metoki H, Obara T, Inoue R, Kikuya M, Thijs L, Staessen
JA, Imai Y; Hypertension Objective Treatment Based on Measurement by Electrical
Devices of Blood Pressure (HOMED-BP).

Collaborators: Imai Y, Arakawa K, Fujishima M, Fujii J, Fukiyama K, Hisamichi S, 
Iimura O, Ishii M, Omae T, Saruta T, Yoshinaga K, Abe I, Abe K, Abukawa T, Ashida
T, Dohba N, Etoh T, Fujimura A, Fujita T, Fukui A, Gotoh T, Hama H, Hano T,
Hayashi H, Hayashida N, Hayashi M, Hiramori K, Hirai Y, Hirata Y, Hiwada K, Hora 
K, Ichikawa S, Iida T, Ikeda T, Imaizumi T, Ishikawa K, Ito I, Ito M, Ito S,
Iwaoka D, Kanamasa K, Katagiri T, Katayama S, Kawamura H, Kawano Y, Kida H,
Kikuchi K, Kimura G, Kimura K, Kitaoka H, Kobayashi S, Kohara K, Kojima S, Komuro
I, Kumagai H, Kumagai Y, Kusano E, Kushiro T, Kuwajima I, Maruyama Y, Masani F,
Matsubara H, Matsubara T, Matsumoto M, Matsuoka H, Matsuura H, Mishima Y, Miura
M, Miyamori I, Mori H, Murakami H, Muratani H, Nakagawa M, Nakao K, Naruse M,
Nishio I, Ogihara T, Ohta M, Ohtsuka K, Ohtsuka Y, Ohuchi Y, Oikawa S, Okabe M,
Okumura K, Saitoh I, Saitoh H, Sakata T, Saku K, Sasaki H, Seino M, Senda S,
Shimada K, Shimamoto K, Shimizu M, Shiomi T, Shirato K, Sone M, Suzuki H, Suzuki 
S, Takahashi H, Takada M, Takeda K, Takeda N, Takeshita A, Takishita S, Tanaka S,
Toba K, Tochikubo O, Tomoike H, Ueno Y, Umemura S, Urata H, Watanabe T, Yamada K,
Yamaguchi T, Yamakado M, Yamamoto Y, Yamamoto Y, Yamashina A, Yokoyama H,
Yoshimura M, Imai Y, Ohkubo T, Asayama K, Satoh H, Kondo Y, Totsune K, Miura Y,
Satoh H, Inoue R, Shishido H, Kondo Y, Katagiri H, Miura K, Fujiyoshi A, Kadota
A, Takashima N, Nagasawa S, Torii S, Kadowaki S, Hisamatsu T, Oka Y, Metoki H,
Saito S, Hosohata K, Kato T, Takahashi C, Kikuya M, Thijs L, Ohkubo T, Asayama K,
Fujiwara T, Nishimura T, Aoki Y, Fushimi Y, Shishido H, Kohinata A, Kanno Y,
Osugi M, Suzuki M, Saito M, Tamura T, Fukushima N, Sakuma S, Katada S, Sakurai K,
Sato M, Hirose T, Obara T, Ando T, Anzai J, Hosoda S, Iida M, Ito K, Kinhara I,
Koizumi M, Masuda Y, Matsumoto K, Mito T, Miyamura T, Morimoto H, Nakagawa M,
Noto T, Oda K, Ogawa Y, Shiiki M, Shiraishi M, Shiraishi K, Tada M, Takagawa Y,
Takahashi K, Tanaka S, Yonekura S, Abe H, Aihara M, Amada Y, Ando Y, Aoyama I,
Aoyama I, Araki F, Asayama K, Egawa S, Emura Y, Fujita T, Fukami K, Goto T,
Hayakawa T, Hayashi Y, Hayashi T, Hirose T, Hiwatari N, Hoshi H, Imai N, Imai Y, 
Inoue M, Ishibashi K, Ishii H, Ishi-kawa Y, Ito M, Ito H, Ito T, Ito K, Ito K,
Iwamoto M, Jin H, Kamimoto M, Kanno A, Kashima S, Kataoka S, Kawamorita K,
Kawamorita Y, Kibira S, Kikuchi K, Kikuchi K, Kikuya M, Kimura Y, Kimura H,
Kimura M, Kishi M, Kitabayashi A, Komai K, Kondo T, Kurosawa K, Kutsuzawa S,
Kyogoku S, Machii K, Mashiko H, Matsuo K, Metoki H, Minami O, Misawa H, Miyazaki 
Y, Mori R, Morikawa H, Morita K, Mouri T, Nagai S, Nakamura K, Nakayama D, Nihei 
K, Ohira K, Ohtomo E, Okuguchi F, Omoto A, Ono Y, Otsuka Y, Saeki K, Sakuma H,
Sasaki S, Sato T, Sato E, Satoho S, Seino J, Seki H, Sekino M, Shibasaki A,
Shimada K, Shimanaka Y, Shishido Y, Sone K, Sugawara T, Suzuki H, Suzuki H,
Suzuki Y, Tajima J, Takagi Y, Takahashi K, Takahashi H, Takaya Y, Tanaka H, Tanno
N, Tanno Y, Tashima G, Techigawara M, Tominaga Y, Toyama H, Tsukahara Y, Unakami 
H, Wada M, Watanabe N, Watanabe T, Watanabe M, Watanabe S, Watanabe H, Yabuki T, 
Yagi C, Yamada N, Yamada Z, Yamagishi T, Yamamoto N, Yamamoto H, Yamamoto H,
Yokkaichi H, Abe S, Adachi M, Akiyama N, Aoki H, Arai M, Arai T, Arai S, Cho T,
Dotare S, Fujito T, Fukuda K, Fukutome T, Funayama H, Gomi T, Hamada Y, Hasegawa 
K, Hashida M, Hashimoto A, Hatori Y, Higashi H, Higashi S, Hirawa N, Honzawa T,
Hori K, Horie K, Horikoshi H, Hoshino T, Ichikawa K, Ieki K, Iguchi C, Ikeda T,
Iketani T, Inaba M, Inokuma S, Ishimaru Y, Ito S, Iwasaki M, Kanouzawa K,
Kanouzawa S, Kato M, Kawamura H, Kimura K, Kodama Y, Koga I, Koide H, Koitabashi 
T, Koshikawa N, Kudo T, Kumagai Y, Kurata F, Kurosawa M, Kuwaki K, Masuda T,
Matsunaga R, Miyakawa M, Mori H, Nagao T, Nakajima C, Nakamura M, Nakano M,
Nakayama T, Nemoto K, Nishimura H, Noda Y, Noji S, Noma K, Noshiro T, Nozaki Y,
Okamoto K, Okano K, Ooba Y, Osuga E, Saito H, Sakurai J, Sato T, Sato H, Sekihara
T, Seta K, Shimizu J, Shinozaki T, Suga H, Suzuki M, Takahata R, Takata H,
Takayama K, Takigawa H, Teramoto T, Tsukagoshi S, Ueda T, Umetsu T, Ushiyama M,
Watanabe Y, Yagi N, Yamada C, Yamaguchi H, Yamakado M, Yamamoto H, Yamamoto T,
Yamashina S, Yanagisawa M, Yasuda F, Yatagai S, Yoshimatsu H, Adachi N, Akaoka F,
Akira S, Ando F, Asai S, Asaji A, Asato S, Goto K, Hayashi K, Hieda N, Higashi H,
Hirahara K, Horie H, Hoshiai M, Iida T, Ise T, Ishiguro J, Ishikawa S, Ito A,
Kamijo J, Kato S, Kato N, Kawamura Y, Kawamura I, Kobayashi H, Kojima N, Koyama
Y, Kozuka M, Kuroda K, Matsu T, Matsumoto H, Mihara J, Mori H, Morise T, Naito A,
Nakagawa T, Nakajima S, Nakamura T, Nakayama H, Nishino H, Nojiri O, Ohno T, Ohya
N, Okanishi N, Okazaki K, Oohashi S, Ookura T, Saeki T, Saito R, Sakakura K,
Satake K, Senga M, Sugiura K, Sugiyama S, Suzaki Y, Suzuki S, Takaeda C,
Takahashi S, Takahira Y, Takakuwa H, Takakuwa H, Takasawa K, Takata M, Takeuchi
N, Takeuchi N, Tamagaki H, Terada Y, Tobe M, Uchiba K, Uwatoko K, Yamaguchi Y,
Yamamoto Y, Yamamoto H, Yokoyama S, Amemori M, Fujita S, Fujiwara M, Goto S,
Hamaguchi Y, Hayashi K, Hirobe N, Imai N, Iwane M, Kanaya T, Kanemasa K, Kasahara
J, Kato H, Katsuya S, Kishima H, Kitayama K, Koide M, Komaki K, Konishi K,
Kurimoto Y, Majima T, Masui A, Nagai M, Nagai H, Nagao K, Nakamura K, Nakamuta K,
Nishi S, Nogami A, Ono S, Orito T, Sakamoto N, Sano I, Sawada S, Sawaoka H,
Shimakoshi H, Shimakoshi Y, Shirai K, Suzuki H, Suzuki N, Takahashi N, Takeda N, 
Takeda Y, Takemoto Y, Takenaka T, Tamai K, Terayama Y, Ueda M, Ueda T, Watanabe
I, Yamaguchi T, Yamaoka O, Yasui K, Yo S, Yoshida K, Yoshikawa H, Furue T,
Furukawa Y, Gen M, Harada M, Iwasaki K, Kahara M, Kamura M, Kida K, Minami J,
Mizuno K, Murata K, Nakamura Y, Nakayasu K, Ogurusu C, Ohtahara A, Osakata M,
Sasaki S, Sasaki N, Sugiura H, Tenou S, Tokunaga A, Tominaga Y, Yoshimoto T,
Arizumi M, Fujino K, Fukui T, Furumoto S, Furumoto W, Inoue T, Kawamoto R, Kimura
M, Kitami Y, Kobaru A, Kouno F, Matsumoto C, Matsuno T, Mizobuchi S, Mizobuchi H,
Nishiyama S, Okabe T, Okura T, Ota A, Takeuchi M, Ueta S, Yamamoto H, Yokoi T,
Yoshida K, Abe K, Arima S, Asato T, Aso T, Endo T, Endo Y, Fujino T, Fujishima Y,
Funatsu K, Hamasaki S, Hano O, Hirooka Y, Hirota C, Homma T, Inobe Y, Inoue J,
Iwaoka T, kamiya H, Karimata Y, Kimura Y, Kitano K, Koga H, Kouno M, Kuwahara A, 
Masuda Y, Miyagi J, Miyazaki Y, Muta Y, Nagata M, Nagayoshi N, Nakamura H,
Nakamura Y, Nakano H, Naomi S, Ninomiya K, Omori F, Ono T, Onoyama K, Oobayashi
W, Oshima K, Ozaki H, Sasaki K, Shindo R, Shiraki M, Sunagawa R, Suzuki S, Takagi
Y, Takano K, Takashiba K, Takeshita Y, Tohaya M, Tohyama K, Tomori H, Urata H,
Wake N, Yamada S, Yoshii H.

Hypertension guidelines recommend blood pressure self-measurement at home (HBP), 
but no previous trial has assessed cardiovascular outcomes in hypertensive
patients treated according to HBP. The multicenter Hypertension Objective
Treatment Based on Measurement by Electrical Devices of Blood Pressure (HOMED-BP;
2001-2010) trial involved 3518 patients (50% women; mean age 59.6 years) with an 
untreated systolic/diastolic HBP of 135-179/85-119 mm Hg. In a 2 × 3 design,
patients were randomized to usual control (125-134/80-84 mm Hg (UC)) vs. tight
control (<125/<80 mm Hg (TC)) of HBP and to initiation of drug treatment with
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers or
calcium channel blockers. During follow-up, a computer algorithm automatically
generated treatment recommendations based on HBP. At the last follow-up (median
5.3 years), TC patients used more antihypertensive drugs than UC patients (1.82
vs. 1.74 defined daily doses, P=0.045) and had a greater HBP reduction (21.3/13.1
mm Hg vs. 22.7/13.9 mm Hg, P=0.018/0.020), but they less frequently achieved the 
lower HBP targets (37.4 vs. 63.5%, P<0.0001). The primary end point,
cardiovascular death plus stroke and myocardial infarction, occurred in 25 UC and
26 TC patients (hazard ratio, 1.02; 95% confidence interval, 0.59-1.77; P=0.94). 
Rates were similar (P=0.13) in the three drug groups. In all patients combined,
the risk of the primary end point independently increased by 41% (6-89%; P=0.019)
and 47% (15-87%; P=0.0020) for a 1-s.d. increase in baseline (12.5 mm Hg) and
follow-up (13.2 mm Hg) systolic HBP. The 5-year risk was minimal (=1%) if
on-treatment systolic HBP was 131.6 mm Hg or less. HOMED-BP proved the
feasibility of adjusting antihypertensive drug treatment based on HBP and
suggests that a systolic HBP level of 130 mm Hg should be an achievable and safe 
target.

PMID: 22895063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Clin Nucl Med. 2012 Sep;37(9):e219-22. doi: 10.1097/RLU.0b013e318262ad9b.

SPECT brain imaging in chronic Lyme disease.

Donta ST(1), Noto RB, Vento JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Infectious Diseases), Boston University Medical
Center, Boston, MA 02541, USA. sdonta@comcast.net

OBJECTIVES: Lyme disease is an infectious disease that frequently involves the
central nervous system, leading to cognitive and/or mood dysfunction. The basis
for these symptoms remains to be defined but may be the result of a vasculitis or
metabolic abnormality secondary to the infection. SPECT scans of the brain might 
provide an objective measure of abnormalities present in patients with otherwise 
difficult to objectify clinical findings. The objective of this study was to
determine the frequency, location, and severity of abnormalities in SPECT scans
of the brain of patients with chronic Lyme disease.
METHODS: A total of 183 individuals who met the clinical definition of chronic
Lyme disease underwent SPECT scanning of the brain using Tc and standard nuclear 
imagine techniques. Abnormalities of perfusion to affected areas of the brain
were defined as mild, moderate, or severe.
RESULTS: Of all patients, 75% demonstrated abnormalities in perfusion to various 
areas of the brain, most notably the frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes.
Patients considered to be seropositive and those considered seronegative had
similar rates, types, and severity of perfusion defects. Abnormalities of MRI of 
the brain were seen in 14% of patients. Treatment with antibiotics, especially
those with intracellular-penetrating activity, resulted in resolution or
improvement of abnormalities in 70% of patients over a 1- to 2-year period.
CONCLUSIONS: Brain SPECT scans are abnormal in most patients with chronic Lyme
disease, and these scans can be used to provide objective evidence in support of 
the clinical diagnosis. The use of certain antibiotic regimens seems to provide
improvement in both clinical status and SPECT scans.

PMID: 22889796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Pediatr Transplant. 2013 Feb;17(1):65-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-3046.2012.01767.x. 
Epub 2012 Aug 9.

Renal function and histology in children after small bowel transplantation.

Boyer O(1), Noto C, De Serre NP, Gubler MC, Dechaux M, Goulet O, Niaudet P,
Lacaille F.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Nephrology Unit, Reference Center for Hereditary Renal Diseases in
Children and Adolescent (MARHEA), Paris, France.

Comment in
    Pediatr Transplant. 2013 Feb;17(1):8-11.

CKD is a frequent long-term complication after SBTx. CNIs are a well-known
factor, but probably not the only cause. We assessed the incidence, risk factors,
and severity of CKD in 27 children with SBTx (15 combined liver/SBTx) and
prednisone/TAC-based maintenance immunosuppression. Median follow-up was seven yr
(3-21). A renal biopsy was performed in 14 patients, 1-18 yr post-SBTx. A reduced
GFR was observed in 17 children (63%) during the follow-up with none requiring
dialysis. CNI toxicity was observed in 11/14 biopsies, as early as two yr
post-transplant, and could occur with a normal mGFR. The dose of TAC was reduced 
by 50% in 13 patients with CKD and/or significant kidney histological lesions,
and six were also given MMF. This led to a significant improvement in renal
function: mGFR normalized in eight patients and improved or stabilized in five.
No rejection occurred. At last follow-up, 37% had CKD stage 2 and 15% had CKD
stage 3. In conclusion, CKD is frequent in children after SBTx and probably
multifactorial. Less nephrotoxic immunosuppressive protocols may improve mGFR and
should be further considered. The kidney histology helps in designing
personalized immunosuppression strategies for patients.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22882667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Curr Med Chem. 2012;19(27):4654-61.

Review metabolomics: a new approach to drug delivery in perinatology.

Atzori L(1), Griffin JL, Noto A, Fanos V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, University of Cagliari, Italy. latzori@unica.it

The purpose of this review is to describe the state of the art of the
pharmacological applications in perinatal medicine and highlight how a new
emerging discipline, metabolomics, may have a significant impact on understanding
complex biological processes associated with the drugs actions. Currently, there 
is great demand for new information regarding the use of drugs, especially during
the perinatal period in order to minimize the occurrence of adverse drug
reactions and to maximize the desired therapeutic effect. Metabolomics is a
functional genomic tool concerned with the high-throughput identification,
quantification and characterization of small molecule metabolites. This new
technique has been shown to have a great impact on classifying phenotypes,
investigation of physiological status, diagnosing disease, measuring the response
to treatment, discovering biomarkers, and identifying perturbed pathways due to
disease or treatment. Metabolic profiles appear to be a key factor in predicting 
the outcome of a pathological condition and the individual's response to a
pharmacological treatment. This new systems biology tool may have important
potential implication for pharmacological science, in particular drug discovery, 
development, and prediction of the drug's effects on the body by explaining the
mechanisms by which drug response causes adverse effects.

PMID: 22876903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2013 Jan;42(1):31-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ijom.2012.06.008.
Epub 2012 Aug 3.

Microcirculation in the healing of surgical wounds in the oral cavity.

Scardina GA(1), Carini F, Noto F, Messina P.

Author information: 
(1)University of Palermo, Department of Surgery and Oncology Section of Oral
Sciences, Italy. scardina@odonto.unipa.it

The aim of this research is to evaluate in vivo the characteristics of
microcirculation after taking a biopsy sample from the oral mucosa. 20 patients
were recruited to the study and all underwent an oral mucosa biopsy for the
excision of benign neoformations. The modifications in the oral microcirculation 
were evaluated in vivo in correspondence to the surgical site through
videocapillaroscopy at three different times: 30 min before the biopsy; 48 h
after the biopsy; and 7 days after the biopsy. The statistical significance was
checked with the Mann-Whitney U-test (P<0.05). The analysis of
videocapillaroscopic patterns showed statistically significant variations
relative to the capillary loop density; the diameter of the outgoing loop; and
the length of the capillary loop. In conclusion, the study describes a simple and
reproducible model for the study of wound healing from a microcirculatory point
of view.

Copyright © 2012 International Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22867738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Genes Dev. 2012 Aug 1;26(15):1729-42. doi: 10.1101/gad.196493.112.

Biased transcription and selective degradation of small RNAs shape the pattern of
DNA elimination in Tetrahymena.

Schoeberl UE(1), Kurth HM, Noto T, Mochizuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences,
Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2012 Aug 15;26(16):1774-9.

The ciliated protozoan Tetrahymena undergoes extensive programmed DNA elimination
when the germline micronucleus produces the new macronucleus during sexual
reproduction. DNA elimination is epigenetically controlled by DNA sequences of
the parental macronuclear genome, and this epigenetic regulation is mediated by
small RNAs (scan RNAs [scnRNAs]) of ~28-30 nucleotides that are produced and
function by an RNAi-related mechanism. Here, we examine scnRNA production and
turnover by deep sequencing. scnRNAs are produced exclusively from the
micronucleus and nonhomogeneously from a variety of chromosomal locations.
scnRNAs are preferentially derived from the eliminated sequences, and this
preference is mainly determined at the level of transcription. Despite this bias,
a significant fraction of scnRNAs is also derived from the macronuclear-destined 
sequences, and these scnRNAs are degraded during the course of sexual
reproduction. These results indicate that the pattern of DNA elimination in the
new macronucleus is shaped by the biased transcription in the micronucleus and
the selective degradation of scnRNAs in the parental macronucleus.

PMCID: PMC3418590
PMID: 22855833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Neurology. 2012 Aug 7;79(6):575-82. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318263c42b. Epub 2012 
Jul 25.

Markedly upregulated serum interleukin-12 as a novel biomarker in POEMS syndrome.

Kanai K(1), Sawai S, Sogawa K, Mori M, Misawa S, Shibuya K, Isose S, Fujimaki Y, 
Noto Y, Sekiguchi Y, Nasu S, Nakaseko C, Takano S, Yoshitomi H, Miyazaki M,
Nomura F, Kuwabara S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Chiba. VZR03355@nifty.ne.jp

OBJECTIVE: To systematically study abnormalities in cytokine profiles in
polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M-protein, and skin changes (POEMS)
syndrome, which has been increasingly recognized as a cause of demyelinating
neuropathy associated with plasma cell dyscrasia and elevated serum level of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
METHODS: In this case-control study, we measured serum levels of 27 cytokines in 
patients with POEMS syndrome using a multiplex suspension array system, and
compared them with those of controls. In 10 patients, serial changes after
treatment were analyzed.
RESULTS: Interleukin (IL)-12 as well as VEGF levels were markedly increased (p < 
0.0001) in all the patients (n = 23). Ten kinds of other proinflammatory
cytokines such as IL-6 and tumor necrosis factor-a were also significantly
increased in the POEMS syndrome group, but in some patients the serum levels of
such cytokines remained within the normal ranges. After treatments, the IL-12 as 
well as VEGF levels significantly decreased with clinical improvements (p > 0.01 
and p > 0.05, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that serum IL-12 is a biomarker of the disease 
activity in POEMS syndrome. The overproduction of IL-12, as well as VEGF, is
likely to play an important role in the pathogenesis of the disorder, and could
contribute to the peripheral nerve demyelination in POEMS syndrome.

PMID: 22843279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Mol Pharmacol. 2012 Oct;82(4):719-27. Epub 2012 Jul 18.

Regulation of sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase acid-like 3A gene (SMPDL3A) by
liver X receptors.

Noto PB(1), Bukhtiyarov Y, Shi M, McKeever BM, McGeehan GM, Lala DS.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Biology, Vitae Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Fort Washington, Pennsylvania,
USA. pnoto@vitaerx.com

Liver X receptor (LXR) a and LXRß function as physiological sensors of
cholesterol metabolites (oxysterols), regulating key genes involved in
cholesterol and lipid metabolism. LXRs have been extensively studied in both
human and rodent cell systems, revealing their potential therapeutic value in the
contexts of atherosclerosis and inflammatory diseases. The LXR genome landscape
has been investigated in murine macrophages but not in human THP-1 cells, which
represent one of the frequently used monocyte/macrophage cell systems to study
immune responses. We used a whole-genome screen to detect direct LXR target genes
in THP-1 cells treated with two widely used LXR ligands
[N-(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl)-N-[4-[2,2,2-trifluoro-1-hydroxy-1-(trifluoromethyl)-eth
yl]phenyl]-benzenesulfonamide (T0901317) and
3-[3-[N-(2-chloro-3-trifluoromethylbenzyl)-(2,2-diphenylethyl)amino]propyloxy]
phenylacetic acid hydrochloride (GW3965)]. This screen identified the
sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase acid-like 3A (SMPDL3A) gene as a novel
LXR-regulated gene, with an LXR response element within its promoter. We
investigated the regulation of SMPDL3A gene expression by LXRs across several
human and mouse cell types. These studies indicate that the induction of SMPDL3A 
is LXR-dependent and is restricted to human blood cells with no induction
observed in mouse cellular systems.

PMID: 22810003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Med Health R I. 2012 May;95(5):144-6.

Non-small cell lung cancer with unsuspected distant metastasis to the kidney seen
on PET/CT.

Barry-Brooks M(1), Yoo DC, Chaump M, Noto RB.

Author information: 
(1)Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, USA. mbarry@lifespan.org

PMID: 22808631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. ChemSusChem. 2012 Sep;5(9):1758-66. doi: 10.1002/cssc.201200118. Epub 2012 Jul
16.

New nanocomposite hybrid inorganic-organic proton-conducting membranes based on
functionalized silica and PTFE.

Di Noto V(1), Piga M, Giffin GA, Negro E, Furlan C, Vezzù K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Padova, Italy.
vito.dinoto@unipd.it

Two types of new nanocomposite proton-exchange membranes, consisting of
functionalized and pristine nanoparticles of silica and silicone rubber (SR)
embedded in a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) matrix, were prepared. The membrane 
precursor was obtained from a mechanical rolling process, and the SiO2
nanoparticles were functionalized by soaking the membranes in a solution of
2-(4-chlorosulfonylphenyl)ethyl trichlorosilane (CSPhEtCS). The membranes exhibit
a highly compact morphology and a lack of fibrous PTFE. At 125<U+2009>°C, the membrane
containing the functionalized nanoparticles has an elastic modulus (2.2 MPa) that
is higher than that of pristine Nafion (1.28 MPa) and a conductivity of 3.6×10<U+207B>³ 
 S<U+2009>cm<U+207B>¹ despite a low proton-exchange capacity (0.11 meq<U+2009>g<U+207B>¹). The good thermal
and mechanical stability and conductivity at T>100<U+2009>°C make these membranes a
promising low-cost material for application in proton-exchange membrane fuel
cells operating at temperatures higher than 100<U+2009>°C.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22807005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. G Ital Cardiol (Rome). 2012 Jul-Aug;13(7-8):511-9. doi: 10.1714/1114.12247.

[Heart failure in Italian intensive cardiac care units: data from the BLITZ-3
survey].

[Article in Italian]

Chinaglia A(1), Casella G, Scorcu G, Cassin M, Chiarella F, Conte MR, Fradella G,
Lucci D, Maggioni AP, Visconti LO; Ricercatori dello Studio BLITZ-3.

Collaborators: Oltrona Visconti L, Chiarella F, Cassin M, Chinaglia A, Pirelli S,
Scorcu G, Casella G, Conte MR, Fradella G, Ferrara L, Greco A, Ciociola G, Genchi
C, Scarsi G, Stocco A, Bazzanini F, Moda L, Zarbo G, Ingrao V, Giordano F, De
Cristofaro A, Fonti S, Paruzzo E, Patruno N, Piras P, Rodio G, Tria E, Aceto G,
Schifalacqua AM, Ripa C, Canestrale R, Costantini C, Longo F, Matera A, Lamanna
R, lorizzo M, Romagnoli D, Leone G, Arvat I, Guida R, Caneschi P, Lo Conte C, Li 
Pizzi G, Perrone C, Tomasi S, Gregori G, Partemi L, Alciati M, Porta V, Di
Pasquale P, Di Mare M, Mariello C, Di Nardo P, lodice P, De Bellis I, Carrozza M,
Olivieri A, Nannini M, Mandb R, Ciriello N, Cagnetta R, Zanna D, Rubini A,
Franchini G, Amoruso G, De Gennaro L, Colovitti M, Palella M, Caferra F, Mascolo 
AR, Dargenio A, Libardoni M, Zarpellon AM, Palatini O, Rossi A, Santopietro S,
Apicella R, Ciampi Q, Maiale AM, Vassiliki Coutsoumbas G, Fabbri S, Veritti U,
Chinelli N, Savasta C, Borghini E, Marenna B, Fontanel M, Musuraca AC, Attana R, 
Cemin R, Stanchina A, Bielli M, Sacco G, Bertola B, Marchino E, Cirillo R, Bove
A, Affatato A, Rinaldi K, Ghizzoni G, Conti C, Forgione C, Tosoni S, Guadalupi M,
Tredici S, Macchi M, Onnis E, Melis O, Bonomo P, Sessini P, Scorcu G, Boi V,
Cinnirella C, Nobile G, Amici R, Greco R, Di Marco A, Peggio M, Costanza G,
Antolini R, Ferrara D, Manzi RC, Mocci W, Patrizi G, Ardente V, Bassano F,
Quattrini L, Piscicelli C, Castoldi F, Greco A, Memmi E, Catanzaro M, Chirico S, 
Colangeli G, Visentin M, Madonna S, Zingone E, Pera I, Gozzi F, Mariani PR,
Turriani A, Cascio Ingurgio N, Bonafede M, Manes E, Mitidieri M, Bellanuova IA,
Agricola P, Romeo C, La Rosa A, Branca B, Licciardello G, Florio C, Palazzo G,
Calvo D, Scotti E, Condito AM, Venturini E, Signorini F, Lo lacono S, Manna G,
Alboni P, Balboni D, Giordano WS, Castro M, Tisselli A, Baschetti S, Ibello L,
D'Andrea C, Rodella P, Mazzoldi G, De Cesare M, Toto E, Cirino D, Grassi C,
Severini D, De Ritis D, Rossi M, Zanarella P, Baldoni M, Friscolanti D, Leo Usai 
T, Gasbarri C, Guasconi C, Pisaroni G, Mennuni M, Cacciotti C, Acquati F, Lucini 
M, Turiano G, Tonon M, Greco EL, Caldararo M, Misuraca G, Corrado M, De Vuono T, 
Statzu P, Tovena D, Franzoni S, Boldini A, Mariani M, Giordano L, Montaruli B,
Morena L, Garnerone M, De Cristan B, Ceresara D, Avanzini E, Cotza R, Mazzuero A,
De Felice M, Vicinanza E, Rizzo R, Nieri M, Checcucci R, Battaglia C, Cagliari G,
Agnelli D, Urso A, Abrignani MG, Sorrentino A, Targa L, Scabello T, Merli E,
Prudente R, Romano S, Gobbis D, Ciliberti D, Monterubbianesi L, Buia E, Binini S,
Battelli P, Litta L, Valente S, Navari L, Valoti P, Cavicchi S, Liberati R,
Tartaglia D, Caravita L, Bacchilega E, Treglia A, Italo G, Giaccari R,
Legrottaglie AM, Podimani N, Crotti F, Cavalieri F, Papa A, Di Domenico E, Saleri
B, Spadaro C, Vella G, Secchi GL, Farina R, Toselli A, Manco T, Giuliano G, Noto 
ME, Lonati A, Canu S, De Rosa P, Zammartino L, Strangi T, Di Sante MG, Mattei L, 
Narduzzi C, Gestra R, Barini S, Guerrini F, Draoli N, Regni O, Ghiandoni N, Mazza
V, De Filippis A, Musso P, Grosso R, Rizzo M, Pasquinelli M, Pileggi V, Cristiano
A, Scimia A, Di Domenico P, De Lisi A, De Luca R, De Giorgi A, Coia I, Achilli F,
Colli F, Barbiero M, Guardalben S, Poletti E, Lorenzano E, Arcidiacono S, D'Anna 
A, Comella A, Marchetti R, Galli M, Croce L, Rossi M, Franco A, Marangoni E,
Ferrari A, Boni A, Gianni P, Gobbi M, Bacchilega F, Morgagni GL, Carpineti G,
Bardelli G, Monfredini M, Pierri F, Di Mitri G, Masa A, Spagnoli J, Izzo A,
Ciulla A, Panzarella A, Molendi V, Grassi C, Magnante A, Galtieri A, Di Giovanni 
P, Puccio M, Erckert M, Azzouzi D, De Fazio G, Gallucci F, Paleologo G, Barbaro
F, Giannetto M, Calatozzo D, Cutolo A, Vianello M, Mafrici A, Viola V, Negrini M,
Camozzi B, Capozi A, Ornago M, Terranova P, Girardi F, Sala R, Mura M, Annoni L, 
Grignani M, Coppolino C, Costa A, Sternieri S, Malaguti F, Pasquetto G, Carraro
C, Tosoni G, Sorrentino S, Fantini G, Bardelli C, Parenzan T, Ancalepore T, Bruna
C, Rossi T, Perazza L, Micheluzzi G, Mannarini A, Fiume C, Crosato M, Sartor F,
Catellani E, Cocconi A, Taddei T, Donati S, Bozzano A, Pirovano M, Mortara A,
Castaneda C, Elia LR, Sparano E, Irace L, Sanfilippo M, Cudemo G, Micillo C,
Siciliano S, Zingarini M, Golia B, Ricci R, Tammaro P, Pardo N, Di Mario F,
Marsill D, Romano C, Esposito F, Picardi G, Stampati E, Bacchini S, Sanna F,
Agosti S, Gemme O, Secci T, Rubanu I, Orecchioni G, Silecchia T, Bianchi V, Duca 
L, Safari D, Beatrici B, Pozzi R, Cappello S, Caddeo A, Bonu G, Baragli D,
Gentile T, Perazzolo Marra M, Brugnaro L, Smecca IM, Cannova C, Celona G, Di
Salvo G, Ajello A, Calabrese L, Cicero S, Cavalieri A, Guarneri A, Pellitteri G, 
Falletta C, Navanzino E, Crivaro A, Pantanella M, Sartorio D, Marletta G, Rancati
V, Lombardi F, Bottaro G, Fazzio O, Del Pinto M, Ponziani R, Tarsi G, Donninelli 
C, Di Clemente D, Cornacchione N, Civitarese G, Cicalò RA, Rossini D, Grassi C,
Ferraro S, Oronte L, De Risi L, Vetere A, Rossi F, Aicardi S, Pasqualini MF,
Marcomin C, Sappe D, Isidori S, Agostini V, Lattanzi F, Saviozzi G, Coceani M,
Corelli L, Chiti M, Parenti K, Romei M, Francardi R, Truncellito L, Graziano V,
Meduri G, Guerrisi G, La Creta C, Petrillo N, Nardiello V, Montella A, Ricci D,
Pipia T, Leonardi T, Casati AG, Viani SM, Caruso M, Rellini G, Spicca A, Murena
E, Tortorella S, Tedeschi D, Agostini D, Guarrella ML, Battaglia G, Scollo V,
Cavalieri L, Parollo R, Babini E, Tortorella G, Battitori A, Vittori G, Bottini
M, Marchese I, Simeoni S, Belletti G, Lombardi D, Bongioanni S, De Luca E, Oppo
I, Buono NC, Fera MS, Fiori F, Finocchiaro ML, Pierini S, Burattini M, Fabrizi S,
Lo Bianco E, Zecca R, Tubaro M, Chisari P, Tozzi Q, Gervasio G, Liuzzo G, Mattu
L, Vitucci NC, Caldironi S, Delle Grotti PL, Tatullo A, Martina C, Gasbarro V,
Scioli R, Piccininno V, Federici A, Fortunato A, Trambaiolo P, Esposito D, Melfi 
R, Autore C, Gargiulo A, Salituri S, Petrone F, Vaccarini C, Carraro M, Zaninati 
M, Barbaro C, Gabriele G, Naddeo C, lannaccone O, Floris F, Di Teodoro D,
Giovinazzo P, Barro S, Villella M, Tartaglione S, Mileto F, Fattore L, Valentini 
G, Matarazzo MM, Propato F, Palumbo B, Zanchi P, Meloni S, Legnani M, Pes R,
Pense G, Melandri F, Francesconi A, Coppolino A, Morra G, Aykut V, Mottolo D,
Villani P, Longobardi G, Sanzone G, Lentini S, De laco MR, Castelluzzo A,
Falchetti E, Piersanti D, Costalunga A, Terzi A, Santoro R, Montiglio C, Barbieri
L, Anduena M, Maffei S, Vinci E, De Luca D, Pontiggia G, Poli C, Fontana D,
Caiazzo A, Sisani S, Cilento A, Di lorio G, Mascio E, Russo NR, Lamperti C,
Morrone V, Matichecchia F, Pascente T, Serio MR, John N, Nicolardi A, Lalla
Piccioni L, Cecchini E, Cuonzo M, Ficco A, Colonna N, Staniscia C, De Bonis P,
Cattin Cosso I, Callegarin L, Marcante S, Amati R, De Flavis A, Usmiani T,
Tarantino E, Bergerone S, Ferraro A, Gandolfo N, Bordino C, Ferro S, Saraceno A, 
Nejrotti A, Gagliardi S, Noussan P, Labriola M, Guastaferro C, Orazzo P, Mutti
EM, Cogotti F, Gianni M, Savoia L, Spadaro R, lori R, Centonze F, Nichetti W,
Totis O, Sallemi P, Accogli M, Micello L, Milo M, Pintarelli M, Fresco C, Fonseca
T, Bersigotti G, Ceccarini S, Aloia A, Gallo G, Limido A, Marchesi P, Prisco GD, 
Sommacal R, Gubelli S, Mastrangelo V, Mazzuero A, Scorpiniti S, Proietti R,
Curacanova M, Morando G, Signorini M, Teti G, Moscato S, Spanghero M, Zuccon S,
Villani R, Argese I, Bassani F, Bonomi G, Sommariva L, Faina C, Osti R, Barone D,
Maffei M.

BACKGROUND: Only limited information about clinical characteristics, diagnostic
procedures and therapeutic options is available in patients admitted to an
intensive cardiac care unit (ICCU) for heart failure. The aim of this study was
to evaluate causes of admission, clinical characteristics, diagnostic and
therapeutic options, and outcome of patients admitted for heart failure in the
ICCU network.
METHODS: The BLITZ-3 Registry prospectively included patients admitted by 332
Italian ICCUs. Data of the patients admitted with a principal diagnosis of heart 
failure are analyzed.
RESULTS: From April 7 to 20, 2008, 6986 consecutive patients with acute cardiac
conditions were admitted to ICCUs; 966 (14%) out of 6986 patients were admitted
for acute heart failure. Heart failure was the second cause of admission after
acute coronary syndromes (52%). Mean age of patients admitted for heart failure
was 73 years, 42% were female, and diabetes accounted for 32% of heart failure
patients. Most patients were admitted to the emergency department (62%), and were
discharged by the cardiology ward (65%). Median length of stay in the ICCU was 4 
days, and during the stay in ICCU 5% of the patients with heart failure died.
Advanced age and elevated creatinine values were associated with a higher risk of
death. Echocardiography was performed in 79% of heart failure patients, coronary 
angiography in 10%, assisted ventilation in 15%, ultrafiltration in 3%, and right
catheterization in 1%. Diuretics were administered in 93% of patients admitted
for acute heart failure, intravenous nitrates in 41%, inotropes in 22%,
beta-blockers in 42%, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin
receptor blockers in 66%.
CONCLUSIONS: In a nationwide survey, acute heart failure accounted for 14% of
hospital admissions in ICCUs. Patients admitted for heart failure are usually
old, with frequent comorbidities. Diagnostic and therapeutic procedures are
rarely used, with the exception of echocardiography.

PMID: 22781378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2013 Jan 1;127(1-3):87-93. doi:
10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2012.06.018. Epub 2012 Jul 6.

Binge drinking among Brazilian students: a gradient of association with
socioeconomic status in five geo-economic regions.

Sanchez ZM(1), Locatelli DP, Noto AR, Martins SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Brazilian Center of Information of
Psychotropic Drugs, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, 04038-034 Sao Paulo,
Brazil. zila.sanchez@unifesp.br

BACKGROUND: Socioeconomic status (SES) may be directly associated with binge
drinking (BD) and country inequality. The aims of this study were to describe the
characteristics of BD among high school students in Brazil and the association of
BD with students' socioeconomic status in the five different Brazilian
macro-regions.
METHODS: A national cross sectional survey was carried out using a multistage
probabilistic sample of 17,297 high school students aged 14-18 years drawn from
789 public and private schools in each of the 27 Brazilian state capitals.
Self-report data about BD behaviors and SES were analyzed via weighted logistic
regressions and a funnel plot.
RESULTS: Almost 32% of the students engaged in BD in the past-year. Being in the 
highest SES stratum doubled the risk of BD among students in all five Brazilian
macro-regions. There was a gradient in the association between past-year BD and
socioeconomic status: as SES increased; the chance of having recently engaged in 
BD also increased. In Brazilian capitals as a whole, being a boy versus being a
girl (adjusted odds ratio - aOR=1.40 [95%CI 1.26; 1.58]), being older (aOR=1.47
[95%CI 1.40; 1.55]) and attending private versus public schools (aOR=1.39 [95%CI 
1.18; 1.62]) were associated with greater risk for BD.
CONCLUSIONS: Contrary to what is observed in developed countries, students living
in Brazilian capitals may be at an increased risk of BD when they belong to the
highest socioeconomic status. There might be similar associations between high
SES and BD among adolescents growing up in other emerging economies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3654539
PMID: 22771006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2012 Jun;17(2):206-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1529-8027.2012.00403.x.

A novel EGR2 mutation within a family with a mild demyelinating form of
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

Shiga K(1), Noto Y, Mizuta I, Hashiguchi A, Takashima H, Nakagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. kenshiga@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

Mutations of the early growth response 2 (EGR2) gene have been reported in a
variety of severe demyelinating neuropathies such as autosomal recessive
congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy, autosomal dominant child-onset
Dejerine-Sottas neuropathy, and autosomal dominant adult-onset
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT). Here, we report on a heterozygous mutation in 
EGR2 (c.1160C>A), which results in threonine at position 387 being changed to
asparagine, in a family with a mild demyelinating form of adult-onset CMT. Of
note, both the proband and her asymptomatic son exhibited neither pes cavus nor
champagne-bottle leg atrophy, suggesting that the heterozygous T387N mutation may
result in a relatively mild phenotype of demyelinating CMT.

© 2012 Peripheral Nerve Society.

PMID: 22734907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2012 Jun;34(2):193-200.

Socioeconomic influences on alcohol use patterns among private school students in
São Paulo.

Locatelli D(1), Sanchez Z, Opaleye E, Carlini C, Noto A.

Author information: 
(1)Psychobiology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
danilo.locatelli@uol.com.br

OBJECTIVES: To describe alcohol use by socioeconomic level and gender among
private high school students in the city of São Paulo, Brazil.
METHODS: Cross-sectional study of students in private schools in São Paulo. An
anonymous self-administered questionnaire was distributed in the classroom. A
total of 2,613 students were selected by the stratification and conglomerate
methods. Chi-squared tests, t-tests and ANOVA were used to test for associations 
between alcohol use and gender and socioeconomic status; for binge drinking, an
ordered logistic regression model was developed.
RESULTS: Overall, 88% of students reported lifetime alcohol use, with 31.6% in
combination with energy drinks. Half of the students (51.3%) reported alcohol use
in the last month, most frequently beer (35.2%), alcopop (32%) and vodka (31.7%);
33.2% reported binge drinking in the last month (5 drinks per occasion). Most
evaluated parameters showed higher rates of use among males and higher social
classes. The regression model exhibited an increasing rate of binge drinking with
increasing socioeconomic status.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that socioeconomic features help to define
alcohol use among São Paulo students. Use behaviors such as binge drinking are
more prevalent among students from the upper social classes.

PMID: 22729416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Cad Saude Publica. 2012 Jul;28(7):1371-80.

Drug use among street children and adolescents: what helps?

Moura YG(1), Sanchez ZM, Opaleye ES, Neiva-Silva L, Koller SH, Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Psicobiologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Brasil.
ygmoura@gmail.com

The aim of this study was to investigate factors associated to frequent and heavy
drug use among street children and adolescents aged 10 to 18 years. A sample of
2,807 street children and adolescents from the 27 Brazilian state capital cities 
was analyzed. A World Health Organization questionnaire for non-students was
adapted for use in Brazil. Data analysis was performed using logistic regression 
and decision tree models. Factors inversely associated with frequent and heavy
drug use were: being age nine to 11 years (OR = 0.1); school attendance (OR =
0.3); daily time (one to five hours) spent on the streets (OR = 0.3 and 0.4); not
sleeping on the streets (OR = 0.4); being on the streets for less than one year
(OR = 0.4); maintenance of some family bonds (OR = 0.5); presence on the streets 
of a family member (OR = 0.6); not suffering domestic violence (OR = 0.6); being 
female (OR = 0.8). All of these variables were significant at the p < 0.05 level.
The findings suggest that being younger, having family bonds and engagement in
school are important protective factors that affect drug use among this
population and should be considered in the formulation of public policies.

PMID: 22729267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Langmuir. 2012 Jul 24;28(29):10849-59. doi: 10.1021/la301319u. Epub 2012 Jul 9.

Geminal imidazolium salts: a new class of gelators.

D'Anna F(1), Vitale P, Marullo S, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento STEMBIO, Sezione di Chimica Organica E. Paternò, Viale delle
Scienze-Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy. francesca.danna@unipa.it

The gelling behavior of some geminal diimidazolium salts was investigated in
solvents differing in polarity and hydrogen bond donor ability. The used salts,
namely the 3,3'-di-n-decyl-1,1'(1,4-phenylenedimethylene)diimidazolium dibromide 
[p-Xyl-(decim)(2)][Br](2) (1), the
3,3'-di-n-dodecyl-1,1'(1,4-phenylenedimethylene)diimidazolium dibromide
[p-Xyl-(dodecim)(2)][Br](2) (2), and the
3,3'-di-n-dodecyl-1,1'(1,4-phenylenedimethylene)diimidazolium ditetrafluoroborate
[p-Xyl-(dodecim)(2)][BF(4)](2) (3), differ in the alkyl chain length and in the
anion properties, such as size, shape, and coordination ability. In all cases in 
which gelation process was observed, the obtained gels were characterized by gel 
melting temperature determination, resonance light scattering, and UV-vis
measurements. On the whole, the investigation allowed to get information about
both the thermodynamic stability and the features of the aggregates
characterizing the soft materials at the equilibrium. Data collected by us point 
out that the used organic salts are able to behave as both hydro- and
organogelators. In particular, bromide salts formed hydrogels in the presence of 
a-cyclodextrin allowing to hypothesize that the gelation process is favored by
the formation of supramolecular assemblies. To verify this hypothesis, 1D and 2D 
(1)H NMR measurements were carried out. Both the alkyl chain length and the anion
ability to reticulate the three-dimensional network proved to be determinant
factors in affecting the gelation process as well as the features of the gel
phases. Finally, with the future aim to use the obtained gels as reaction media, 
the effect of a guest molecule such as the UV-vis active probe Nile Red was
studied.

PMID: 22724440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Urol. 2012 Aug;188(2):668-74. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2012.03.115. Epub 2012 Jun
15.

Avanafil, a potent and highly selective phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor for
erectile dysfunction.

Kotera J(1), Mochida H, Inoue H, Noto T, Fujishige K, Sasaki T, Kobayashi T,
Kojima K, Yee S, Yamada Y, Kikkawa K, Omori K.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Medical Research Laboratories, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corp.,
Yokohama, Japan.

PURPOSE: We investigated the in vitro inhibitory effects of avanafil, a novel,
potent inhibitor of phosphodiesterase-5, on 11 phosphodiesterases. We also
studied its potentiation of penile tumescence in dogs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Phosphodiesterase assay was done with the 4
phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors avanafil, sildenafil, vardenafil and tadalafil
using 11 phosphodiesterase isozymes. In anesthetized dogs the pelvic nerve was
repeatedly stimulated to evoke tumescence. Intracavernous pressure was measured
after avanafil or sildenafil administration.
RESULTS: Avanafil specifically inhibited phosphodiesterase-5 activity at a 50%
inhibitory concentration of 5.2 nM. Avanafil showed higher selectivity (121-fold)
against phosphodiesterase-6 than sildenafil and vardenafil (16 to 21-fold) and
showed excellent selectivity (greater than 10,000-fold) against
phosphodiesterase-1 compared with sildenafil (375-fold). Avanafil also had higher
selectivity against phosphodiesterase-11 than tadalafil (greater than 19,000 vs
25-fold). Avanafil also showed excellent selectivity against all other
phosphodiesterases. After intravenous administration in anesthetized dogs the
200% effective dose of avanafil and sildenafil on the penile tumescence was 37.5 
and 34.6 µg/kg, respectively. After intraduodenal administration the 200%
effective dose of avanafil and sildenafil on tumescence was 151.7 and 79.0 µg/kg 
at the peak time, respectively. Time to peak response with avanafil and
sildenafil was 10 and 30 minutes, respectively, indicating a more rapid onset of 
avanafil.
CONCLUSIONS: Avanafil has a favorable phosphodiesterase-5 selectivity profile
compared to that of marketed phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors. Avanafil shows
excellent in vitro and in vivo potency, and fast onset of action for penile
erection. Cumulative data suggest that avanafil has a promising pharmacological
profile for erectile dysfunction.

Copyright © 2012 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22704456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Colloid Interface Sci. 2012 Sep 1;381(1):67-72. doi:
10.1016/j.jcis.2012.04.074. Epub 2012 May 16.

Mononuclear rearrangement of heterocycles in zwitterionic micelles of amine oxide
surfactants.

Guernelli S(1), Fontana A, Noto R, Spinelli D, Turco Liveri ML.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica A. Mangini, Università degli Studi di
Bologna, Via S. Giacomo 11, 40126 Bologna, Italy.

Rate constants for the mononuclear rearrangement (MRH) of Z-phenylhydrazones of
some 5-substituted-3-benzoyl-1,2,4-oxadiazoles in water have been measured in the
presence of zwitterionic micelles. The use of micellized
N-tetradecyl-N,N-dimethylamineoxide (C(14)DMAO) as the reaction medium allowed to
solubilize the otherwise water-insoluble oxadiazoles. Micellar rate effects were 
analyzed by using a simple pseudo-phase model and compared with those obtained in
non-ionic micelles (Triton X-100). Evidence that both the rate of the
rearrangement reaction and the binding of the substrates to the micelles are
mainly governed by substrate hydrophobicity is obtained. The disagreement with
the primarily sterically controlled MRH in Triton X-100 micelles highlights large
and intriguing differences between the two micellar environments.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22703616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2012 Jul 28;14(28):10022-6. doi: 10.1039/c2cp40553a. Epub
2012 Jun 14.

Raman study of the polybenzimidazole-phosphoric acid interactions in membranes
for fuel cells.

Conti F(1), Majerus A, Di Noto V, Korte C, Lehnert W, Stolten D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Energy and Climate Research-Fuel Cells (IEK-3), Forschungszentrum
Jülich GmbH, 52425 Jülich, Germany. f.conti@fz-juelich.de

Poly(2,5-benzimidazole) (AB-PBI) membranes are investigated by studying the
FT-Raman signals due to the benzimidazole ring vibration together with the C-C
and C-H out-of- and in-plane ring deformations. By immersion in aqueous
ortho-phosphoric acid for different time periods, membranes with various doping
degrees, i.e. different molar fractions of acid, are prepared. The
chemical-physical interactions between polymer and acid are studied through band 
shifting and intensity change of diagnostic peaks in the 500-2000 cm(-1) spectral
range. The formation of hydrogen bonding networks surrounding the polymer seems
to be the main reason for the observed interactions. Only if the AB-PBI polymer
is highly doped, the Raman spectra show an additional signal, which can be
attributed to the presence of free phosphoric acid molecules in the polymer
network. For low and intermediate doping degrees no evidence for free phosphoric 
acid molecules can be seen in the spectra. The extent of the polymer-phosphoric
acid interactions in the doped membrane material is reinvestigated after a period
of one month and the stability discussed. Our results provide insight into the
role of phosphoric acid as a medium in the conductivity mechanism in
polybenzimidazole.

PMID: 22699788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Acta Diabetol. 2013 Apr;50(2):241-9. doi: 10.1007/s00592-012-0406-1. Epub 2012
Jun 9.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver and metabolic syndrome in Italy: results from a
multicentric study of the Italian Arteriosclerosis society.

Soresi M(1), Noto D, Cefalù AB, Martini S, Vigna GB, Fonda M, Manzato E, Cattin
L, Fellin R, Averna MR, Notarbartolo A; Metabolic Syndrome Study Group.

Collaborators: Pujia A, Montalcini T, Mezzetti A, Bucci M, Mannarino E, Pirro M, 
Catapano A, Norata D, Rubba P, Gentile M, Cocorullo G, Montalto G, Manzato E,
Martini S, Fellin R, Vigna GB, Cattin L, Fonda M, Federici M, Lauro D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties (DIMIS), University of
Palermo, Via del Vespro 141, 90127, Palermo, Italy.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is associated with all the components of
metabolic syndrome (MS) and might to be considered an additional component of MS 
itself. The Italian Society for the Study of Atherosclerosis (SISA) in 2005
started a research project aimed to study the NAFLD, using ultrasound (US), in
nondiabetic MS subjects matching at least one of the ATP III criteria for HDL-C
or triglycerides [TG]. Prevalence of US-NAFLD and its associated risk factors and
prevalence of hypertransaminasemia and its possible determinants were evaluated. 
NAFLD prevalence was 0.78. Men with steatosis compared to men without steatosis
were younger (P < 0.05) with higher TG (P < 0.03), homeostasis model assessment
insulin resistance (HOMA-R) (P < 0.003), and visceral fat thickness (VFT)
(P < 0.0001). Women with steatosis showed higher TG (P < 0.05), HOMA-R
(P < 0.04), VFT (P < 0.0001), and lower age (P < 0.05). At multivariate analyses,
VFT (P < 0.0001), HOMA-R (P < 0.02), and TG/HDL (P < 0.05) were associated with
severity of NAFLD. Age (P < 0.05), LogTG (P < 0.005), and VFT (P < 0.01) were
associated with higher ALT. The US prevalence of steatosis in this study (0.78)
is the highest reported in patients with MS. Considering the exclusion of severe 
obese and diabetic patients and the recruitment criteria, this finding highlights
the prominent role played by the alterations of lipid metabolism in the
pathogenesis of NAFLD.

PMID: 22684314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. BMC Pediatr. 2012 Jun 8;12:64. doi: 10.1186/1471-2431-12-64.

Epidemic spread of ST1-MRSA-IVa in a neonatal intensive care unit, Italy.

Giuffrè M(1), Cipolla D, Bonura C, Geraci DM, Aleo A, Di Noto S, Nociforo F,
Corsello G, Mammina C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mother and Child, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(CA-MRSA) has recently emerged as an important pathogen in neonatal intensive
care units (NICUs). The purposes of this study were to characterize
methicillin-resistant isolates from an outbreak in a NICU, to examine the genetic
traits and clonality of CA-MRSA, and to review the characteristics and outcomes
of the neonatal cases and investigate the routes of entry and transmission of the
MRSA outbreak strain in the NICU under study.
METHODS: The study NICU practiced an active surveillance program for
multidrug-resistant organisms, including weekly cultures for detection of MRSA
from nasal swabs among all the admitted neonates. All first isolates from
surveillance cultures and all clinical isolates were submitted for susceptibility
testing and genotyping. Data from each infant's medical records were
prospectively included in a database, and the clinical features and outcomes of
the colonized/infected infants were assessed.
RESULTS: A total of 14 infants were colonized or infected by a strain of
ST1-MRSA-IVa between April and August 2011. The CA-MRSA strain appeared to have
been introduced to the NICU by an infected infant transferred from another
hospital. The outbreak was successfully contained by multifaceted infection
control interventions.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study confirm that NICU is a healthcare setting 
with a critical permeability to CA-MRSA. Active surveillance including molecular 
typing can help to detect and monitor the spread of antimicrobial drug-resistant 
organisms, and thus trigger timely control interventions.

PMCID: PMC3407518
PMID: 22682025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2012 May 31;3:73. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2012.00073.
eCollection 2012.

Emerging targeted therapies for castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Adamo V(1), Noto L, Franchina T, Chiofalo G, Picciotto M, Toscano G, Caristi N.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Therapies in Oncology Unit, Department of Human Pathology,
University of Messina Messina, Italy.

Until recently, few therapeutic options were available for patients with
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Since 2010, four new molecules with 
a demonstrated benefit (sipuleucel-T, cabazitaxel, abiraterone, and denosumab)
have been approved in this setting, and to-date several other agents are under
investigation in clinical trials. The purpose of this review is to present an
update of targeted therapies for CRPC. Presented data are obtained from
literature and congress reports updated until December 2011. Targeted therapies
in advanced phases of clinical development include novel androgen signaling
inhibitors, inhibitors of alternative signaling pathways, anti-angiogenic agents,
inhibitors that target the bone microenvironment, and immunotherapeutic agents.
Radium-223 and MDV3100 demonstrated a survival advantage in phase III trials and 
the road for their introduction in clinical practice is rapidly ongoing. Results 
are also awaited for phase III studies currently underway or planned with new
drugs given as monotherapy (TAK-700, cabozantinib, tasquinimod, PROSTVAC-VF,
ipilimumab) or in combination with docetaxel (custirsen, aflibercept, dasatinib, 
zibotentan). The optimal timing, combination, and sequencing of emerging
therapies remain unknown and require further investigation. Additionally, the
identification of novel markers of response and resistance to these therapies may
better individualize treatment for patients with CRPC.

PMCID: PMC3364443
PMID: 22666217  [PubMed]


455. Hepatology. 2012 Dec;56(6):2163-71. doi: 10.1002/hep.25871. Epub 2012 Sep 17.

JD induced pluripotent stem cell-derived hepatocytes faithfully recapitulate the 
pathophysiology of familial hypercholesterolemia.

Cayo MA(1), Cai J, DeLaForest A, Noto FK, Nagaoka M, Clark BS, Collery RF,
Si-Tayeb K, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Program in Regenerative 
Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

Elevated levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) in plasma are a
major contributor to cardiovascular disease, which is the leading cause of death 
worldwide. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified 95 loci that
associate with control of lipid/cholesterol metabolism. Although GWAS results are
highly provocative, direct analyses of the contribution of specific allelic
variations in regulating LDL-C has been challenging due to the difficulty in
accessing appropriate cells from affected patients. The primary cell type
responsible for controlling cholesterol and lipid flux is the hepatocyte.
Recently, we have shown that cells with hepatocyte characteristics can be
generated from human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). This finding raises 
the possibility of using patient-specific iPSC-derived hepatocytes to study the
functional contribution of GWAS loci in regulating lipid metabolism. To test the 
validity of this approach, we produced iPSCs from JD a patient with mutations in 
the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene that result in familial
hypercholesterolemia (FH). We demonstrate that (1) hepatocytes can be efficiently
generated from FH iPSCs; (2) in contrast to control cells, FH iPSC-derived
hepatocytes are deficient in LDL-C uptake; (3) control but not FH iPSC-derived
hepatocytes increase LDL uptake in response to lovastatin; and (4) FH
iPSC-derived hepatocytes display a marked elevation in secretion of lipidated
apolipoprotein B-100.CONCLUSION: Cumulatively, these findings demonstrate that FH
iPSC-derived hepatocytes recapitulate the complex pathophysiology of FH in
culture. These results also establish that patient-specific iPSC-derived
hepatocytes could be used to definitively determine the functional contribution
of allelic variation in regulating lipid and cholesterol metabolism and could
potentially provide a platform for the identification of novel treatments of
cardiovascular disease. (HEPATOLOGY 2012).

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3900031
PMID: 22653811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Data Min Knowl Discov. 2012;25(1):109-133. Epub 2011 Sep 8.

FRaC: a feature-modeling approach for semi-supervised and unsupervised anomaly
detection.

Noto K(1), Brodley C, Slonim D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Tufts University, 161 College Ave., Medford,
MA 02155, USA.

Anomaly detection involves identifying rare data instances (anomalies) that come 
from a different class or distribution than the majority (which are simply called
"normal" instances). Given a training set of only normal data, the
semi-supervised anomaly detection task is to identify anomalies in the future.
Good solutions to this task have applications in fraud and intrusion detection.
The unsupervised anomaly detection task is different: Given unlabeled,
mostly-normal data, identify the anomalies among them. Many real-world machine
learning tasks, including many fraud and intrusion detection tasks, are
unsupervised because it is impractical (or impossible) to verify all of the
training data. We recently presented FRaC, a new approach for semi-supervised
anomaly detection. FRaC is based on using normal instances to build an ensemble
of feature models, and then identifying instances that disagree with those models
as anomalous. In this paper, we investigate the behavior of FRaC experimentally
and explain why FRaC is so successful. We also show that FRaC is a superior
approach for the unsupervised as well as the semi-supervised anomaly detection
task, compared to well-known state-of-the-art anomaly detection methods, LOF and 
one-class support vector machines, and to an existing feature-modeling approach.

PMCID: PMC3359096
PMID: 22639542  [PubMed]


457. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2012 Aug;73(4):308-11. doi:
10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2012.04.006. Epub 2012 May 22.

Diagnostic utility of LightCycler SeptiFast and procalcitonin assays in the
diagnosis of bloodstream infection in immunocompromised patients.

Mauro MV(1), Cavalcanti P, Perugini D, Noto A, Sperlì D, Giraldi C.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Virology Department, Azienda Ospedaliera SS Annunziata, via
Migliori 1, 87100 Cosenza, Italy. m.v.mauro@virgilio.it

Sepsis is an increasingly prevalent cause of death, and management in the early
stage is a critical issue. However, microbiological findings are generally
obtained late during the course of the disease. In this study, we evaluated the
clinical utility of procalcitonin (PCT) in improving the diagnosis of bloodstream
infections and the potential utility of the SeptiFast (SF) test, a multiplex
pathogen detection system, in the etiological diagnosis of immunocompromised
patients. Seventy-nine hospitalized immunocompromised patients were included in
this study. Our results demonstrate that while the PCT value correlates highly
with sepsis, the results do not discriminate adequately enough to justify its
independent use as a diagnostic tool. The SF test, combined with blood cultures, 
improves microbiological data in immunocompromised patients, especially in cases 
of previous antibiotic therapy and invasive fungal infection.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22626731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Amyloid. 2012 Sep;19(3):129-32. doi: 10.3109/13506129.2012.691918. Epub 2012 May 
25.

Coagulation and fibrinolysis abnormalities in familial amyloid polyneuropathy.

Takahashi R(1), Ono K, Ikeda T, Akagi A, Noto D, Nozaki I, Sakai K, Asakura H,
Iwasa K, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University
Graduate School of Medical Science, Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) is an autosomal dominant form of
hereditary amyloidosis. Several studies reported coagulation factor X deficiency 
and excessive fibrinolysis in immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis. However,
few have investigated coagulation and fibrinolysis in FAP. The objective of this 
study was to determine abnormalities in plasma biomarkers of coagulation and
fibrinolysis in FAP.
METHODS: We prospectively recruited eight FAP patients with transthyretin
mutations and ten age-matched control patients with other neuropathies in our
university. We examined plasma biomarkers of coagulation and fibrinolysis
including prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, fibrinogen,
fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products, D-dimer, a2-antiplasmin, antithrombin,
plasminogen, thrombin-antithrombin complex, plasmin-a2-antiplasmin complex,
prothrombin fragment 1+2, and coagulation factor X. The Mann-Whitney U test was
performed for statistical comparisons between FAP and control groups.
RESULTS: FAP patients exhibited significantly decreased levels of coagulation
factor X, plasminogen and a2-antiplasmin, and significantly increased levels of
prothrombin fragment 1+2 compared to control patients.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate abnormalities of coagulation and fibrinolysis in
FAP patients.

PMID: 22624582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Proteomics. 2012 Jun;12(12):2045-59. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201100370.

Protein cross-talk in CD133+ colon cancer cells indicates activation of the Wnt
pathway and upregulation of SRp20 that is potentially involved in tumorigenicity.

Corbo C(1), Orrù S, Gemei M, Noto RD, Mirabelli P, Imperlini E, Ruoppolo M,
Vecchio LD, Salvatore F.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE, Biotecnologie Avanzate scarl, Naples, Italy.

The cancer stem cell (CSC) theory represents a breakthrough in cancer research.
We characterized the protein pattern of CSCs to identify specific intracellular
pathways in this subpopulation of tumor cells. We studied colon CSCs using two
different colon cancer cell lines: CaCo-2 and HCT-116. Putative CSCs were
separated from non-CSCs by flow cytometry using CD133 as stemness marker. Total
protein extracts of CD133+ cells were then compared to protein extracts of CD133-
cells by 2D DIGE. The protein spots differentially expressed in the two
subpopulations of cells were analyzed by mass spectrometry. Bioinformatics
analysis of the identified proteins indicated alteration of two main processes:
energy metabolism and the Wnt pathway. Interestingly, we observed upregulation of
the splicing factor SRp20, a newly identified target gene of the Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway, and we demonstrated a direct cause-effect relationship between Wnt
pathway activation and the increased SRp20 expression. Our results also show that
SRp20 influences cell proliferation, which suggests it plays a role in the
tumorigenicity of CD133+ cells. In conclusion, activation of the Wnt pathway in
CD133+ cells and upregulation of SRp20, which is implicated in tumorigenesis,
raises the possibility of a sequential series of molecular events occurring in
connection with this process.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22623141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Agric Food Chem. 2012 Jun 6;60(22):5565-70. doi: 10.1021/jf300165j. Epub 2012
May 24.

Isolation of a new phlorotannin, a potent inhibitor of carbohydrate-hydrolyzing
enzymes, from the brown alga Sargassum patens.

Kawamura-Konishi Y(1), Watanabe N, Saito M, Nakajima N, Sakaki T, Katayama T,
Enomoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, Faculty of Bioresources and Environmental
Sciences, Ishikawa Prefectural University, Ishikawa, Japan.
konishi@ishikawa-pu.ac.jp

Ethanol extracts from 15 kinds of marine algae collected from the coast of the
Noto Peninsula in Japan were examined for their inhibitory effects on human
salivary a-amylase. Four extracts significantly suppressed the enzyme activity.
An inhibitor was purified from the extract of Sargassum patens . The compound was
a new phloroglucinol derivative,
2-(4-(3,5-dihydroxyphenoxy)-3,5-dihydroxyphenoxy) benzene-1,3,5-triol (DDBT),
which strongly suppressed the hydrolysis of amylopectin by human salivary and
pancreatic a-amylases. The 50% inhibitory activity (IC(50)) for a-amylase
inhibition of DDBT (3.2 µg/mL) was much lower than that of commercially available
a-amylase inhibitors, acarbose (26.3 µg/mL), quercetagetin (764 µg/mL), and
a-amylase inhibitor from Triticum aestivum (88.3 µg/mL). A kinetic study
indicated that DDBT was a competitive a-amylase inhibitor with a K(i) of 1.8
µg/mL. DDBT also inhibited rat intestinal a-glucosidase with an IC(50) value of
25.4 µg/mL for sucrase activity and 114 µg/mL for maltase activity. These results
suggest that DDBT, a potent inhibitor of carbohydrate-hydrolyzing enzymes, may be
useful as a natural nutraceutical to prevent diabetes.

PMID: 22594840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. BMC Public Health. 2012 May 14;12:353. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-12-353.

Reasons for not using ecstasy: a qualitative study of non-users, ex-light users
and ex-moderate users.

Comis MA(1), Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Botucatu, 
862 1o andar - Vila Clementino, São Paulo, SP CEP 04023-062, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Although ecstasy is often consumed in the electronic music scene, not
everyone with the opportunity to use it chooses to do so. The objective of this
study was to understand the reasons for non-use or the cessation of use, which
could provide information for public health interventions.
METHODS: A qualitative reference method was used. Our "snowball" sample group
consisted of 53 people who were split into three subgroups: non-users (NU,
n<U+2009>=<U+2009>23), ex-light users (EX-L, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>12) and ex-moderate users (EX-M, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>18).
Individual, semi-structured interviews were conducted, transcribed and subjected 
to content analysis with the aid of NVivo8.
RESULTS: Adverse health effects and personal values were given as reasons for
non-use in the three groups. Non-users (NU) and ex-light users (EX-L) provided
reasons that included fear of possible effects as well as moral, family and
religious objections. Ex-moderate users (EX-M) cited reasons related to health
complications and concomitant withdrawal from the electronic music scene.
However, most of the ex-moderate users did not rule out the possibility of future
use.
CONCLUSIONS: Potential effects and undesirable consequences appear to guide the
decisions within the different groups. Prevention might target these motivations.
Individuals who have used ecstasy indicate that social and environmental factors 
are the most important factors.

PMCID: PMC3507853
PMID: 22583984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Hypertens. 2012 Jul;30(7):1468-77. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e32835466ac.

Twenty-four hour and early morning blood pressure control of olmesartan vs.
ramipril in elderly hypertensive patients: pooled individual data analysis of two
randomized, double-blind, parallel-group studies.

Omboni S(1), Malacco E, Mallion JM, Volpe M, Zanchetti A; Study Group.

Collaborators: Malacco E, Auteri A, Volpe M, Mallion JM, Baghestanian M, Eber B, 
Zweiker R, Riegelnik V, Van Mieghem W, Mallion JM, DuCailar G, Panzer PK, Kresse 
WR, Carewicz O, Iserloh J, Krause KH, Prechtel E, Naudts IF, Schmidt A,
Zimmermann U, Borbas E, Kremastinos D, Triantafyllidi H, Stefanadis C, Barton J, 
Ambrosio GB, Anastasio L, Antonelli B, Antonucci G, Aurelio G, Auteri A, Baldi F,
Battistello L, Baule GM, Bellazzi R, Blasio A, Bonollo V, Borello L, Campanini M,
Candido R, Capobianco G, Capuano V, Caruso D, Corbara F, Casanova R, Cerasola G, 
Cianflone D, Ciconte V, Cipriani M, Cocchi R, Cucchini F, Dallemule J, D'amico F,
De Cesaris R, De Curtis G, Defeo, deFerrari G, Dei Cas L, Del Carratore G,
Demartino M, Desideri G, Destro M, Di Biase M, Di Somma S, Donadon V, Doronzo B, 
Fariello R, Feraco E, Ferri C, Fiorini F, Fogari R, Foresti A, Galasso D,
Gargiulo A, Gaudio G, Gavazzi A, Giannatempo C, Guzzardi G, Iaconelli G, Lacchè
A, Laghi F, Lechi A, Lembo G, Lettica G, Licata G, Locatelli F, Maimone I, Manfrè
M, Manfredini R, Marracci G, Mauro GF, Mazzuca L, Melandri F, Meloni L, Mezzetti 
A, Minutiello L, Mondillo S, Montereggi A, Mos L, Musca, Nami R, Nigro P, Novo S,
Noto R, Olivieri O, Palasciano G, Palatini P, Panettieri MI, Pedrinelli R,
Perticone F, Pini C, Pirrone GT, Portaluppi F, Prinzi D, Pulitanò G, Pupilella T,
Puzzolante V, Radaeli A, Raisaro A, Rappelli A, Ricciardi B, Fanelli F, Rovero E,
Russo F, Uriarte J, Santonastaso M, Scala A, Schipani F, Sechi L, Serviddio G,
Sganzerla P, Spadola V, Sprovieri M, Stornello M, Tamburino C, Totaro G, Turiel
M, Varì N, Venco A, Ventrella F, Villa G, Volpe M, Uguccioni M, Narkiewicz K,
Chrostowska M, Napora P, Gornikiewicz-Brzezicka B, Graczak I, Klimkiewicz J,
Jesewska M, Gamiz JL, Olivan J, Puig J, Extremera B, Lopez P, Martinez J, Adrian 
M, Coca A, Doménech M.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the antihypertensive efficacy of olmesartan medoxomil and
ramipril on 24-h ambulatory blood pressure (ABP) in elderly hypertensive patients
by pooled data analysis of two studies with identical designs (one Italian, one
European).
METHODS: After a 2-week placebo wash-out 1453 elderly hypertensive patients
(65-89 years; sitting office DBP 90-109 mmHg and/or sitting office SBP 140-179
mmHg) were randomized to a 12-week double-blind treatment with olmesartan
medoxomil 10 mg or ramipril 2.5 mg once-daily, up-titrated (20 and 40 mg
olmesartan medoxomil; 5 and 10 mg ramipril) after 2 and 6 weeks in patients
without normalized office BP. 24-h ABP was recorded at randomization and after 12
weeks.
RESULTS: In 715 patients with valid baseline and end-of-treatment recordings
baseline-adjusted 24-h SBP and DBP reductions were greater with olmesartan
medoxomil (n = 356) than with ramipril (n = 359) [between-treatment differences
and 95% confidence interval (CI), SBP: 2.2 (3.8, 0.6), P = 0.006; DBP: 1.3 (2.2, 
0.3), P = 0.009]. Olmesartan medoxomil showed larger BP reductions in the last 6 
h from the dosing interval and higher smoothness indices than ramipril.
Olmesartan medoxomil reduced the SBP morning rise [-2.8 (-4.9, -0.8) mmHg],
whereas ramipril did not [+1.5 (-0.6, +3.6) mmHg; P = 0.004 between-treatments]. 
Five hundred and eighty-two patients with sustained hypertension (office and 24-h
ambulatory hypertension) showed the largest antihypertensive effect, with
between-treatment differences still in favor of olmesartan medoxomil [SBP: 2.1
(3.9, 0.4), P = 0.019; DBP: 1.2 (2.3, 0.1), P = 0.032].
CONCLUSIONS: Olmesartan medoxomil provides a more effective and sustained 24-h BP
control than ramipril in elderly hypertensive patients, particularly in the hours
farthest from last intake.

PMID: 22573127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Chest. 2012 May;141(5):1131-2. doi: 10.1378/chest.11-3245.

Macrolides for acute lung injury.

Noto MJ, Wheeler AP.

Comment on
    Chest. 2012 May;141(5):1153-9.

PMCID: PMC3342786
PMID: 22553255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Arch Environ Occup Health. 2012;67(2):91-7. doi: 10.1080/19338244.2011.578683.

Prevalence of sensitization to Anisakis simplex among professionally exposed
populations in Sicily.

Mazzucco W(1), Lacca G, Cusimano R, Provenzani A, Costa A, Di Noto AM, Massenti
MF, Leto-Barone MS, Lorenzo GD, Vitale F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento Scienze Promozione della Salute-Sezione Igiene, University of
Palermo, Palermo, Italy. waltermazzucco@unipa.it

Anisakis simplex (AS) is a cause of allergic sensitization and potential
occupational risk is suggested in fishermen and workers assigned to fish
processing and sale. A cross-sectional study was conducted in order to assess
possible health effects of occupational exposure to AS in workers recruited from 
western Sicily fisheries sector. Social, demographic, and occupation-related data
were collected. Serum total immunoglobulin E (IgE) and specific IgE levels to AS 
(threshold >0.35 kU/L) were determined by an fluoroimmunoassay technique.
Ninety-four subjects with potential occupational exposure (fishmongers,
fishermen, fish industry employees) were recruited. Specific AS IgEs were
detected in 20.2% of the study population. AS IgE seroprevalence was elevated
6.7-fold (p = .03) among fishermen/sailors compared with fish industry workers.
The study suggested the importance to adopt specific prevention strategies
against exposure to AS in the occupational setting.

PMID: 22524649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Cereb Cortex. 2013 May;23(5):1005-13. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs005. Epub 2012 Apr
17.

The hermunculus: what is known about the representation of the female body in the
brain?

Di Noto PM(1), Newman L, Wall S, Einstein G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The representation of the body in the brain, the homunculus, was posited by
Wilder Penfield based on his studies of patients with intractable epilepsy. While
he mapped both male and female patients, Penfield reports little about the
females. The now iconic illustration of the map is clearly male with testicles,
penis, and no breasts. In order to bring attention to this omission and to
stimulate studies of female somatosensory cortex (SS), we discuss what is known
about the map of the female body in the brain, including Penfield's findings in
his female patients and subsequent work by others exploring the human female SS. 
We reveal that there is much we do not know about how the entire female body is
represented in the brain or how it might change with different reproductive life 
stages, hormones, and experiences. Understanding what is and is not currently
known about the female SS is a first step toward fully understanding neurological
and physiological sex differences, as well as producing better-informed
treatments for pain conditions related to mastectomy, hysterectomy, vulvodynia,
and fibromyalgia. We suggest that the time is ripe for a full mapping of the
female brain with the production of a hermunculus.

PMID: 22510528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Nat Prod Res. 2013;27(6):541-7. doi: 10.1080/14786419.2012.676553. Epub 2012 Apr 
13.

Determination of terpene alcohols in Sicilian Muscat wines by HS-SPME-GC-MS.

Barbera D(1), Avellone G, Filizzola F, Monte LG, Catanzaro P, Agozzino P.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Regionale Vite e Vino, Via Libertà, 66, 90143 Palermo, Italy.
d.barbera@vitevino.it

Muscat is a grape family used to obtain several sweet, aromatic white dessert
wines common in the Mediterranean area. Currently, three Sicilian cultivars (all 
classified DOC) are known: 'Moscato di Siracusa' the oldest and very rare today; 
'Moscato di Noto', a modern derivative of the first and finally 'Moscato di
Pantelleria', now the most common. This study concerns the volatile profile of 15
different Sicilian Muscat wines produced in different years using HS-SPME-GC-MS. 
In particular, four fundamental terpene alcohols (linalool, geraniol, nerol and
citronellol) were considered. The principal aim was to study the evolution of
aromatic compounds in wine during aging, and the information obtained is useful
for production and marketing. It was found that the amount of terpenes decreased 
with aging, thereby reducing the quality characteristic of these wines. An
accurate analysis of chromatograms could characterise Muscat wines on the basis
of geographic origin.

PMID: 22502739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012 Aug;11(8):303-16. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M112.018135. Epub
2012 Apr 6.

A cell surfaceome map for immunophenotyping and sorting pluripotent stem cells.

Gundry RL(1), Riordon DR, Tarasova Y, Chuppa S, Bhattacharya S, Juhasz O,
Wiedemeier O, Milanovich S, Noto FK, Tchernyshyov I, Raginski K, Bausch-Fluck D, 
Tae HJ, Marshall S, Duncan SA, Wollscheid B, Wersto RP, Rao S, Van Eyk JE,
Boheler KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin
53226, USA.

Induction of a pluripotent state in somatic cells through nuclear reprogramming
has ushered in a new era of regenerative medicine. Heterogeneity and varied
differentiation potentials among induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines are, 
however, complicating factors that limit their usefulness for disease modeling,
drug discovery, and patient therapies. Thus, there is an urgent need to develop
nonmutagenic rapid throughput methods capable of distinguishing among putative
iPSC lines of variable quality. To address this issue, we have applied a highly
specific chemoproteomic targeting strategy for de novo discovery of cell surface 
N-glycoproteins to increase the knowledge-base of surface exposed proteins and
accessible epitopes of pluripotent stem cells. We report the identification of
500 cell surface proteins on four embryonic stem cell and iPSCs lines and
demonstrate the biological significance of this resource on mouse fibroblasts
containing an oct4-GFP expression cassette that is active in reprogrammed cells. 
These results together with immunophenotyping, cell sorting, and functional
analyses demonstrate that these newly identified surface marker panels are useful
for isolating iPSCs from heterogeneous reprogrammed cultures and for isolating
functionally distinct stem cell subpopulations.

PMCID: PMC3412963
PMID: 22493178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Med Health R I. 2012 Feb;95(2):57-9.

Benign ovarian serous cystadenoma mimicking papillary thyroid carcinoma
metastasis on I-131 SPECT/CT.

Haaga TL(1), Yoo DC, Ortiz R, Noto RB.

Author information: 
(1)The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, USA. thaaga@lifespan.org

PMID: 22474878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Med Health R I. 2012 Feb;95(2):54-6.

Rheumatoid arthritis demonstrated on PET/CT as the etiology of hypercalcemia.

Mudge CS(1), Yoo DC, Noto RB.

Author information: 
(1)The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, USA. cmudge@lifespan.org

PMID: 22474877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2012;60(4):531-5.

On-line concentration and fluorescence determination HPLC for polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons in seawater samples and its application to Japan Sea.

Li Y(1), Yoshida S, Chondo Y, Nassar H, Tang N, Araki Y, Toriba A, Kameda T,
Hayakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences, Kanazawa University,
Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.

An on-line concentration and fluorescence determination HPLC for polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in seawater was proposed. An online concentration
column packed with octadecyl polyvinyl alcohol polymer, a pump and a column
switching valve were introduced in the conventional HPLC with a fluorescence
detector. Only 1.0-100<U+2009>mL seawater sample was introduced into the concentration
column at 1.0<U+2009>mL<U+2009>min(-1) without any other pretreatment except filtration. Then
the trapped PAHs totally flew into the separation column and eluted separately to
be detected fluorogenically. The proposed method had good linearity with
correlation coefficients (r) ranged from 0.951 to 0.998, and limits of detection 
ranged from 0.002 to 0.50<U+2009>ng<U+2009>L(-1) for 15 PAHs as 100<U+2009>mL seawater was loaded. The
sensitivity of the method was 10 to 100 times higher than those reported by other
works. The proposed method was applied to the determination of PAHs in the
seawater samples collected in the Japan Sea with satisfactory results and to
check the present benzo[a]pyrene concentration at the beaches in Noto peninsula, 
Japan polluted with C-heavy oil spilled from the tanker in 1997.

PMID: 22466737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33411. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033411. Epub 2012 Mar 20.

Cancer risk in diabetic patients treated with metformin: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Noto H(1), Goto A, Tsujimoto T, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine, Center Hospital, National
Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. noto-tky@umin.net

BACKGROUND: A growing body of evidence has suggested that metformin potentially
reduces the risk of cancer. Our objective was to enhance the precision of
estimates of the effect of metformin on the risk of any-site and site-specific
cancers in patients with diabetes.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We performed a search of MEDLINE, EMBASE, ISI Web of 
Science, Cochrane Library, and ClinicalTrials.gov for pertinent articles
published as of October 12, 2011, and included them in a systematic review and
meta-analysis. We calculated pooled risk ratios (RRs) for overall cancer
mortality and cancer incidence. Of the 21,195 diabetic patients reported in 6
studies (4 cohort studies, 2 RCTs), 991 (4.5%) cases of death from cancer were
reported. A total of 11,117 (5.3%) cases of incident cancer at any site were
reported among 210,892 patients in 10 studies (2 RCTs, 6 cohort studies, 2
case-control studies). The risks of cancer among metformin users were
significantly lower than those among non-metformin users: the pooled RRs (95%
confidence interval) were 0.66 (0.49-0.88) for cancer mortality, 0.67 (0.53-0.85)
for all-cancer incidence, 0.68 (0.53-0.88) for colorectal cancer (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>6), 0.20
(0.07-0.59) for hepatocellular cancer (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>4), 0.67 (0.45-0.99) for lung cancer
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>3).
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: The use of metformin in diabetic patients was associated
with significantly lower risks of cancer mortality and incidence. However, this
analysis is mainly based on observational studies and our findings underscore the
more need for long-term RCTs to confirm this potential benefit for individuals
with diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3308971
PMID: 22448244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Environ Sci Technol. 2012 May 1;46(9):4941-9. doi: 10.1021/es300391w. Epub 2012
Apr 12.

Emission and atmospheric transport of particulate PAHs in Northeast Asia.

Inomata Y(1), Kajino M, Sato K, Ohara T, Kurokawa J, Ueda H, Tang N, Hayakawa K, 
Ohizumi T, Akimoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Asia Center for Air Pollution Research, 1182, Sowa, Niigatashi, Niigata,
950-2144, Japan. inomata@acap.asia

The emission, concentration levels, and transboundary transport of particulate
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in Northeast Asia were investigated using
particulate PAH measurements, the newly developed emission inventory (Regional
Emission inventory in ASia for Persistent Organic Pollutants version, REAS-POP), 
and the chemical transport model (Regional Air Quality Model ver2 for POPs
version, RAQM2-POP). The simulated concentrations of the nine particulate PAHs
agreed well with the measured concentrations, and the results firmly established 
the efficacy of REAS/RAQM2-POP. It was found that the PAH concentrations in
Beijing (China, source region), which were emitted predominantly from domestic
coal, domestic biofuel, and other transformations of coal (including coke
production), were approximately 2 orders of magnitude greater than those
monitored at Noto (Japan, leeward region). In Noto, the PAH concentrations showed
seasonal variations; the PAH concentrations were high from winter to spring due
to contributions from domestic coal, domestic biofuel, and other transformations 
of coal, and low in summer. In summer, these contribution were decrease, instead,
other sources, such as the on-road mobile source, were relatively increased
compared with those in winter. These seasonal variations were due to seasonal
variations in emissions from China, as well as transboundary transport across the
Asian continent associated with meteorological conditions.

© 2012 American Chemical Society

PMID: 22435795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Gene. 2012 May 15;499(2):326-31. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.03.042. Epub 2012 Mar
13.

Cloning of two members of the calcitonin-family receptors from stingray, Dasyatis
akajei: possible physiological roles of the calcitonin family in osmoregulation.

Suzuki N(1), Sekiguchi T, Satake H, Kato K, Nishiyama Y, Takahashi H, Danks JA,
Martin TJ, Hattori A, Nakano M, Kakikawa M, Yamada S, Ogoshi M, Hyodo S,
Yamaguchi Y, Chowdhury VS, Hayakawa K, Funahashi H, Sakamoto T, Sasayama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University, Housu-gun, Ishikawa 927-0553, Japan.
nobuos@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

In cartilaginous fish, two cDNAs encoding calcitonin-family receptors were
isolated for the first time from the stingray brain. The open reading frame of
one receptor cDNA coded a 525-amino acid protein. The amino acid identity of this
receptor to human calcitonin-receptor-like receptor (CRLR) is 64.5%, frog CRLR is
64.7%, and flounder CRLR is 61.2% and this was higher than to human calcitonin
receptor (CTR) (46.1%), frog CTR (54.7%), and flounder CTR (48.9%). We strongly
suggested that this receptor is a ray CRLR based on phylogenetic analysis. In
case of the second receptor, amino acid identity among CRLRs (human 50.5%, frog
50.7%, flounder 48.0%) and CTRs (human 43.2%, frog 49.1%, flounder 41.8%) was
similar. From phylogenetic analysis of both CRLRs and CTRs, we believe that this 
receptor is ray CTR. The expression of ray CRLR mRNA was predominantly detected
in the nervous system (brain) and vascular system (atrium, ventricle, and gill), 
which reflects the similar localization of CGRP in the nervous and vascular
systems as mammals. It was observed that the second receptor was expressed in
several tissues, namely cartilage, brain, pituitary gland, gill, atrium,
ventricle, pancreas, spleen, liver, gall bladder, intestine, rectal gland,
kidney, testis and ovary. This localization pattern was very similar to flounder 
CTR. Both receptor mRNAs were strongly expressed in the gill. This suggests that 
the calcitonin-family members are involved in the osmoregulation of stingray as
this fish is known to be euryhaline. When a stingray was transferred to diluted
seawater (20% seawater), the expression of both receptors significantly decreased
in the gill. Similar results were obtained in the kidney of the stingray. Thus,
our cloning and isolation of both receptors in the stingray will be helpful for
elucidation of their physiological role(s) such as osmoregulation including
calcium metabolism of cartilaginous fish.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22429839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32444. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032444. Epub 2012 Mar 6.

The tempered polymerization of human neuroserpin.

Noto R(1), Santangelo MG, Ricagno S, Mangione MR, Levantino M, Pezzullo M,
Martorana V, Cupane A, Bolognesi M, Manno M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics, National Research Council of Italy, Palermo, Italy.

Neuroserpin, a member of the serpin protein superfamily, is an inhibitor of
proteolytic activity that is involved in pathologies such as ischemia,
Alzheimer's disease, and Familial Encephalopathy with Neuroserpin Inclusion
Bodies (FENIB). The latter belongs to a class of conformational diseases, known
as serpinopathies, which are related to the aberrant polymerization of serpin
mutants. Neuroserpin is known to polymerize, even in its wild type form, under
thermal stress. Here, we study the mechanism of neuroserpin polymerization over a
wide range of temperatures by different techniques. Our experiments show how the 
onset of polymerization is dependent on the formation of an intermediate
monomeric conformer, which then associates with a native monomer to yield a
dimeric species. After the formation of small polymers, the aggregation proceeds 
via monomer addition as well as polymer-polymer association. No further secondary
mechanism takes place up to very high temperatures, thus resulting in the
formation of neuroserpin linear polymeric chains. Most interesting, the overall
aggregation is tuned by the co-occurrence of monomer inactivation (i.e. the
formation of latent neuroserpin) and by a mechanism of fragmentation. The
polymerization kinetics exhibit a unique modulation of the average mass and size 
of polymers, which might suggest synchronization among the different processes
involved. Thus, fragmentation would control and temper the aggregation process,
instead of enhancing it, as typically observed (e.g.) for amyloid fibrillation.

PMCID: PMC3295756
PMID: 22412873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Metallomics. 2012 Apr;4(4):361-72. doi: 10.1039/c2mt20037f. Epub 2012 Mar 8.

Evidence of Fe3+ interaction with the plug domain of the outer membrane
transferrin receptor protein of Neisseria gonorrhoeae: implications for Fe
transport.

Banerjee S(1), Siburt CJ, Mistry S, Noto JM, DeArmond P, Fitzgerald MC, Lambert
LA, Cornelissen CN, Crumbliss AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, NC-27708-0346, USA.

Neisseria gonorrhoeae is an obligate pathogen that hijacks iron from the human
iron transport protein, holo-transferrin (Fe(2)-Tf), by expressing TonB-dependent
outer membrane receptor proteins, TbpA and TbpB. Homologous to other
TonB-dependent outer membrane transporters, TbpA is thought to consist of a
ß-barrel with an N-terminal plug domain. Previous reports by our laboratories
show that the sequence EIEYE in the plug domain is highly conserved among various
bacterial species that express TbpA and plays a crucial role in iron utilization 
for gonococci. We hypothesize that this highly conserved EIEYE sequence in the
TbpA plug, rich in hard oxygen donor groups, binds with Fe(3+) through the
transport process across the outer membrane through the ß-barrel. Sequestration
of Fe(3+) by the TbpA-plug supports the paradigm that the ferric iron must always
remain chelated and controlled throughout the transport process. In order to test
this hypothesis here we describe the ability of both the recombinant wild-type
plug, and three small peptides that encompass the sequence EIEYE of the plug, to 
bind Fe(3+). This is the first report of the expression/isolation of the
recombinant wild-type TbpA plug. Although CD and SUPREX spectroscopies suggest
that a non-native structure is observed for the recombinant plug, fluorescence
quenching titrations indicate that the wild-type recombinant TbpA plug binds Fe
(3+) with a conditional log K(d) = 7 at pH 7.5, with no evidence of binding at pH
6.3. A recombinant TbpA plug with mutated sequence (NEIEYEN <U+2192> NEIAAAN) shows no
evidence of Fe(3+) binding under our experimental set up. Interestingly, in
silico modeling with the wild-type plug also predicts a flexible loop structure
for the EIEYE sequence under native conditions which once again supports the
Fe(3+) binding hypothesis. These in vitro observations are consistent with the
hypothesis that the EIEYE sequence in the wild-type TbpA plug binds Fe(3+) during
the outer membrane transport process in vivo.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012

PMCID: PMC3391718
PMID: 22399131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2012 Mar;34(1):43-51.

The Brazilian smoker: a survey in the largest cities of Brazil.

Opaleye ES(1), Sanchez ZM, Moura YG, Galduróz JC, Locatelli DP, Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Psicobiologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo.
emerita@psicobio.epm.br

OBJECTIVE: To understand the sociodemographic factors associated with daily
consumption of cigarettes and pattern of cigarette use among Brazilian smokers.
METHOD: A cross-sectional study was performed in 2005 involving the 108 largest
Brazilian cities. Data were collected through interviews with subjects aged 12 to
65 years in randomly selected households. Based on a questionnaire adapted to the
Brazilian context, a logistic regression model was used to investigate the
association between the sociodemographic characteristics of the sample and
smoking.
RESULTS: Of the 7,921 subjects interviewed, 16.4% reported daily use of
cigarettes. The smoking prevalence was similar between genders, although women
reported to start smoking at a later age and smoke fewer cigarettes per day.
Almost 65% of the smokers were interested in quitting or reducing their smoking
habit. The main sociodemographic characteristics associated with smoking were as 
follows: adult age (30-59 years old), unemployment, low education level, and low 
socioeconomic level. Alcohol abuse was also shown to be associated with smoking.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that adverse socioeconomic characteristics are 
implicated in increased susceptibility to smoking in Brazil. In our sample, a
high proportion of smokers reported interest to quit or reduce smoking. These
data suggest that sociodemographic factors should be considered in the
elaboration of smoking prevention and treatment policies.

PMID: 22392388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Atherosclerosis. 2012 May;222(1):106-9. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2012.01.049. Epub 2012 Feb 7.

Characteristics of earlier atherosclerotic involvement in adolescent patients
with Kawasaki disease and coronary artery lesions: significance of gray scale
median on B-mode ultrasound.

Noto N(1), Okada T, Abe Y, Miyashita M, Kanamaru H, Karasawa K, Ayusawa M,
Sumitomo N, Mugishima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Nihon University School of Medicine
30-1 Oyaguchikami-machi, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8610, Japan. info@noto-clinic.com

OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that textural changes in the carotid
intima-media complex (IMC) detected by B-mode ultrasound are associated with the 
difference of remodeling process in earlier atherosclerotic involvement in
patients with Kawasaki disease (KD) and coronary artery lesions (CALs).
METHODS: Eighteen patients with KD and CALs (mean age 17.2 years), 17 patients
with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) (mean age 16.9 years) and 15
age-matched healthy controls (Cont) were assessed and compared for carotid
intima-media thickness (CIMT), elastic property (E(p)), and first- and
second-order statistics.
RESULTS: KD showed significantly higher gray scale median (GSM) than FH and Cont.
KD and FH showed significantly higher CIMT, entropy and lower angular second
moment than Cont, but no significant difference was found between KD and FH.
CONCLUSION: Higher GSM in KD may indicate alteration of tissue components and
heterogeneity of IMC, suggesting the development of arteriosclerotic vascular
remodeling after vasculitis. This is distinct from that of atherosclerosis with
lower GSM often observed in FH.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22377394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Development. 2012 Apr;139(7):1276-84. doi: 10.1242/dev.072728. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Differential regulation of node formation, nodal ciliogenesis and cilia
positioning by Noto and Foxj1.

Alten L(1), Schuster-Gossler K, Beckers A, Groos S, Ulmer B, Hegermann J, Ochs M,
Gossler A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, Hannover, Germany.

The mouse transcription factor Noto is expressed in the node and controls node
morphogenesis, formation of nodal cilia and left-right asymmetry. Noto acts
upstream of Foxj1, which regulates ciliogenesis in other mouse tissues. However, 
the significance of Foxj1 for the formation of cilia in the mouse node is
unclear; in non-amniote species Foxj1 is required for ciliogenesis in the
structures equivalent to the node. Here, we analyzed nodes, nodal cilia and nodal
flow in mouse embryos in which we replaced the Noto-coding sequence with that of 
Foxj1, or in embryos that were deficient for Foxj1. We show that Foxj1 expressed 
from the Noto locus is functional and restores the formation of structurally
normal motile cilia in the absence of Noto. However, Foxj1 is not sufficient for 
the correct positioning of cilia on the cell surface within the plane of the
nodal epithelium, and cannot restore normal node morphology. We also show that
Foxj1 is essential for ciliogenesis upstream of Rfx3 in the node. Thus, the
function of Foxj1 in vertebrate organs of asymmetry is conserved, and Noto
regulates node morphogenesis and the posterior localization of cilia on node
cells independently of Foxj1.

PMID: 22357932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Clin Virol. 2012 May;54(1):26-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2012.01.009. Epub 2012 Feb 
16.

Monophyletic outbreak of Hepatitis A involving HIV-infected men who have sex with
men, Rome, Italy 2008-2009.

Bordi L(1), Rozera G, Scognamiglio P, Minosse C, Loffredo M, Antinori A, Narciso 
P, Ippolito G, Girardi E, Capobianchi MR; GEAS Group.

Collaborators: Corpolongo A, Ghirga P, Grisetti S, La Scala P, Noto P, Nurra G,
Petrosillo N, Rianda A, Casalanguida A, Ciufoli A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, National Institute for Infectious Diseases 'L.
Spallanzani', 292 Via Portuense, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Outbreaks of Acute Hepatitis A Virus (HAV) among men who have sex
with men (MSM) have been reported in Europe and, recently, in Italy. From July
2008 through January 2010, 162 HAV infections were diagnosed at National
Institute for Infectious Diseases, Rome, Italy, with high male-to-female ratio
(M:F=7.5).
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to characterize viral strains involved in
this outbreak.
STUDY DESIGN: The sequences of VP1-2A junction of HAV genome, obtained from 67/97
HAV-RNA-positive samples, were used for phylogenetic analysis.
RESULTS: All but 1 of the HAV sequences were genotype 1A, 1 was genotype 1B. A
monophyletic cluster, including 59/66 genotype IA sequences, was identified by
phylogenetic analysis. This cluster included also 2 HAV strains isolated in
Germany (2007) and France (2008) from MSM, that, in turn, were reported to be
genetically correlated to HAV strains circulating in Tuscany in 2008. Among the
males harboring an HAV strain belonging to the cluster, 62% reported to be MSM,
and 25% were HIV-positive, 2 with acute HIV infection.
CONCLUSION: The outbreak occurred in Rome in 2008-2010, involving high proportion
of HIV-infected MSM, is sustained by a monophyletic HAV strain, circulating
around the same period also in other European countries. Possible factors
favouring HAV spread among HIV-infected persons, such as high risk behavior and
prolonged fecal excretion, need to be further elucidated. Timely identification
of outbreaks with one or the same source of infection may be helpful to implement
preventive measures addressing at risk populations.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22341552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2012 Apr;25 Suppl 1:104-9. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2012.663198. Epub 2012 Mar 16.

Clinical application of metabolomics in neonatology.

Fanos V(1), Antonucci R, Barberini L, Noto A, Atzori L.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section,
University of Cagliari, Italy.

The youngest and more rapidly increasing "omic" discipline, called metabolomics, 
is the process of describing the phenotype of a cell, tissue or organism through 
the full complement of metabolites present. Metabolomics measure global sets of
low molecular weight metabolites (including amino acids, organic acids, sugars,
fatty acids, lipids, steroids, small peptides, vitamins, etc.), thus providing a 
"snapshot" of the metabolic status of a cell, tissue or organism in relation to
genetic variations or external stimuli. The use of metabolomics appears to be a
promising tool in neonatology. The management of sick newborns might improve if
more information on perinatal/neonatal maturational processes and their metabolic
background were available. Urine ("a window on the organism") is a biofluid
particularly suitable for metabolomic analysis in neonatology because it may be
collected by using simple, noninvasive techniques and because it may provide
valuable diagnostic information. In this review, the authors report the few
literature data on neonatal metabolomics, including their personal experience, in
the following fields: intrauterine growth restriction, perinatal transition,
asphyxia, brain injury and hypothermia, maternal milk evaluation, postnatal
maturation, bronchiolitis, sepsis, patent ductus arteriosus, respiratory distress
syndrome, nephrouropathies, metabolic diseases, antibiotic treatment, perinatal
programming and long-term outcome in extremely low birth-weight infants.

PMID: 22339399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Diabetes Investig. 2012 Feb 20;3(1):24-33. doi:
10.1111/j.2040-1124.2011.00183.x.

Significantly increased risk of cancer in diabetes mellitus patients: A
meta-analysis of epidemiological evidence in Asians and non-Asians.

Noto H(1), Tsujimoto T(1), Noda M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine, Center Hospital ; Department of
Diabetes Research, Diabetes Research Center, Research Institute, National Center 
for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Aims/Introduction:  Emerging evidence from observational studies suggests that
diabetes mellitus affects the cancer risk. However, whether there are differences
in the magnitude of the influence of diabetes among ethnic groups is
unknown.MATERIALS AND METHODS:   We searched MEDLINE and the Cochrane Library for
pertinent articles that had been published as of 4 April 2011, and included them 
in a meta-analysis of the risk of all-cancer mortality and incidence in diabetic 
subjects.
RESULTS:   A total of 33 studies were included in the meta-analysis, and they
provided 156,132 diabetic subjects for the mortality analysis and 993,884 for the
incidence analysis. Cancer mortality was approximately 3%, and cancer incidence
was approximately 8%. The pooled adjusted risk ratio (RR) of all-cancer mortality
was significantly higher than for non-diabetic people (RR 1.32 [CI 1.20-1.45] for
Asians; RR 1.16 [CI 1.01-1.34] for non-Asians). Diabetes was also associated with
an increased RR of incidence across all cancer types (RR 1.23 [CI 1.09-1.39] for 
Asians; RR 1.15 [CI 0.94-1.43] for non-Asians). The RR of incident cancer for
Asian men was significantly higher than for non-Asian men (P = 0.021).
CONCLUSIONS:   Diabetes is associated with a higher risk for incident cancer in
Asian men than in non-Asian men. In light of the exploding global epidemic of
diabetes, particularly in Asia, a modest increase in the cancer risk will
translate into a substantial socioeconomic burden. Our current findings
underscore the need for clinical attention and better-designed studies of the
complex interactions between diabetes and cancer. (J Diabetes Invest, doi:
10.1111/j.2040-1124.2011.00183.x, 2012).

PMCID: PMC4014928
PMID: 24843541  [PubMed]


482. Urologia. 2012;79(1):44-8. doi: 10.5301/RU.2012.9019.

[Circumcision in Nesbit corporoplasty: a mandatory time? Our experience on 158
patients].

[Article in Italian]

Pavone C(1), Abbadessa D, Usala M, Mangiapane G, Noto M, Scaduto G, Passalacqua
D.

Author information: 
(1)UO di Urologia, AOU Policlinico P. Giaccone, Università degli Studi di
Palermo, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: The Nesbit procedure is the most common surgical technique to
correct congenital or acquired penile curvature. It is a common opinion that this
surgical procedure has to be completed with a circumcision to prevent foreskin
necrosis or phimosis. According to our experience we believe that some procedural
"tricks" could strongly reduce that mechanical and ischemic trauma on the
foreskin responsible for these complications.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: From 1988 to 2010 we selected 158 patients treated with
Nesbit's corporoplasty. The procedure was recommended to patients who presented a
penile curvature wider than 30° and reporting however some difficulty or pain at 
coitus, or to patients who complained about aesthetical problems (123 patients
presented a La Peyronie disease and 35 presented a congenital curvature).
RESULTS: Eleven patients underwent circumcision during surgery because of a
pre-operative phimosis, or according to their own desire. Among the patients who 
did not undergo circumcision (147), paraphimosis was present in 3 patients. We
reported only one case of curvature recurrence in a patient who had a sexual
intercourse the day after surgery. We also had one case of hourglass effect in a 
congenital curvature.
DISCUSSION: We believe that some tricks during Nesbit surgical procedure could
prevent tissue and vascular trauma that give rise to tissue retraction, and
consequently to phimosis and foreskin necrosis: a coronal incision to 0.5-1cm
from the gland line would allow to let intact an adequate amount of reflection of
skin (prepuce) bound of preputial skin reflection , maintaining good vascularity.
The careful degloving with preparatory isolation of the dissection plan between
dartos and Buck's fascia, can reduce vascular trauma of the fascia, minimizing
bleeding and ensuring tissue vitality. Moreover, execution of only two hydraulics
erections, after degloving and after correction, causes a minimal tissue stress.
CONCLUSIONS: Circumcision must not be considered a mandatory time in Nesbit
procedure: on the contrary, mandatory is the respect of the anatomical structures
surgically attacked to avoid preputial resection.

PMID: 22328416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Chemphyschem. 2012 May 14;13(7):1877-84. doi: 10.1002/cphc.201100878. Epub 2012
Feb 9.

Binary mixtures of ionic liquids: a joint approach to investigate their
properties and catalytic ability.

D'Anna F(1), Marullo S, Vitale P, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento STEMBIO, Sezione di Chimica Organica E. Paternò, Università degli
Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, Ed. 17, 90128 Palermo,
Italy. francesca.danna@unipa.it

The growing interest in the properties and applications of ionic liquids has
recently led to research into the possibility of using their binary mixtures.
This work reports on the effects of binary mixtures of ionic liquids on the
outcome of organic reactions such as the mononuclear rearrangement of
heterocycles and the solvatochromic behavior of Nile Red. Binary mixtures formed 
by ionic liquids differing in the structure of the cation and the anion are taken
into account. In particular, ionic liquids such as 1-benzyl-3-butylimidazolium
bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide,
1-(2,3,4,5,6-pentafluorobenzyl)-3-butylimidazolium
bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide, and 1-benzyl-3-butylimidazolium
tetrafluoroborate, are studied. To achieve a deep understanding of the properties
of ionic-liquid binary mixtures, their three-dimensional organization was
analyzed by a combination of resonance light scattering, UV/Vis spectroscopy, and
(1)H and (19)F NMR spectroscopy. Data collected herein evidence that the most
significant changes in the ionic lattice structure, and consequently the most
pronounced effects exerted as solvent media, occur when the studied system
involves a blend of different anions.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22323334  [PubMed]


484. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2012 Mar;13(3):165-74. doi:
10.2459/JCM.0b013e3283515be3.

Elderly patients with acute coronary syndromes admitted to Italian intensive
cardiac care units: a Blitz-3 Registry sub-analysis.

Casella G(1), Scorcu G, Cassin M, Chiarella F, Chinaglia A, Conte MR, Fradella G,
Lucci D, Maggioni AP, Visconti LO; Blitz-3 Investigators.

Collaborators: Lucci D, Gonzini L, Oltrona Visconti L, Chiarella F, Cassin M,
Chinaglia A, Pirelli S, Scorcu G, Casella G, Conte MR, Fradella G, Ferrara L,
Greco A, Ciociola G, Genchi C, Scarsi G, Stocco A, Bazzanini F, Moda L, Zarbo G, 
Ingrao V, Giordano F, De Cristofaro A, Fonti S, Paruzzo E, Patruno N, Piras P,
Rodio G, Tria E, Aceto G, Schifalacqua AM, Ripa C, Canestrale R, Costantini C,
Longo F, Matera A, Lamanna R, Iorizzo M, Romagnoli D, Leone G, Arvat I, Guida R, 
Caneschi P, Lo Conte C, Li Pizzi G, Perrone C, Tomasi S, Gregori G, Partemi L,
Alciati M, Porta V, Di Pasquale P, Di Mare M, Mariello C, Di Nardo P, Iodice P,
De Bellis I, Carrozza M, Olivieri A, Nannini M, Mando R, Ciriello N, Cagnetta R, 
Zanna D, Rubini A, Franchini G, Amoruso G, De Gennaro L, Colovitti M, Palella M, 
Caferra F, Mascolo AR, Dargenio A, Libardoni M, Zarpellon AM, Palatini O, Rossi
A, Santopietro S, Apicella R, Ciampi Q, Maiale AM, Vassiliki Coutsoumbas G,
Fabbri S, Veritti U, Chinelli N, Savasta C, Borghini E, Marenna B, Fontanel M,
Musuraca AC, Attana R, Cemin R, Stanchina A, Bielli M, Sacco G, Bertola B,
Marchino E, Cirillo R, Bove A, Affatato A, Rinaldi M, Ghizzoni G, Conti C,
Forgione C, Tosoni S, Guadalupi M, Tredici S, Macchi M, Onnis E, Melis O, Bonomo 
P, Sessini P, Scorcu G, Boi V, Cinnirella C, Nobile G, Amici R, Greco R, Di Marco
A, Peggio M, Costanza G, Antolini R, Ferrara D, Manzi RC, Mocci W, Patrizi G,
Ardente V, Bassano F, Quattrini L, Piscicelli C, Castoldi F, Greco A, Memmi E,
Catanzaro M, Chirico S, Colangeli G, Visentin M, Madonna S, Zingone E, Pera I,
Gozzi F, Mariani PR, Turriani A, Cascio Ingurgio N, Bonafede M, Manes E,
Mitidieri M, Bellanuova IA, Agricola P, Romeo C, La Rosa A, Branca B,
Licciardello G, Florio C, Palazzo G, Calvo D, Scotti E, Condito AM, Venturini E, 
Signorini F, Lo Iacono S, Manna G, Alboni P, Balboni D, Giordano WS, Castro M,
Tisselli A, Baschetti S, Ibello L, D'Andrea C, Rodella P, Mazzoldi G, De Cesare
M, Toto E, Cirino D, Grassi C, Severini D, De Ritis D, Rossi M, Zanarella P,
Baldoni M, Friscolanti D, Leo Usai T, Gasbarri C, Guasconi C, Pisaroni G, Mennuni
M, Cacciotti C, Acquati F, Lucini M, Turiano G, Tonon M, Greco EL, Caldararo M,
Misuraca G, Corrado M, De Vuono T, Statzu P, Tovena D, Franzoni S, Boldini A,
Mariani M, Giordano L, Montaruli B, Morena L, Garnerone M, De Cristan B, Ceresara
D, Avanzini F, Cotza R, Mazzuero A, De Felice M, Vicinanza E, Rizzo R, Nieri M,
Checcucci R, Battaglia C, Cagliari G, Agnelli D, Urso A, Abrignani MG, Sorrentino
A, Targa L, Scabello T, Merli E, Prudente R, Romano S, Gobbis D, Ciliberti D,
Monterubbianesi L, Buia E, Binini S, Battelli P, Litta L, Valente S, Navari L,
Valoti P, Cavicchi S, Liberati R, Tartaglia D, Caravita L, Bacchilega E, Treglia 
A, Italo G, Giaccari R, Legrottaglie AM, Podimani N, Crotti F, Cavalieri F, Papa 
A, Di Domenico E, Saleri B, Spadaro C, Vella G, Secchi GL, Farina R, Toselli A,
Manco T, Giuliano G, Noto ME, Lonati A, Canu S, De Rosa P, Zammartino L, Strangi 
T, Mattei L, Narduzzi C, Chianca R, Barini S, Guerrini F, Draoli N, Regni O,
Ghiandoni N, Mazza V, De Filippis A, Musso P, Grosso R, Rizzo M, Pasquinelli M,
Pileggi V, Cristiano A, Scimia A, Di Domenico P, De Lisi A, De Luca R, De Giorgi 
A, Coia I, Achilli F, Colli F, Barbiero M, Guardalben S, Poletti F, Lorenzano E, 
Arcidiacono S, D'Anna A, Comella A, Marchetti R, Galli M, Croce L, Rossi M,
Franco A, Marangoni E, Ferrari A, Boni A, Gianni P, Gobbi M, Bacchilega F,
Morgagni GL, Carpineti G, Bardelli G, Monfredini M, Pierri F, Di Mitri G, Masa A,
Spagnoli J, Izzo A, Ciulla A, Panzarella A, Molendi V, Grassi C, Magnante A,
Galtieri A, Di Giovanni P, Puccio M, Erckert M, Azzouzi D, De Fazio G, Gallucci
F, Paleologo G, Barbaro F, Giannetto M, Calatozzo D, Cutolo A, Vianello M,
Mafrici A, Viola V, Negrini M, Camozzi B, Capozi A, Ornago M, Terranova P,
Girardi F, Sala R, Mura M, Annoni L, Grignani M, Coppolino C, Costa A, Sternieri 
S, Malaguti F, Pasquetto G, Carraro C, Tosoni G, Sorrentino S, Fantini G,
Bardelli C, Parenzan T, Ancalepore T, Bruna C, Rossi T, Perazza L, Micheluzzi G, 
Mannarini A, Fiume C, Crosato M, Sartor F, Catellani E, Cocconi A, Taddei T,
Donati S, Bozzano A, Pirovano M, Mortara A, Castaneda C, Elia LR, Sparano E,
Irace L, Sanfilippo M, Cudemo G, Micillo C, Siciliano S, Zingarini M, Golia B,
Ricci V, Tammaro P, Pardo N, Di Mario F, Marsili D, Romano C, Esposito F, Picardi
G, Stampati E, Bacchini S, Sanna F, Agosti S, Gemme O, Secci T, Rubanu I,
Orecchioni G, Silecchia T, Bianchi V, Duca L, Safari D, Beatrici B, Pozzi R,
Cappello S, Caddeo A, Bonu G, Baragli D, Gentile T, Perazzolo Marra M, Brugnaro
L, Smecca IM, Cannova C, Celona G, Di Salvo G, Ajello A, Calabrese L, Cicero S,
Cavalieri A, Guarneri A, Pellitteri G, Falletta C, Navanzino F, Crivaro A,
Pantanella M, Sartorio D, Marletta G, Rancati V, Lombardi F, Bottaro G, Fazzio O,
Del Pinto M, Ponziani R, Tarsi G, Donninelli C, Di Clemente D, Cornacchione N,
Civitarese G, Cicalo RA, Rossini D, Grassi C, Ferraro S, Oronte L, De Risi L,
Vetere A, Rossi F, Aicardi S, Pasqualini MF, Marcomin C, Sappe D, Isidori S,
Agostini V, Lattanzi F, Saviozzi G, Coceani M, Corelli L, Chiti M, Parenti K,
Romei M, Francardi R, Truncellito L, Graziano V, Meduri G, Guerrisi G, La Creta
C, Petrillo N, Nardiello V, Montella A, Ricci D, Pipia T, Leonardi T, Casati AG, 
Viani SM, Caruso M, Rellini G, Spicca A, Murena E, Tortorella S, Tedeschi D,
Agostini D, Guarrella ML, Battaglia G, Scollo V, Cavalieri L, Parollo R, Babini
E, Tortorella G, Battitori A, Vittori G, Bottini M, Marchese I, Simeoni S,
Belletti G, Lombardi D, Bongioanni S, De Luca E, Oppo I, Buono NC, Fera MS, Fiori
F, Finocchiaro ML, Pierini S, Burattini M, Fabrizi S, Lo Bianco F, Zecca R,
Tubaro M, Chisari P, Tozzi Q, Gervasio G, Liuzzo G, Mattu L, Vitucci NC,
Caldironi S, Delle Grotti PL, Tatullo A, Martina C, Gasbarro V, Scioli R,
Piccininno V, Federici A, Fortunato A, Trambaiolo P, Esposito D, Melfi R, Autore 
C, Gargiulo A, Salituri S, Petrone F, Vaccarini C, Carraro M, Zaninati M, Barbaro
C, Gabriele G, Naddeo C, Iannaccone O, Floris F, Di Teodoro D, Giovinazzo P,
Barro S, Villella M, Tartaglione S, Mileto F, Fattore L, Valentini G, Matarazzo
MM, Propato F, Palumbo B, Zanchi P, Meloni S, Legnani M, Pes R, Pense G, Melandri
F, Francesconi A, Coppolino A, Morra G, Aykut V, Mottolo D, Villani P, Longobardi
G, Sanzone G, Lentini S, De Iaco MR, Castelluzzo A, Falchetti E, Piersanti D,
Costalunga A, Terzi A, Santoro R, Montiglio C, Barbieri L, Anduena M, Maffei S,
Vinci E, De Luca D, Pontiggia G, Poli C, Fontana D, Caiazzo A, Sisani S, Cilento 
A, Di Iorio G, Mascio E, Russo NR, Lamperti C, Morrone V, Matichecchia F,
Pascente T, Serio MR, John N, Nicolardi A, Lalla Piccioni L, Cecchini E, Cuonzo
M, Ficco A, Colonna N, Staniscia C, De Bonis P, Cattin Cosso I, Callegarin L,
Marcante S, Amati R, De Flavis A, Usmiani T, Tarantino E, Bergerone S, Ferraro A,
Gandolfo N, Bordino C, Ferro S, Saraceno A, Nejrotti A, Gagliardi S, Noussan P,
Labriola M, Guastaferro C, Orazzo P, Mutti EM, Cogotti F, Gianni M, Savoia L,
Spadaro R, Iori R, Centonze F, Nichetti W, Totis O, Sallemi P, Accogli M, Micello
L, Milo M, Pintarelli M, Fresco C, Fonseca T, Bersigotti G, Ceccarini S, Aloia A,
Gallo G, Limido A, Marchesi P, Prisco GD, Sommacal R, Gubelli S, Mastrangelo V,
Mazzuero A, Scorpiniti S, Proietti R, Curacanova M, Morando G, Signorini M, Teti 
G, Moscato S, Spanghero M, Zuccon S, Villani R, Argese I, Bassani F, Sommariva L,
Faina C, Osti R, Barone D, Maffei M.

BACKGROUND: Guideline-recommended therapies for acute coronary syndromes (ACS)
derive from randomized trials in which elderly patients are underrepresented.
Although numbers of this population are increasing, they are largely undertreated
in the real world.
OBJECTIVE: The study evaluates the impact of older age on care for patients with 
ACS admitted to the Italian Intensive Cardiac Care Units (ICCUs) network.
METHODS: We analyzed data from the BLITZ-3 Registry in order to assess
in-hospital care among unselected elderly patients (=75 years).
RESULTS: From 7-20 April 2008, 6986 consecutive patients with acute cardiac
conditions were admitted to ICCUs and prospectively enrolled; 3636 (52%) had ACS 
and 38% of them were elderly. Elderly patients had a higher risk profile, their
median length of stay in ICCU was longer [4 days, interquartile range (IQR): 3-6 
vs. 3 days, IQR: 2-5; P<U+200A><<U+200A>0.0001] and guideline-recommended care was applied less
often. At multivariable analysis, elderly patients were less likely to receive
reperfusion [odds ratio (OR)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.53, 95% confidence interval (CI)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.42-0.67]
for ST-elevation, or early coronary angiography (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.45, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.37-0.56)
for non-ST elevation ACS. Besides, unadjusted in-ICCU total mortality was higher 
for elderly patients with ST-elevation (11.8% elderly vs. 1.8% younger patients; 
P<U+200A><<U+200A>0.0001) or non-ST-elevation (3.9% elderly vs. 0.6% younger patients;
P<U+200A><<U+200A>0.0001) ACS.
CONCLUSION: In a nationwide survey, age impacts on care. The elderly with ACS
have a higher risk profile but receive less guideline-recommended care than
younger patients. Thus, further improvements in care of this population should be
pursued.

PMID: 22306786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Cytometry A. 2012 Mar;81(3):232-7. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.22013. Epub 2012 Jan 20.

ImageStream promyelocytic leukemia protein immunolocalization: in search of
promyelocytic leukemia cells.

Mirabelli P(1), Scalia G, Pascariello C, D'Alessio F, Mariotti E, Di Noto R,
George TC, Kong R, Venkatachalam V, Basiji D, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a hematological emergency in which a rapid 
diagnosis is essential for early administration of appropriate therapy, including
all-trans retinoic acid before the onset of fatal coagulopathy. Currently, the
following methodologies are widely used for rapid initial diagnosis of APL: 1)
identification of hypergranular leukemic promyelocytes by using classical
morphology; 2) identification of cells with diffuse promyelocytic leukemia (PML) 
protein distribution by immunofluorescence microscopy; 3) evidence of aberrant
promyelocyte surface immunophenotype by conventional flow cytometry (FCM). Here, 
we show a method for immunofluorescent detection of PML localization using
ImageStream FCM. This technique provides objective per-cell quantitative image
analysis for statistically large sample sizes, enabling precise and
operator-independent PML pattern recognition even in electronic and real dilution
experiments up to 10% of APL cellular presence. Therefore, we evidence that this 
method could be helpful for rapid and objective initial diagnosis and the prompt 
initiation of APL treatment.

Copyright © 2012 International Society for Advancement of Cytometry.

PMID: 22266986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Arch Surg. 2012 Jan;147(1):18-24. doi: 10.1001/archsurg.2011.795.

Combined CD133/CD44 expression as a prognostic indicator of disease-free survival
in patients with colorectal cancer.

Galizia G(1), Gemei M, Del Vecchio L, Zamboli A, Di Noto R, Mirabelli P,
Salvatore F, Castellano P, Orditura M, De Vita F, Pinto M, Pignatelli C, Lieto E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Clinical and Experimental
Medicine and Surgery F. Magrassi-A. Lanzara, Second University of Naples School
of Medicine, c/o II Policlinico, Edificio 17, 5 Via Pansini, 80131 Naples, Italy.
gennaro.galizia@unina2.it

Comment in
    Arch Surg. 2012 Jan;147(1):24-5.

HYPOTHESIS: Because of some inconsistencies in the traditional model of human
colorectal carcinogenesis, the cancer stem cell (CSC) model was recently
proposed, in which tumor results from neoplastic transformation of stem cells,
which become CSCs. Identification of CSCs by expression of surface antigens
remains a critical issue because no biomarker has been shown to be completely
reliable. CD133 and CD44 are commonly used as CSC markers, and correlation of
their expression with colorectal cancer (CRC) clinicopathological features and
outcomes may be useful.
DESIGN: Pilot study.
SETTING: University hospital.
PATIENTS: Thirty-six consecutive patients with CRC. CD133 and CD44 expression
(alone or combined) was determined in nontumor cells and in tumor cells by flow
cytometry, which identified viable cells only.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Correlation of CD133 and CD44 expression with each other, 
with other prognostic indicators, and with disease-free survival.
RESULTS: CD133 and CD44 expression was significantly higher in tumor cells than
in nontumor cells, and expression of one did not necessarily correlate with
expression of the other. CD133 or CD44 expression alone was variable, while
combined CD133/CD44 expression identified a small subset of cells positive for
CRC. CD133 or CD44 overexpression was not associated with CRC recurrence; only
high frequencies of CD133(+)/CD44(+) cells were a strong indicator of worse
disease-free survival and an independent risk factor for CRC recurrence.
CONCLUSION: Evaluation of combined CD133/CD44 expression could be useful to
identify putative colorectal CSCs and tumors with a poor prognosis.

PMID: 22250106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Mar;32(3):805-9. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.238766. Epub 2012 Jan 12.

Prevalence of ANGPTL3 and APOB gene mutations in subjects with combined
hypolipidemia.

Noto D(1), Cefalù AB, Valenti V, Fayer F, Pinotti E, Ditta M, Spina R, Vigna G,
Yue P, Kathiresan S, Tarugi P, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, University of
Palermo, Via del Vespro 141, I-90127 Palermo, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: Mutations of the ANGPTL3 gene have been associated with a novel form
of primary hypobetalipoproteinemia, the combined hypolipidemia (cHLP),
characterized by low total cholesterol and low HDL-cholesterol levels. The aim of
this work is to define the role of ANGPTL3 gene as determinant of the combined
hypolipidemia phenotype in 2 large cohorts of 913 among American and Italian
subjects with primary hypobetalipoproteinemia (total cholesterol<5th percentile).
METHODS AND RESULTS: The combined hypolipidemia cut-offs were chosen according to
total cholesterol and HDL-cholesterol levels reported in the ANGPTL3 kindred
described to date: total cholesterol levels, <2nd percentile and HDL-cholesterol,
levels<2nd decile. Seventy-eight subjects with combined hypolipidemia were
analyzed for ANGPTL3 and APOB genes. We identified nonsense and/or missense
mutations in ANGPTL3 gene in 8 subjects; no mutations of the APOB gene were
found. Mutated ANGPTL3 homozygous/compound heterozygous subjects showed a more
severe biochemical phenotype compared to heterozygous or ANGPTL3 negative
subjects, although ANGPTL3 heterozygotes did not differ from ANGPTL3 negative
subjects.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrated that in a cohort of subjects with severe
primary hypobetalipoproteinemia the prevalence of ANGPTL3 gene mutations
responsible for a combined hypolipidemia phenotype is about 10%, whereas
mutations of APOB gene are absent.

PMID: 22247256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Mt Sinai J Med. 2012 Jan-Feb;79(1):133-9. doi: 10.1002/msj.21286.

Preventing post-thoracotomy pain syndrome.

Khelemsky Y(1), Noto CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY,
USA. yury.khelemsky@mountsinai.org

This article provides a concise overview of post-thoracotomy pain syndrome,
describes anesthetic and surgical factors that have been investigated to reduce
the incidence of the syndrome, and explores the effectiveness of various
treatments for this condition. Although some interventions (both procedural and
pharmacologic) have been investigated in both preventing and treating
post-thoracotomy pain syndrome, definitive studies are lacking and firm
conclusions regarding the benefit of any intervention cannot be drawn. The
problem is compounded further by our lack of understanding of the
pathophysiologic mechanisms underlying the development of chronic pain after
surgery. Going forward, it will be important to elucidate these mechanisms and
conduct well-designed trials involving novel therapeutic agents for both
prevention and treatment of post-thoracotomy pain syndrome.

© 2012 Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

PMID: 22238046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Oct;227(10):3381-8. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24037.

Novel anti-ErbB3 monoclonal antibodies show therapeutic efficacy in xenografted
and spontaneous mouse tumors.

Aurisicchio L(1), Marra E, Luberto L, Carlomosti F, De Vitis C, Noto A, Gunes Z, 
Roscilli G, Mesiti G, Mancini R, Alimandi M, Ciliberto G.

Author information: 
(1)Biogem s.c. a r.l, Ariano Irpino (AV), Italy. aurisicchio@takis-it.it

The role of the ErbB3 receptor in signal transduction is to augment the signaling
repertoire of active heterodimeric ErbB receptor complexes through activating the
PI3K/AKT pathway, which in turn promotes survival and proliferation. ErbB3 has
recently been proposed to be involved in acquired resistance to tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs), and is therefore a promising new drug cancer target. Since
ErbB3 is a kinase defective receptor, it cannot be targeted by small molecule
inhibitors, whereas monoclonal antibodies may offer a viable strategy for
pharmacological intervention. In this study, we have utilized DNA electroporation
(DNA-EP) to generate a set of novel hybridomas directed against human ErbB3,
which have been characterized for their biochemical and functional properties and
selected for their ability to negatively regulate the ErbB3-mediated signaling
pathway. In vitro, the anti-ErbB3 antibodies modulate the growth rate of cancer
cells of different origins. In vivo they show antitumoral properties in a
xenograft model of human pancreatic tumor and in the ErbB2-driven carcinogenesis 
genetically engineered mouse model (GEMM) for mammary tumor, the BALB/neuT. Our
data confirm that downregulating the ErbB3-mediated signals with the use of
anti-ErbB3 monoclonal antibodies is both feasible and relevant for therapeutic
purposes and provides new opportunities for novel anti-ErbB3 combinatory
strategies for cancer treatment.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22213458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Hormones (Athens). 2013 Jan-Mar;12(1):135-41.

Severe water intoxication secondary to the concomitant intake of non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs and desmopressin: a case report and review of the
literature.

Verrua E(1), Mantovani G, Ferrante E, Noto A, Sala E, Malchiodi E, Iapichino G,
Peccoz PB, Spada A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan,
Endocrinology and Diabetology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, Milan, Italy. elisaverrua@yahoo.it

Most of the clinical data on the safety profile of desmopressin (DDAVP), which is
an effective treatment for both polyuric conditions and bleeding disorders,
originate from studies on the tailoring of drug treatment, whereas few reports
exist describing severe side effects secondary to drug-drug interaction. We
herein describe a case of severe hyponatremia complicated by seizure and coma due
to the intake of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in a patient on
DDAVP replacement therapy for central diabetes insipidus (DI). A 50-yr-old
Caucasian man, with congenital central DI, developed an episode of generalized
tonic-clonic seizure, resulting in coma immediately after being admitted to the
Emergency Unit for weakness and emesis. Based on his medical history and clinical
findings, water intoxication secondary to ketoprofen intake (200 mg/day for the
last 3 days) concomitant with DDAVP replacement therapy (Minirin(®) 60 mcg 4
tablets a day) was hypothesized as being the cause of the severe euvolemic
hypotonic hyponatremia (natremia 113 mEq/l, plasma osmolality 238 mOsm/Kg). After
standard emergency procedures, appropriate gradual restoration of serum sodium
levels to the normal range was achieved in 72 hours. Hydratation was maintained
according to water excretion and desmopressin therapy was re-introduced. We
discuss this case report in the context of the published literature. The present 
report first highlights the potentially life-threatening side effects associated 
with over-the-counter NSAIDs during DDAVP replacement therapy for central DI.
Risks and benefits of co-treatment should be carefully considered and therapeutic
alternatives to NSAIDs should be recommended to patients with central DI in order
to improve DDAVP safety.

PMID: 23624139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Clin Neurophysiol. 2012 Jul;123(7):1440-5. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2011.11.002.
Epub 2011 Dec 26.

Differences in excitability between median and superficial radial sensory axons.

Fujimaki Y(1), Kanai K, Misawa S, Shibuya K, Isose S, Nasu S, Sekiguchi Y, Ohmori
S, Noto Y, Kugio Y, Shimizu T, Matsubara S, Lin CS, Kuwabara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba,
Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate differences in excitability
properties of human median and superficial radial sensory axons (e.g., axons
innervating the glabrous and hairy skin in the hand). Previous studies have shown
that excitability properties differ between motor and sensory axons, and even
among sensory axons between median and sural sensory axons.
METHODS: In 21 healthy subjects, threshold tracking was used to examine
excitability indices such as strength-duration time constant, threshold
electrotonus, supernormality, and threshold change at the 0.2 ms inter-stimulus
interval in latent addition. In addition, threshold changes induced by ischemia
for 10 min were compared between median and superficial radial sensory axons.
RESULTS: Compared with radial sensory axons, median axons showed shorter
strength-duration time constant, greater threshold changes in threshold
electrotonus (fanning-out), greater supernormality, and smaller threshold changes
in latent addition. Threshold changes in both during and after ischemia were
greater for median axons.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that membrane potential in human median
sensory axons is more negative than in superficial radial axons, possibly due to 
greater activity of electrogenic Na(+)/K(+) pump. These results may reflect
adaptation to impulses load carried by median axons that would be far greater
with a higher frequency.
SIGNIFICANCE: Biophysical properties are not identical in different human sensory
axons, and therefore their responses to disease may differ.

Copyright © 2011 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Published 
by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22204921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Anticancer Res. 2011 Dec;31(12):4207-10.

Reliability of direct sequencing of EGFR: comparison between cytological and
histological samples from the same patient.

Bruno P(1), Mariotta S, Ricci A, Duranti E, Scozzi D, Noto A, Mancini R,
Giarnieri E, Giovagnoli MR.

Author information: 
(1)UOC Pneumologia, Az. Osp. Sant'Andrea, via di Grottarossa 1035, 00189 Rome,
Italy.

The results of a recent study have shown the superiority of treatment with
gefitinib or erlotinib in lung tumors positive for epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutation. As a consequence, the complete diagnosis of lung cancer
cannot be limited to histotype classification, but should include a series of
molecular biology analyses. In most cases, the diagnosis of lung cancer is
performed on cytological specimens; therefore, there is a need to obtain a
complete and reliable molecular diagnosis on cytologic specimens. Brushing,
transbronchial needle aspiration (TBNA) and broncho alveolar lavage during
fibro-bronchoscopy allow the sampling of the lung and the mediastinal lymph node.
The aim of this study was to demonstrate that direct sequencing of exons 19 and
21 of EGFR in lung tumors, carried out on the cytological samples obtained
through fibro-bronchoscopy, is as reliable as the same analysis carried out on a 
histological surgical sample obtained from the same individual. We considered 50 
patients with a histological diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma whose cytological
samples, obtained by fibro-bronchoscopy and histological samples, obtained by
surgical resection were available. A comparison of the sensitivity and
reliability of the molecular biology analyses carried out on histological and
cytological samples of the same patient was carried out. The combined mutation
percentage of exons 19 and 21 of EGFR was 10%. The results of the analyses
carried out on cytological samples matched those obtained from the histological
samples. The feasibility of EGFR analysis on cytological samples has already been
demonstrated in previous studies, however these studies referred to the method of
fluorescence in situ hybridization, or did not perform any comparison between
histological samples from the same patient; our work, on the other hand, shows
that direct sequencing of exons 19 and 21 of the EGFR gene is feasible on
fibro-bronchoscopy cytological samples with the same reliability offered by the
histological samples obtained from the same patient.

PMID: 22199282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Oct 3;12 Suppl 8:S3. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-S8-S3.

The Protein-Protein Interaction tasks of BioCreative III: classification/ranking 
of articles and linking bio-ontology concepts to full text.

Krallinger M(1), Vazquez M, Leitner F, Salgado D, Chatr-Aryamontri A, Winter A,
Perfetto L, Briganti L, Licata L, Iannuccelli M, Castagnoli L, Cesareni G, Tyers 
M, Schneider G, Rinaldi F, Leaman R, Gonzalez G, Matos S, Kim S, Wilbur WJ, Rocha
L, Shatkay H, Tendulkar AV, Agarwal S, Liu F, Wang X, Rak R, Noto K, Elkan C, Lu 
Z, Dogan RI, Fontaine JF, Andrade-Navarro MA, Valencia A.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology and BioComputing Programme, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. mkrallinger@cnio.es

BACKGROUND: Determining usefulness of biomedical text mining systems requires
realistic task definition and data selection criteria without artificial
constraints, measuring performance aspects that go beyond traditional metrics.
The BioCreative III Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) tasks were motivated by
such considerations, trying to address aspects including how the end user would
oversee the generated output, for instance by providing ranked results, textual
evidence for human interpretation or measuring time savings by using automated
systems. Detecting articles describing complex biological events like PPIs was
addressed in the Article Classification Task (ACT), where participants were asked
to implement tools for detecting PPI-describing abstracts. Therefore the
BCIII-ACT corpus was provided, which includes a training, development and test
set of over 12,000 PPI relevant and non-relevant PubMed abstracts labeled
manually by domain experts and recording also the human classification times. The
Interaction Method Task (IMT) went beyond abstracts and required mining for
associations between more than 3,500 full text articles and interaction detection
method ontology concepts that had been applied to detect the PPIs reported in
them.
RESULTS: A total of 11 teams participated in at least one of the two PPI tasks
(10 in ACT and 8 in the IMT) and a total of 62 persons were involved either as
participants or in preparing data sets/evaluating these tasks. Per task, each
team was allowed to submit five runs offline and another five online via the
BioCreative Meta-Server. From the 52 runs submitted for the ACT, the highest
Matthew's Correlation Coefficient (MCC) score measured was 0.55 at an accuracy of
89% and the best AUC iP/R was 68%. Most ACT teams explored machine learning
methods, some of them also used lexical resources like MeSH terms, PSI-MI
concepts or particular lists of verbs and nouns, some integrated NER approaches. 
For the IMT, a total of 42 runs were evaluated by comparing systems against
manually generated annotations done by curators from the BioGRID and MINT
databases. The highest AUC iP/R achieved by any run was 53%, the best MCC score
0.55. In case of competitive systems with an acceptable recall (above 35%) the
macro-averaged precision ranged between 50% and 80%, with a maximum F-Score of
55%.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the ACT task of BioCreative III indicate that
classification of large unbalanced article collections reflecting the real class 
imbalance is still challenging. Nevertheless, text-mining tools that report
ranked lists of relevant articles for manual selection can potentially reduce the
time needed to identify half of the relevant articles to less than 1/4 of the
time when compared to unranked results. Detecting associations between full text 
articles and interaction detection method PSI-MI terms (IMT) is more difficult
than might be anticipated. This is due to the variability of method term
mentions, errors resulting from pre-processing of articles provided as PDF files,
and the heterogeneity and different granularity of method term concepts
encountered in the ontology. However, combining the sophisticated techniques
developed by the participants with supporting evidence strings derived from the
articles for human interpretation could result in practical modules for
biological annotation workflows.

PMCID: PMC3269938
PMID: 22151929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Blood. 2012 Feb 9;119(6):1561-5. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-11-391961. Epub 2011 Dec
16.

Thigh-length versus below-knee compression elastic stockings for prevention of
the postthrombotic syndrome in patients with proximal-venous thrombosis: a
randomized trial.

Prandoni P(1), Noventa F, Quintavalla R, Bova C, Cosmi B, Siragusa S, Bucherini
E, Astorri F, Cuppini S, Dalla Valle F, Lensing AW, Prins MH, Villalta S; Canano 
Investigators.

Collaborators: Vedovetto V, Barbar S, Campello E, Milan M, Filippi L, Rocci A,
Chiappetta P, Pellegrini R, Fiaschi E, Vallone G, D'Amico E, Noto A, Pili C,
Costantini E, Gasperon M, Palareti G, Malato A, Saccullo G, Brini C, Bitti G,
Marzolo M, Ramazzina E, Zamboni S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Sciences, Clinica Medica 2,
University of Padua, Via Giustiniani 2, Padua, Italy. paoloprandoni@tin.it.

Although below-knee compression elastic stockings (CES) are effective for the
prevention of the postthrombotic syndrome (PTS), a substantial number of patients
with deep venous thrombosis still develop PTS. In the present open-label,
randomized clinical trial, we compared thigh-length with below-knee CES for the
prevention of PTS. A total of 267 patients with the first episode of proximal
deep venous thrombosis were randomized to wear either thigh-length or below-knee 
CES for 2 years. After 3, 6, 12, 18, 24, and 36 months, they were assessed for
PTS manifestations according to the Villalta scale. PTS developed in 44 (32.6%)
of the 135 patients randomized to thigh-length CES and in 47 (35.6%) of the 132
allocated to below-knee CES, for an adjusted hazard ratio of 0.93 (95% confidence
interval, 0.62-1.41). Severe PTS developed in 3 patients in each group.
CES-related side effects developed in 55 (40.7%) of the 135 patients allocated to
thigh-length CES and in 36 (27.3%) of those randomized to the below-knee group (P
= .017), and led to premature discontinuation of their use in 29 (21.5%) and 18
(13.6%) patients, respectively. We conclude that thigh-length CES do not offer a 
better protection against PTS than below-knee CES and are less well tolerated.

PMID: 22180438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Chem Soc Rev. 2012 Mar 21;41(6):2406-47. doi: 10.1039/c1cs15206h. Epub 2011 Dec
14.

Low-loading asymmetric organocatalysis.

Giacalone F(1), Gruttadauria M, Agrigento P, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Molecolari e Biomolecolari (STEMBIO) Sez.
Chimica Organica E. Paternò, Università di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Ed. 17, 
90128, Palermo, Italy.

Asymmetric organocatalysis is now recognized as the third pillar of asymmetric
synthesis. Recent years have witnessed increasing interest towards the use of
highly active and stereoselective organocatalysts. This critical review documents
the advances in the development of chiral organocatalysts which are
systematically used in =3 mol% loading in all the sub-areas of the field, namely 
aminocatalysis, Brønsted acids and bases, Lewis acids and bases, hydrogen
bond-mediated catalysis, phase transfer and N-heterocyclic carbene catalyses (194
references).

PMID: 22167174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Org Chem. 2012 Mar 16;77(6):2588-607. doi: 10.1021/jo202179s. Epub 2011 Dec 28.

Stereoselective synthesis of 2,6-cis-substituted tetrahydropyrans: Brønsted
acid-catalyzed intramolecular oxa-conjugate cyclization of a,ß-unsaturated ester 
surrogates.

Fuwa H(1), Ichinokawa N, Noto K, Sasaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-ku, 
Sendai 980-8577, Japan. hfuwa@bios.tohoku.ac.jp

Intramolecular oxa-conjugate cyclization (IOCC) of a,ß-unsaturated carbonyl
compounds, triggered by deprotonation with a base, represents a straightforward
method for the synthesis of tetrahydropyrans. However, it has been known that
stereochemical outcome of IOCC depends on the local structure of substrates and
sometimes requires harsh reaction conditions and/or prolonged reaction times for 
selective formation of 2,6-cis-substituted tetrahydropyrans. These shortcomings
limit the feasibility of IOCC in the context of complex natural product
synthesis. In this paper, we describe Brønsted acid-catalyzed IOCC of
a,ß-unsaturated ester surrogates (e.g., a,ß-unsaturated thioesters, oxazolidinone
imides, and pyrrole amides) under mild reaction conditions, which affords a
series of synthetically versatile 2,6-cis-substituted tetrahydropyran derivatives
with good to excellent stereoselectivity (dr from 7:1 to >20:1). These
a,ß-unsaturated carbonyl compounds were found to be more reactive than the
corresponding oxoesters that are generally unreactive toward Brønsted
acid-catalyzed intramolecular oxa-conjugate additions. The product
tetrahydropyrans could be transformed into various derivatives in an efficient
manner, highlighting the usefulness of our methodology.

PMID: 22148171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2011;24(9-10):627-31.

Intracranial hypertension in pediatric patients treated with recombinant human
growth hormone: data from 25 years of the Genentech National Cooperative Growth
Study.

Noto R(1), Maneatis T, Frane J, Alexander K, Lippe B, Davis DA.

Author information: 
(1)New York Medical College, Sleepy Hollow, NY, USA.

Intracranial hypertension (IH) is a rare condition in children. However, a
relationship between recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) therapy and IH has
been well documented. Risk factors were assessed for 70 rhGH-naive patients
enrolled in the National Cooperative Growth Study with reports of IH after
treatment initiation. Patients with severe growth hormone deficiency, Turner
syndrome, chronic renal insufficiency (CRI), and obesity (particularly in the CRI
group) were at highest risk of developing IH during the first year of therapy,
suggesting initiation of careful early monitoring. In some patients, factors such
as corticosteroid use or other chromosomal abnormalities appear to confer a
delayed risk of IH, and these patients should be monitored long-term for signs
and symptoms of IH.

PMID: 22145447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Hum Ergol (Tokyo). 2011 Dec;40(1-2):109-17.

Effects of various knee-raising postures in a supine position on swelling in the 
lower legs and feet in elderly women.

Muraki S(1), Kuroda K, Noto H, Ookura M, Saito S.

Author information: 
(1)Kyushu University, 4-9-1 Shiobaru, Minami-ku, Fukuoka 815-8540, Japan.

The present study examined the effects of different knee-raising postures in the 
supine position on swelling in the lower legs and feet of elderly women. Seven
elderly women with no illness-related swelling maintained a supine position for
40 min on a bed under four knee-raising postures: downhill, raising the knees and
further raising the feet; horizon, raising the knees with the lower legs in a
horizontal position; mountain, raising the knees to a height above the feet; and 
control, stretching the knees without elevation of the feet. While maintaining a 
supine position, downhill and horizon conditions showed significant decreases in 
circumferences and increased bio-impedance at all measured positions of the calf 
and foot, compared to the control condition. In contrast, the mountain condition 
did not show decreases in all circumferences. No significant differences were
found for heart rate, blood pressure or scores of subjective comfort in any body 
areas among the conditions. These results suggest that the downhill and horizon
conditions have effects on lower leg swelling without causing additional
discomfort or circulatory strain.

PMID: 25665215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Gastroenterology. 2012 Jan;142(1):12-3, 187-8. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.12.047.
Epub 2011 Nov 19.

Malignant solitary fibrous tumor originating from the mesentery.

Muroni M(1), Mezzetti G, Noto S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, La Sapienza University of Rome, Second School
of Medicine, St. Andrea Hospital, Rome, Italy.

PMID: 22107718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2011;67(11):1438-42.

[Optimization of X-ray conditions for full spine X-ray examinations in slot-scan 
digital radiography].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto K(1), Minami S, Morishita A, Yokoi T, Iida H, Matsubara K, Takemura A,
Koshida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Kanazawa University Hospital.

The purpose of this study was to optimize X-ray conditions for full spine X-ray
examinations in slot-scan digital radiography (SSDR). Follow-up of spinal
deformities, such as scoliosis, typically involves many radiographs of the
patient throughout childhood and adolescence. The Radiation doses for the full
spine X-ray examination should be minimized. Recently, SSDR has been introduced
for full spine as well as lower extremity examinations. This system utilizes slot
scanning geometry to acquire the radiographic images. X-ray energy
characteristics of direct amorphous Selenium (a-Se) digital fluoroscopy and short
time X-ray tube loads of this system were investigated. Orthopedists evaluated
the irradiation time for full spine radiographs in various conditions using an
observer study. Patient doses were measured with radiophotoluminescence glass
dosimeters, which were implanted in various tissue and organ positions within an 
anthropomorphic phantom. In the optimization of conditions for SSDR, patient
doses are reduced by approximately 60% compared to default setting.

PMID: 22104236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2011;67(11):1381-97.

[Study of appropriate dosing in consideration of image quality and patient dose
on the digital radiography].

[Article in Japanese]

Kishimoto K(1), Ariga E, Ishigaki R, Imai M, Kawamoto K, Kobayashi K, Sawada M,
Noto K, Nakamae M, Higashide R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Osaka City University Hospital.

Recently about 90% of radiographs have been taken by the digital radiographic
system in Japan, but the exposure dose of the patients are about ten-times
different among the systems. We understood it by a surveytaken in 2007. We
studied the visual evaluation with varying exposure doses using the image phantom
of the lumber AP, lumber lateral and hip AP. Additionally we measured quantum
efficiency (DQE) of the digital systems. We also studied the exposure index (EI) 
of IEC standard to see whether it is able to be the sensitivity index among the
digital systems. DQE in 1.0 cycle/mm of CR, FPD (GOS), FPD (CsI, a-Se) became
0.2-0.25, 0.3, 0.5, respectively. Our results display that the dose reduction is 
relative to DQE. The visual evaluation results also show that dose reduction is
possible among the systems. From these results, we are able to reduce the
exposure dose of the patients at the clinical site. We also suggest that we
manage the exposure dose using the E.I of the IEC standard.

PMID: 22104230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Carbohydr Res. 2012 Jan 10;347(1):32-9. doi: 10.1016/j.carres.2011.10.029. Epub
2011 Oct 25.

Synthesis and characterization of new polyamino-cyclodextrin materials.

Lo Meo P(1), D'Anna F, Gruttadauria M, Riela S, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Molecolari e Biomolecolari (STEMBIO),
Sez. Chimica Organica, Università degli Studi di Palermo, V.le delle Scienze,
Parco d'Orleans Pad. 17. 90128 PALERMO, Italy. paolomeo@unipa.it

With the aim of the synthesis of chemically modified cyclodextrins bearing
polyamine pendant groups, potentially useful as capping agents for the
preparation of nanosized metal systems or as auxiliaries for gene transfection,
the reaction between the heptakis-(6-iodo)-(6-deoxy)-ß-cyclodextrin and various
polyamines has been explored. This synthetic approach allows obtaining materials 
constituted by mixtures of cyclodextrins, having different degrees of
substitution, which were satisfactorily characterized by means of various
complementary techniques (ESI-MS, NMR, potentiometric titration). The products
obtained were successfully subjected to preliminary tests for their binding
abilities towards suitable organic guests and as capping agents for the
preparation of stable silver nanoparticles.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22094007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biologicals. 2012 Jan;40(1):88-91. doi: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2011.10.006. Epub
2011 Nov 9.

Mollicutes contamination: a new strategy for an effective rescue of cancer cell
lines.

Mariotti E(1), D'Alessio F, Mirabelli P, Di Noto R, Fortunato G, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate, Napoli, Italy.

Mollicutes contaminations of cellular models can have marked effects on gene
expression and cell behaviour in vitro leading to the production of unreliable
data, unsafe biopharmaceutical drugs or to the loss of cell culture itself.
Fortunately, irreplaceable cell culture can be cured by decontamination with the 
specific antibiotic regimen. Here, we describe the treatment of 35
mycoplasma-positive cell lines by the use of the novel antibiotic Mycozap(®) as
well as evaluate its eradication performance versus the well-known routinely
employed BM-Cyclins and fluoroquinolones molecules (175 treatments). Our data
evidenced: i) the permanent elimination of mycoplasma infection by MycoZap(®),
MRA, Enrofloxacin, Ciprofloxacin and BM-Cyclins in 46%, 29%, 40%, 43%, and 57% of
the cultures, respectively; ii) a significant correlation between MRA and
Ciprofloxacin eradication profile, as determined by the Spearman correlation
coefficient (r = 0.3469, p < 0.05); iii) a mycoplasma eradication in 100% of cell
lines by the exclusive adoption of MycoZap(®), Ciprofloxacin, Enrofloxacin,
BM-Cyclin 1-2 antibiotic regimen, with the MRA exclusion; iv) the MycoZap(®)
effectiveness even in case of a mycoplasmal load higher than 50 CFU/mL, as for
SH-SY5Y and Neuro2A cells. In conclusion, we want to suggest an optimized
antibiotic panel to get 100% mycoplasma-clearance especially in case of unique or
treatment-resistant cellular models.

Copyright © 2011 The International Alliance for Biological Standardization.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22078664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Proteins. 2012 Jan;80(1):8-13. doi: 10.1002/prot.23197. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

On the molecular structure of human neuroserpin polymers.

Santangelo MG(1), Noto R, Levantino M, Cupane A, Ricagno S, Pezzullo M, Bolognesi
M, Mangione MR, Martorana V, Manno M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

The polymerization of serpins is at the root of a large class of diseases; the
molecular structure of serpin polymers has been recently debated. In this work,
we study the polymerization kinetics of human neuroserpin by Fourier Transform
Infra Red spectroscopy and by time-lapse Size Exclusion Chromatography. First, we
show that two distinct neuroserpin polymers, formed at 45 and 85°C, display the
same isosbestic points in the Amide I' band, and therefore share common secondary
structure features. We also find a concentration independent polymerization rate 
at 45°C suggesting that the polymerization rate-limiting step is the formation of
an activated monomeric species. The polymer structures are consistent with a
model that predicts the bare insertion of portions of the reactive center loop
into the A ß-sheet of neighboring serpin molecule, although with different
extents at 45 and 85°C.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22072549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Neurosci Lett. 2011 Nov 21;505(3):282-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.10.042. Epub 
2011 Oct 21.

Association of biomarkers and depressive symptoms in schizophrenia.

Noto CS(1), Gadelha A, Belangero SI, Smith MA, de Aguiar BW, Panizzuti B, Mari
Jde J, Gama CS, Bressan RA, Brietzke E.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Schizophrenia, Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal de
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. csnoto@gmail.com

Emergence of depressive symptoms in schizophrenia results in a deteriorating
course and poor prognosis. Schizophrenia and depressive disorder are both
associated with low levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and with a
longstanding low grade inflammatory state. The objective of this study is to
analyze the relationship between these serum biomarkers and depressive and
psychotic symptoms in schizophrenic patients. Thirty-nine individuals diagnosed
with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder by Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), assessed by Structured Clinical Interview
for DSM-IV (SCID), were included. Interviews were conducted with The Positive and
Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) and The Calgary Depression Scale for
Schizophrenia (CDSS). Blood samples were collected for determination of BDNF,
IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12 and TNF-alpha measurements. Positive
correlations between BDNF and CDSS and between IL-1beta and severity in PANSS
scores were found. BDNF levels were not correlated with any cytokine or with
PANSS scores. The results of this study suggest that depressive and psychotic
symptoms may be associated with different profiles of biomarkers in the
association between schizophrenia and depression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22044873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Intern Med. 2011;50(21):2653-7. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Successful treatment of immunoglobulin D myeloma by bortezomib and dexamethasone 
therapy.

Sekiguchi N(1), Takezako N, Nagata A, Wagatsuma M, Noto S, Yamada K, Miwa A.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, National Hospital Organization Disaster Medical Center,
Japan. nao26@aol.com

Immunoglobulin D (IgD) myeloma is a rare subtype and it is widely accepted as an 
aggressive disease. Here, we report a 66-year-old woman with IgD myeloma who had 
anemia, lumbago, multiple osteolytic lesions and hypercalcemia. The patient
refused a blood transfusion because of her beliefs, so we administered bortezomib
and dexamethasone (BD) after high-dose dexamethasone therapy. Marked improvement 
of anemia and elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels was recognized. After 5 
cycles of BD therapy, the patient achieved a stringent complete response
according to International Myeloma Working Group Response Criteria. BD therapy
might be a feasible and useful treatment option for IgD myeloma.

PMID: 22041375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Dis Model Mech. 2012 Jan;5(1):73-82. doi: 10.1242/dmm.008128. Epub 2011 Oct 25.

Tracing notochord-derived cells using a Noto-cre mouse: implications for
intervertebral disc development.

McCann MR(1), Tamplin OJ, Rossant J, Séguin CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Western Ontario,
London, N6A 5C1, Canada.

Back pain related to intervertebral disc degeneration is the most common
musculoskeletal problem, with a lifetime prevalence of 82%. The lack of effective
treatment for this widespread problem is directly related to our limited
understanding of disc development, maintenance and degeneration. The aim of this 
study was to determine the developmental origins of nucleus pulposus cells within
the intervertebral disc using a novel notochord-specific Cre mouse. To trace the 
fate of notochordal cells within the intervertebral disc, we derived a
notochord-specific Cre mouse line by targeting the homeobox gene Noto. Expression
of this gene is restricted to the node and the posterior notochord during
gastrulation [embryonic day 7.5 (E7.5)-E12.5]. The Noto-cre mice were crossed
with a conditional lacZ reporter for visualization of notochord fate in
whole-mount embryos. We performed lineage-tracing experiments to examine the
contribution of the notochord to spinal development from E12.5 through to
skeletally mature mice (9 months). Fate mapping studies demonstrated that,
following elongation and formation of the primitive axial skeleton, the notochord
gives rise to the nucleus pulposus in fully formed intervertebral discs. Cellular
localization of ß-galactosidase (encoded by lacZ) and cytokeratin-8 demonstrated 
that both notochordal cells and chondrocyte-like nucleus pulposus cells are
derived from the embryonic notochord. These studies establish conclusively that
notochordal cells act as embryonic precursors to all cells found within the
nucleus pulposus of the mature intervertebral disc. This suggests that
notochordal cells might serve as tissue-specific progenitor cells within the disc
and establishes the Noto-cre mouse as a unique tool to interrogate the
contribution of notochordal cells to both intervertebral disc development and
disc degeneration.

PMCID: PMC3255545
PMID: 22028328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. BMJ Open. 2011 Jan 1;1(2):e000139. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2011-000139.

Asymptomatic coronary heart disease in patients with type 2 diabetes with
vascular complications: a cross-sectional study.

Tsujimoto T(1), Kajio H, Takahashi Y, Kishimoto M, Noto H, Yamamoto-Honda R,
Kamimura M, Morooka M, Kubota K, Shimbo T, Hiroe M, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine and Diabetes Research Center,
National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have suggested that microvascular and macrovascular
diseases are associated with coronary events.
OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that asymptomatic coronary heart disease (CHD) 
may be present in many patients with diabetes with vascular complications.
DESIGN: From April 2009 to August 2010, the authors conducted a cross-sectional
study to assess the prevalence of asymptomatic CHD among patients with type 2
diabetes with vascular complications at a national diabetes centre in Japan.
Eligibility criteria included patients with type 2 diabetes with no known CHD and
one or more of the following four criteria: (1) proliferative diabetic
retinopathy or after photocoagulation; (2) estimated glomerular filtration rate
<30 ml/min/1.73 m² or an estimated glomerular filtration rate <45 ml/min/1.73 m² 
plus albuminuria; (3) peripheral arterial disease; and (4) cerebrovascular
disease. Each patient underwent a stress single-photon emission computed
tomography; patients with myocardial perfusion abnormalities then underwent
coronary angiography.
RESULTS: A total of 1008 patients with type 2 diabetes were screened, and 122
eligible patients consented to participate. Stress single-photon emission
computed tomography revealed myocardial perfusion abnormalities in 96 (79%)
patients. Of the 112 patients who completed the study protocol, 59 (53%) had
asymptomatic CHD with =50% diameter stenosis. Additionally, 35 (31%) patients had
multivessel disease or left main disease, and 42 (38%) had a coronary artery with
=75% diameter stenosis. In the multivariate logistic-regression analysis to
identify coronary risk factors associated with asymptomatic CHD, the only
significant predictor was male sex (OR 6.18; 95% CI 2.30 to 16.64; p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Asymptomatic CHD with =50% diameter stenosis and myocardial
perfusion abnormalities was detected in more than half of the patients with type 
2 diabetes with vascular complications.

PMCID: PMC3211053
PMID: 22021872  [PubMed]


9. Proc IEEE Int Conf Data Min. 2010 Dec 13:953-958.

Anomaly Detection Using an Ensemble of Feature Models.

Noto K(1), Brodley C, Slonim D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Tufts University Medford, MA, 02155 United
States.

We present a new approach to semi-supervised anomaly detection. Given a set of
training examples believed to come from the same distribution or class, the task 
is to learn a model that will be able to distinguish examples in the future that 
do not belong to the same class. Traditional approaches typically compare the
position of a new data point to the set of "normal" training data points in a
chosen representation of the feature space. For some data sets, the normal data
may not have discernible positions in feature space, but do have consistent
relationships among some features that fail to appear in the anomalous examples. 
Our approach learns to predict the values of training set features from the
values of other features. After we have formed an ensemble of predictors, we
apply this ensemble to new data points. To combine the contribution of each
predictor in our ensemble, we have developed a novel, information-theoretic
anomaly measure that our experimental results show selects against noisy and
irrelevant features. Our results on 47 data sets show that for most data sets,
this approach significantly improves performance over current state-of-the-art
feature space distance and density-based approaches.

PMCID: PMC3197694
PMID: 22020249  [PubMed]


10. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012 Jan;83(1):23-8. doi:
10.1136/jnnp-2011-300309. Epub 2011 Oct 18.

Antiganglioside antibodies are associated with axonal Guillain-Barré syndrome: a 
Japanese-Italian collaborative study.

Sekiguchi Y(1), Uncini A, Yuki N, Misawa S, Notturno F, Nasu S, Kanai K, Noto Y, 
Fujimaki Y, Shibuya K, Ohmori S, Sato Y, Kuwabara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1 
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Whether or not antiganglioside antibodies are related to axonal or
demyelinating Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is still a matter of controversy, as 
detailed in previous studies conducted in Western and Asian countries.
OBJECTIVE: To clarify whether antiganglioside antibodies are associated with
axonal dysfunction in Japanese and Italian GBS patient cohorts.
METHODS: Clinical and electrophysiological profiles were reviewed for 156 GBS
patients collected from Japan (n=103) and Italy (n=53). Serum IgG antibodies
against GM1, GM1b, GD1a and GalNAc-GD1a were measured by ELISA in the same
laboratory. Electrodiagnostic criteria and results of serial electrophysiological
studies were used for classification of GBS subtypes: acute inflammatory
demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP) and acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN).
RESULTS: In both Japanese and Italian cohorts, any of the antibodies were
positive in 36% of the patients, and antibody positivity had a significant
association with the AMAN electrodiagnosis. Approximately 30% of Japanese and
Italian antiganglioside positive patients showed the AIDP pattern at the first
examination whereas sequential studies showed that most finally showed the AMAN
pattern. Clinically, seropositive patients more frequently had preceding
diarrhoea and pure motor neuropathy in both Japanese and Italian cohorts;
vibratory sensation was normal in 97% of Japanese and in 94% of Italian
seropositive patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In GBS, clinical and electrophysiological features appear to be
determined by antiganglioside antibodies, and the antibodies are associated with 
motor axonal GBS in both Japan and Italy. Classification of the GBS subtypes as a
disease entity should be made, combining the results of antiganglioside assays
and serial electrodiagnostic studies.

PMID: 22010183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Med Imaging Radiat Oncol. 2011 Oct;55(5):493-7. doi:
10.1111/j.1754-9485.2011.02293.x.

Relationship between specific organ doses and volumetric CT dose indices in
multidetector CT studies.

Matsubara K(1), Koshida K, Noto K, Shimono T, Yamamoto T, Matsui O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Quantum Medical Technology, Faculty of Health Sciences
Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa,
Japan. matsuk@mhs.mp.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Organ doses are useful for estimating radiation doses to patients. However, it is
impossible to determine specific organ doses for each patient. The aim of this
study was to examine the relationship between specific organ doses and volumetric
CT dose indices (CTDIvols) in multidetector CT studies to estimate specific organ
doses in each patient. Radiophotoluminescent glass dosimeters were placed at
locations corresponding to specific organs of an anthropomorphic phantom.
Thereafter, the phantoms were examined with respect to various imaging ranges and
protocols, including cranial, thoracic and abdominal acquisitions using a
64-section multidetector CT. Concurrently, we recorded the mean CTDIvol for each 
acquisition range. In the cranial acquisition, the displayed mean CTDIvol was
69.0mGy, and the absorbed doses for brain and intra-ocular lenses were 57.2±2.6
and 57.1±3.0mGy, respectively. In the thoracic acquisition, the displayed mean
CTDIvol was 16.3mGy, and the absorbed doses for breast and lung were 19.1±6.4 and
31.7±2.2mGy, respectively. In the abdominal acquisition, the displayed mean
CTDIvol was 21.6mGy, and the absorbed doses for stomach and colon were 28.2±6.1
and 28.0±8.6mGy, respectively. The displayed mean CTDIvols overestimated the
specific organ doses in the cranial acquisition and underestimated them in the
thoracic and abdominal acquisitions. However, the approximate specific organ
doses may be estimated by multiplying the displayed mean CTDIvols with a
conversion factor for each organ.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Medical Imaging and Radiation Oncology © 2011 The 
Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists.

PMID: 22008168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Phys Chem B. 2011 Nov 24;115(46):13519-25. doi: 10.1021/jp207917n. Epub 2011
Nov 3.

Effect of high pressure CO2 on the structure of PMMA: a FT-IR study.

Di Noto V(1), Vezzù K, Giffin GA, Conti F, Bertucco A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Padova, via Marzolo 1, I-35131 
Padova, Italy. vito.dinoto@unipd.it

Conformational changes in polymer films exposed to high-pressure CO(2) have been 
investigated with Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy. The
experimental setup, based on a custom-made stainless steel optical cell with
CaF(2) windows, allows measurements in a CO(2) environment for pressures up to 6 
MPa, in a temperature range from 293 to 353 K and in the mid-infrared (1000-4000 
cm(-1)). Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), a polymer with a side group (C-type), 
was studied to monitor the spectral changes as a function of CO(2) pressure and
was compared to poly(D,L-lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA), a polymer without a
side group (B-type). By monitoring the characteristic carbonyl bands,
conformational changes that occur due to molecular interactions between the
high-pressure CO(2) and the polymers were explored at a constant pressurization
rate (0.02 MPa/min) and temperature. Spectral changes are observed only for PMMA,
where the vibrational band at 1680 cm(-1) disappears with increasing pressure.
The spectra of PLGA do not show any significant change in the presence of high
pressure CO(2) in the investigated range. The behavior of the absorbance peak as 
a function of pressure and temperature highlights the presence of dynamic
cross-links (DCs) between the side groups of PMMA films obtained by solvent
casting below the glass transition temperature of the polymer. The spectral
features are correlated using a model that accounts for CO(2) diffusion and the
relaxation kinetics of the polymer chains in the thin film. The disappearance of 
the vibrational band attributed to the DCs for PMMA is related to the glass
transition temperature, and a retrograde vitrification phenomenon is observed.
This approach can be considered a useful alternative to magnetic suspended
balance for the study of polymer-gas systems.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

PMID: 21999722  [PubMed]


13. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2011 Oct;24 Suppl 2:59-62. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2011.607012.

Metabolomics in paediatric respiratory diseases and bronchiolitis.

Atzei A(1), Atzori L, Moretti C, Barberini L, Noto A, Ottonello G, Pusceddu E,
Fanos V.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericultura Institute and Neonatal Section,
University of Cagliari, Italy.

The metabolic study of an organism may make it possible to monitor, through the
metabolites,the physiology and/or pathology of the organism itself. Metabolomics,
in the strictest sense, "the set of metabolites, the final products of the
genetic expression". Most clinical chemistry tests available today rely on old
technologies that measure only a single chemical in blood, urine or other
biofluids, and these tests are neither sensitive nor specific for any particular 
disease. Metabolomics offers a holistic approach to systems medicine, with the
promise to enhance clinical chemistry diagnostics in several pathologic
conditions. The present review covers the application of clinical metabolomics in
three different areas of respiratory diseases in pediatrics: asthma, pneumonia
and bronchiolitis. Comparison between two 1H-NMR urine spectra by two
bronchiolitis patients are also presented.

PMID: 21966897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2011 Oct;24 Suppl 2:55-8. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2011.606977.

Metabolomic analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in preterm infants
complicated by respiratory distress syndrome: preliminary results.

Fabiano A(1), Gazzolo D, Zimmermann LJ, Gavilanes AW, Paolillo P, Fanos V, Caboni
P, Barberini L, Noto A, Atzori L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maternal, Fetal and Neonatal Medicine, CasilinoHospital, Rome,
Italy.

OBJECTIVE: Metabolomics is a technique used to non-invasively determine a
snapshot of the current metabolic status of an organism by analyzing intact
tissue or bio-fluids. The aim of the present preliminary study was to analyze
metabolic profiles in preterm infants complicated by respiratory distress
syndrome (RDS) trough bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) measurement.
METHODS: Twelve BALF samples collected at birth prior surfactant, post-surfactant
during mechanical ventilation and at extubation time-points, were analyzed by
proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and Gas chromatography-Mass
Spectrometry (GC-MS).
RESULTS: GC-MS analysis identified 25 metabolites of whom 10 had a known
molecular structure. They were: undecane, decanoic acid, dodecanoic acid,
hexadecanoic acid, octadecanoic acid, hexadecanoic acid methyl ester,
9-octadecanoic acid, tetracosanoic acid, myristic acid, phosphate. These
metabolites were over-expressed in BALF collected during mechanical ventilation
after surfactant administration.
CONCLUSIONS: The present preliminary data suggest that metabolic profile in BALF 
of RDS infants is becoming possible opening a new cue of metabolomics as
promising tool in management of sick premature infants.

PMID: 21781003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2011 Oct;24 Suppl 2:40-3. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2011.606678.

Clinical metabolomics and urinary NGAL for the early prediction of chronic kidney
disease in healthy adults born ELBW.

Atzori L(1), Mussap M, Noto A, Barberini L, Puddu M, Coni E, Murgia F, Lussu M,
Fanos V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Oncology and Molecular Pathology Unit, University of
Cagliari, Italy. latzori@unica.it

BACKGROUND: Clinical metabolomics is a recent "omic" technology which is defined 
as a global holistic overview of the personal metabolic status (fingerprinting). 
This technique allows to prove metabolic differences in different groups of
people with the opportunity to explore interactions such as genotype-phenotype
and genotype-environment type, whether normal or pathological.
AIM: To study chronic kidney injury 1) using urine metabolomic profiles of young 
adults born extremely low-birth weight (ELBW) and 2) correlating a biomarker of
kidney injury, urinary neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), in
order to confirm the metabolomic injury profile.
METHOD: Urine samples were collected from a group of 18 people (mean:
24-year-old, std: 4.27) who were born with ELBW and a group of 13 who were born
at term appropriate for gestational age (AGA) as control (mean 25-year-old, std: 
5.15). Urine samples were analyzed by (1)H-nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy, and then submitted to unsupervised and supervised multivariate
analysis. Urine NGAL (uNGAL) was measured using ARCHITECT (ABBOTT diagnostic NGAL
kit).
RESULTS: With a multivariate approach and using a supervised analysis method,
PLS-DA, (partial least squares discriminant analysis) we could correlate ELBW
metabolic profiles with uNGAL concentration. Conversely, uNGAL could not be
correlated to AGA.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the relevance of the metabolomic technique
as a predictive tool of the metabolic status of exELBW. This was confirmed by the
use of uNGAL as a biomarker which may predict a subclinical pathological process 
in the kidney such as chronic kidney disease.

PMID: 21781002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2011 Oct;24 Suppl 2:35-9. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2011.605868.

Metabolomics in newborns with intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR): urine
reveals markers of metabolic syndrome.

Dessì A(1), Atzori L, Noto A, Visser GH, Gazzolo D, Zanardo V, Barberini L, Puddu
M, Ottonello G, Atzei A, De Magistris A, Lussu M, Murgia F, Fanos V.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section,
University of Cagliari, Italy.

To date, we have little knowledge on the overall metabolic status of neonates
with intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR). In the last few years, the analysis 
of metabolomics has assumed an important clinical role in identifying "disorders"
in the metabolic profile of patients. The aim of this work has been to analyze
the urine metabolic profiles of neonates with IUGR and compare them with controls
to define the metabolic patterns associated with this pathology. To our
knowledge, this is the first study of metabolomics performed on neonates with
IUGR. Recruited for the study were 26 neonates with IUGR diagnosed in the
neonatal period and with weight at birth below the 10th percentile and 30
neonates of proper gestational weight at birth (controls). In the first 24 hours 
(prior to feeding) (T1) and about 4 days after birth (T2), a urine sample was
taken non-invasively from each neonate. The samples were then frozen at -80°C up 
to the time of the analysis by proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(1H-NMR). The data contained in the NMR spectra obtained from the single samples 
were statistically analyzed using the Principal Components Analysis and the
Partial Least Squares-Discriminate Analysis. By means of a multivariate analysis 
of the NMR spectra obtained, it was possible to highlight the differences between
the two groups (IUGRs and controls) owing to the presence of different metabolic 
patterns. The discriminants in the urine metabolic profiles derived essentially
from significant differences in certain metabolites such as: myo-inositol,
sarcosine, creatine and creatinine. The metabolomic analysis showed different
urine metabolic profiles between neonates with IUGR and controls and made it
possible to identify the molecules responsible for such differences.

PMID: 21767100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2011 Oct;24 Suppl 2:15-7. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2011.603913. Epub 2011 Aug 30.

Urine neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (uNGAL) and netrin-1: are they
effectively improving the clinical management of sepsis-induced acute kidney
injury (AKI)?

Mussap M(1), Noto A, Fravega M, Fanos V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University-Hospital San Martino, Genova,
Italy. michele.mussap@hsanmartino.it

Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) and Netrin-1 have been proposed
over the past years as emergent biomarkers for the early and accurate diagnosis
and monitoring of acute kidney injury (AKI). During the early phases of AKI, a
rapid and massive up-regulation of NGAL mRNA takes place in the thick ascending
limb of Henle's loop and in the collecting ducts, and therefore, changes in
urinary NGAL (uNGAL) excretion seem to be more specific than plasma NGAL in
assessing early kidney injury. The availability of a new automated immunoassay
for measuring uNGAL facilitates its introduction in the clinical routine,
especially in an emergency setting. However, in critically ill newborns AKI often
develops during sepsis, which in turn induces an up-regulation of NGAL mRNA in
neutrophils. To improve the effectiveness of therapeutic treatment in septic
newborns with AKI, there is the need to accurately distinguish NGAL molecular
forms originating within the distal nephron from those originating from
neutrophils. This concise review summarizes properties and perspectives of uNGAL 
and Netrin-1 for their appropriate clinical utilization.

PMID: 21740336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2011 Oct;24 Suppl 2:12-4. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2011.601923.

Soluble CD14 subtype presepsin (sCD14-ST) and lipopolysaccharide binding protein 
(LBP) in neonatal sepsis: new clinical and analytical perspectives for two old
biomarkers.

Mussap M(1), Noto A, Fravega M, Fanos V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University-Hospital San Martino, Genova,
Italy. michele.mussap@hsanmartino.it

Several biochemical markers have been proposed over the past years to manage
critically ill newborns with acute inflammation and sepsis. The state of the art 
in diagnosing and monitoring neonatal sepsis, severe sepsis and septic shock
consists of the measurement of plasma C-reactive protein (CRP) and procalcitonin 
(PCT) at the onset and in the course of the disease. CRP and PCT in combination
are clinically significant in diagnosing and monitoring septic newborns; however,
CRP and PCT have a very limited value for risk stratification and in predicting
outcome. The availability of commercial methods for the automated measurement of 
the soluble CD14 subtype presepsin (sCD14-ST) and lipopolysaccharide binding
protein (LBP) represent a challenge for the evaluation in clinical practice of
reliable markers of neonatal sepsis, specifically for the very early diagnosis,
the classification into class of severity, and the prediction of complications
and death.

PMID: 21740312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Rev Calid Asist. 2012 Jan-Feb;27(1):55-64. doi: 10.1016/j.cali.2011.07.002. Epub 
2011 Oct 7.

Pharmaceutical care to patients treated with antidepressants.

Marques LA(1), Galduroz JC, Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology at UNIFESP, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
lualvesmarques@gmail.com

Depression is considered one of the ten most disabling conditions on the planet, 
causing physical, personal and social limitations. Antidepressants are the most
commonly used drug treatment for eliminating or controlling the symptoms of
depression. A variety of factors can contribute to treatment abandonment,
particularly severe side effects. The present article is aimed to provide
information and guidelines on the development of a pharmacotherapy follow-up
program for patients treated with antidepressant medication. According to this
practice, the pharmacist evaluates whether the three following requirements of a 
proper pharmacotherapy are being observed: need, effectiveness and safety. If one
of these requirements is not met, the pharmacist seeks to solve the problem, by
intervening in the pharmacotherapy, within the scope of his/her skills.
Pharmaceutical care is aimed to improve adherence to treatment and minimize side 
effects, as well as the occurrence of drug interactions. Thus, the present
article presents and discusses the main strategies of pharmaceutical care to
achieve the proposed objectives.

Copyright © 2011 SECA. Published by Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21982751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Minerva Anestesiol. 2011 Oct;77(10):971-8.

Survey of non-invasive ventilation practices: a snapshot of Italian practice.

Crimi C(1), Noto A, Princi P, Nava S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal and Specialized Medicine, Division of Respiratory
Diseases, Policlinico "G. Rodolico", University of Catania, Italy.

BACKGROUND: In Italy, NIV began to be employed in the late 1980s. Because it was 
adopted earlier than in Italy than in other countries, the pattern and rate of
utilization of NIV may be different. We aim to determine factors that may
influence Italian physicians' preferences towards NIV use, with a particular
emphasis on the primary specialty of these physicians and the type of hospital in
which they work.
METHODS: We re-examined the data from our European survey conducted in 2008 and
focused our analysis on the Italian subsets of respondents to explore factors
that influence physicians' perceptions of their NIV practices in four scenarios: 
acute hypercapnic respiratory failure (AHRF), cardiogenic pulmonary edema (CPE), 
de novo respiratory failure, and weaning/post-extubation failure (W/PE).
RESULTS: On average, NIV was equally applied in university and community
hospitals (P>0.05) and its utilization rate was higher for pulmonologists (62%
reported >20% of patients treated with NIV a year) vs. intensivists (17%) and
others (21%) (P<0.05). A greater use of NIV was related to a smaller number of
unit beds in de novo respiratory failure (56% vs. 40%) and a larger amount of
unit beds in AHRF (16% vs. 7%) (P<0.05). Dedicated NIV platforms and ICU
ventilators with NIV modules were the preferred machines in AHRF (P<0.05), while 
a greater utilization of ICU ventilators with NIV modules was observed in de novo
respiratory failure. In all the scenarios, a facial mask was predominantly used
(P<0.05), with the helmet rated as the second preferred choice in CPE.
CONCLUSION: Overall, Italian physicians perceived that NIV represents an
essential tool when dealing with acute episodes of respiratory failure,
irrespective of the type of hospital in which they worked.

PMID: 21952597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Behav Brain Res. 2012 Jan 1;226(1):242-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.09.023. Epub
2011 Sep 17.

Different pathophysiology underlying animal models of fibromyalgia and
neuropathic pain: comparison of reserpine-induced myalgia and chronic
constriction injury rats.

Nagakura Y(1), Takahashi M, Noto T, Sekizawa T, Oe T, Yoshimi E, Tamaki K,
Shimizu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pain Research, Pharmacology Research Labs, Drug Discovery
Research, Astellas Pharma Inc., 21 Miyukigaoka, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8585, Japan.
yukinori.nagakura@jp.astellas.com

The reserpine-induced myalgia (RIM) rat manifests fibromyalgia-like chronic pain 
symptoms. The present study explored the pathophysiology underlying the pain
symptoms in the RIM rat and the chronic constriction injury (CCI) rat, an animal 
model of neuropathic pain as a reference. Nerve tissue samples were collected
from the nociception-tested animals for pathological examinations. Additionally, 
the therapeutic efficacy of a sodium channel blocker mexiletine was assessed in
both rats. A slight vacuolization in the substantia nigra (SN) occurred in some
of the RIM rats without any other histopathological changes in the brain or
peripheral neurons. All the RIM rats, with or without vacuolization, showed
hypersensitivity to tactile, muscle pressure, and cold stimuli. In the CCI rat,
neurodegenerative changes were apparent in the sciatic nerve and the spinal cord 
only. CCI rats displayed muscle hyperalgesia in addition to tactile and cold
allodynia. Pharmacotherapy with mexiletine did not attenuate the pain in the RIM 
rat, although it was effective in the CCI rat. Taken together, it is not likely
that pain symptoms in RIM rats are caused by degenerative changes at the level of
primary afferents and spinal cord, as is the case for CCI rats. The significance 
of the vacuolization in the SN is less clear at present because of the minor
extent of the change and the lack of correlation with nociceptive sensitivity.
The pain symptoms in RIM rats could be associated with dysfunction of biogenic
amines-mediated CNS pain control even without apparent pathologies in the nervous
system.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21945299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Neurology. 2011 Oct 18;77(16):1532-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318233b36a. Epub
2011 Sep 21.

Ultrasonographic detection of fasciculations markedly increases diagnostic
sensitivity of ALS.

Misawa S(1), Noto Y, Shibuya K, Isose S, Sekiguchi Y, Nasu S, Kuwabara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1 
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba, Japan. sonoko.m@mb.infoweb.ne.jp

Comment in
    Neurology. 2011 Oct 18;77(16):1508-9.
    Neurology. 2012 Jan 31;78(5):370; author reply 370-1.

OBJECTIVES: To study the utility of muscle ultrasound (US) for detection of
fasciculations and its contribution to diagnosis in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS). Fasciculations are characteristic features of ALS, and US can detect them 
easily and reliably. New diagnostic criteria for ALS, the Awaji algorithm,
reintroduced fasciculations as evidence of acute denervation equivalent to that
of fibrillations and positive sharp waves.
METHODS: In 81 consecutive patients with sporadic ALS, we prospectively performed
needle EMG and US in 6 muscles (tongue, biceps brachii, first dorsalis
interosseous, paraspinalis, vastus lateralis, and tibialis anterior), and
diagnostic category were determined by revised El Escorial criteria and Awaji
criteria.
RESULTS: Fasciculations were much more frequently detected by US than by EMG in
the tongue (60% vs 0%), biceps brachii (88% vs 60%), and tibialis anterior
muscles (83% vs 45%). The proportion of the patients with definite or probable
ALS was 48% by revised El Escorial criteria and 79% by Awaji criteria using US.
CONCLUSIONS: Muscle US is a practical and efficient tool to detect
fasciculations, particularly in the tongue. A combination of US and EMG
substantially increases the diagnostic sensitivity of ALS.

PMID: 21940619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2011;67(9):1183-91.

[New method of measuring effective energy using copper-pipe absorbers in X-ray
CT].

[Article in Japanese]

Iida H(1), Noto K, Mitsui W, Takata T, Yamamoto T, Matsubara K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Kanazawa University Hospital.

The general method of measuring the half-value layer (HVL) for X-ray computed
tomography (CT) using square aluminum-sheet filters is inconvenient in that the
X-ray tube has to be set to stationary mode. To avoid this inconvenience, we
investigated a new method using copper-pipe filters that cover the ionization
chamber (copper-pipe method). Using this method, the HVL can be measured at the
isocenter in the rotation modes of CT. We examined the accuracy and
reproducibility of the copper-pipe method compared with those of the general
method. The effective energy measured using the copper-pipe method correlated
well with the general method (y=1.064x, r=0.987), and its error was 1.81±1.38%.
The results indicate that the copper-pipe method enables accurate measurement of 
the effective energy of X-ray CT and is a convenient method suited to all general
X-ray equipment as well as all X-ray CT.

PMID: 21937842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2011;67(9):1174-82.

[Method for evaluating the positional accuracy of a six-degrees-of-freedom
radiotherapy couch using high definition digital cameras].

[Article in Japanese]

Takemura A(1), Ueda S, Noto K, Kurata Y, Shoji S.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health
Sciences, Kanazawa University.

PURPOSE: In this study, we proposed and evaluated a positional accuracy
assessment method with two high-resolution digital cameras for add-on
six-degrees-of-freedom radiotherapy (6D) couches.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Two high resolution digital cameras (D5000, Nikon Co.)
were used in this accuracy assessment method. These cameras were placed on two
orthogonal axes of a linear accelerator (LINAC) coordinate system and focused on 
the isocenter of the LINAC. Pictures of a needle that was fixed on the 6D couch
were taken by the cameras during couch motions of translation and rotation of
each axis. The coordinates of the needle in the pictures were obtained using
manual measurement, and the coordinate error of the needle was calculated. The
accuracy of a HexaPOD evo (Elekta AB, Sweden) was evaluated using this method.
RESULTS: All of the mean values of the X, Y, and Z coordinate errors in the
translation tests were within ±0.1 mm. However, the standard deviation of the Z
coordinate errors in the Z translation test was 0.24 mm, which is higher than the
others. In the X rotation test, we found that the X coordinate of the rotational 
origin of the 6D couch was shifted.
CONCLUSIONS: We proposed an accuracy assessment method for a 6D couch. The method
was able to evaluate the accuracy of the motion of only the 6D couch and revealed
the deviation of the origin of the couch rotation. This accuracy assessment
method is effective for evaluating add-on 6D couch positioning.

PMID: 21937841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Clin Invest. 2011 Oct;121(10):3877-88. doi: 10.1172/JCI59211. Epub 2011 Sep 19.

Loss of memory B cells during chronic HIV infection is driven by Foxo3a- and
TRAIL-mediated apoptosis.

van Grevenynghe J(1), Cubas RA, Noto A, DaFonseca S, He Z, Peretz Y,
Filali-Mouhim A, Dupuy FP, Procopio FA, Chomont N, Balderas RS, Said EA,
Boulassel MR, Tremblay CL, Routy JP, Sékaly RP, Haddad EK.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute - Florida, Port St. Lucie, Florida, USA.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Jul 2;122(7):2704.

Loss of memory B cells occurs from the onset of HIV-1 infection and persists into
the chronic stages of infection. Lack of survival of these cells, even in
subjects being treated, could primarily be the consequence of an altered local
microenvironment induced by HIV infection. In this study we showed that memory B 
cell survival was significantly decreased in aviremic successfully treated (ST)
subjects compared with subjects who control viral load as a result of natural
immunity (elite controller [EC]) or with uninfected control (HIV-) subjects. The 
lower survival levels observed in memory B cells from ST subjects were the result
of disrupted IL-2 signaling that led to increased transcriptional activity of
Foxo3a and increased expression of its proapoptotic target TRAIL. Notably, memory
B cell survival in ST subjects was significantly enhanced by the addition of
exogenous IL-2 in a Foxo3a-dependent manner. We further showed that Foxo3a
silencing by siRNA resulted in decreased expression of TRAIL and apoptosis levels
in memory B cells from ST subjects. Our results thus establish a direct role for 
Foxo3a/TRAIL signaling in the persistence of memory B cells and provide a
mechanism for the reduced survival of memory B cells during HIV infection. This
knowledge could be exploited for the development of therapeutic and preventative 
HIV vaccines.

PMCID: PMC3195482
PMID: 21926463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Exp Neurol. 2011 Dec;232(2):149-53. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2011.08.015. Epub
2011 Aug 30.

Markedly reduced axonal potassium channel expression in human sporadic
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: an immunohistochemical study.

Shibuya K(1), Misawa S, Arai K, Nakata M, Kanai K, Yoshiyama Y, Ito K, Isose S,
Noto Y, Nasu S, Sekiguchi Y, Fujimaki Y, Ohmori S, Kitamura H, Sato Y, Kuwabara
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba,
Japan.

Fasciculations are characteristic features of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS), suggesting abnormally increased excitability of motor axons. Previous
nerve excitability studies have shown reduced axonal potassium currents in ALS
patients that may contribute to the hyperexcitability and thereby generation of
fasciculations. To clarify changes in axonal ion channel expression in motor
axons of ALS, we performed immunohistochemistry of potassium and sodium channels 
in the C7 and L5 ventral/dorsal roots obtained from five autopsy cases of
sporadic ALS. Compared to controls, the immunoreactivity of potassium channels
(Kv1.2) was markedly reduced in the ventral roots, but normal in the dorsal roots
of all the ALS patients. Nodal sodium channel expression was not significantly
different in ALS patients and control subjects. Our results show prominently
reduced expression of axonal potassium channels, and provide the
neuropathological and biological basis for decreased accommodative potassium
currents in motor axons of ALS patients. The axonal hyperexcitability would lead 
to generation of fasciculations, and possibly enhances motor neuron death in ALS.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21906595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Clin Neurophysiol. 2012 Mar;123(3):613-20. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2011.07.044.
Epub 2011 Sep 1.

Reference values for voluntary and stimulated single-fibre EMG using concentric
needle electrodes: a multicentre prospective study.

Kokubun N(1), Sonoo M, Imai T, Arimura Y, Kuwabara S, Komori T, Kobayashi M,
Nagashima T, Hatanaka Y, Tsuda E, Misawa S, Abe T, Arimura K; Japanese SFEMG
Study Group.

Collaborators: Nishibayashi M, Kurokawa K, Oishi C, Nakamura T, Noto Y, Fukui M, 
Kondo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Dokkyo Medical University, Kitakobayashi 880, Mibu,
Shimotsuga, Tochigi, Japan.

Comment in
    Clin Neurophysiol. 2013 Jun;124(6):1255-6.
    Clin Neurophysiol. 2013 Jun;124(6):1256-8.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to establish reference values for
single-fibre electromyography (SFEMG) using concentric needles in a prospective, 
multicentre study.
METHODS: Voluntary or stimulated SFEMG at the extensor digitorum communis (EDC)
or frontalis (FRO) muscles was conducted in 56-63 of a total of 69 normal
subjects below the age of 60years at six Japanese institutes. The cut-off values 
for mean consecutive difference (MCD) of individual potentials were calculated
using +2.5 SD or 95% prediction limit (one-tail) of the upper 10th percentile MCD
value for individual subjects.
RESULTS: The cut-off values for individual MCD (+2.5 SD) were 56.8µs for EDC-V
(voluntary SFEMG for EDC), 58.8µs for EDC-S (stimulated SFEMG for EDC), 56.8µs
for FRO-V (voluntary SFEMG for FRO) and 51.0µs for FRO-S (stimulated SFEMG for
FRO). The false positive rates using these cut-off values were around 2%.
CONCLUSIONS: The +2.5 SD and 95% prediction limit might be two optimal cut-off
values, depending on the clinical question. The obtained reference values were
larger than those reported previously using concentric needles, but might better 
coincide with conventional values.
SIGNIFICANCE: This is the first multicentre study reporting reference values for 
SFEMG using concentric needles. The way to determine cut-off values and the
statistically correct definition of the percentile were discussed.

Copyright © 2011 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Published 
by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21889397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e22982. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022982. Epub 2011 Aug 23.

HIV-1 Nef induces proinflammatory state in macrophages through its acidic cluster
domain: involvement of TNF alpha receptor associated factor 2.

Mangino G(1), Percario ZA, Fiorucci G, Vaccari G, Acconcia F, Chiarabelli C,
Leone S, Noto A, Horenkamp FA, Manrique S, Romeo G, Polticelli F, Geyer M,
Affabris E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University Roma Tre, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: HIV-1 Nef is a virulence factor that plays multiple roles during HIV 
replication. Recently, it has been described that Nef intersects the CD40
signalling in macrophages, leading to modification in the pattern of secreted
factors that appear able to recruit, activate and render T lymphocytes
susceptible to HIV infection. The engagement of CD40 by CD40L induces the
activation of different signalling cascades that require the recruitment of
specific tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factors (i.e. TRAFs). We
hypothesized that TRAFs might be involved in the rapid activation of NF-<U+03BA>B, MAPKs
and IRF-3 that were previously described in Nef-treated macrophages to induce the
synthesis and secretion of proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines and IFNß to
activate STAT1, -2 and -3.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Searching for possible TRAF binding sites on Nef,
we found a TRAF2 consensus binding site in the AQEEEE sequence encompassing the
conserved four-glutamate acidic cluster. Here we show that all the signalling
effects we observed in Nef treated macrophages depend on the integrity of the
acidic cluster. In addition, Nef was able to interact in vitro with TRAF2, but
not TRAF6, and this interaction involved the acidic cluster. Finally silencing
experiments in THP-1 monocytic cells indicate that both TRAF2 and, surprisingly, 
TRAF6 are required for the Nef-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT1 and
STAT2.
CONCLUSIONS: Results reported here revealed TRAF2 as a new possible cellular
interactor of Nef and highlighted that in monocytes/macrophages this viral
protein is able to manipulate both the TRAF/NF-<U+03BA>B and TRAF/IRF-3 signalling axes,
thereby inducing the synthesis of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines as
well as IFNß.

PMCID: PMC3160284
PMID: 21886773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Am J Crit Care. 2011 Sep;20(5):405-9. doi: 10.4037/ajcc2011824.

Levels of neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin in 2 patients with crush
syndrome after a mudslide.

Donato V(1), Noto A, Lacquaniti A, Bolignano D, Versaci A, David A, Spinelli F,
Buemi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine at the University of Messina in Messina,
Italy.

Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin is one of the most promising
biomarkers for the diagnosis of acute kidney injury. An increase in the level of 
neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin is a good predictor of acute kidney
injury and is associated with an increase in the serum level of creatinine. Two
victims of a mudslide in Messina, Italy, initially had crush syndrome followed by
development of acute kidney injury. The development of acute kidney injury is the
second most common cause of death after large earthquakes and other natural
disasters, but at the same time, crush-related acute kidney injury is one of the 
few life-threatening complications of crush injuries that can be reversed if
diagnosed early and treated. In this case, measuring the level of neutrophil
gelatinase-associated lipocalin enabled early diagnosis of acute kidney injury
and anticipation of the changes in levels of conventional markers such as
creatinine.

PMID: 21885463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. No Shinkei Geka. 2011 Sep;39(9):865-9.

[Pilocytic astrocytoma of the cerebrum presenting in an elderly patient: a case
report].

[Article in Japanese]

Yoshida Y(1), Tsukada T, Hashimoto M, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Noto General Hospital, Nanao-city, Ishikawa,
Japan.

We report a case of pilocytic astrocytoma of the cerebrum presenting in an
elderly patient. A 76-year-old man was admitted to our department due to the
development of dysarthria. MRI showed a cystic mass with an enhanced small mural 
nodule in the left frontal lobe. At surgery, the cyst contents were aspirated,
and the mural nodule was excised. Histological examination showed a pattern that 
is usually seen in pilocytic astrocytoma of the cerebellum, including loose and
compact areas composed of pilocytic and stellate cells, a few eosinophilic
granular bodies, but not Rosenthal fibers. Pilocytic astrocytoma is a common type
of pediatric brain tumor that can arise within either the cerebellum or the
hypothalamic/chiasmatic region, but rarely seen in the cerebral hemisphere at an 
advanced age. To our knowledge, only 45 cases of pilocytic astrocytoma of the
cerebrum developing in an adult are reported. In those cases, the symptoms of the
disease developed during the third decade of life. The onset at a most advanced
age as in the present case is thought to be extremely rare.

PMID: 21873741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Lipid Res. 2011 Nov;52(11):2095-100. doi: 10.1194/jlr.D017772. Epub 2011 Aug
24.

An improved method on stimulated T-lymphocytes to functionally characterize novel
and known LDLR mutations.

Romano M(1), Di Taranto MD, Mirabelli P, D'Agostino MN, Iannuzzi A, Marotta G,
Gentile M, Raia M, Di Noto R, Del Vecchio L, Rubba P, Fortunato G.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE - Biotecnologie Avanzate, Napoli, Italy.

The main causes of familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) are mutations in LDL
receptor (LDLR) gene. Functional studies are necessary to demonstrate the LDLR
function impairment caused by mutations and would be useful as a diagnostic tool 
if they allow discrimination between FH patients and controls. In order to
identify the best method to detect LDLR activity, we compared continuous
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed B-lymphocytes and mitogen stimulated
T-lymphocytes. In addition, we characterized both novel and known mutations in
the LDLR gene. T-lymphocytes and EBV-transformed B-lymphocytes were obtained from
peripheral blood of 24 FH patients and 24 control subjects. Functional assays
were performed by incubation with fluorescent LDL followed by flow cytometry
analysis. Residual LDLR activity was calculated normalizing fluorescence for the 
mean fluorescence of controls. With stimulated T-lymphocytes we obtained a better
discrimination capacity between controls and FH patients compared with
EBV-transformed B-lymphocytes as demonstrated by receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve analysis (the areas under the curve are 1.000 and
0.984 respectively; P < 0.0001 both). The characterization of LDLR activity
through T-lymphocytes is more simple and faster than the use of EBV-transformed
B-lymphocytes and allows a complete discrimination between controls and FH
patients. Therefore the evaluation of residual LDLR activity could be helpful not
only for mutation characterization but also for diagnostic purposes.

PMCID: PMC3196240
PMID: 21865347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Arch Dis Child. 2011 Nov;96(11):1038-41. doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2011-300595.
Epub 2011 Aug 23.

Thyroid autoimmunity in children with coeliac disease: a prospective survey.

Diamanti A(1), Ferretti F, Guglielmi R, Panetta F, Colistro F, Cappa M, Daniele
A, Sole Basso M, Noto C, Crisogianni M, Castro M.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology and Nutrition Unit, Pediatric Hospital 'Bambino Gesù', Piazza
S Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome, Italy. diamanti@opbg.net

BACKGROUND: Thyroid autoimmunity (TA) is often associated with coeliac disease
(CD).
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate, in children and adolescents with CD on a gluten-free diet
(GFD): (1) the prevalence of TA; (2) the impact of TA on growth and the need for 
L-thyroxine (L-T4) treatment, during a longitudinal survey.
METHOD: Between January and December 2005, 545 patients with CD, prospectively
followed up until December 2007, and 622 controls were screened for TA.
Antithyroperoxidase and antithyroglobulin antibodies were assayed and, if
positive, serum free tri-iodothyronine, free thyroxine and thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH) assays and thyroid ultrasound were performed. L-T4 was started if
TSH was >5.5 mU/ml at two successive measurements.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference in TA prevalence between patients
with CD on a GFD (10%) and controls (8.2%). Duration of GFD differed
significantly in coeliac patients with TA in comparison with those without TA
(7.9±0.9 and 10.2±0.3 years, p<0.001), but no significant difference was found
for weight and height gain (1.8±1.0 vs 3.7±1.5 and 2.1±1.2 kg/year vs 4.0±1.1
cm/year, respectively). At the end of the follow-up an increase of 7% in the
prevalence of patients with CD with TA requiring L-T4 was found.
CONCLUSIONS: TA seems no more common in paediatric and adolescent patients with
CD on a GFD than in controls; its clinical evolution does not seem to impact on
growth. Therefore, a long-term regular screening programme for thyroid disease
may not be necessary for all patients with CD on a GFD, but only for those who
are suspected of having thyroid diseases.

PMID: 21862521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Future Microbiol. 2011 Aug;6(8):843-6. doi: 10.2217/FMB.11.75.

Role of Helicobacter pylori virulence factors for iron acquisition from gastric
epithelial cells of the host and impact on bacterial colonization.

Boyanova L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Medical University of Sofia, Bulgaria.
l.boyanova@hotmail.com

EVALUATION OF: Tan S, Noto JM, Romero-Gallo J, Peek RM Jr, Amieva MR.
Helicobacter pylori perturbs iron trafficking in the epithelium to grow on the
cell surface. PLoS Pathog. 7(5), E1002050 (2011). The effects of Helicobacter
pylori virulence factors on gastric epithelial cells are topics open to many
studies. Major virulence factors, cytotoxin-associated gene A (CagA) and
vacuolating cytotoxin (VacA), predict severe infection outcomes in many
countries. H. pylori possesses various proteins for iron transport/storage,
however, mechanisms of iron acquisition are not fully evaluated. The study by Tan
et al. reveals a concurrent CagA/VacA activity for micronutrient acquisition and 
host tissue colonization. The virulence factors possess new activities, involving
VacA-induced apical mislocalization of transferrin receptors to regions of H.
pylori attachment and effects of both factors on polarized uptake and recycling
of transferrin. The authors used many in vitro methods and an animal model. Iron 
acquisition by CagA was proven in vitro and in vivo by strain colonization of the
gastric mucosa in iron-depleted conditions. CagA EPIYA motifs were associated
with increased host internalization of transferrin. Importantly, CagA and VacA
were involved in iron acquisition and colonization without severely damaging the 
host cells, thus favoring the infection chronicity. Further studies should assess
molecular mechanisms of H. pylori iron acquisition, comparative activities of
contact-dependent/soluble VacA and Eastern/Western CagA on the polarized
epithelium and long-term effects of iron deficiency by virulent versus less
virulent H. pylori strains. An interesting topic is the association of virulent
strains with iron deficiency anemia but also with various H. pylori-induced
diseases, in different populations and, possibly, for other bacterial infections.
In conclusion, H. pylori iron acquisition is multifaceted. CagA and VacA work
concurrently to provide both iron acquisition from interstitial holotransferrin
and enhanced bacterial colonization of host cells apically. The new activities of
the major virulence factors of adherent H. pylori are important both to research 
and in a clinical setting.

PMID: 21861616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2011 Oct 1;21(19):5835-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2011.07.104. 
Epub 2011 Aug 3.

Solid-phase synthesis and pharmacological evaluation of novel nucleoside-tethered
dinuclear platinum(II) complexes.

D'Errico S(1), Oliviero G, Piccialli V, Amato J, Borbone N, D'Atri V, D'Alessio
F, Di Noto R, Ruffo F, Salvatore F, Piccialli G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica delle Sostanze Naturali, Università degli Studi di
Napoli Federico II, Via D. Montesano 49, 80131 Napoli, Italy.
stefano.derrico@unina.it

Three novel inosine-based dinuclear platinum complexes have been synthesized via 
a solid-phase strategy. In these compounds, the metal is linked both to the N-7
of the purine nucleus and to the terminal amine group of a hexylamine side chain 
installed on N-1. Cis- or trans- diamine as well as ethylenediamine ligands are
coordinated to platinum along with a chloride. The synthesised complexes were
tested against four different human tumor cell lines. One of these complexes
proved to be more cytotoxic than cisplatin against the MCF7 cancer cell line in a
short-term exposure assay.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21855340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2012 Jan;114(1):68-9. doi: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2011.07.019.
Epub 2011 Aug 19.

An easy diagnostic tool distinguishing lateral medullary infarction from
peripheral vertigo.

Nozaki I(1), Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Noto General Hospital, Nanao, Japan. nozaki@ipch.jp

PMID: 21855212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Development. 2011 Oct;138(19):4143-53. doi: 10.1242/dev.062547. Epub 2011 Aug 18.

HNF4A is essential for specification of hepatic progenitors from human
pluripotent stem cells.

DeLaForest A(1), Nagaoka M, Si-Tayeb K, Noto FK, Konopka G, Battle MA, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

The availability of pluripotent stem cells offers the possibility of using such
cells to model hepatic disease and development. With this in mind, we previously 
established a protocol that facilitates the differentiation of both human
embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells into cells that share
many characteristics with hepatocytes. The use of highly defined culture
conditions and the avoidance of feeder cells or embryoid bodies allowed
synchronous and reproducible differentiation to occur. The differentiation
towards a hepatocyte-like fate appeared to recapitulate many of the developmental
stages normally associated with the formation of hepatocytes in vivo. In the
current study, we addressed the feasibility of using human pluripotent stem cells
to probe the molecular mechanisms underlying human hepatocyte differentiation. We
demonstrate (1) that human embryonic stem cells express a number of mRNAs that
characterize each stage in the differentiation process, (2) that gene expression 
can be efficiently depleted throughout the differentiation time course using
shRNAs expressed from lentiviruses and (3) that the nuclear hormone receptor
HNF4A is essential for specification of human hepatic progenitor cells by
establishing the expression of the network of transcription factors that controls
the onset of hepatocyte cell fate.

PMCID: PMC3171218
PMID: 21852396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Intern Med. 2011;50(16):1709-14. Epub 2011 Aug 15.

Toxic multinodular goiter with low radioactive iodine uptake.

Kahara T(1), Shimizu A, Uchiyama A, Terahata S, Tajiri J, Nishihara E, Miyauchi
A, Abo H, Sumiya H, Ishikura K, Usuda R, Noto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Prefectural Central Hospital, Japan.
kchizu1230@yahoo.co.jp

A 74-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for goiter and persistent
thyrotoxicosis. She had no signs of ophthalmopathy. She was not taking thyroid
hormone. Thyroid CT revealed multiple nodules. The thyroid gland was not detected
on (99m)Tc scintigraphy, (123)I uptake rate was 4.5% at 24 hours without hot
nodules, and aberrant goiter was negative. After partial thyroidectomy, she was
treated with levothyroxine. TRAb was undetectable during the disease course, and 
focal destructive change or chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis on the pathological
specimens was not evident. We report a rare case of toxic multinodular goiter
with low radioactive iodine uptake.

PMID: 21841330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2012 Aug;35(4):868-74. doi:
10.1007/s00270-011-0241-8. Epub 2011 Aug 11.

Complications of microwave ablation for liver tumors: results of a multicenter
study.

Livraghi T(1), Meloni F, Solbiati L, Zanus G; Collaborative Italian Group using
AMICA system.

Collaborators: Zanus G, Solbiati L, Meloni F, Noto A, Goletti O, Grasso RF,
Pusceddu C, Nani R, Mazzucco M, Poggi G, Santambrogio R, Mezzolla L, Fiore F,
Bissoli E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Interventional Radiology, IRCCS Istituto Clinico Humanitas,
Rozzano, MI, Italy. lalivra@tin.it

PURPOSE: New technologies for microwave ablation (MWA) have been conceived,
designed to achieve larger areas of necrosis compared with radiofrequency
ablation (RFA). The purpose of this study was to report complications by using
this technique in patients with focal liver cancer.
METHODS: Members of 14 Italian centers used a 2.45-GMHz generator delivering
energy through a cooled miniature-choke MW antenna and a standardized protocol
for follow-up. They completed a questionnaire regarding number and type of
deaths, major and minor complications and side effects, and likelihood of their
relationship to the procedure. Enrollment included 736 patients with 1.037
lesions: 522 had hepatocellular carcinoma with cirrhosis, 187 had metastases
predominantly from colorectal cancer, and 27 had cholangiocellular carcinoma.
Tumor size ranged from 0.5 to 10 cm. In 13 centers, the approach used was
percutaneous, in 4 videolaparoscopic, and in 3 laparotomic.
RESULTS: No deaths were reported. Major complications occurred in 22 cases
(2.9%), and minor complications in 54 patients (7.3%). Complications of MWA do
not differ from those RFA, both being based on the heat damage.
CONCLUSION: Results of this multicenter study confirmed those of single-center
experiences, indicating that MWA is a safe procedure, with no mortality and a low
rate of major complications. The low rate of complications was probably due to
precautions adopted, knowing in advance possible risk conditions, on the basis of
prior RFA experience.

PMID: 21833809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2012 Aug;26(8):999-1006. doi:
10.1111/j.1468-3083.2011.04201.x. Epub 2011 Aug 11.

Imported leprosy in Italy.

Massone C(1), Brunasso AM, Noto S, Campbell TM, Clapasson A, Nunzi E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Dermatology, Department of Dermatology, Medical University
of Graz, Graz, Austria. cesare.massone@klinikum-graz.at

BACKGROUND: Leprosy is far from being eliminated with more than 200,000 new cases
detected (NCD)/year.
OBJECTIVE: Retrospective analysis between 2003 and 2009 to compare the New Case
Detected Rate (NCDR) observed in Italy in the immigrant population with the NCDR 
of the same population in their country of origin to verify if the cases observed
are those expected or not.
METHODS: Leprosy statistics were retrieved from the Italian leprosy register and 
from official WHO data.
RESULTS: The NCD in Italy were lower than expected, from 2003 when the expected
number of NCD was 40.5 between the legally resident immigrants, but only one case
was diagnosed (98% of lower from the expected), to 2009 when four NCD were
diagnosed and 41 were expected (90% lower from expected).
CONCLUSIONS: This study points out a discrepancy between the observed and the
expected cases of leprosy in Italy. Specifically, the number of NCD was less than
expected for each studied year. Of course our data do not represent a validation,
but only an indication of the leprosy diagnosis in Italy. Difficulty in accessing
the health systems, fear of segregation, ignorance and illegal immigrant status
with consequent fear of police arrest are possible explaining factors. The
critical issue anyhow is the medical expertise. The role of the dermatologist is 
fundamental. For these reasons, there is still a need for wide spread leprosy
teaching programmes. Although with few limitations, this study represents a first
approach to validate the accuracy in leprosy diagnosis in Italy.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and
Venereology © 2011 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

PMID: 21831112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Amino Acids. 2012 Feb;42(2-3):761-8. doi: 10.1007/s00726-011-0992-1. Epub 2011
Jul 29.

Further characterization of agmatine binding to mitochondrial membranes:
involvement of imidazoline I2 receptor.

Martinis P(1), Battaglia V, Grancara S, Dalla Via L, Di Noto V, Saccoccio S,
Agostinelli E, Bragadin M, Grillo MA, Toninello A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Padua, Viale G. Colombo 3,
35121, Padua, Italy.

Agmatine, a divalent diamine with two positive charges at physiological pH, is
transported into the matrix of liver mitochondria by an energy-dependent
mechanism, the driving force of which is the electrical membrane potential. Its
binding to mitochondrial membranes is studied by applying a thermodynamic
treatment of ligand-receptor interactions on the analyses of Scatchard and Hill. 
The presence of two mono-coordinated binding sites S(1) and S(2), with a negative
influence of S(2) on S(1), has been demonstrated. The calculated binding energy
is characteristic for weak interactions. S(1) exhibits a lower binding capacity
and higher binding affinity both of about two orders of magnitude than S(2).
Experiments with idazoxan, a ligand of the mitochondrial imidazoline receptor
I(2), demonstrate that S(1) site is localized on this receptor while S(2) is
localized on the transport system. S(1) would act as a sensor of exogenous
agmatine concentration, thus modulating the transport of the amine by its binding
to S(2).

PMID: 21800257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e21320. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021320. Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Spheres derived from lung adenocarcinoma pleural effusions: molecular
characterization and tumor engraftment.

Mancini R(1), Giarnieri E, De Vitis C, Malanga D, Roscilli G, Noto A, Marra E,
Laudanna C, Zoppoli P, De Luca P, Affuso A, Ruco L, Di Napoli A, Mesiti G,
Aurisicchio L, Ricci A, Mariotta S, Pisani L, Andreetti C, Viglietto G, Rendina
EA, Giovagnoli MR, Ciliberto G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, University of Rome La Sapienza 
S Andrea Hospital, Rome, Italy. rita.mancini@uniroma1.it

Malignant pleural effusions (MPEs) could represent an excellent source to culture
a wide variety of cancer cells from different donors. In this study, we set up
culture conditions for cancer cells deriving from MPEs of several patients
affected by the most frequent form of lung cancer, namely the subset of non small
cell lung cancers (NSCLC) classified as Lung Adenocarcinomas (AdenoCa) which
account for approximately 40% of lung cancer cases. AdenoCa malignant pleural
effusions gave rise to in vitro cultures both in adherent and/or in spheroid
conditions in almost all cases analyzed. We characterized in greater detail two
samples which showed the most efficient propagation in vitro. In these samples we
also compared gene profiles of spheroid vs adherent cultures and identified a set
of differentially expressed genes. Finally we achieved efficient tumor
engraftment in recipient NOD/SCID mice, also upon inoculation of small number of 
cells, thus suggesting indirectly the presence of tumor initiating cells.

PMCID: PMC3138755
PMID: 21789168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Med Case Rep. 2011 Jul 22;5:323. doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-5-323.

Salmonella enterica ssp. arizonae infection in a 43-year-old Italian man with
hypoglobulinemia: a case report and review of the literature.

Di Bella S(1), Capone A, Bordi E, Johnson E, Musso M, Topino S, Noto P,
Petrosillo N.

Author information: 
(1)Second Infectious Diseases Division, National Institute for Infectious
Diseases, 'Lazzaro Spallanzani', Via Portuense, 292 00149, Rome, Italy.
stefano932@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Salmonella enterica ssp. arizonae is an uncommon human pathogen
with serious infections reported in immunocompromised hosts. In Europe, only a
few cases have been described. Patients with this infection usually have a
history of contact with reptiles or travel abroad. We present a case report of
infection in a patient with hypoglobulinemia and a literature review.
CASE PRESENTATION: We describe the case of a 43-year-old Caucasian Italian man
with hypoglobulinemia who presented to our hospital with sepsis and diarrhea. A
stool culture yielded S. enterica ssp. arizonae. Our patient was treated with
oral ciprofloxacin and made a full recovery. We also present a review of the
cases of S. enterica ssp. arizonae infections previously reported in Europe.
CONCLUSIONS: The majority of infections from S. enterica ssp. arizonae occur in
patients who are immunocompromised. Data from the literature suggests that it may
be difficult to eradicate the bacteria and thus, prolonged antibiotic courses are
often used. It would be advisable for clinicians to investigate for pre-existing 
immune dysfunction if S. enterica ssp. arizonae is isolated. In Italy, although
there have only been a few cases, the likely route of transmission remains
unclear and requires further surveillance.

PMCID: PMC3156765
PMID: 21781321  [PubMed]


43. J Lipids. 2011;2011:271062. doi: 10.1155/2011/271062. Epub 2011 Jul 6.

The apolipoprotein C-I content of very-low-density lipoproteins is associated
with fasting triglycerides, postprandial lipemia, and carotid atherosclerosis.

Hansen JB(1), Fernández JA, Notø AT, Deguchi H, Björkegren J, Mathiesen EB.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Research Group, Department of Clinical Medicine, University of
Tromsø, 9037 Tromsø, Norway.

Background. Experimental studies in animals suggest that apolipoprotein (apo) C-I
is an important regulator of triglycerides in fasting and postprandial conditions
and associated with carotid atherosclerosis. Methods. A cross-sectional study was
conducted with 81 subjects, aged 56-80 years recruited from a population health
survey. The participants underwent a fat tolerance test (1<U+2009>g fat per Kg body
weight) and carotid atherosclerosis was determined by ultrasound examination.
VLDL particles, Sf 20-400, were isolated and their lipid composition and apoC-I
content determined. Results. The carotid plaque area increased linearly with the 
number of apoC-I molecules per VLDL particles (P = 0.048) under fasting
conditions. Fasting triglycerides increased across tertiles of apoC-I per VLDL
particle in analyses adjusted for apoC-II and -C-III, apoE genotype and
traditional cardiovascular risk factors (P = 0.011). The relation between apoC-I 
in VLDL and serum triglycerides was conveyed by triglyceride enrichment of VLDL
particles (P for trend <0.001. The amount of apoC-I molecules per VLDL was
correlated with the total (r = 0.41, P < 0.0001) and incremental (r = 0.35, P <
0.001) area under the postprandial triglyceride curve. Conclusions. Our findings 
support the concept that the content of apoC-I per VLDL particle is an important 
regulator of triglyceride metabolism in the fasting and postprandial state and
associated with carotid athrosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC3139117
PMID: 21776394  [PubMed]


44. Clin Neurophysiol. 2012 Feb;123(2):382-5. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2011.05.030. Epub
2011 Jul 20.

Awaji ALS criteria increase the diagnostic sensitivity in patients with bulbar
onset.

Noto Y(1), Misawa S, Kanai K, Shibuya K, Isose S, Nasu S, Sekiguchi Y, Fujimaki
Y, Nakagawa M, Kuwabara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba,
Japan. y-noto@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

Comment in
    Clin Neurophysiol. 2012 Feb;123(2):217-8.

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether Awaji criteria improve the sensitivity of diagnosis 
for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). In Awaji ALS criteria, fasciculation
potentials are regarded as evidence of acute denervation in the presence of
chronic neurogenic changes on needle electromyography.
METHODS: We reviewed clinical and neurophysiological data of 113 consecutive
patients who were suspected as suffering ALS. The six muscles (trapezius, biceps,
first dorsal interosseous, T10-paraspinalis, vastus lateralis, and tibialis
anterior muscles) were examined by EMG, focusing on the presence of fasciculation
potentials. The sensitivity of revised El Escorial (R-EEC) and Awaji criteria was
compared.
RESULTS: Probable or definite ALS was diagnosed in 61% of the patients by R-EEC
and 71% by Awaji criteria. By applying Awaji criteria; (1) 17 of the 44 patients 
categorized as possible ALS by R-EEC reached to probable/definite ALS, 11 of whom
had bulbar onset, (2) in 48 patients with bulbar onset, the proportion of
probable/definite ALS increased from 59% to 82%, (3) in 62 patients with limb
onset, the proportion of probable/definite ALS was 61% (63% by R-EEC).
CONCLUSIONS: Awaji criteria improve the sensitivity of ALS diagnosis in patients 
with bulbar onset, but not in those with limb onset.
SIGNIFICANCE: Accepting fasciculation potentials as evidence of acute denervation
increases the diagnostic sensitivity of ALS, particularly in patients with bulbar
onset, and contributes to early diagnosis.

Copyright © 2011 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Published 
by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21764635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Ultrason Sonochem. 2012 Jan;19(1):136-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ultsonch.2011.06.010.
Epub 2011 Jun 25.

Synthesis of aryl azides: a probe reaction to study the synergetic action of
ultrasounds and ionic liquids.

D'Anna F(1), Marullo S, Vitale P, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento STEMBIO, Sezione di Chimica Organica E. Paternò, Università degli
Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze-Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
fdanna@unipa.it

The combined effect of ultrasounds and ionic liquids was used to perform the
synthesis of aryl azides by nucleophilic aromatic substitution in ionic
liquid/[1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium][N3] binary mixtures. The ultrasounds
efficiency was analyzed as a function of the substrate and of the ionic liquid
structure. In the first case, both 6p and 10p electrons aryl halides were
considered. As far as the ionic liquid structure is concerned, both aromatic and 
aliphatic ionic liquids were taken into account. Among aromatic cations, the
effects due to different ability in giving hydrogen bond or p-p interactions were
considered. The use of a geminal ionic liquid having an aromatic spacer was
examined too. On the whole, collected data evidence an activating effect on the
target reaction by the combined use of ultrasounds and ionic liquids. The
structural order degree of the ionic liquid seems to be the main factor affecting
the ultrasounds efficiency. Furthermore, the effects due to changes in the anion 
structure seem to be more significant than those due to changes in the cation
structure.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21757391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jul 26;108(30):12390-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1107103108. Epub 2011 Jul 6.

Mutation of the conserved polyadenosine RNA binding protein, ZC3H14/dNab2,
impairs neural function in Drosophila and humans.

Pak C(1), Garshasbi M, Kahrizi K, Gross C, Apponi LH, Noto JJ, Kelly SM, Leung
SW, Tzschach A, Behjati F, Abedini SS, Mohseni M, Jensen LR, Hu H, Huang B,
Stahley SN, Liu G, Williams KR, Burdick S, Feng Y, Sanyal S, Bassell GJ, Ropers
HH, Najmabadi H, Corbett AH, Moberg KH, Kuss AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.

Here we report a human intellectual disability disease locus on chromosome
14q31.3 corresponding to mutation of the ZC3H14 gene that encodes a conserved
polyadenosine RNA binding protein. We identify ZC3H14 mRNA transcripts in the
human central nervous system, and we find that rodent ZC3H14 protein is expressed
in hippocampal neurons and colocalizes with poly(A) RNA in neuronal cell bodies. 
A Drosophila melanogaster model of this disease created by mutation of the gene
encoding the ZC3H14 ortholog dNab2, which also binds polyadenosine RNA, reveals
that dNab2 is essential for development and required in neurons for normal
locomotion and flight. Biochemical and genetic data indicate that dNab2 restricts
bulk poly(A) tail length in vivo, suggesting that this function may underlie its 
role in development and disease. These studies reveal a conserved requirement for
ZC3H14/dNab2 in the metazoan nervous system and identify a poly(A) RNA binding
protein associated with a human brain disorder.

PMCID: PMC3145741
PMID: 21734151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Intern Med. 2011;50(13):1393-6. Epub 2011 Jul 1.

Detection of bone lesions by CT in POEMS syndrome.

Shibuya K(1), Misawa S, Horikoshi T, Kanai K, Isose S, Nasu S, Sekiguchi Y, Noto 
Y, Fujimaki Y, Nakaseko C, Kuwabara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To study the utility of CT for detection of small bone lesions in
POEMS (polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M-protein, and skin changes)
syndrome. For patients with a solitary bone lesion, irradiation is a first-line
treatment, whereas systemic chemotherapy is indicated for patients with multiple 
bone lesions. Therefore it is important to correctly identify the number of bone 
lesions.
METHODS: We studied the sensitivity of chest/abdomen/pelvic CT to detect bone
lesions in 28 patients with POEMS syndrome. (99m)Tc-HMDP bone scintigraphy was
performed in 14 patients, and the results were compared with CT.
RESULTS: CT showed multiple bone lesions in 68% of the 28 patients, and 71% of
the lesions had a diameter <10 mm. In 14 patients who underwent both CT and
scintigraphy, bone lesions were detected in 57% by CT and in 79% by scintigraphy,
but the location and nature of the identified lesions were considerably
different; CT frequently showed small lesions (diameter <10 mm) in the vertebrae 
and pelvis, which were not detected by scintigraphy, whereas scintigraphy could
show lesions in the skull and long bones. Overall, by using both examinations,
multiple bone lesions were found for 86% of patients.
CONCLUSION: CT is particularly useful to detect small bone lesions. CT and bone
scintigraphy are complementary, and therefore both should be performed for bone
survey in POEMS syndrome.

PMID: 21720058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Prev Med Hyg. 2011 Mar;52(1):9-11.

A food borne outbreak of Salmonella enterica serotype Brandenburg as a hint to
compare human, animal and food isolates identified in the years 2005-2009 in
Italy.

Mammina C(1), Aleo A, Romanelli G, Marconi P, Di Noto AM, Donato R, Nastasi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sciences for Health Promotion G. D'Alessandro, Section of
Microbiology, University of Palermo, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: There are only a few reported cases of Salmonella enterica serotype
Brandenburg foodborne outbreaks in the literature. In Italy Brandenburg is
consistently present among the top ten serotypes from human source, but at low
prevalences.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifty-five S. Brandenburg isolates from human, animal,
environmental and food sources, including twelve isolates from a foodborne
outbreak, were genotyped by Pulsed-Field Gel Electrophoresis (PFGE).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Eight pulsogroups and 19 pulsotypes were detected, with a
unique pulsotype being attributed to the outbreak strains. Molecular subtyping
can reliably complement the epidemiological investigations. Moreover, mapping
molecular types of Salmonella isolates from human and non-human source may
greatly contribute to risk assessment, by tracking possible animal sources, so
improving cost-effectiveness of the prevention and control strategies.

PMID: 21710817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Gastroenterology. 2011 Aug;141(2):553-64. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2011.05.004. Epub
2011 May 17.

ß-Catenin and p120 mediate PPARd-dependent proliferation induced by Helicobacter 
pylori in human and rodent epithelia.

Nagy TA(1), Wroblewski LE, Wang D, Piazuelo MB, Delgado A, Romero-Gallo J, Noto
J, Israel DA, Ogden SR, Correa P, Cover TL, Peek RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Colonization of gastric mucosa by Helicobacter pylori leads to
epithelial hyperproliferation, which increases the risk for gastric
adenocarcinoma. One H pylori virulence locus associated with cancer risk, cag,
encodes a secretion system that transports effectors into host cells and leads to
aberrant activation of ß-catenin and p120-catenin (p120). Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)d is a ligand-activated transcription
factor that affects oncogenesis in conjunction with ß-catenin. We used a
carcinogenic H pylori strain to define the role of microbial virulence
constituents and PPARd in regulating epithelial responses that mediate
development of adenocarcinoma.
METHODS: Gastric epithelial cells or colonies were co-cultured with the H pylori 
cag(+) strain 7.13 or cagE(-), cagA(-), soluble lytic transglycosylase(-), or
cagA(-)/soluble lytic transglycosylase(-) mutants. Levels of PPARd and cyclin E1 
were determined by real-time, reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction,
immunoblot analysis, or immunofluorescence microscopy; proliferation was measured
in 3-dimensional culture. PPARd and Ki67 expression were determined by
immunohistochemical analysis of human biopsies and rodent gastric mucosa.
RESULTS: H pylori induced ß-catenin- and p120-dependent expression and activation
of PPARd in gastric epithelial cells, which were mediated by the cag secretion
system substrates CagA and peptidoglycan. H pylori stimulated proliferation in
vitro, which required PPARd-mediated activation of cyclin E1; H pylori did not
induce expression of cyclin E1 in a genetic model of PPARd deficiency. PPARd
expression and proliferation in rodent and human gastric tissue was selectively
induced by cag(+) strains and PPARd levels normalized after eradication of H
pylori.
CONCLUSIONS: The H pylori cag secretion system activates ß-catenin, p120, and
PPARd, which promote gastric epithelial cell proliferation via activation of
cyclin E1. PPARd might contribute to gastric adenocarcinoma development in
humans.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3152603
PMID: 21704622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Bioresour Technol. 2011 Sep;102(17):7720-6. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2011.06.001. 
Epub 2011 Jun 6.

Novel autotrophic nitrogen removal system using gel entrapment technology.

Isaka K(1), Itokawa H, Kimura Y, Noto K, Murakami T.

Author information: 
(1)Hitachi Plant Technologies Ltd., Kami-Hongo 537, Matsudo, Chiba 271-0064,
Japan. kazuichi.isaka.mp@hitachi-pt.com

A pilot plant involving a nitritation-anammox process was operated for treating
digester supernatant. In the preceding nitritation process, ammonium-oxidizing
bacteria were immobilized in gel carriers, and the growth of nitrite-oxidizing
bacteria was suppressed by heat-shock treatment. For the following anammox
process, in order to maintain the anammox biomass in the reactor, a novel process
using anammox bacteria entrapped in gel carriers was also developed. The
nitritation performance was stable, and the average nitrogen loading and
nitritation rates were 3.0 and 1.7 kg Nm(-3)d(-1), respectively. In the
nitritation process, nitrate production was completely suppressed. For the
anammox process, the startup time was about two months. Stable nitrogen removal
was achieved, and an average nitrogen conversion rate of 5.0 kg Nm(-3)d(-1) was
obtained. Since the anammox bacteria were entrapped in gel carriers, stable
nitrogen removal performance was attained even at an influent suspended solids
concentration of 1500 mg L(-1).

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21704511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Acta Diabetol. 2012 Apr;49(2):145-51. doi: 10.1007/s00592-011-0305-x. Epub 2011
Jun 23.

Prediction of incident type 2 diabetes mellitus based on a twenty-year follow-up 
of the Ventimiglia heart study.

Noto D(1), Cefalù AB, Barbagallo CM, Falletta A, Ganci A, Sapienza M, Cavera G,
Nardi I, Pagano M, Notarbartolo A, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties (DIMIS), University of
Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

A novel algorithm to predict incident type 2 diabetes mellitus (iT2DM) is
presented considering data from a 20-year prospective study in a Southern Italy
population. Eight hundred and fifty-eight out of 1,351 subjects (24-85 years
range of age) were selected. Incident type 2 diabetes was diagnosed in 103
patients in a 20-year follow-up. The Finnish Diabetes Risk Score (FINDRISC) and
the Framingham Offspring Study simple clinical model (FOS) have been used as
reference algorithms. Two custom algorithms have been created using Cox
parametric hazard models followed by PROBIT analyses: the first one (VHSRISK)
includes all the study subjects and the second one (VHS95RISK) evaluates
separately subjects with baseline fasting blood glucose (FBG) above/below
5.2 mmol/L (95 mg/dL). The 44 iT2DM cases below 5.2 mmol/L of baseline FBG were
predicted by high LDL cholesterol, metabolic syndrome (ATPIII criteria),
BMI > 30 kg/m(2), and high factor VII activity. The 59 cases above the FBG
threshold were predicted by FBG classes, hypertension, and age. ROC areas for
iT2DM prediction were: FINDRISC = 0.759, FOS = 0.762, VHSRISK = 0.789, and
VHS95RISK = 0.803. In a Mediterranean population, the use of a custom generated
algorithm evaluating separately low/high FBG subjects improves the prediction of 
iT2DM in subjects classified at lower risk by common estimation algorithms.

PMID: 21698484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Phys Chem B. 2011 Jul 28;115(29):9014-21. doi: 10.1021/jp2043448. Epub 2011 Jul
7.

Broadband electric spectroscopy at high CO2 pressure: dipole moment of CO2 and
relaxation phenomena of the CO2-poly(vinyl chloride) system.

Di Noto V(1), Vezzù K, Conti F, Giffin GA, Lavina S, Bertucco A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Padua, Via F. Marzolo 1,
I-35131 Padova, Italy. vito.dinoto@unipd.it

Broadband electric spectroscopy (BES) is a technique that shows promise in
studying the interactions of dense or supercritical gases with polymers,
particularly with respect to chain mobility. Polymers that are treated with dense
gases show a reduction in the viscosity, glass transition, and melting
temperature. A high pressure cell for BES has been constructed that can be used
from ambient temperature and pressure to 353 K and 15 MPa and over a frequency
range from 20 Hz to 1 MHz. In the past, the dielectric constant of CO(2) was
determined by measurements at only one or two frequency values. New
instrumentation and technology allow this experiment to be expanded to cover a
wider frequency range. BES measurements of CO(2) do not show any relaxation peaks
in the permittivity from 20 Hz to 1 MHz and 1 to 6 MPa. By these measurements,
the CO(2) dielectric constant was evaluated between 0.1 and 6 MPa. Cell testing
with poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) at 323 K and CO(2) pressures from 0.1 to 13 MPa
indicate an increase in the chain segmental motion at high pressures resulting
from a reduction in the glass transition temperature of the PVC-CO(2) system due 
to plasticization by CO(2).

© 2011 American Chemical Society

PMID: 21678893  [PubMed]


53. Clin Neurophysiol. 2011 Dec;122(12):2512-7. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2011.05.005.
Epub 2011 Jun 12.

Activity-dependent changes in impulse conduction of single human motor axons: a
stimulated single fiber electromyography study.

Noto Y(1), Misawa S, Kanai K, Sato Y, Shibuya K, Isose S, Nasu S, Sekiguchi Y,
Fujimaki Y, Ohmori S, Nakagawa M, Kuwabara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba,
Japan. y-noto@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to develop a novel method to assess
activity-dependent hyperpolarization in human single motor axons at a constant
stimulus frequency by using intra-muscular axonal stimulating single fiber
electromyography (s-SFEMG).
METHODS: We performed s-SFEMG in the extensor digitorum communis (EDC) muscle of 
10 normal subjects, and measured changes in latencies for single muscle fiber
action potentials (MAPs) during 500 stimuli delivered at 5, 10 and 20 Hz. The
data were analyzed with a repeated measurement analysis, and multiple comparisons
were performed.
RESULTS: A total of 585 MAPs were examined at 5 Hz (n=190), 10 Hz (n=210), and 20
Hz (n=185) steady stimulation. There was a progressive linear prolongation of
latencies, as the stimulus rate increased (F=95.6, p<0.001); the least square
means (SEM) of latency change were 100.7 (0.28)% at 5 Hz, 102.3 (0.27)% at 10 Hz 
and 105.3 (0.28)% at 20 Hz. There were statistically significant differences
between frequencies by Tukey-Kramer's method. Despite the significant latency
prolongation, no activity-dependent conduction block developed. A 20 Hz electric 
stimulation to intramuscular axons was well-tolerated in all the subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Tetanic stimulation at a constant rate results in significant
latency increase in single human motor axons, the extent of which depends on the 
stimulus frequency. The findings imply that physiological discharge rates will
activate the Na(+)/K(+) pump and thereby produce axonal hyperpolarization in
single motor axons.
SIGNIFICANCE: This technique may detect activity-dependent conduction block if
the safety margin of impulse transmission is significantly reduced by
demyelination or increased branching due to collateral sprouting in a variety of 
neuromuscular disorders.

Copyright Â© 2011 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Published
by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21664178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Eur Respir J. 2011 Dec;38(6):1278-86. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00007711. Epub 2011
Jun 9.

Exposure to thoracic dust, airway symptoms and lung function in cement production
workers.

Nordby KC(1), Fell AK, Notø H, Eduard W, Skogstad M, Thomassen Y, Bergamaschi A, 
Kongerud J, Kjuus H.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Occupational Health, PO Box 8149 Dep, NO-0033 Oslo,
Norway. kcn@stami.no

Cement dust exposure has previously been associated with airway symptoms and
ventilatory impairment. The aim of the present study was to examine lung function
and airway symptoms among employees in different jobs and at different levels of 
exposure to thoracic dust in the cement production industry. At the start of a
4-yr prospective cohort study in 2007, exposure to cement dust, symptoms and lung
function were recorded cross-sectionally in 4,265 employees in 24 European cement
plants. Bronchial exposure was assessed by 2,670 full-shift dust samples with
cyclones collecting the thoracic aerosol fraction. A job exposure matrix was
constructed by grouping dust concentrations according to job type and plant.
Elevated odds ratios for symptoms and airflow limitation (range 1.2-2.6 in the
highest quartile), but not for chronic bronchitis, were found in the higher
quartiles of exposure compared with the lowest quartile. Forced expiratory volume
in 1 s (FEV(1)) showed an exposure-response relationship with a 270-mL deficit of
FEV(1) (95% CI 190-300 mL) in the highest compared with the lowest exposure
level. The results support the hypothesis that exposure to dust in cement
production may lead to respiratory symptoms and airway obstruction.

PMID: 21659410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Leuk Res. 2011 Oct;35(10):1290-3. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2011.05.016. Epub 2011
Jun 11.

Miniaturized flow cytometry-based BCR-ABL immunoassay in detecting leptomeningeal
disease.

D'Alessio F(1), Mirabelli P, Mariotti E, Raia M, Di Noto R, Fortunato G, Camera
A, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy.

Comment in
    Leuk Res. 2011 Oct;35(10):1286-7.

Despite central nervous system (CNS) prophylactic programs limit leptomeningeal
involvement in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), it can still occur in a
restricted percentage of cases. The exact risk rate remains still unknown, and
several factors are associated with an increased probability to develop CNS
involvement. Among them, Philadelphia (Ph)-positive genotype seems to play a
relevant role. Recently, a flow cytometric assay to detect BCR-ABL protein has
been developed, but little is known about its possible employment in
leptomeningeal disease. Here, we show the miniaturized application of the
original assay for BCR-ABL oncoprotein detection in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
samples.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21658767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Langenbecks Arch Surg. 2011 Oct;396(7):1041-6. doi: 10.1007/s00423-011-0813-8.
Epub 2011 Jun 1.

Plasma citrulline as marker of bowel adaptation in children with short bowel
syndrome.

Diamanti A(1), Panetta F, Gandullia P, Morini F, Noto C, Torre G, Lezo A,
Goffredo B, Daniele A, Gambarara M.

Author information: 
(1)Hepathology, Gastroenterology and Nutrition Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, Piazza S. Onofrio, 4-00165 Rome, Italy. diamanti@opbg.net

PURPOSE: The aim of this study is to determine if prospective determinations of
citrulline could be predictive of the bowel adaptation in children with short
bowel syndrome (SBS).
METHODS: Between March 2005 and March 2010, we prospectively included 28 SBS
patients on parenteral nutrition. The citrulline and the enteral intake
determinations were scheduled at the inclusion and at 6-month intervals. We
assessed the correlation between citrulline and bowel length as well as enteral
caloric intake, longitudinal trend of citrulline and association between patients
characteristics according to the course of bowel adaptation.
RESULTS: Citrulline significantly correlated with the residual duodenum-jejunum
length (r (2)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.22, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0113) and with enteral intake (r (2)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.20,
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.016 and r (2)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.48, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0001). Baseline citrulline at the cutoff >10
µmol/L and a longitudinal increase >25% provided a weak association with bowel
adaptation (likelihood ratio (LR), 2.6 and 2.4, respectively), unlike residual
small bowel length =20 cm and the presence of >50% of the colon (LR, 10 and 6,
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Citrulline seems to be a powerful biomarker of the intestinal
function, showed by the correlation with the residual duodenum-jejunum length and
the enteral absorption, but not of its prospective changes during the bowel
adaptation process. Future studies may be necessary to confirm this finding.

PMID: 21630079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Ultrasound. 2011 Jun;14(2):84-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jus.2011.04.006. Epub 2011 Apr 
22.

Ganglioneuroblastoma: Case report and review of the literature.

Alessi S(1), Grignani M, Carone L.

Author information: 
(1)Radiology Institute, San Matteo Policlinic, University of Pavia, Italy.

Neuroblastoma are among the most important tumors of extracranial origin in
pediatric patients. They arise from embryonal cells involved in the development
of the sympathetic nervous system, whose differentiation has been arrested [1,2].
They are the tumors most frequently diagnosed during the first decade of life.
Their evolution is unpredictable, ranging from progression to spontaneous
regression or maturation, and their location and metastatic potential vary.
Little is known about the cause of these tumors and the risk factors associated
with their development. This article describes a typical case of
ganglioneuroblastoma and provides a review of the literature on this type of
tumor.Sommario Il neuroblastoma è uno dei più importanti tumori pediatrici di
derivazione extracranica; esso origina dalle cellule embrionali coinvolte nello
sviluppo del sistema nervoso simpatico a causa di un blocco nel loro processo di 
differenziamento [1,2]. È la più frequente neoplasia della prima decade di vita; 
la sua progressione biologica è imprevedibile, regressione spontanea, maturazione
a ganglioneuroma, localizzazione e metastatizzazione variabili. Poco è noto a
riguardo dei fattori di rischio e della sua eziopatogenesi. Viene presentato un
caso tipico di ganglioneuroblastoma e riesaminata la letteratura su questa
neoplasia.

PMCID: PMC3558053
PMID: 23396255  [PubMed]


58. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg. 2011;89(4):226-33. doi: 10.1159/000326778. Epub 2011 
May 25.

Trigeminal neuralgia associated with the specific bridging pattern of transverse 
pontine vein: diagnostic value of three-dimensional multifusion volumetric
imaging.

Oishi M(1), Fukuda M, Noto Y, Kawaguchi T, Hiraishi T, Fujii Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Brain Research Institute, Niigata University,
Niigata, Japan. mac.oishi@mac.com

OBJECTIVES: We report the specific bridging pattern of a transverse pontine vein 
(TPV) associated with trigeminal neuralgia (TN), which was evaluated by
3-dimensional (3D) multifusion volumetric imaging (MFVI).
METHODS: In 3 cases with TN (V1 or V1-2 territory), constructive interference in 
steady state (CISS) imaging confirmed no arterial compression but indicated a
vein draining into Meckel's cave. Virtual endoscopic (VE) analysis for CISS
images and 3D MFVI (in 2 cases) including venous information was obtained by a
multidetector row computed tomography (MDCT) system. Additionally, we
investigated the bridging pattern of veins around Meckel's cave on 3D MFVI of 50 
cerebellopontine angle (CPA) regions without any lesions.
RESULTS: In all 3 patients, VE of CISS or 3D MFVI identified a bridging vein from
the TPV causing the focal deformity of the trigeminal nerve near Meckel's cave.
All those patients achieved a pain-free state after surgically coagulating and
cutting the vein. In investigating 3D MFVI of 50 CPA regions, this type of the
bridging vein was found in 4 (8%) including the presented 2 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The specific bridging pattern of the TPV draining into Meckel's cave
can be associated with TN. The 3D MFVI analysis using venous information obtained
by MDCT was useful to evaluate surgical anatomy including the offending vein
which can be missed.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21613808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Development. 2011 Jun;138(12):2457-65. doi: 10.1242/dev.060335.

Topoisomerase IIbeta is required for lamina-specific targeting of retinal
ganglion cell axons and dendrites.

Nevin LM(1), Xiao T, Staub W, Baier H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of California, San Francisco, 1550 4th
Street, San Francisco, CA 94158-2722, USA.

The specific partnering of synaptically connected neurons is central to nervous
system function. Proper wiring requires the interchange of signals between a
postmitotic neuron and its environment, a distinct pattern of transcription in
the nucleus, and deployment of guidance and adhesion cues to the cell surface. To
identify genes involved in neurite targeting by retinal ganglion cells (GCs),
their presynaptic partners in the retina, and their postsynaptic targets in the
optic tectum, we undertook a forward genetic screen for mutations disrupting
visual responses in zebrafish. This rapid primary screen was subsequently refined
by immunohistochemical labeling of retinal and tectal neurites to detect
patterning errors. From this unbiased screen, the notorious (noto) mutant
exhibited the most specific phenotypes: intact retinal and tectal differentiation
but multiple neurite targeting defects in the retinal inner plexiform layer (IPL)
and tectal neuropil. Positional cloning and morpholino phenocopy revealed that
the mutation disrupts Topoisomerase IIß (Top2b), a broadly distributed nuclear
protein involved in chromatin modifications during postmitotic differentiation.
Top2b-DNA interactions are known to regulate transcription of developmentally
important genes, including axon guidance factors and cell adhesion molecules, but
a specific role in local synaptic targeting has not been previously described.
The neurite targeting defects among GC axons are largely restricted to crossovers
between sublaminae of a specific layer, SFGS, and were shown by mosaic analysis
to be autonomous to the GC axons. The noto mutant provides the first example of
the importance of an epigenetic regulator, Top2b, in the intricate series of
events that lead to a properly wired visual system.

PMCID: PMC3100707
PMID: 21610027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Urology. 2011 Jul;78(1):126-33. doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2011.02.055. Epub 2011 May
23.

Solifenacin as add-on therapy for overactive bladder symptoms in men treated for 
lower urinary tract symptoms--ASSIST, randomized controlled study.

Yamaguchi O(1), Kakizaki H, Homma Y, Takeda M, Nishizawa O, Gotoh M, Yokoyama O, 
Seki N, Yoshida M; ASSIST Study Group.

Collaborators: Kakizaki H, Kobayashi S, Machino R, Sato T, Takahashi K, Takayama 
N, Takeda K, Toyota K, Kaneto H, Namima T, Matsuo S, Noto H, Muraki O, Morimoto
S, Ishii Y, Kato A, Aikawa H, Iwata S, Nakamura T, Hirano I, Kobari T, Minami T, 
Yoshida M, Fujimoto Y, Shiramizu M, Yajima M, Hasegawa T, Uchibayashi T, Fujita
T, Sugata T, Tsukahara K, Nishizawa O, Kageyama S, Okishio N, Watanabe T, Aota Y,
Kinukawa T, Murase T, Narita H, Otani T, Azemoto M, Otani T, Nakagawa S, Nonomura
M, Yamada H, Doi H, Ikegami M, Iwasa A, Matsumoto S, Momose H, Naya Y, Hara S,
Kokura K, Maeda O, Oka N, Tanaka K, Tsujimoto Y, Terai A, Kokehara O, Sone A,
Yamamoto H, Numata A, Fujii M, Nakaishi M, Kaji S, Kano M, Kawai S, Nakamura Y,
Nashima Y, Ohno H, Sagiyama K, Sakuma S, Seki N, Ueda S, Yamaguchi A, Komine S,
Nanri M, Fujisawa S, Kikukawa H, Kitani K, Kuwahara T, Nabekura Y, Yamamoto T,
Yoshida M, Sakamoto S, Kawahara K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine,
Fukushima, Japan. yamaosa@fmu.ac.jp

OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of solifenacin add-on therapy to
tamsulosin in lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) men with residual overactive
bladder (OAB) symptoms despite tamsulosin monotherapy.
METHODS: In this randomized, multicenter, double-blind study, male LUTS patients 
aged=50 years with urgency episodes/24 hours=2 and micturitions/24 hours=8 were
randomized to 3 groups: 12-weeks tamsulosin plus placebo (TAM+PBO), tamsulosin
plus solifenacin 2.5 mg (TAM+SOL), and tamsulosin plus solifenacin 5 mg
(TAM+SOL). Changes from baseline to end of treatment in the number of urgency
episodes/24 hours (primary endpoint), micturitions, nocturia, urgency
incontinence episodes, International Prostate Symptom Scores (IPSS), and
Overactive Bladder Symptom Score (OABSS) were compared between the TAM+SOL groups
and TAM+PBO. Safety was assessed on adverse events, postvoid residual volume, and
maximal urinary flow rate (Qmax.).
RESULTS: Six-hundred thirty-eight men were randomized. Urgency was reduced by 2.2
and 2.4 episodes in the TAM+SOL 2.5 and 5 mg groups, respectively. The TAM+SOL 5 
mg group showed significant improvement compared with TAM+PBO (-2.4 vs -1.9,
P=.049). The number of micturitions in both TAM+SOL groups were significantly
reduced compared with TAM+PBO (both P<.001). IPSS storage symptom score and OABSS
significantly improved in both TAM+SOL groups compared with TAM+PBO. Changes in
IPSS voiding symptom score and Qmax. were similar in all groups. Four patients
(1.9%) in the TAM+SOL 5 mg group had urinary retention, but all recovered after
catheterization.
CONCLUSIONS: In male LUTS patients with residual OAB symptoms despite tamsulosin 
monotherapy, TAM+SOL showed efficacy on urgency, which represents OAB symptoms
and was well tolerated.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21601248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Biol Inorg Chem. 2011 Jun;16(5):695-713. doi: 10.1007/s00775-011-0771-1. Epub
2011 Mar 29.

Platinum(II) chloride indenyl complexes: electrochemical and biological
evaluation.

Dalla Via L(1), Santi S, Di Noto V, Venzo A, Agostinelli E, Calcabrini A,
Condello M, Toninello A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Padova, Padua, Italy.

Four platinum(II) complexes of general formula [PtCl(<U+03B7>(1)-C(9)H(7))L(2)] [where
L(2) is 1,2-bis(diphenylphosphino)ethane (dppe) 1 or cycloocta-1,5-diene (cod) 3]
and [PtCl(2)L(2)] (where L(2) is dppe 2 or cod 4) were studied. Inhibition growth
assays on human tumor cell lines evidenced for 1 and 3 an antiproliferative
effect and, interestingly, the cytotoxic effect exerted by 1 is similar to that
of cisplatin. Electrochemical and NMR measurements allowed us to determine the
structural and redox properties. Investigation of the mechanism of action
responsible for the cytotoxicity demonstrated a weak capacity of interacting with
DNA. Some experiments performed on rat liver mitochondria indicate that 1 acts as
an inducer of the mitochondrial permeability transition, thus leading to the
release of proapoptotic factors, such as cytochrome c and apoptosis-inducing
factor.

PMID: 21594772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2011 Jul 14;13(26):12146-54. doi: 10.1039/c1cp20902g. Epub
2011 May 19.

Structure-property interplay of proton conducting membranes based on PBI5N,
SiO2-Im and H3PO4 for high temperature fuel cells.

Di Noto V(1), Piga M, Giffin GA, Quartarone E, Righetti P, Mustarelli P,
Magistris A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Università di Padova, Padova, Italy.
vito.dinoto@unipd.it

Polybenzimidazoles (PBIs) are among the polymers of choice to prepare membranes
for high temperature polymer fuel cells.
Poly-2,2'(2,6-pyridine)-5,5'-bibenzimidazole (PBI5N), doped with H(3)PO(4), and
acid-doped PBI5N containing 10 wt% of imidazole-functionalized silica membranes
were studied with thermogravimetric analysis, differential scanning calorimetry, 
dynamic-mechanical analysis, infrared spectroscopy, and broadband electric
spectroscopy to examine the structure-property relationships. Key results show
that: (1) doped PBI5N membranes show thermal decomposition starting at 120 °C,
while pristine PBI5N is stable up to 300 °C; (2) the presence of filler increases
the acid uptake and decreases the crystallinity of PBI5N; (3) the addition of
phosphoric acid reduces the mechanical properties of the membrane, while the
addition of filler has the opposite effect; (4) acid-doped membranes have
conductivity values on the order of 10(-2)-10(-3) S cm(-1); and (5) membranes
exhibit a Vogel-Tamman-Fulcher (VTF) type proton conduction mechanism, where
proton hopping is coupled with the segmental motion of the polymer chain.
Infrared spectroscopy combined with DFT quantum mechanical calculations was used 
to assign the experimental spectrum of PBI5N.

PMID: 21594297  [PubMed]


63. PLoS Pathog. 2011 May;7(5):e1002050. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002050. Epub 2011
May 12.

Helicobacter pylori perturbs iron trafficking in the epithelium to grow on the
cell surface.

Tan S(1), Noto JM, Romero-Gallo J, Peek RM Jr, Amieva MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, United States of America.

Helicobacter pylori (Hp) injects the CagA effector protein into host epithelial
cells and induces growth factor-like signaling, perturbs cell-cell junctions, and
alters host cell polarity. This enables Hp to grow as microcolonies adhered to
the host cell surface even in conditions that do not support growth of
free-swimming bacteria. We hypothesized that CagA alters host cell physiology to 
allow Hp to obtain specific nutrients from or across the epithelial barrier.
Using a polarized epithelium model system, we find that isogenic <U+0394>cagA mutants
are defective in cell surface microcolony formation, but exogenous addition of
iron to the apical medium partially rescues this defect, suggesting that one of
CagA's effects on host cells is to facilitate iron acquisition from the host. Hp 
adhered to the apical epithelial surface increase basolateral uptake of
transferrin and induce its transcytosis in a CagA-dependent manner. Both CagA and
VacA contribute to the perturbation of transferrin recycling, since VacA is
involved in apical mislocalization of the transferrin receptor to sites of
bacterial attachment. To determine if the transferrin recycling pathway is
involved in Hp colonization of the cell surface, we silenced transferrin receptor
expression during infection. This resulted in a reduced ability of Hp to colonize
the polarized epithelium. To test whether CagA is important in promoting iron
acquisition in vivo, we compared colonization of Hp in iron-replete vs.
iron-deficient Mongolian gerbils. While wild type Hp and <U+0394>cagA mutants colonized 
iron-replete gerbils at similar levels, <U+0394>cagA mutants are markedly impaired in
colonizing iron-deficient gerbils. Our study indicates that CagA and VacA act in 
concert to usurp the polarized process of host cell iron uptake, allowing Hp to
use the cell surface as a replicative niche.

PMCID: PMC3093365
PMID: 21589900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Radiat Prot Dosimetry. 2011 Jul;146(1-3):234-6. doi: 10.1093/rpd/ncr158. Epub
2011 May 10.

Evaluation of patient doses due to fluoroscopic exposures.

Noto K(1), Matsubara K, Koshida K, Iida H, Yamamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiological Technology, Kanazawa University Hospital, 13-1
Takara, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8641, Japan. kimiyanoto@hotmail.com

The present study measures entrance surface doses of radiation administered to
patients during various fluoroscopic procedures using a dose-area product meter
as well as the duration of each procedure. A conversion factor for entrance skin 
dose to patients was calculated. The average dose to patient during the insertion
of intravenous hyperalimentation was 10.2 (maximum, 74.0) mGy, during a barium
meal, 58.4 (maximum, 184.0) mGy, for endoscopic retrograde
cholangio-pancreatography (ERCP), 97.3 (maximum, 376.0) mGy and for a barium
enema, 86.1 (maximum, 271.0) mGy. Doses tended to increase in the abdominal
domain and when patients undergo not only diagnostic evaluation but also
treatment requiring procedures such as drainage. The management of radiation
doses determined using a dose-area product meter is very important and that of
individual patients is enabled using the Radiation Information System (RIS).

PMID: 21561943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Toxicol Pathol. 2011 Jun;39(4):641-52. doi: 10.1177/0192623311406932. Epub 2011
May 5.

Transitional gene expression profiling in ovarian follicle during ovulation in
normal-cycle rats.

Tsubota K(1), Kanki M, Noto T, Shiraki K, Takeuchi A, Nakatsuji S, Seki J, Oishi 
Y, Matsumoto M, Nakayama H.

Author information: 
(1)Toxicologic Pathology, Drug Safety Research Laboratories, Astellas Pharma
Inc., Osaka, Japan. kenjiro.tsubota@jp.astellas.com

Evaluation of ovarian toxicity requires an understanding of the physiological
changes related to the estrous cycle in the ovary. The authors investigated the
transitional gene expression profile of ovulatory follicles in rats that show
normal estrous cyclicity. Ovaries were collected at 10:00 and 22:00 on the
proestrus day and at 10:00 on the estrus day. Ovarian follicles or early corpora 
lutea were isolated using laser microdissection, and extracted total RNA was
analyzed using microarray technology. Clustering analysis revealed four different
expression patterns: transient up- or down-regulation only at 22:00 on the
proestrus day (pattern 1), up- or down-regulation only at 10:00 on the estrus day
(pattern 2), continuous increase at 22:00 on the proestrus day and at 10:00 on
the estrus day (pattern 3), and up- or down-regulation at 22:00 on the proestrus 
day and level maintenance at 10:00 on the estrus day (pattern 4). In addition,
these probe sets were functionally categorized in each pattern using the
Ingenuity Pathways Analysis database. These data will aid in understanding the
physiology of ovulation and may be useful in assessing ovarian toxicity and its
mechanism, such as in investigations of chemical-induced ovulatory impairment.

PMID: 21551027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Intern Emerg Med. 2012 May;7 Suppl 1:S35-6. doi: 10.1007/s11739-011-0592-9. Epub 
2011 May 5.

Statin therapy in patients with aortic stenosis after the ASTRONOMER trial: is
there still any space?

Novo G, Noto D, Averna M, Novo S.

PMID: 21544538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Acta Radiol. 2011 Jul 1;52(6):632-7. doi: 10.1258/ar.2011.100322. Epub 2011 Apr
27.

Estimation of organ-absorbed radiation doses during 64-detector CT coronary
angiography using different acquisition techniques and heart rates: a phantom
study.

Matsubara K(1), Koshida K, Noto K, Takata T, Shimono T, Kawashima H, Yamamoto T, 
Matsui O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Quantum Medical Technology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Kanazawa
University, Kanazawa, Japan. matsuk@mhs.mp.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Though appropriate image acquisition parameters allow an effective
dose below 1 mSv for CT coronary angiography (CTCA) performed with the latest
dual-source CT scanners, a single-source 64-detector CT procedure results in a
significant radiation dose due to its technical limitations. Therefore,
estimating the radiation doses absorbed by an organ during 64-detector CTCA is
important.
PURPOSE: To estimate the radiation doses absorbed by organs located in the chest 
region during 64-detector CTCA using different acquisition techniques and heart
rates.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Absorbed doses for breast, heart, lung, red bone marrow,
thymus, and skin were evaluated using an anthropomorphic phantom and
radiophotoluminescence glass dosimeters (RPLDs). Electrocardiogram (ECG)-gated
helical and ECG-triggered non-helical acquisitions were performed by applying a
simulated heart rate of 60 beats per minute (bpm) and ECG-gated helical
acquisitions using ECG modulation (ECGM) of the tube current were performed by
applying simulated heart rates of 40, 60, and 90 bpm after placing RPLDs on the
anatomic location of each organ. The absorbed dose for each organ was calculated 
by multiplying the calibrated mean dose values of RPLDs with the mass energy
coefficient ratio.
RESULTS: For all acquisitions, the highest absorbed dose was observed for the
heart. When the helical and non-helical acquisitions were performed by applying a
simulated heart rate of 60 bpm, the absorbed doses for heart were 215.5, 202.2,
and 66.8 mGy for helical, helical with ECGM, and non-helical acquisitions,
respectively. When the helical acquisitions using ECGM were performed by applying
simulated heart rates of 40, 60, and 90 bpm, the absorbed doses for heart were
178.6, 139.1, and 159.3 mGy, respectively.
CONCLUSION: ECG-triggered non-helical acquisition is recommended to reduce the
radiation dose. Also, controlling the patients' heart rate appropriately during
ECG-gated helical acquisition with ECGM is crucial.

PMID: 21525109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Atherosclerosis. 2011 Jun;216(2):409-13. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.10.050. Epub 2011 Feb 1.

Plasma non-cholesterol sterols in primary hypobetalipoproteinemia.

Noto D(1), Cefalù AB, Barraco G, Fayer F, Minà M, Yue P, Tarugi P, Schonfeld G,
Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Emerging Diseases, University of Palermo, 
Via del Vespro 141, I-90127 Palermo, Italy.

Primary hypobetalipoproteinemia (pHBL) is characterized by plasma cholesterol
levels <5th percentile of a population distribution. Plasma non-cholesterol
sterols (NCS) are markers of cholesterol liver synthesis and intestinal
absorption. Plasma NCS were measured in 111 pHBL subjects, 108 low cholesterol
(LC) and 253 normal cholesterol (NC) controls to gain information on cholesterol 
metabolism in pHBL, and to assess whether NCS measurements may aid in
distinguishing pHBL from LC controls. pHBL subjects compared with LC controls
were characterized by increased cholesterol absorption (campesterol/TC) while the
synthesis (lathosterol/TC) was not increased. The analysis of pHBL subjects
divided by gene defect showed a high campesterol/TC ratio in familial HBL (FHBL) 
carriers of apolipoproteinB (ApoB) truncations longer than ApoB48 and in FHBL
without known gene defect ("not linked"). One not linked kindred was
characterized by an increase of the 7-dehydrocholesterol/latho ratio. In a
discriminant analysis plasma NCS did not improve the power of TC levels to
distinguish FHBL from LC controls. In conclusion, increased cholesterol
absorption was found in FHBL subjects harbouring truncations of ApoB>ApoB48, and 
FHBL harbouring as yet unknown molecular defects. Not linked FHBL kindred are not
homogeneous in terms of plasma NCS levels. NCS cannot replace genetic HBL
analysis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21492858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011 Apr;59(3):186-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1250427. Epub
2011 Apr 8.

Association between gastroesophageal reflux and endobronchial carcinoid: a case
report.

Diamanti A(1), Noto C, Magistrelli A, Perotti G, Panetta F, Diomedi-Camassei F,
Inserra A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatology, Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Bambino Gesù
Pediatric Hospital, Rome, Italy.

Children with neurological disorders may suffer from gastroesophageal reflux
disease (GERD). Typical symptoms are vomiting, regurgitation and hematemesis.
Patients present with respiratory symptoms only in cases with swallowing
disorders causing chronic airway aspiration. We report the case of a patient
affected by chromosome 8 p deletion syndrome with mental retardation, referred to
our unit for suspected GERD. Chest X-ray, performed at admission for coexisting
respiratory complaints, showed left lower lobe pneumonia; esophageal pH
monitoring and upper endoscopy were normal for GERD. To rule out chronic airway
aspiration, gastroesophageal 99 mTc scintigraphy with lung scan 18 to 24 h after 
a test meal and video fluoroscopy swallowing study were performed, both negative.
Two months later, a second episode of left lower lobe pneumonia occurred. A chest
CT scan was performed and showed an endobronchial mass; the biopsy taken during
the broncoscopy was not conclusive. Surgical excision resulted in a diagnosis of 
pulmonary carcinoid. Bronchial carcinoids, although rare, should be taken into
consideration as a potential cause of recurrent pneumonia even in the presence of
demonstrated GERD where severe respiratory infections only occur with coexisting 
chronic pulmonary aspiration, even in neurologically impaired people.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 21480146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2011 May 28;13(20):9327-34. doi: 10.1039/c0cp02316g. Epub
2011 Apr 8.

Effect of SiO2 on the dynamics of proton conducting [Nafion/(SiO2)X] composite
membranes: a solid-state 19F NMR study.

Ghassemzadeh L(1), Pace G, Di Noto V, Müller K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physikalische Chemie, Universität Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 55, 
D-70569, Stuttgart, Germany.

Composite membranes, consisting of Nafion and inorganic oxide additives, are
frequently discussed alternative materials to overcome the known low conductivity
of pure Nafion at temperatures above 100 °C and at low relative humidity. It has 
been reported that under dry conditions, these membranes show enhanced water
uptake and diffusion as compared to filler-free Nafion. This work focuses on the 
polymer mobility in Nafion/SiO(2) composites and on the impact of the silica
particles on the polymer dynamics. [Nafion/(SiO(2))(X)] composite membranes (with
X ranging from 0 to 15 wt%) in the dry and wet states were investigated by
variable temperature solid-state (19)F NMR spectroscopy. (19)F T(1) and T(1<U+03C1>)
relaxation times, and NMR lineshapes (linewidths and spinning sideband
intensities) were analyzed to get information about the polymer mobility. It is
found that Nafion composite membranes, in general, possess a higher mobility as
compared to recast Nafion which is in agreement with previous results from
conductivity studies. These findings are attributed to the ability of the SiO(2) 
particles to keep more water inside the composite membranes which also leads to a
higher mobility of the polymer component. The results are further supported by
the experimental (19)F{(1)H} CP/MAS NMR spectra. It is also shown that the
structure of the composite membranes is more stable after dehydration, and
possible condensation reactions are diminished in these membranes. In addition,
the decrease in ionic exchange capacity after dehydration is less pronounced for 
the composite membranes as compared to filler-free Nafion.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011

PMID: 21479290  [PubMed]


71. Mol Med Rep. 2010 Mar-Apr;3(2):341-5. doi: 10.3892/mmr_00000263.

A novel putative interactor for the low density lipoprotein receptor cytoplasmic 
domain.

Costa S(1), Nicosia A, Ragusa MA, Cefalù AB, Pollaccia D, Noto D, Averna M,
Gianguzza F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Developmental Biology 'A. Monroy', University of
Palermo, I-90128 Palermo, Italy.

Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a genetic disease mainly caused by
mutations in the low density lipoprotein receptor (LDL-R) gene. However, FH-like 
phenotypes may also arise from mutations occurring in other genes, the products
of which normally interact with the LDL receptor. Although several FH-associated 
proteins have been discovered, many FH-like phenotypes cannot be linked to
mutations in already characterized genes, suggesting the existence of other genes
still to be identified, the mutations of which may be directly linked to the FH
disorder. In order to identify new putative LDLr interactors possibly involved in
its internalization and/or sorting, the cytoplasmic tail of the receptor was used
as 'bait' in a two-hybrid assay. We identified an 85-amino acid protein able to
bind the LDLr intracellular domain through the last 14 C-terminal amino acids.
The novel protein is probably derived from the translation of an alternative open
reading frame of the human MT2A gene.

PMID: 21472245  [PubMed]


72. Endocr Pract. 2011 Jul-Aug;17(4):616-28. doi: 10.4158/EP10357.RA.

Significantly increased risk of cancer in patients with diabetes mellitus: a
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Noto H(1), Tsujimoto T, Sasazuki T, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine, National Center for Global
Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To conduct a review and meta-analysis of the effect of diabetes
mellitus on the incidence of and mortality attributable to cancer at any anatomic
site.
METHODS: We performed a search of MEDLINE and the Cochrane Library for pertinent 
articles published from the origin of these databases to July 5, 2010, and
included them in a qualitative review and meta-analysis of the risk of all-cancer
incidence and mortality in patients with diabetes.
RESULTS: Among patients with diabetes (n = 257,222) in 12 cohort studies, the
cancer incidence was about 7%. The cancer mortality was approximately 3% among
patients with diabetes (n = 152,091) in 19 cohort studies. The pooled adjusted
risk ratio (RR) of all-cancer incidence was significantly elevated-RR, 1.10 (95% 
confidence interval [CI], 1.04 to 1.17) overall; RR, 1.14 (CI, 1.06 to 1.23) for 
men; and RR, 1.18 (CI, 1.08 to 1.28) for women. Diabetes was also associated with
an increased RR of mortality across all cancer types-RR, 1.16 (CI, 1.03 to 1.30) 
overall; RR, 1.10 (CI, 0.98 to 1.23) for men; and RR, 1.24 (CI, 1.11 to 1.40) for
women.
CONCLUSION: Cancer prevention and early detection by appropriate screening
methods in patients with diabetes should be important components of clinical
management and investigation, inasmuch as the exponentially increasing prevalence
of diabetes will translate into substantial clinical and public health
consequences on a global scale.

PMID: 21454235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. BMC Public Health. 2011 Mar 31;11:201. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-11-201.

Social factors associated to binge drinking: a cross-sectional survey among
Brazilian students in private high schools.

Sanchez ZM(1), Martins SS, Opaleye ES, Moura YG, Locatelli DP, Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)Brazilian Center of Information on Psychotropic Drugs (CEBRID), Psychobiology 
Department of the Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
zila@psicobio.epm.br

BACKGROUND: Binge drinking (BD) seems to be related to health and social
complications among adolescents. Considering that knowledge about BD in
developing countries is limited and that in Brazil high socioeconomic status is a
risk factor for alcohol abuse, this study sheds light about this phenomenon among
adolescents from a different cultural background than prior North-American and
European studies.
METHODS: Brazilian students (n = 2691) selected through a representative,
stratified and clustered sampling method were asked to answer a self-report
questionnaire. The questionnaire contained questions about patterns of alcohol
consumption, religious beliefs, leisure activities, family structure and
relationships. Data were analyzed with basic contingency tables with Chi-square
tests followed by a decision tree analysis and weighted logistic regression.
RESULTS: Almost thirty-five percent of the students reported recent binge
drinking. BD in the past month was positively associated with older age (aOR =
1.5[1.2-1.7]), male gender (aOR = 1.5[1.2-2.0]) going out with friends almost
every night (aOR = 33.9[14.2-80.7]), not living with mother (aOR = 2.4[1.3-4.7]),
believing in God with little conviction (aOR = 1.6[1.2-2.0]) and rarely talking
to parents about anything (aOR = 1.7[1.3-2.2]) or always about drugs (aOR =
1.8[1.3-2.5]). Factors inversely associated with BD were: paying lower monthly
tuition fees (aOR = 0.5[0.4-0.9]), living with people who do not get drunk (aOR =
0.6[0.4-0.7]) and frequent engagement in worships (aOR = 0.7[0.5-0.9]).
CONCLUSION: The habit of BD in adolescents enrolled in private high schools in
Brazil is strongly linked to the frequency with which they go out with friends at
night. Factors such as religiosity, expressed by trust in God and participation
in worship, and being enrolled in a school with cheaper tuition fees were
associated with avoidance of BD in this population.

PMCID: PMC3080304
PMID: 21453510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Lipid Res. 2011 Jun;52(6):1162-9. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M011155. Epub 2011 Mar 28.

Lipase maturation factor 1 is required for endothelial lipase activity.

Ben-Zeev O(1), Hosseini M, Lai CM, Ehrhardt N, Wong H, Cefalù AB, Noto D, Averna 
MR, Doolittle MH, Péterfy M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Lipase maturation factor 1 (Lmf1) is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane
protein involved in the posttranslational folding and/or assembly of lipoprotein 
lipase (LPL) and hepatic lipase (HL) into active enzymes. Mutations in Lmf1 are
associated with diminished LPL and HL activities ("combined lipase deficiency")
and result in severe hypertriglyceridemia in mice as well as in human subjects.
Here, we investigate whether endothelial lipase (EL) also requires Lmf1 to attain
enzymatic activity. We demonstrate that cells harboring a (cld) loss-of-function 
mutation in the Lmf1 gene are unable to generate active EL, but they regain this 
capacity after reconstitution with the Lmf1 wild type. Furthermore, we show that 
cellular EL copurifies with Lmf1, indicating their physical interaction in the
ER. Finally, we determined that post-heparin phospholipase activity in a patient 
with the LMF1(W464X) mutation is reduced by more than 95% compared with that in
controls. Thus, our study indicates that EL is critically dependent on Lmf1 for
its maturation in the ER and demonstrates that Lmf1 is a required factor for all 
three vascular lipases, LPL, HL, and EL.

PMCID: PMC3090237
PMID: 21447484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Environ Health Prev Med. 2010 Sep;15(5):292-8. doi: 10.1007/s12199-010-0142-5.
Epub 2010 Apr 24.

Association between the incidence of premature rupture of membranes in pregnant
women and seismic intensity of the Noto Peninsula earthquake.

Sekizuka N(1), Sakai A, Aoyama K, Kohama T, Nakahama Y, Fujita S, Hibino Y,
Hitomi Y, Kambayashi Y, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa
University, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, 920-0942, Japan.
sekky@mhs.mp.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVES: The Noto Peninsula earthquake struck the coast of the Noto Peninsula,
Japan on March 25, 2007, resulting in the death of one woman and injury to 356
people. A total of 684 houses were totally destroyed by this earthquake, and more
than 2,500 people were forced to live at shelters. In this study, we have
evaluated the association between the incidence of peripartum abnormalities and
seismic intensity of the Noto Peninsula earthquake.
METHODS: Demographic data, births, seismic intensity of the earthquake and the
incidence of peripartum abnormalities between June 25, 2007 and January 31, 2008 
were surveyed. The dataset included 126 pregnant women who lived in the disaster 
area. The seismic intensity of the earthquake was expressed on the scale (0-7,
with 7 being the strongest measure) used by the Japan Meteorological Agency. The 
subjects of the analysis included 19.7% of the pregnant women affected by the
disaster.
RESULTS: Of the pregnant women included in this study, 7.9% had a premature
rupture of membranes (PROM), with the percentage being significantly higher in
the group that experienced a seismic intensity of 6 than in that experienced a
seismic intensity of 5.
CONCLUSIONS: Our epidemiologic study shows that the PROM among our study cohort
was associated with seismic intensity, suggesting that the physical outcome was
due to aftershocks of the earthquake at a seismic intensity =6. This outcome may 
result from the psychological stress caused by the earthquakes.

PMCID: PMC2921045
PMID: 21432558  [PubMed]


76. G Ital Cardiol (Rome). 2011 Jan;12(1):23-30.

[Distribution and appropriateness of hospital admissions, resource utilization in
the Italian intensive cardiac care units. The BLITZ-3 study].

[Article in Italian]

Visconti LO(1), Scorcu G, Cassin M, Casella G, Chinaglia A, Conte MR, Fradella G,
Lucci D, Maggioni AP, Pirelli S, Chiarella F; Ricercatori del BLITZ-3.

Collaborators: Lucci D, Gonzini L, Visconti LO, Chiarella F, Cassin M, Chinaglia 
A, Pirelli S, Scorcu G, Casella G, Conte MR, Fradella G, Ferrara L, Greco A,
Ciociola G, Genchi C, Scarsi G, Stocco A, Bazzanini F, Moda L, Zarbo G, Ingrao V,
Giordano F, De Cristofaro A, Fonti S, Paruzzo E, Patruno N, Piras P, Rodio G,
Tria E, Aceto G, Schifalacqua AM, Ripa C, Canestrale R, Costantini C, Longo F,
Matera A, Lamanna R, Iorizzo M, Romagnoli D, Leone G, Arvat I, Guida R, Caneschi 
P, Lo Conte C, Li Pizzi G, Perrone C, Tomasi S, Gregori G, Partemi L, Alciati M, 
Porta V, Di Pasquale P, Di Mare M, Mariello C, Di Nardo P, Iodice P, De Bellis I,
Carrozza M, Olivieri A, Nannini M, Mandò R, Ciriello N, Cagnetta R, Zanna D,
Rubini A, Franchini G, Amoruso G, De Gennaro L, Colovitti M, Palella M, Caferra
F, Mascolo AR, Dargenio A, Libardoni M, Zarpellon AM, Palatini O, Rossi A,
Santopietro S, Apicella R, Ciampi Q, Maiale AM, Vassiliki Coutsoumbas G, Fabbri
S, Veritti U, Chinelli N, Savasta C, Borghini E, Marenna B, Fontanel M, Musuraca 
AC, Attanà R, Cemin R, Stanchina A, Bielli M, Sacco G, Bertola B, Marchino E,
Cirillo R, Bove A, Affatato A, Rinaldi M, Ghizzoni G, Conti C, Forgione C, Tosoni
S, Guadalupi M, Tredici S, Macchi M, Onnis E, Melis O, Bonomo P, Sessini P,
Scorcu G, Boi V, Cinnirella C, Nobile G, Amici R, Greco R, Di Marco A, Peggio M, 
Costanza G, Antolini R, Ferrara D, Manzi RC, Mocci W, Patrizi G, Ardente V,
Bassano F, Quattrini L, Piscicelli C, Castoldi F, Greco A, Memmi E, Catanzaro M, 
Chirico S, Colangeli G, Visentin M, Madonna S, Zingone E, Pera I, Gozzi F,
Mariani PR, Turriani A, Cascio Ingurgio N, Bonafede M, Manes E, Mitidieri M,
Bellanuova IA, Agricola P, Romeo C, La Rosa A, Branca B, Licciardello G, Florio
C, Palazzo G, Calvo D, Scotti E, Condito AM, Venturini E, Signorini F, Lo lacono 
S, Manna G, Alboni P, Balboni D, Giordano WS, Castro M, Tisselli A, Baschetti S, 
Ibello L, D'Andrea C, Rodella P, Mazzoldi G, De Cesare M, Toto E, Cirino D,
Grassi C, Severini D, De Ritis D, Rossi M, Zanarella P, Baldoni M, Friscolanti D,
Leo Usai T, Gasbarri C, Guasconi C, Pisaroni G, Mennuni M, Cacciotti C, Acquati
F, Lucini M, Turiano G, Tonon M, Greco EL, Caldararo M, Misuraca G, Corrado M, De
Vuono T, Statzu P, Tovena D, Franzoni S, Boldini A, Mariani M, Giordano L,
Montaruli B, Morena L, Garnerone M, De Cristan B, Ceresara D, Avanzini F, Cotza
R, Mazzuero A, De Felice M, Vicinanza E, Rizzo R, Nieri M, Checcucci R, Battaglia
C, Cagliari G, Agnelli D, Urso A, Abrignani MG, Sorrentino A, Targa L, Scabello
T, Merli E, Prudente R, Romano S, Gobbis D, Ciliberti D, Monterubbianesi L, Buia 
E, Binini S, Battelli P, Litta L, Valente S, Navari L, Valoti P, Cavicchi S,
Liberati R, Tartaglia D, Caravita L, Bacchilega E, Treglia A, Italo G, Giaccari
R, Legrottaglie AM, Podimani N, Crotti F, Cavalieri F, Papa A, Di Domenico E,
Saleri B, Spadaro C, Vella G, Secchi GL, Farina R, Toselli A, Manco T, Giuliano
G, Noto ME, Lonati A, Canu S, De Rosa P, Zammartino L, Strangi T, Di Sante MG,
Mattei L, Narduzzi C, Gestra R, Barini S, Guerrini F, Draoli N, Regni O,
Ghiandoni N, Mazza V, De Filippis A, Musso P, Grosso R, Rizzo M, Pasquinelli M,
Pileggi V, Cristiano A, Scimia A, Di Domenico P, De Lisi A, De Luca R, De Giorgi 
A, Coia I, Achilli F, Colli F, Barbiero M, Guardalben S, Poletti F, Lorenzano E, 
Arcidiacono S, D'Anna A, Comella A, Marchetti R, Galli M, Croce L, Rossi M,
Franco A, Marangoni E, Ferrari A, Boni A, Gianni P, Gobbi M, Bacchilega F,
Morgagni GL, Carpineti G, Bardelli G, Monfredini M, Pierri F, Di Mitri G, Masa A,
Spagnoli J, Izzo A, Ciulla A, Panzarella A, Molendi V, Grassi C, Magnante A,
Galtieri A, Di Giovanni P, Puccio M, Erckert M, Azzouzi D, De Fazio G, Gallucci
F, Paleologo G, Barbaro F, Giannetto M, Calatozzo D, Cutolo A, Vianello M,
Mafrici A, Viola V, Negrini M, Camozzi B, Capozi A, Ornago M, Terranova P,
Girardi F, Sala R, Mura M, Annoni L, Grignani M, Coppolino C, Costa A, Sternieri 
S, Malaguti F, Pasquetto G, Carraro C, Tosoni G, Sorrentino S, Fantini G,
Bardelli C, Parenzan T, Ancalepore T, Bruna C, Rossi T, Perazza L, Micheluzzi G, 
Mannarini A, Fiume C, Crosato M, Sartor F, Catellani E, Cocconi A, Taddei T,
Donati S, Bozzano A, Pirovano M, Mortara A, Castaneda C, Elia LR, Sparano E,
Irace L, Sanfilippo M, Cudemo G, Micillo C, Siciliano S, Zingarini M, Golia B,
Ricci V, Tammaro P, Pardo N, Di Mario F, Marsili D, Romano C, Esposito F, Picardi
G, Stampati E, Bacchini S, Sanna F, Agosti S, Gemme O, Secci T, Rubanu I,
Orecchioni G, Silecchia T, Bianchi V, Duca L, Safari D, Beatrici B, Pozzi R,
Cappello S, Caddeo A, Bonu G, Baragli D, Gentile T, Perazzolo Marra M, Brugnaro
L, Smecca IM, Cannova C, Celona G, Di Salvo G, Ajello A, Calabrese L, Cicero S,
Cavalieri A, Guarneri A, Pellitteri G, Falletta C, Navanzino F, Crivaro A,
Pantanella M, Sartorio D, Marletta G, Rancati V, Lombardi F, Bottaro G, Fazzio O,
Del Pinto M, Ponziani R, Tarsi G, Donninelli C, Di Clemente D, Cornacchione N,
Civitarese G, Cicalò RA, Rossini D, Grassi C, Ferraro S, Oronte L, De Risi L,
Vetere A, Rossi F, Aicardi S, Pasqualini MF, Marcomin C, Sappè D, Isidori S,
Agostini V, Lattanzi F, Saviozzi G, Coceani M, Corelli L, Chiti M, Parenti K,
Romei M, Francardi R, Truncellito L, Graziano V, Meduri G, Guerrisi G, La Creta
C, Petrillo N, Nardiello V, Montella A, Ricci D, Pipia T, Leonardi T, Casati AG, 
Viani SM, Caruso M, Rellini G, Spicca A, Murena E, Tortorella S, Tedeschi D,
Agostini D, Guarrella ML, Battaglia G, Scollo V, Cavalieri L, Parollo R, Babini
E, Tortorella G, Battitori A, Vittori G, Bottini M, Marchese I, Simeoni S,
Belletti G, Lombardi D, Bongioanni S, De Luca E, Oppo I, Buono NC, Fera MS, Fiori
F, Finocchiaro ML, Pierini S, Burattini M, Fabrizi S, Lo Bianco F, Zecca R,
Tubaro M, Chisari P, Tozzi Q, Gervasio G, Liuzzo G, Mattu L, Vitucci NC,
Caldironi S, Delle Grotti PL, Tatullo A, Martina C, Gasbarro V, Scioli R,
Piccininno V, Federici A, Fortunato A, Trambaiolo P, Esposito D, Melfi R, Autore 
C, Gargiulo A, Salituri S, Petrone F, Vaccarini C, Carraro M, Zaninati M, Barbaro
C, Gabriele G, Naddeo C, lannaccone O, Floris F, Di Teodoro D, Giovinazzo P,
Barro S, Villella M, Tartaglione S, Mileto F, Fattore L, Valentini G, Matarazzo
MM, Propato F, Palumbo B, Zanchi P, Meloni S, Legnani M, Pes R, Pensè G, Melandri
F, Francesconi A, Coppolino A, Morra G, Aykut V, Mottolo D, Villani P, Longobardi
G, Sanzone G, Lentini S, De laco MR, Castelluzzo A, Falchetti E, Piersanti D,
Costalunga A, Terzi A, Santoro R, Montiglio C, Barbieri L, Anduena M, Maffei S,
Vinci E, De Luca D, Pontiggia G, Poli C, Fontana D, Caiazzo A, Sisani S, Cilento 
A, Di lorio G, Mascio E, Russo NR, Lamperti C, Morrone V, Matichecchia F,
Pascente T, Serio MR, John N, Nicolardi A, Lalla Piccioni L, Cecchini E, Cuonzo
M, Ficco A, Colonna N, Staniscia C, De Bonis P, Cattin Cosso I, Callegarin L,
Marcante S, Amati R, De Flavis A, Usmiani T, Tarantino E, Bergerone S, Ferraro A,
Gandolfo N, Bordino C, Ferro S, Saraceno A, Nejrotti A, Gagliardi S, Noussan P,
Labriola M, Guastaferro C, Orazzo P, Mutti EM, Cogotti E, Gianni M, Savoia L,
Spadaro R, lori R, Centonze F, Nichetti W, Totis O, Sallemi P, Accogli M, Micello
L, Milo M, Pintarelli M, Fresco C, Fonseca T, Bersigotti G, Ceccarini C, Aloia A,
Gallo G, Limido A, Marchesi P, Prisco GD, Sommacal R, Gubelli S, Mastrangelo V,
Mazzuero A, Scorpiniti S, Proietti R, Curacanova M, Morando G, Signorini M, Teti 
G, Moscato S, Spanghero M, Zuccon S, Villani R, Argese I, Bassani F, Bonomi G,
Sommariva L, Faina C, Osti R, Barone D, Maffei M.

Comment in
    G Ital Cardiol (Rome). 2011 Jan;12(1):47-9.
    G Ital Cardiol (Rome). 2011 Jan;12(1):43-4.
    G Ital Cardiol (Rome). 2011 Jan;12(1):45-6.

BACKGROUND: The BLITZ-3 study prospectively evaluated the epidemiology of
hospital admissions, the patterns of care and the most important comorbidities in
intensive cardiac care unit (ICCU) patients.
METHODS: Distribution and level of appropriateness of hospital admissions in
relation to type of ICCU were analyzed (type A, 32%, without cardiac cath lab or 
cardiac surgery; type B, 49%, with cath lab; type C, 19%, with both cath lab and 
cardiac surgery). The caseload was estimated on the basis of different levels of 
mortality risk during the ICCU stay: high (>5.1%), intermediate (0.7-5.1%), low
(< or = 0.7%).
RESULTS: A total of 6986 consecutive patients admitted to 332 ICCUs were
enrolled. A median number of 19 patients (interquartile range 15-26) was admitted
to each center during the 14 days of enrollment; 28% of the ICCUs admitted more
than 25 patients, 48% between 15 and 25, and 24% less than 15. A higher number of
type A ICCUs admitted less than 15 patients (p<0.0001), whereas a higher number
of type C ICCUs admitted more than 25 patients (p<0.0001). Hospital admissions
for ST-elevation myocardial infarction occurred more frequently in type B or C
ICCUs (p<0.0001), whereas hospital admission for heart failure mostly occurred in
type A ICCUs (p<0.0001). The number of patients not undergoing reperfusion
(p<0.0001) or treated with thrombolytic therapy (p<0.0001) was higher in the type
A ICCUs. Coronary revascularization with primary percutaneous coronary
intervention was performed more frequently in type B and C ICCUs (p<0.0001).
Similarly, patients hospitalized for acute coronary syndrome underwent coronary
angiography (p<0.0001) and percutaneous coronary intervention more frequently in 
type B and C ICCUs (p<0.0001). Prevalence of low-risk rather than intermediate-
or high-risk patients was higher in type A ICCUs (p<0.05), and prevalence of
high- or intermediate-risk patients was higher in type C ICCUs (p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the BLITZ-3 study should lead the Italian
cardiological community to reflect upon the needed number of ICCUs, the role of
Spoke centers for their integration in the interhospital network, and
inappropriate hospital admissions for low-risk conditions.

PMID: 21428024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Nihon Hansenbyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2011 Feb;80(1):59-70.

[Diagnosis of Hansen's disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Yotsu RR(1), Suzuki K, Mori S, Ishii N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, National Center for Global Health and Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

The Leprosy Mailing List (LML) is an e-mailing list open to whoever interested in
the field from all over the world. It acts as a forum for exchanging information 
related to Hansen's disease. It was established in February 2001 in Italy, and
the present moderator of the LML is Dr. Salvatore Noto. He and his colleague have
recently introduced an atlas for diagnosing Hansen's disease which they brought
together information and photos collected through the LML. The atlas is divided
into three sections, (1) Introduction, (2) Cardinal signs, and (3) Diagnosis and 
the clinical spectrum of leprosy, and they are all accompanied with relevant
photos. This time, Dr. Noto kindly permitted us to translate the atlas into
Japanese to be published in the Japanese Journal of Leprosy and posted in the
Japanese Leprosy Association homepage. This article includes the translation and 
some of the most informative photos. For more information, please refer to the
homepage where you will find all photos in the atlas.

PMID: 21404597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2011 Feb;52(2):87-9.

[Significance of bortezomib and dexamethasone therapy for multiple myeloma
showing a serum creatinine level above 2 mg/dl].

[Article in Japanese]

Sekiguchi N(1), Takezako N, Haga M, Nagata A, Noto S, Miwa A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, National Hospital Organization Disaster Medical
Center.

Here, we retrospectively assessed the reversibility of renal impairment and
anti-myeloma effect of bortezomib and dexamethasone (BD therapy) for Japanese
patients with multiple myeloma showing a serum creatinine level above 2 mg/dl.
Improvement of renal impairment was observed in 6 of 7 patients following a
median of 2.4 cycles of BD therapy. Three of 7 patients achieved more than
partial response by BD therapy. The present study demonstrated that BD therapy
was highly effective for the treatment of Japanese myeloma patients with renal
impairment.

PMID: 21403430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2011 May-Jun;8(3):851-7. doi:
10.1109/TCBB.2009.83.

Identifying relevant data for a biological database: handcrafted rules versus
machine learning.

Sehgal AK(1), Das S, Noto K, Saier MH Jr, Elkan C.

Author information: 
(1)Core Technologies Group, Parity Computing, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.
a.sehgal@paritycomputing.com

With well over 1,000 specialized biological databases in use today, the task of
automatically identifying novel, relevant data for such databases is increasingly
important. In this paper, we describe practical machine learning approaches for
identifying MEDLINE documents and Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL protein records, for
incorporation into a specialized biological database of transport proteins named 
TCDB. We show that both learning approaches outperform rules created by hand by a
human expert. As one of the first case studies involving two different approaches
to updating a deployed database, both the methods compared and the results will
be of interest to curators of many specialized databases.

PMCID: PMC3980937
PMID: 21393656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Nat Prod. 2011 Apr 25;74(4):866-70. doi: 10.1021/np100783k. Epub 2011 Mar 7.

Cytotoxic and apoptosis-inducing activities of limonoids from the seeds of
Azadirachta indica (neem).

Kikuchi T(1), Ishii K, Noto T, Takahashi A, Tabata K, Suzuki T, Akihisa T.

Author information: 
(1)College of Science and Technology, Nihon University, 1-8-14 Kanda Surugadai,
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8308, Japan.

Thirty-five limonoids, including 15 of the azadiradione type (1-15), five of the 
gedunin type (16-20), four of the azadirachtin type (21-24), nine of the nimbin
type (25-33), and two degraded limonoids (34, 35), isolated from Azadirachta
indica seed extracts, were evaluated for their cytotoxic activities against five 
human cancer cell lines. Seven compounds (3, 6, 7, 16, 18, 28, and 29) exhibited 
cytotoxic activity against one or more cell lines. Among these compounds,
7-deacetyl-7-benzoylepoxyazadiradione (7), 7-deacetyl-7-benzoylgeduin (18), and
28-deoxonimbolide (28) exhibited potent cytotoxic activity against HL60 leukemia 
cells with IC(50) values in the range 2.7-3.1 µM. Compounds 7, 18, and 28 induced
early apoptosis in HL60 cells, observed by flow cytometry. Western blot analysis 
showed that compounds 7, 18, and 28 activated caspases-3, -8, and -9 in HL60
cells. This suggested that compounds 7, 18, and 28 induced apoptotic cell death
in HL60 cells via both the mitochondrial- and the death receptor-mediated
pathways. Futhermore, compound 7 was shown to possess high selective cytotoxicity
for leukemia cells since it exhibited only weak cytotoxicity against a normal
lymphocyte cell line (RPMI 1788).

PMID: 21381696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Org Lett. 2011 Apr 1;13(7):1820-3. doi: 10.1021/ol200333p. Epub 2011 Mar 3.

Biosynthesis-inspired intramolecular oxa-conjugate cyclization of a,ß-unsaturated
thioesters: stereoselective synthesis of 2,6-cis-substituted tetrahydropyrans.

Fuwa H(1), Noto K, Sasaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-ku, 
Sendai 980-8577, Japan.

Intramolecular oxa-conjugate cyclization of a,ß-unsaturated thioesters under
Brønsted acid catalysis, inspired by biosynthesis of polyketide natural products,
provides a variety of 2,6-cis-substituted tetrahydropyran derivatives with
excellent diastereoselectivities. An added bonus of this methodology is that the 
product tetrahydropyrans could be readily elaborated to various derivatives by
exploiting the unique reactivity of the thioester group.

PMID: 21370871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Nov;20(11):1817-27. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0042. Epub 2011
Apr 6.

Isolation and characterization of node/notochord-like cells from mouse embryonic 
stem cells.

Winzi MK(1), Hyttel P, Dale JK, Serup P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte,
Denmark.

The homeobox gene Noto is expressed in the node and its derivative the notochord.
Here we use a targeted Noto-GFP reporter to isolate and characterize
node/notochord-like cells derived from mouse embryonic stem cells. We find very
few Noto-expressing cells after spontaneous differentiation. However, the number 
of Noto-expressing cells was increased when using Activin A to induce a Foxa2-
and Brachyury-expressing progenitor population, whose further differentiation
into Noto-expressing cells was improved by simultaneous inhibition of BMP, Wnt,
and retinoic acid signaling. Noto-GFP(+) cells expressed the node/notochord
markers Noto, Foxa2, Shh, Noggin, Chordin, Foxj1, and Brachyury; showed a
vacuolarization characteristic of notochord cells; and can integrate into midline
structures when grafted into Hensen's node of gastrulating chicken embryos. The
ability to generate node/notochord-like cells in vitro will aid the biochemical
characterization of these developmentally important structures.

PMCID: PMC3928718
PMID: 21351873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Int J Urol. 2011 May;18(5):365-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1442-2042.2011.02732.x. Epub
2011 Feb 20.

Propiverine hydrochloride in Japanese patients with overactive bladder: a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.

Gotoh M(1), Yokoyama O, Nishizawa O; Japanese Propiverine Study Group.

Collaborators: Aarai A, Aikawa H, Arai T, Goto R, Hayami H, Hayashi M, Hisataki
T, Ikegami M, Imai T, Ishigooka N, Ishii Y, Ishikawa J, Ito K, Iwata S, Kageyama 
S, Kamijo T, Kato K, Kawahara K, Kobayashi S, Kojima M, Kondo I, Kuwamitsu O, Lee
Z, Mamiya Y, Matsumura K, Mokuo Y, Moriguchi R, Nakada J, Nakagawa S, Nakano T,
Namima T, Nanri M, Narita H, Natsume H, Noto H, Okishio N, Oonuma T, Otani N,
Ozaki Y, Saito N, Sakamoto S, Sato T, Sekiguchi Y, Senju M, Shigeta M, Takada M, 
Takei M, Takeuchi H, Torii S, Tsujimoto Y, Tsujino S, Ueda M, Yamaguchi T, Yasuda
K, Yokoyama E, Yoshida M, Yoshida T, Yoshida M, Yuge F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, 
Aichi, Japan. gotoh@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Comment in
    Int J Urol. 2011 May;18(5):374.
    Int J Urol. 2011 May;18(5):373-4.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to investigate the efficacy and safety of
propiverine for overactive bladder (OAB) in Japanese patients.
METHODS: In this multicentre, randomized, double-blind study, patients = 20 years
old with symptoms of OAB for = 12 weeks were allocated to either propiverine (20 
mg once daily) or placebo for 12 weeks. Efficacy and quality of life were
assessed using a 7-day bladder diary, the OAB symptom score, and King's Health
Questionnaire. Safety was mainly assessed by adverse events and the QTc interval.
RESULTS: A total of 567 patients were allocated. Change in number of
micturitions/24 h was significantly greater in the propiverine group than in the 
placebo group (-1.86 vs-1.36, P = 0.001). Compared to placebo, propiverine
produced significant improvements in urgency, urgency incontinence, urine
volume/micturition, and the OAB symptom score. Significant improvements in
urgency, urgency incontinence, and micturition frequency were observed at the
first 4 weeks of treatment. All nine domains of King's Health Questionnaire were 
improved more with propiverine than with placebo. Adverse effects with
propiverine were mostly mild, and no patient developed QTc interval prolongation 
exceeding 500 ms.
CONCLUSION: Propiverine is effective for Japanese OAB patients by improving their
symptoms and quality of life with a predictable side-effect profile.

© 2011 The Japanese Urological Association.

PMID: 21332825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2011 Apr;24(4):438-43. doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2010.12.026.
Epub 2011 Feb 15.

Changes in the textural characteristics of intima-media complex in young patients
with familial hypercholesterolemia: implication for visual inspection on B-mode
ultrasound.

Noto N(1), Okada T, Abe Y, Miyashita M, Kanamaru H, Karasawa K, Ayusawa M,
Sumitomo N, Mugishima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
info@noto-clinic.com

BACKGROUND: To test the hypothesis that textural changes in the carotid
intima-media complex (IMC) on visual inspection by B-mode ultrasound are
associated with early atherosclerotic involvement in patients with heterozygous
familial hypercholesterolemia (FH).
METHODS: 55 patients (mean age 13.4 years) were categorized into three groups
according to the degree of thickness in IMC (intima-media thickness [IMT])
(groups I-III) and 15 healthy controls within the same age range as the patients 
were assessed for first- and second-order statistics and visual scoring of
textural changes in IMC (1, normal; 2, proximal interface disruption; 3,
granulation).
RESULTS: There was no significant difference in first-order statistics among the 
four groups. As for second-order statistics, groups II (moderately increased IMT)
and III (markedly increased IMT) had significantly higher entropy and lower
angular second moment than group I (normal IMT) and control. Likewise, groups II 
and III received significantly higher visual scoring than group I. Visual scoring
correlated with entropy (r = 0.57) and angular second moment (r = -0.50).
Multiple regression analysis identified entropy (beta = 0.52) and visual scoring 
(beta = 0.42) as significant determinants of IMT.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that higher visual scoring may indicate
dishomogeneity of IMC, suggesting early medial infiltration. This seems to be a
simple visual marker to more effectively identify high-risk young patients with
FH.

Copyright © 2011 American Society of Echocardiography. Published by Mosby, Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 21324643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Occup Environ Med. 2011 Nov;68(11):799-805. doi: 10.1136/oem.2010.057729. Epub
2011 Feb 5.

A cross-shift study of lung function, exhaled nitric oxide and inflammatory
markers in blood in Norwegian cement production workers.

Fell AK(1), Notø H, Skogstad M, Nordby KC, Eduard W, Svendsen MV, Ovstebø R,
Trøseid AM, Kongerud J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Telemark Hospital,
N-3710 Skien, Norway. anne-kristin.fell@sthf.no

OBJECTIVES: To study possible effects of aerosol exposure on lung function,
fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) and inflammatory markers in blood from
Norwegian cement production workers across one work shift (0 to 8 h) and again 32
h after the non-exposed baseline registration.
METHODS: 95 workers from two cement plants in Norway were included. Assessment of
lung function included spirometry and gas diffusion pre- and post-shift (0 and 8 
h). FeNO concentrations were measured and blood samples collected at 0, 8 and 32 
h. Blood analysis included cell counts of leucocytes and mediators of
inflammation.
RESULTS: The median respirable aerosol level was 0.3 mg/m(3) (range 0.02-6.2
mg/m(3)). FEV(1), FEF(25-75%) and DL(CO) decreased by 37 ml (p=0.04), 170 ml/s
(p<0.001) and 0.17 mmol/min/kPa (p=0.02), respectively, across the shift. A 2 ppm
reduction in FeNO between 0 and 32 h was detected (p=0.01). The number of
leucocytes increased by 0.6×10(9) cells/l (p<0.001) across the shift, while
fibrinogen levels increased by 0.02 g/l (p<0.001) from 0 to 32 h. TNF-a level
increased and IL-10 decreased across the shift. Baseline levels of fibrinogen
were associated with the highest level of respirable dust, and increased by 0.39 
g/l (95% CI 0.06 to 0.72).
CONCLUSIONS: We observed small cross-shift changes in lung function and
inflammatory markers among cement production workers, indicating that
inflammatory effects may occur at exposure levels well below 1 mg/m(3). However, 
because the associations between these acute changes and personal exposure
measurements were weak and as the long-term consequences are unknown, these
findings should be tested in a follow-up study.

PMCID: PMC3191466
PMID: 21297153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. BMC Infect Dis. 2011 Jan 25;11:23. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-11-23.

Long-term CD4+ T-cell count evolution after switching from regimens including HIV
nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI) plus protease inhibitors to
regimens containing NRTI plus non-NRTI or only NRTI.

Torti C(1), d'Arminio-Monforte A, Pozniak AL, Lapadula G, Cologni G, Antinori A, 
De Luca A, Mussini C, Castagna A, Cicconi P, Minoli L, Costantini A, Carosi G,
Liang H, Cesana BM; MASTER, Chelsea & Westminster, ICONA, Modena and S. Raffaele 
HIV Cohorts.

Collaborators: Carosi G, Puoti M, Torti C, Quiros-Roldan E, Paraninfo G, Casari
S, Pastore G, Ladisa N, Suter F, Maggiolo F, Quirino T, Migliorino M, Ghinelli F,
Sighinolfi L, Mazzotta F, Lo Caputo S, Marino N, Angarano A, Saracino A,
D'Arminio Monforte A, Cicconi P, Minoli L, Maserati R, Novati S, Tinelli C,
Antinori A, Antonucci G, Ammassari A, Cauda R, De Luca A, Montroni M, Scalise G, 
Braschi MC, Riva A, Tirelli U, Martellotta F, Pastore G, Ladisa N, Minafra G,
Suter F, Arici C, Chiodo F, Colangeli V, Fiorini C, Coronado O, Carosi G,
Cristini G, Torti C, Minardi C, Bertelli D, Quirino T, Melzi S, Manconi PE, Piano
P, Cosco L, Scerbo A, Pizzigallo E, D'Alessandro M, Santoro D, Pusterla L,
Carnevale G, Zoncada A, Viganò P, Mena M, Ghinelli F, Sighinolfi L, Leoncini F,
Mazzotta F, Pozzi M, Lo Caputo S, Angarano G, Grisorio B, Saracino A, Ferrara S, 
Grima P, Tundo P, Pagano G, Cassola G, Alessandrini A, Piscopo R, Toti M, Trezzi 
M, Soscia F, Tacconi L, Orani A, Perini P, Scasso A, Vincenti A, Chiodera F,
Castelli P, Scalzini A, Palvarini L, Moroni M, Lazzarin A, Rizzardini G, Caggese 
L, d'Arminio Monforte A, Repetto D, Galli A, Merli S, Pastecchia C, Moioli MC,
Esposito R, Mussini C, Abrescia N, Chirianni A, Izzo CM, Piazza M, De Marco M,
Viglietti R, Manzillo E, Nappa S, Colomba A, Abbadessa V, Prestileo T, Mancuso S,
Ferrari C, Pizzaferri P, Filice G, Minoli L, Bruno R, Novati S, Baldelli F,
Camanni G, Petrelli E, Cioppi A, Alberici F, Ruggieri A, Menichetti F, Martinelli
C, De Stefano C, La Gala A, Ballardini G, Rizzo E, Magnani G, Ursitti MA, Arlotti
M, Ortolani P, Cauda R, Dianzani F, Ippolito G, Antinori A, Antonucci G, Ciardi
M, Narciso P, Petrosillo N, Vullo V, De Luca A, Ammassari A, Zaccarelli M,
Acinapura R, De Longis P, Murri R, Trotta MP, Noto P, Lichtner M, Capobianchi MR,
Carletti F, Perno CF, Girardi E, Pezzotti P, Rezza G, Mura MS, Mannazzu M,
Caramello P, Di Perri G, Orofino GC, Sciandra M, Grossi PA, Basilico C, Poggio A,
Bottari G, Raise E, Ebo F, Pellizzer G, Buonfrate D, Resta F, Loso K, Cozzi Lepri
A, Esposito R, Borghi V, Lazzarin A, Galli L, Sampietro S, Mandalia S, Gazzard B.

BACKGROUND: Data regarding CD4+ recovery after switching from protease inhibitor 
(PI)-based regimens to regimens not containing PI are scarce.
METHODS: Subjects with virological success on first-PI-regimens who switched to
NNRTI therapy (NNRTI group) or to nucleoside reverse transcriptase (NRTI)-only
(NRTI group) were studied. The effect of the switch on the ongoing CD4+ trend was
assessed by two-phase linear regression (TPLR), allowing us to evaluate whether a
change in the CD4+ trend (hinge) occurred and the time of its occurrence.
Furthermore, we described the evolution of the frequencies in CD4-count classes
across four relevant time-points (baseline, before and immediately after the
switch, and last visit). Finally, we explored whether the CD4+ counts evolved
differently in patients who switched to NNRTI or NRTI-only regimens by
considering: the overall CD4+ trends, the time to CD4+= 500/mm3 after the switch,
and the area-under-the-curve (AUC) of the CD4+ after the switch.
RESULTS: Eight hundred and ninety-six patients, followed for a median of 2,121
days, were included. At TPLR, hinges occurred in 581/844 (68.9%), but in only
40/581 (6.9%) within a time interval (180 days) compatible with a possible
relationship to the switch; furthermore, in 19/40 cases, CD4+ counts appeared to 
decrease after the hinges. In comparison with the NNRTI group, the NRTI group
showed CD4+ count greater at baseline (P = 0.0234) and before the switch (P =
0.0001), superior CD4+ T-cell increases after HAART was started, lower
probability of not achieving CD4+ = 500/mm3 (P = 0.0024), and, finally, no
significant differences in the CD4+ T-cell AUC after the switch after adjusting
for possible confounders (propensity score and pre-switch AUC). Persistence at
CD4+ < 200/mm3 was observed in 34/435 (7.5%) patients, and a decrease below this 
level was found in only 10/259 (3.9%) with baseline CD4+ = 350/mm3.
CONCLUSIONS: Switching from first-line PI to NNRTI- or NRTI-based regimens did
not seem to impair CD4+ trend over long-term follow-up. Although the greater CD4+
increases in patients who switched to the NRTI-only regimen was due to higher
CD4+ counts before the switch, several statistical analyses consistently showed
that switching to this regimen did not damage the ongoing immune-reconstitution. 
Lastly, the observation that CD4+ T-cell counts remained low or decreased in the 
long term despite virological success merits further investigation.

PMCID: PMC3038912
PMID: 21266068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Neurol Sci. 2011 Mar 15;302(1-2):58-62. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2010.11.025. Epub
2010 Dec 31.

Distal motor axonal dysfunction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Noto Y(1), Kanai K, Misawa S, Shibuya K, Isose S, Nasu S, Sekiguchi Y, Fujimaki
Y, Nakagawa M, Kuwabara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba,
Japan. y-noto@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

Nerve conduction slowing in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is usually caused
by loss of fast motor axons. We studied the frequency, extent, and distribution
of prominently prolonged distal motor latencies in ALS. We reviewed results of
median, ulnar, and tibial nerve conduction studies in 91 patients with ALS, 24
with lower motor neuron disorders, and 36 with axonal neuropathy. Coincidental
carpal tunnel syndrome was found for 4 (4.4%) of the ALS patients who were
excluded from analyses. Markedly prolonged distal latencies (>125% of the upper
limit of normal) were found only in the median nerve of ALS patients (9%), and in
none of the disease controls. Excitability studies suggested membrane
depolarization in some ALS patients. Our results show that approximately 10% of
ALS patients shows prominently prolonged median distal latency, which cannot be
explained by axonal loss and carpal tunnel lesion. The distal nerve conduction
slowing may partly be caused by membrane depolarization possibly due to motor
neuronal degeneration in ALS. We suggest that recognition of the pattern of
distal motor axonal dysfunction predominant in the median nerve is clinically
important, and could provide additional insights into the pathophysiology of ALS.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21195434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2012 Jan 3;1:21. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2011.00021.
eCollection 2011.

The role of microRNAs in Helicobacter pylori pathogenesis and gastric
carcinogenesis.

Noto JM(1), Peek RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA. jennifer.noto@vanderbilt.edu

Gastric carcinogenesis is a multistep process orchestrated by aberrancies in the 
genetic and epigenetic regulation of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes.
Chronic infection with Helicobacter pylori is the strongest known risk factor for
the development of gastric cancer. H. pylori expresses a spectrum of virulence
factors that dysregulate host intracellular signaling pathways that lower the
threshold for neoplastic transformation. In addition to bacterial determinants,
numerous host and environmental factors increase the risk of gastric
carcinogenesis. Recent discoveries have shed new light on the involvement of
microRNAs (miRNAs) in gastric carcinogenesis. miRNAs represent an abundant class 
of small, non-coding RNAs involved in global post-transcriptional regulation and,
consequently, play an integral role at multiple steps in carcinogenesis,
including cell cycle progression, proliferation, apoptosis, invasion, and
metastasis. Expression levels of miRNAs are frequently altered in malignancies,
where they function as either oncogenic miRNAs or tumor suppressor miRNAs. This
review focuses on miRNAs dysregulated by H. pylori and potential etiologic roles 
they play in H. pylori-mediated gastric carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3417373
PMID: 22919587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Cytometry A. 2011 Jan;79(1):14-24. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.20989.

Polychromatic flow cytometry analysis of CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells in
cryopreserved early preterm human cord blood samples.

D'Alessio F(1), Mirabelli P, Gorrese M, Scalia G, Gemei M, Mariotti E, Di Noto R,
Martinelli P, Fortunato G, Paladini D, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy.

During the last decades, extended characterizations were performed of human
full-term cord blood (hTCB) cells, but little information is available on human
early preterm cord blood (hEPCB) hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). In our study,
we analyzed by flow cytometry 19 hEPCB and 17 hTCB samples. First, we observed
that the percentage of CD34(Pos)CD45(Dim) cells was higher in hEPCB compared with
hTCB and that it decreased during 16th-20th week of pregnancy. Within the
CD34(Pos)CD45(Dim) population, we examined the expression of CD29, CD31, CD38,
CD90, CD117, CD133, CD135, CD200, CD243, and CD338. We found that CD135 intensity
and CD243(Pos) cells percentage were lower in hEPCB compared with hTCB. As to
CD38, we observed that hEPCB samples were richer in undifferentiated
CD34(Pos)CD45(Dim)CD38(Neg) HSCs compared with hTCB counterparts. We also
compared the expression of the above-mentioned molecules in undifferentiated and 
committed HSCs residing in hEPCB and hTCB. In particular, although
CD34(Pos)CD45(Dim)CD38(Pos) HSCs from both hEPCB and hTCB expressed relatively
higher amounts of CD29, CD71, and CD135 compared with CD34(Pos)CD45(Dim)CD38(Neg)
cells, a higher expression of CD31 was restricted to CD34(Pos)CD45(Dim)CD38(Pos) 
cells from hEPCB samples, and a higher expression of CD117 was demonstrated in
CD34(Pos)CD45(Dim)CD38(Pos) cells from hTCB samples. Moreover, our data showed
that CD34(Pos)CD45(Dim) cell population from hEPCB displayed higher percent of
undifferentiated CD38(Neg)CD133(Pos) cells compared with hTCB samples. Finally,
analyzing monocytes and lymphocytes within the two samples, we observed that
T-cell percentages were higher in hTCB, whereas B-cell percentages were higher in
hEPCB. We, therefore, studied the B-cell lineage maturation and found a higher
percent of pro-B and pre-B cells in hEPCB compared with hTCB samples. Taken
together, these results evidence the hematopoietic peculiarity of hEPCB,
potentially useful for highlighting early steps of human hematolymphopoiesis as
well as for developing novel strategies of stem cell-based therapy.

PMID: 21182179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Surg Oncol. 2010 Dec 15;102(8):909-13. doi: 10.1002/jso.21656.

Optimum imaging of colorectal metastases.

Grand DJ(1), Beland M, Noto RB, Mayo-Smith W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Warren Alpert School of Medicine, Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island 02903, USA. dgrand@lifespan.org

Dramatic improvements in diagnostic imaging have developed with and enabled
increasingly sophisticated treatments for metastatic colorectal cancer. Advances 
in therapeutic techniques, such as surgical resection and percutaneous therapies,
demand that diagnostic imaging provide an accurate assessment of disease burden
as well as precise localization. In this article, we present the current
state-of-the-art of diagnostic imaging for evaluation of metastatic colorectal
cancer.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21165992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Hepatol. 2011 Jun;54(6):1102-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.09.024. Epub 2011 Feb 
2.

High HIV prevalence in male patients with acute hepatitis A in the Rome
metropolitan area, Italy 2002-2008.

Girardi E(1), Scognamiglio P, Sciarrone MR, Loffredo M, Gnesivo C, Noto P,
Antonucci G, Capobianchi MR, Ippolito G; GEAS GROUP.

Collaborators: Antinori A, Corpolongo A, Ghirga P, Grisetti S, La Scala P,
Narciso P, Nurra G, Petrosillo N, Rianda A, Casalanguida A, Ciufoli A, Cimaglia
C, Navarra A.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Infectious Diseases L. Spallanzani, Rome, Italy.
enrico.girardi@inmi.it

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2011 Jun;54(6):1085-6.
    Ann Hepatol. 2011 Oct-Dec;10(4):578-9.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Several outbreaks of hepatitis A affecting homosexual men have
been reported in Europe. However, the prevalence of HIV infection in patients
affected by hepatitis A has not been extensively studied and hepatitis A is not
considered as an indicator disease for routine HIV testing.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed all adult cases of acute hepatitis A,
reported by the National Institute of Infectious Disease "L. Spallanzani",
Rome-Italy, in 2002-2008. Data on HIV infection were obtained by chart review and
cross-linkage with laboratory. Information on exposure to risk factors were
collected from the standard questionnaire of the Local Health Unit.
RESULTS: We analyzed a total of 473 cases of hepatitis A, 368 (77.2%) males that 
accounted for 75% of all reported cases in Rome, aged 25-64 years (same gender
distribution). During the study period, we diagnosed a high proportion of cases
among male individuals (78%). Among the male patients, HIV serology was available
for 203/368 (55.2%). The overall HIV prevalence was 15.2% (56/368); it was
significantly associated with same gender sex and was significantly higher than
that observed among patients with hepatitis B (4.0%).
CONCLUSIONS: We found a high HIV prevalence, associated with same gender sex,
among adult male patients diagnosed with hepatitis A in the period 2002-2008,
except for 2006. Our data suggest that in a low incidence area for hepatitis A,
with a constant high proportion of cases among male individuals, all individuals 
with acute hepatitis A should be routinely offered an HIV test.

Copyright © 2010 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21145799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Intern Med. 2010;49(23):2631-4. Epub 2010 Dec 1.

Multiple skull metastases from hepatocellular carcinoma successfully treated with
radiotherapy.

Nozaki I(1), Tsukada T, Nakamura Y, Takanaka T, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Noto General Hospital, Nanao. nozaki@noto-hospital.jp

We report a Japanese man who presented with multiple cranial nerve palsies with
hepatitis B virus-related multiple hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). He presented
with right III, IV, VI, IX, X, and XII cranial nerve palsies. Metastases
involving the clivus and the right occipital bone from HCC were diagnosed by the 
findings of magnetic resonance imaging of the head, cerebral angiography, and
2-deoxy-2-[(18)F]fluoro-D-glucose positron emission tomography/computed
tomography. In this case, over one-year survival and improvement of neurological 
signs were achieved by radiotherapy in spite of multiple skull metastases, which 
are extremely rare.

PMID: 21139306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. BMC Public Health. 2010 Dec 3;10:748. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-10-748.

Adolescent gender differences in the determinants of tobacco smoking: a cross
sectional survey among high school students in São Paulo.

Sanchez ZM(1), Opaleye ES, Martins SS, Ahluwalia JS, Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)Brazilian Center of Information on Psychotropic Drugs (CEBRID), Psychobiology 
Department of the Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Brazil. zila@psicobio.epm.br

BACKGROUND: Diverse psychosocial factors have been associated with the use of
cigarettes by adolescents. We investigated gender differences in tobacco smoking,
and factors correlated with smoking among boys and girls.
METHODS: Data was collected on recent cigarette smoking (CS) and related factors,
with a focus on religious beliefs, leisure activities, family structure,
relationships and parental monitoring from 2,691 private school-attending youths 
from 28 schools in São Paulo, Brazil, selected via probability sampling.
Estimates were derived via weighted hierarchical logistic regression models.
RESULTS: There was no difference in the prevalence of recent cigarette smoking
between boys and girls (14.2%). Older age (aORboys = 1.71[1.33-2.21]; aORgirls = 
1.73[1.35-2.23]), second-hand smoke exposure at home (aORboys = 1.52[1.00-2.29]; 
aORgirls = 1.74[1.13-2.68]) and not having a religion (aORboys = 1.99[1.41-2.81];
aORgirls = 1.78[1.14-2.78]) were associated with CS in boys and girls.
Adolescents who went out often at night were more likely to be tobacco smokers
(aORboys = 8.82[3.96-19.67]; aORgirls = 14.20[6.64-30.37]). For girls, data
suggest that CS was also associated with a lack of parental attention and care
(aORgirls = 4.37[1.19-16.04]) and no participation in youth religious activities 
(aORgirls = 2.76[1.49-5.12]). For boys, CS was additionally associated with the
loss of one or both parents (aORboys = 3.75[1.78-7.85]).
CONCLUSIONS: Although older age, living with smokers at home and lack of religion
were common contributing factors to cigarette smoking among all adolescents,
girls were influenced to a greater degree by family relationships and religiosity
than boys. The study results may be materially important to the development of
prevention programs that influence determinants connected to gender and the
implementation of single-core models of prevention; gender differences must be
considered in order to reduce adolescent CS.

PMCID: PMC3004838
PMID: 21129177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Amyotroph Lateral Scler. 2011 Mar;12(2):140-3. doi: 10.3109/17482968.2010.541263.
Epub 2010 Dec 2.

Elevated CSF TDP-43 levels in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: specificity,
sensitivity, and a possible prognostic value.

Noto Y(1), Shibuya K, Sato Y, Kanai K, Misawa S, Sawai S, Mori M, Uchiyama T,
Isose S, Nasu S, Sekiguchi Y, Fujimaki Y, Kasai T, Tokuda T, Nakagawa M, Kuwabara
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Japan.
y-noto@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

TAR DNA binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43) is likely to be the major pathogenetic
protein in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). A previous study has shown that
levels of TDP-43 in CSF measured by an ELISA are significantly higher for ALS
patients than for controls. The aim of this study was to investigate whether
elevated CSF TDP-43 levels are specific to ALS, and are associated with clinical 
profiles in ALS patients. We measured CSF TDP-43 levels by the same ELISA in 27
ALS patients and 50 neurodegenerative or inflammatory disease controls such as
Parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, and Guillain-Barré syndrome. Results
showed that the CSF TDP-43 levels were increased only in ALS patients. Receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) analyses showed a sensitivity of 59.3% and a
specificity of 96.0%. We also found that lower CSF TDP-43 levels may be
associated with shorter survival time. In conclusion, the CSF TDP-43 is a
potential biomarker that supports a diagnosis of ALS. Moreover, among ALS
patients, lower levels of CSF TDP-43 may reflect the accumulation of TDP-43 in
the cortical and spinal motor neurons and thereby shorter survival time, although
this should be confirmed in larger prospective studies.

PMID: 21126161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2010 Nov-Dec;28(6):855-65. Epub 2011 Jan 3.

Comparison of the Recent-Onset Arthritis Disability questionnaire with the Health
Assessment Questionnaire disability index in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Salaffi F(1), Ciapetti A, Gasparini S, Migliore A, Scarpellini M, Corsaro SM,
Laganà B, Mozzani F, Varcasia G, Pusceddu M, Castriotta M, Serale F, Maier A,
Foti R, Scarpa R, Bombardieri S; NEW INDICES Study Group.

Collaborators: Salaffi F, Gasparini S, Ciapetti A, Laganà B, Varcasia G, Pomponio
G, Scarpa R, Maier A, Romeo N, Migliore A, Scarpellini M, Corsaro SM, Pusceddu M,
Foti R, Rotondi M, Marasini B, Ferraccioli G, Malavolta N, Sabadini L, Cimmino M,
Bombardieri S, Ricioppo A, Triolo G, Mascia MT, Minisola G, Botsios K, Pellerito 
R, Noto A.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Università Politecnica delle Marche, Ancona, Italy.
fsalaffi@tin.it

BACKGROUND: Physical disability in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is
often assessed by questionnaires. We compared the Recent-Onset Arthritis
Disability (ROAD) questionnaire with the Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ)
disability index (DI) in a cohort of RA patients. The aim of this study was to
obtain information on several aspects of construct validity of these measures.
METHODS: A cross-sectional multicentre study was carried out among patients with 
RA who were attending hospital outpatient clinics. The patient group included 196
patients partially or not responding to disease modifying anti-rheumatic drugs.
For the evaluation of the psychometric properties of the ROAD in comparison with 
HAQ-DI this population has been compared to another cohort of 247 outpatients
with RA who were participating in a long-term observational study. All patients
completed the ROAD and HAQ-DI. Additional comparator composite indices of disease
activity were analysed. The ROAD structural validity was first assessed using
exploratory factor analysis. Concurrent validity was analysed by Spearman's
correlations and cross-tabulations. Discriminant validity to distinguish patients
with active and non-active disease was assessed with receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve analysis. For agreement analysis Bland and Altman
plots were calculated.
RESULTS: Factor analysis yielded a two-factor ROAD score that accounted for
68.74% of the explained variance in the questionnaire. The first factor, namely
upper extremity function/activity daily living and work (ROAD-upper) accounted
for 55.6% of the explained variance. The second factor, namely lower extremity
function (ROAD-lower) accounted for 13.1% of the explained variance. Significant 
correlations were found between the scores of the ROAD and the other clinical
variables with a high ability to measure pain and disease activity, supporting
the concept of convergent construct validity. The discriminatory power of both
questionnaires to assess inactive and active RA patients was good, without
significant difference.
CONCLUSIONS: ROAD is a good alternative to the HAQ-DI for the assessment of
physical disability in RA. Use of the ROAD makes it easier and less costly to
collect data and reduces the burden on RA patients and should be applied in both 
clinical trials and routine clinical care settings.

PMID: 21122262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Minerva Anestesiol. 2010 Nov;76(11):945-9.

Limitations of volumetric indices obtained by trans-thoracic thermodilution.

Bigatello LM(1), Kistler EB, Noto A.

Author information: 
(1)Anesthesiology Service, VA Boston Healthcare System, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA. luca.bigatello@va.gov

Comment in
    Minerva Anestesiol. 2011 Jul;77(7):754-5; author reply 756-7.

Transthoracic thermodilution (TTT) measures cardiac output without the need for
right heart catheterization. In addition, two volumetric hemodynamic indices have
been derived from the mathematical analysis of the TTT curve: the global end
diastolic volume (a quantitative measure of cardiac preload) and the
extravascular lung water volume (a quantitative measure of pulmonary edema).
Despite the undeniable appeal of these two novel parameters, uncertainty exists
regarding both the validity of their mathematical derivation and their
physiological significance. This concise review attempts to discuss such
concerns.

PMID: 21102390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2011 Oct;82(10):1174-7. doi:
10.1136/jnnp.2010.210708. Epub 2010 Nov 11.

Neuromuscular transmission is not impaired in axonal Guillain--Barré syndrome.

Kuwabara S(1), Kokubun N, Misawa S, Kanai K, Isose S, Shibuya K, Noto Y, Mori M, 
Sekiguchi Y, Nasu S, Fujimaki Y, Hirata K, Yuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba,
Japan. kuwabara-s@faculty.chiba-u.jp

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that anti-GQ1b antibodies induce massive 
neuromuscular blocking. If anti-GM1 and -GD1a antibodies have similar effects on 
the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) in human limb muscles, this may explain
selective motor involvement in axonal Guillain--Barré syndrome (GBS).
METHODS: Axonal-stimulating single-fibre electromyography was performed in the
extensor digitorum communis muscle of 23 patients with GBS, including 13 with the
axonal form whose sera had a high titre of serum IgG anti-GM1 or -GD1a
antibodies.
RESULTS: All patients with axonal or demyelinating GBS showed normal or
near-normal jitter, and no blocking.
CONCLUSION: In both axonal and demyelinating GBS, neuromuscular transmission is
not impaired. Our results failed to support the hypothesis that anti-GM1 or -GD1a
antibody affects the NMJ. In GBS, impulse transmission is presumably impaired in 
the motor nerve terminal axons proximal to the NMJ.

PMID: 21071752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Addiction. 2011 Jan;106(1):225. doi: 10.1111/j.1360-0443.2010.03196.x. Epub 2010 
Nov 9.

An anti-inflammatory as a recreational drug in Brazil.

Opaleye ES, Sanchez ZM, Moura YG, Locatelli DP, Noto AR.

PMID: 21059186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cerebrospinal Fluid Res. 2010 Oct 31;7:18. doi: 10.1186/1743-8454-7-18.

Diagnosis of idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus is supported by MRI-based
scheme: a prospective cohort study.

Hashimoto M(1), Ishikawa M, Mori E, Kuwana N; Study of INPH on neurological
improvement (SINPHONI).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Noto General Hospital, Nanao, 926-8610, Japan.
hashim@noto-hospital.jp

BACKGROUND: Idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus (iNPH) is a treatable
neurological syndrome in the elderly. Although the magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) findings of tight high-convexity and medial subarachnoid spaces and the
ventriculo-peritoneal (VP) shunt with programmable valve are reportedly useful
for diagnosis and treatment, respectively, their clinical significance remains to
be validated. We conducted a multicenter prospective study (Study of Idiopathic
Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus on Neurological Improvement: SINPHONI) to evaluate 
the utility of the MRI-based diagnosis for determining the 1-year outcome after
VP shunt with the Codman-Hakim programmable valve.
METHODS: Twenty-six centers in Japan were involved in this study. Patients aged
between 60 and 85 years with one or more of symptoms (gait, cognitive, and
urinary problems) and MRI evidence of ventriculomegaly and tight high-convexity
and medial subarachnoid spaces received VP shunt using the height/weight-based
valve pressure-setting scheme. The primary endpoint was a favorable outcome
(improvement of one level or more on the modified Rankin Scale: mRS) at one year 
after surgery, and the secondary endpoints included improvement of one point or
more on the total score of the iNPH grading scale. Shunt responder was defined by
more than one level on mRS at any evaluation point in one year.
RESULTS: The full analysis set included 100 patients. A favorable outcome was
achieved in 69.0% and 80.0% were shunt responders. When measured with the iNPH
grading scale, the one-year improvement rate was 77.0%, and response to the
surgery at any evaluation point was detected in 89.0%. Serious adverse events
were recorded in 15 patients, three of which were events related to surgery or VP
shunt. Subdural effusion and orthostatic headache were reported as non-serious
shunt-related adverse events, which were well controlled with readjustment of
pressure.
CONCLUSIONS: The MRI-based diagnostic scheme is highly useful. Tight
high-convexity and medial subarachnoid spaces, and enlarged Sylvian fissures with
ventriculomegaly, defined as disproportionately enlarged subarachnoid-space
hydrocephalus (DESH), are worthwhile for the diagnosis of iNPH. This study is
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00221091.

PMCID: PMC2987762
PMID: 21040519  [PubMed]


100. J Anesth. 2010 Dec;24(6):827-31. doi: 10.1007/s00540-010-1028-9. Epub 2010 Oct
26.

Leg massage therapy promotes psychological relaxation and reinforces the
first-line host defense in cancer patients.

Noto Y(1), Kitajima M, Kudo M, Okudera K, Hirota K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Health
Sciences, Hirosaki 036-8564, Japan.

PURPOSE: Patients with cancer suffer a wide range of physical symptoms coupled
with psychological stress. Moreover, cancer chemotherapy induces
immunosuppression and consequently causes respiratory infections. Massage therapy
has been reported to reduce symptoms in cancer patients via an increase in
psychosocial relaxation and to enhance and/or improve immune function.
METHODS: In the present study, we determined whether leg massage could induce
psychosocial relaxation and activate the first line of the host defense system.
To assess effects of rest and leg massage, 15 healthy volunteers rested on a bed 
for 20 min on the first day, and 3 days later the subjects received a
standardized massage of the legs for 20 min with nonaromatic oil. Twenty-nine
cancer patients also received the same standardized massage of the legs.
Anxiety/stress was assessed before and just after the rest or the massage using
the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI-s) and visual analogue scale (VAS). To
evaluate oral immune function, salivary chromogranin A (CgA) and secretory
immunoglobulin A (sIgA) levels were measured.
RESULTS: In healthy volunteers, rest significantly reduced VAS by 34% and
increased sIgA by 61%. In contrast, leg massage significantly reduced both STAI-s
and VAS by 24% and 63%, and increased both sIgA and CgA by 104% and 90%,
respectively. In cancer patients, leg massage significantly decreased both STAI-s
and VAS by 16% and 38%, and increased both salivary CgA and sIgA by 33% and 35%, 
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Leg massage may promote psychosocial relaxation and reinforce a
first-line host defense with an increase in secretion of antimicrobial peptides.

PMID: 20976508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Med Case Rep. 2010 Oct 21;4:334. doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-4-334.

Hemolytic anemia due to acute cytomegalovirus infection in an immunocompetent
adult: a case report and review of the literature.

Taglietti F(1), Drapeau CM, Grilli E, Capone A, Noto P, Topino S, Petrosillo N.

Author information: 
(1)2ndInfectious Diseases Division, National Institute for Infectious Diseases
"L, Spallanzani", Via Portuense, 292-00149 Rome, Italy. taglietti.f@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Cytomegalovirus is a common virus responsible for a wide range of
clinical manifestations. Hemolysis is a rare but potentially life-threatening
complication of cytomegalovirus infection, described mostly in immunocompromised 
patients, the pathogenesis of which is still unclear.We performed a review of the
literature regarding cases of hemolytic anemia during acute cytomegalovirus
infection in apparently immunocompetent individuals. We searched for relevant
articles in PubMed for the period of 1980 through 2008.
CASE PRESENTATION: We describe a case of Coombs-negative hemolytic anemia in a
44-year-old Caucasian immunocompetent man with acute cytomegalovirus infection.
CONCLUSION: Clinicians should consider cytomegalovirus infection in the
differential diagnosis of hemolytic anemia in immunocompetent adults. Possible
therapeutic options include antiviral therapy and steroids, although the best
treatment strategy is still controversial.

PMCID: PMC2984465
PMID: 20964811  [PubMed]


102. Minerva Anestesiol. 2010 Oct;76(10):814-23. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

Daily monitoring of biomarkers of sepsis in complicated long-term ICU-patients:
can it support treatment decisions?

Iapichino G(1), Marzorati S, Umbrello M, Baccalini R, Barassi A, Cainarca M,
Colombo Pavini F, Mantovani E, Mauri A, Moroni B, Noto A, Melzi D'Eril GV, Langer
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, San Paolo University Hospital, University of
Milan, Milan, Italy. g.iapichino@unimi.it

BACKGROUND: Diagnosis/grading of infection and the systemic response to infection
may be difficult on admission to the intensive care unit, but it is even more
complicated for severely ill patients with long intensive care stays. The
ACCP-SCCM criteria are difficult to apply for such patients, and objective,
validated biomarkers would be of great use in this setting.
METHODS: Long-term (>6 days) critically ill patients in the general ICU of
University Hospital were prospectively enrolled in the study. All patients were
assessed daily by the attending physician using the ACCP-SCCM classification.
C-reactive protein (CRP, mg/dL), procalcitonin (PCT, ng/mL), and interleukin-6
(IL-6, pg/mL) of daily stored sera were measured after each patient's discharge. 
After discharge, an independent, overall clinical evaluation and an a posteriori 
ACCP-SCCM classification were chosen as the reference standard for all
comparisons. The assessor was aware of the patient's clinical course but was
blinded to levels of biomarkers.
RESULTS: We studied clinical variables and biomarkers of 26 patients over a total
of 592 patient days. The day-by-day ACCP-SCCM classification of the attending
physician overestimated the severity of the inflammatory response to infection.
The diagnostic discriminative ability of severe-sepsis/septic-shock for PCT was
high (ROC area 0.952 [0.931-0.973]) and had a best threshold value of 1.58 (83.7%
sensitivity, 94.6 % specificity). IL-6 had better discriminative ability than
CRP, but both were worse than PCT.
CONCLUSION: PCT > 0.43 ng/mL could add to the clinical propensity for sepsis vs. 
SIRS not related to infection. Values higher than 1.58 ng/mL may support the
bedside clinical diagnosis of severe-sepsis. PCT between 0.5 and 1.0 suggest
tight daily monitoring of clinical conditions and re-evaluation of PCT.

PMID: 20935617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Am J Med Sci. 2011 Jan;341(1):74-7. doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e3181f54e59.

A patient with diabetes and breast cancer in whom virilization was caused by a
testosterone-producing mature cystic teratoma containing a Brenner tumor.

Tsujimoto T(1), Takaichi M, Endo H, Yasuda K, Kishimoto M, Noto H, Gomibuchi H,
Yasuda H, Yamamoto-Honda R, Takahashi Y, Kajio H, Sasano H, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine, National Center for Global
Health and Medicine, Japan.

A 74-year-old woman with impaired glucose tolerance exhibited virilization. An
examination of various hormone levels showed normal pituitary hormone and adrenal
hormone levels. However, the patient's blood testosterone level was remarkably
high and was suspected of having caused the virilization. An abdominal computed
tomography revealed a multilocular cystoma in the left ovary with the features of
a mature cystic teratoma. In addition, a chest computed tomography revealed the
presence of a mass in the left breast that was subsequently diagnosed as breast
cancer based on the results of a biopsy. After the simultaneous surgical
resection of the ovarian and breast tumors, her blood testosterone level
decreased. The mature cystic teratoma containing a Brenner tumor was considered
to be responsible for the high testosterone level because of the presence of
androgenic enzymes. This case is extremely rare, but the case was accurately
diagnosed through a comprehensive analysis.

PMID: 20924286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 3;5(9):e12553. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012553.

Broad-scale patterns of late jurassic dinosaur paleoecology.

Noto CR(1), Grossman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Grand Valley State University, Allendale,
Michigan, United States of America. notoc@gvsu.edu

BACKGROUND: There have been numerous studies on dinosaur biogeographic
distribution patterns. However, these distribution data have not yet been applied
to ecological questions. Ecological studies of dinosaurs have tended to focus on 
reconstructing individual taxa, usually through comparisons to modern analogs.
Fewer studies have sought to determine if the ecological structure of fossil
assemblages is preserved and, if so, how dinosaur communities varied. Climate is 
a major component driving differences between communities. If the ecological
structure of a fossil locality is preserved, we expect that dinosaur assemblages 
from similar environments will share a similar ecological structure.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: This study applies Ecological Structure Analysis 
(ESA) to a dataset of 100+ dinosaur taxa arranged into twelve composite fossil
assemblages from around the world. Each assemblage was assigned a climate zone
(biome) based on its location. Dinosaur taxa were placed into ecomorphological
categories. The proportion of each category creates an ecological profile for the
assemblage, which were compared using cluster and principal components analyses. 
Assemblages grouped according to biome, with most coming from arid or
semi-arid/seasonal climates. Differences between assemblages are tied to the
proportion of large high-browsing vs. small ground-foraging herbivores, which
separates arid from semi-arid and moister environments, respectively. However,
the effects of historical, taphonomic, and other environmental factors are still 
evident.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study is the first to show that the general
ecological structure of Late Jurassic dinosaur assemblages is preserved at large 
scales and can be assessed quantitatively. Despite a broad similarity of climatic
conditions, a degree of ecological variation is observed between assemblages,
from arid to moist. Taxonomic differences between Asia and the other regions
demonstrate at least one case of ecosystem convergence. The proportion of
different ecomorphs, which reflects the prevailing climatic and environmental
conditions present during fossil deposition, may therefore be used to
differentiate Late Jurassic dinosaur fossil assemblages. This method is broadly
applicable to different taxa and times, allowing one to address questions of
evolutionary, biogeographic, and climatic importance.

PMCID: PMC2933236
PMID: 20838442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Int Immunopharmacol. 2010 Nov;10(11):1434-9. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2010.08.011.
Epub 2010 Sep 9.

Effect of the inosine 5'-monophosphate dehydrogenase inhibitor BMS-566419 on
renal fibrosis in unilateral ureteral obstruction in rats.

Nakanishi T(1), Morokata T, Noto T, Kubo K, Umeno H, Kinugasa F, Eikyu Y, Kozuki 
Y, Seki N.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Research Laboratories, Astellas Pharma Inc., Tsukuba-shi,
Ibaraki, Japan. tomonori.nakanishi@jp.astellas.com

Chronic allograft nephropathy (CAN) is a major cause of late allograft loss. One 
morphological characteristic of CAN is renal interstitial fibrosis. Mycophenolate
mofetil (MMF), the inosine 5'-monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH) inhibitor, has 
been reported to attenuate the progression of renal interstitial fibrosis.
However, the question of whether the newly synthesized IMPDH inhibitors with
structures different from MMF have an antifibrotic effect remains unanswered. We 
evaluated the antifibrotic effects of BMS-566419, a chemically synthesized IMPDH 
inhibitor, using an experimental rat model, unilateral ureteral obstruction
(UUO), in comparison with those of MMF. Expression levels of monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) and transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-ß1), 
which play important roles in UUO-induced renal fibrosis, were also investigated 
to determine the mechanism by which BMS-566419 affects the progression of renal
fibrosis. After 14 days of UUO, interstitial fibrosis was frequently observed in 
the renal cortex of rats administered vehicle control. BMS-566419 by oral
administration showed a significant and dose-dependent suppressive effect on
UUO-induced renal fibrosis in histopathological experiments. BMS-566419 treatment
also decreased collagen content, as indicated by hydroxyproline concentration,
and the expression of collagen type 1 mRNA. BMS-566419 also decreased the
expression of mRNA for both MCP-1 and TGF-ß1. The antifibrotic effects of
treatment with BMS-566419 at 60 mg/kg seemed comparable to those with MMF at 40
mg/kg. These results suggest that BMS-566419 and other chemically synthesized
IMPDH inhibitors have beneficial pharmacological effects similar to those of MMF,
and are potential pharmaceutical candidates in the treatment of fibrotic renal
disease, including CAN.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20832515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Int J Hematol. 2010 Oct;92(3):481-9. doi: 10.1007/s12185-010-0670-1. Epub 2010
Sep 10.

Clinical significance of minimal residual disease in adult acute lymphoblastic
leukemia.

Kikuchi M(1), Tanaka J, Kondo T, Hashino S, Kasai M, Kurosawa M, Iwasaki H,
Morioka M, Kawamura T, Masauzi N, Fukuhara T, Kakinoki Y, Kobayashi H, Noto S,
Asaka M, Imamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sapporo, Hokkaido, 060-8648, Japan.

Monitoring minimal residual disease (MRD) in patients with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) is a useful way for assessing treatment response and relapse. We
studied the value of MRD and showed a correlation with relapse for 34 adult
patients with ALL. MRD was evaluated by real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (RQ-PCR) with probes derived from fusion chimeric genes (BCR/ABL) (n =
12) or PCR-based detection of clonal immunoglobulin and T cell receptor gene
rearrangements (n = 16), or both (n = 6). We analyzed 27 of the 34 patients who
could be examined for MRD on day 100 after induction therapy. The overall
survival (OS) rate (45.0%) and relapse-free survival (RFS) rate (40.0%) at 2
years in complete remission (CR) patients with MRD level = 10<U+207B>³ (n = 12) were
significantly lower than those in CR patients with MRD level <10(-3) (n = 15) (OS
rate 79.0%, RFS rate 79.4%) (log-rank test, P = 0.017 and 0.0007). We also
applied multicolor flow cytometry for comparison with MRD results analyzed by PCR
methods. The comparison of results obtained in 27 follow-up samples showed
consistency in 17 samples (63.0%) (P = 0.057). MRD analysis on day 100 is
important for treatment decision in adult ALL.

PMID: 20830615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Proteins. 2010 Nov 1;78(14):3033-47. doi: 10.1002/prot.22827.

Solution structures of the trihelix DNA-binding domains of the wild-type and a
phosphomimetic mutant of Arabidopsis GT-1: mechanism for an increase in
DNA-binding affinity through phosphorylation.

Nagata T(1), Niyada E, Fujimoto N, Nagasaki Y, Noto K, Miyanoiri Y, Murata J,
Hiratsuka K, Katahira M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Supramolecular Biology, Graduate School of Nanobioscience,
Yokohama City University, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

GT-1 is a plant transcription factor that binds to one of the cis-acting
elements, BoxII, which resides within the upstream promoter region of
light-responsive genes. GT-1 was assumed to act as a molecular switch modulated
through Ca(2+)-dependent phosphorylation/dephosphorylation in response to light
signals. It was shown previously that the phosphorylation of threonine 133 in the
DNA-binding domain (DBD) of GT-1 results in enhancement of the BoxII-binding
activity. Interestingly, point mutation of Thr133 to Asp also enhances the
BoxII-binding activity. Here, we report the solution structures of hypothetical
trihelix DBDs of the wild-type (WT) and a phosphomimetic mutant (T133D) of GT-1. 
First, we demonstrated that the isolated DBD of GT-1 alone has the ability to
bind to DNA, and that the T133D mutation of the isolated DBD can enhance the
DNA-binding affinity. The structures of these DBDs turned out to be almost
identical. The structural topology resembles that of Myb DBDs, but all a-helices 
are longer in GT-1. Our NMR titration experiments suggested that these longer
a-helices yield an enlarged DNA-binding surface. The phosphorylation site is
located at the N-terminus of the third a-helix. We built a structural model of
the T133D DBD:BoxII complex with the program HADDOCK. The model resembles the
structure of the TRF1 DBD:telomeric DNA complex. Interestingly, the model implies
that the phosphorylated side chain may directly interact with the bases of DNA.
On the basis of our findings, we propose a mechanism by which the DNA-binding
activity toward BoxII of the phosphorylated GT-1 could be enhanced.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20717979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Anesth. 2010 Dec;24(6):955-8. doi: 10.1007/s00540-010-1001-7. Epub 2010 Aug 5.

Back massage therapy promotes psychological relaxation and an increase in
salivary chromogranin A release.

Noto Y(1), Kudo M, Hirota K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Health Sciences,
Hirosaki 036-8563, Japan.

Massage therapy promotes psychosocial relaxation, reduces stress and has been
reported to improve the immune function. As such, massage therapy is currently
used in palliative care for the relief of anxiety and pain. Although psychosocial
status has been evaluated using subjective psychological tests, such as
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI), subjective psychological tests are of
limited value if the subjects fail to report reliably. Salivary biomarkers have
been recently suggested as useful objective markers for assessing psychosocial
status. To determine whether salivary biomarkers are useful objective indices for
assessing the effects of back massage on the mental status of 25 young healthy
female volunteers, we measured heart rate and salivary biomarkers (a-amylase
activity, cortisol, and chromogranin A) and assessed the STAI score before and
after the back massage. Back massage significantly reduced the heart rate and
STAI; however, salivary amylase and cortisol levels did not change. In contrast, 
the level of salivary chromogranin A significantly increased. We therefore
conclude that changes in the salivary biomarkers tested here may not indicate
changes in psychological status following massage therapy. However, the increase 
in chromogranin A release may contribute to the immunologically beneficial
effects of massage therapy as chromogranin A has antibacterial and antifungal
activity.

PMID: 20683736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. BMC Dev Biol. 2010 Aug 3;10:81. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-10-81.

Generation of human induced pluripotent stem cells by simple transient
transfection of plasmid DNA encoding reprogramming factors.

Si-Tayeb K(1), Noto FK, Sepac A, Sedlic F, Bosnjak ZJ, Lough JW, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown
Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

BACKGROUND: The use of lentiviruses to reprogram human somatic cells into induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cells could limit their therapeutic usefulness due to the 
integration of viral DNA sequences into the genome of the recipient cell. Recent 
work has demonstrated that human iPS cells can be generated using episomal
plasmids, excisable transposons, adeno or sendai viruses, mRNA, or recombinant
proteins. While these approaches offer an advance, the protocols have some
drawbacks. Commonly the procedures require either subcloning to identify human
iPS cells that are free of exogenous DNA, a knowledge of virology and safe
handling procedures, or a detailed understanding of protein biochemistry.
RESULTS: Here we report a simple approach that facilitates the reprogramming of
human somatic cells using standard techniques to transfect expression plasmids
that encode OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, and LIN28 without the need for episomal stability 
or selection. The resulting human iPS cells are free of DNA integration, express 
pluripotent markers, and form teratomas in immunodeficient animals. These iPS
cells were also able to undergo directed differentiation into hepatocyte-like and
cardiac myocyte-like cells in culture.
CONCLUSIONS: Simple transient transfection of plasmid DNA encoding reprogramming 
factors is sufficient to generate human iPS cells from primary fibroblasts that
are free of exogenous DNA integrations. This approach is highly accessible and
could expand the use of iPS cells in the study of human disease and development.

PMCID: PMC2923111
PMID: 20682060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Diabetes Complications. 2010 Sep-Oct;24(5):345-53. doi:
10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2010.06.004. Epub 2010 Jul 24.

Substantially increased risk of cancer in patients with diabetes mellitus: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of epidemiologic evidence in Japan.

Noto H(1), Osame K, Sasazuki T, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine, National Center for Global
Health and Medicine, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan.

AIMS: Several meta-analyses have shown that diabetes mellitus affects the risk of
certain site-specific cancers. However, a meta-analysis on the overall risk of
cancer has not yet been performed.
METHODS: We performed a search of MEDLINE and the Cochrane Library for pertinent 
articles (including their references) that had been published as of June 10,
2010. English-language, original observational cohort studies and case-control
studies conducted in Japan were included for a qualitative review and a
meta-analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 22,485 cancer cases were reported in four cohort studies and 
one case-control study (with a total of 250,479 subjects). With these five
reports, a meta-analysis of the all-cancer risk in both men and women showed an
increased risk in subjects with diabetes, compared with nondiabetic subjects (OR 
1.70, 95% CI 1.38-2.10). The increase in the risk ratio adjusted for possible
confounders was significant in men and borderline in women (adjusted RR 1.25, 95%
CI 1.06-1.46 in men; adjusted RR 1.23, 95% CI 0.97-1.56 in women). An analysis of
site-specific cancers revealed increased risks for incident hepatocellular cancer
(OR 3.64, 95% CI 2.61-5.07) and endometrial cancer (OR 3.43, 95% CI 1.53-7.72).
CONCLUSIONS: As is the case in Western countries, Asian people with diabetes have
a higher risk of incident cancer than those without diabetes. Cancer prevention
and early detection should be important components of diabetes management in
light of the exponentially increasing prevalence of diabetes, which has
substantial implications in public health and clinical practices.

PMID: 20656522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Adv Nurse Pract. 2010 Jul;18(7):27-9.

NPs in urology. Treating voiding dysfunction in children.

Noto PF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Dysfunctional Voiding Clinic, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta,
USA.

PMID: 20648864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2010 May 20;66(5):487-94.

[Measurement of effective energy and entrance surface dose using fluorescent
glass dosimeter in interventional radiology procedures: make of half-value layer 
measurement instrument and IVR-phantom].

[Article in Japanese]

Iida H(1), Noto K, Takata T, Chabatake M, Yamamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Kanazawa University Hospital.

In interventional radiology (IVR) procedures, automatic brightness control (ABC) 
is helpful in maintaining good image quality by adjusting kV and/or mA based on
the subject's thickness. However, it was difficult to measure effective energy
using half-value layer (HVL). We investigated the usefulness of measuring
effective energy and entrance surface dose using a fluorescent glass dosimeter in
IVR procedures, and we made an HVL folder and IVR-phantom for that purpose.
Effective energy measured using the HVL folder correlated well with reference
ionization dosimeter (y=0.992x, r=0.963). The result indicated that the present
method using an HVL folder and IVR-phantom provides accurate measurements of
effective energy and entrance surface dose in IVR procedures. In conclusion, the 
present measurement method may be useful for quality control of IVR equipment. In
addition, the development of this measurement technique may be useful for
comparisons of exposure levels in different hospitals.

PMID: 20628216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Clin Neurophysiol. 2011 Jan;122(1):205-9. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2010.06.015. Epub
2010 Jul 10.

Altered axonal excitability properties in juvenile muscular atrophy of distal
upper extremity (Hirayama disease).

Sawai S(1), Misawa S, Kanai K, Isose S, Shibuya K, Noto Y, Fujimaki Y, Sekiguchi 
Y, Nasu S, Nomura F, Kuwabara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Diagnosis, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.
ssawai@yj8.so-net.ne.jp

OBJECTIVE: Juvenile muscular atrophy of distal upper extremity (Hirayama disease)
is characterized by juvenile-onset of asymmetric amyotrophy, but the
pathophysiology has not been fully clarified. "Cold paresis", aggravation of
muscle weakness with exposure to cold, is a characteristic feature of this
disease. The aim of this study was to investigate changes in axonal excitability 
properties in Hirayama disease.
METHODS: Threshold tracking was used to measure strength-duration time constant
(SDTC), threshold electrotonus, refractoriness, and supernormality in median
motor axons at the wrist of 14 patients and 10 age-matched normal controls. The
measurements were performed at room temperature and after cooling.
RESULTS: Patients showed prolonged SDTC, fanning-out of threshold electrotonus
curves, and increased refractoriness and supernormality. After cooling, there
were similar changes in patients and normal subjects, compatible with axonal
depolarization possibly due to paralysis of sodium-potassium pump.
CONCLUSIONS: Motor axonal excitability in Hirayama disease were characterized by 
increased persistent sodium currents, and dysfunction of transient sodium and
potassium channels possibly associated with prominent collateral sprouting in
young individuals. Further studies will be required to elucidate mechanisms for
cold paresis.
SIGNIFICANCE: Assessment of axonal excitability could provide characteristic
features of ionic mechanisms in diseases with neurogenic amyotrophy such as
Hirayama disease.

Copyright © 2010 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Published 
by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20624687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Hinyokika Kiyo. 2010 Jun;56(6):305-9.

[Investigation of urinary management after removal of indwelling urethral
catheters in a general hospital: associations between bedridden state and
impaired bladder emptying].

[Article in Japanese]

Tsuchiyama K(1), Ueki O, Minami H, Kawaguchi K, Aoki Y, Yokoyama O.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Urology, Noto General Hospital.

In this study we investigated the influences of decreased levels of activities of
daily living (ADL), especially in bedridden patients,on lower urinary tract
dysfunction and urinary management during hospital care. All 1,106 non-urological
inpatients (896 non-bedridden patients and 210 bedridden patients) with an
indwelling urethral catheter treated at Noto General Hospital between April 2006 
and October 2009 were retrospectively evaluated. Maximum bladder capacity and
post-void residual urine volume (PVR) were evaluated with uroflowmetry or voiding
cystourethrography at the time the catheter was removed. Clean intermittent
catheterization (CIC) and drug administration were performed for patients who had
a PVR of 100 ml or more. Bedridden patients required urinary interventions at a
higher rate than did non-bedridden patients (bedridden : 29.0%,non-bedridden :
17.6%). Although indwelling urethral catheters were reinserted in 13 patients in 
the bedridden group and 16 patients in the non-bedridden group,many patients in
both groups could be free from the catheter. Our results indicate that patients
with low ADL are vulnerable to impaired bladder emptying,and early diagnosis of
impaired bladder emptying and active urinary management are required to solve
their urinary problems.

PMID: 20610921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Aug 6;398(4):665-70. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.06.130. Epub 2010 Jul 6.

The production of 85 kDa N-terminal fragment of apolipoprotein B in mutant HepG2 
cells generated by targeted modification of apoB gene occurs by ALLN-inhibitable 
protease cleavage during translocation.

Srivastava N(1), Cefalu AB, Noto D, Schonfeld G, Averna M, Srivastava RA.

Author information: 
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.

To study the mechanism of low levels of full length and truncated apoB in
individuals heterozygous for apoB truncation, a non-sense mutation was introduced
in one of the three alleles of apob gene of HepG2 cells by homologous
recombination. Despite very low levels of apoB-82 (1-2%) in the media, a
prominent N-terminal apoB protein of 85 kDa (apoB-15) was secreted that
fractionated at d>1.065 in density gradient ultracentrifugation. The mechanism of
production of this short protein was studied by (35)S-methionine pulse-chase
experiment. Oleate prevented presecretory degradation of apoB-100 in the cell and
resulted in increased secretion of newly synthesized apoB-100 with decreases in
the apoB-15, suggesting that rescue of pre-secretary intracellular degradation of
apoB restricted the production and secretion of apoB-15. Further investigation on
the degradation of transmembrane forms of apoB, in the presence and absence of a 
cysteine protease inhibitor, N-acetyl-leucyl-leucyl-norleucinal (ALLN), showed
appearance of detectable levels of newly synthesized apoB-82 in the cell and the 
media together with increased apoB-100 secretion, and reduction in the secretion 
of apoB-15. Compared to ER membrane, the levels of apoB were higher in the
luminal content, and presence of both oleate and ALLN had additive effect on apoB
secretion. These results suggest that the presence of improper folding of apoB
during translocation led to the cleavage of both apoB-100 and apoB-82 by
ALLN-sensitive protease and generation of 85 kDa N-terminal fragment of apoB.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20609357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Ren Nutr. 2011 May;21(3):277-82. doi: 10.1053/j.jrn.2010.04.007. Epub 2010 Jul 
3.

Lanthanum carbonate provides control of phosphorus levels in patients new to
phosphate binder therapy and patients changed from other phosphate binders.

Noto L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Western New York Dialysis Centers, LLC, Orchard Park, New York, USA.
lpanda11@bluefrog.com

OBJECTIVE: This retrospective study examined whether patients in an outpatient
clinical setting with chronic kidney disease (CKD) stage 5, and who were either
new to phosphate binder treatment or were previously treated with other phosphate
binders, received benefit from treatment with lanthanum carbonate (LC).
DESIGN: This was a retrospective analysis of patient records.
SETTING: Patients were treated at the Western New York Dialysis Center, LLC
(Orchard Park, NY).
PATIENTS: Patients (n = 33) were identified through records as having CKD stage 5
and currently receiving or about to begin dialysis treatment. Naive patients (n =
16) had serum phosphorus levels >5.5 mg/dL and did not have previous exposure to 
phosphate binder treatment. "Changed" patients (n = 17) were treated with
sevelamer hydrochloride or calcium-based binders before changing treatment to LC.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients received 500 to 1,500 mg LC thrice daily as needed, to
achieve serum phosphorus levels =5.5 mg/dL.
RESULTS: Serum phosphorus control with LC was rapid (within 1 month) and
sustained (after 6 months) in 81% of naive patients; serum albumin levels were
maintained at 3.61 ± 0.28 g/dL over a period of 13.81 ± 8.4 months. Treatment
with LC maintained serum phosphorus control after 10 to 12 months in 65% of
patients in whom treatment was changed from other phosphate binders; serum
albumin levels were maintained at 3.78 ± 0.35 g/dL after the change.
CONCLUSIONS: In this clinical setting, outpatients treated with LC maintained
serum phosphorus control and serum albumin levels, suggesting that LC may be
effective as an alternative to other phosphate binders or as first-line therapy
for controlling serum phosphorus for =6 months in patients with CKD stage 5
beginning dialysis.

Copyright © 2011 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 20598905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Am Coll Nutr. 2010 Feb;29(1):72-80.

Dietary milled flaxseed and flaxseed oil improve N-3 fatty acid status and do not
affect glycemic control in individuals with well-controlled type 2 diabetes.

Taylor CG(1), Noto AD, Stringer DM, Froese S, Malcolmson L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutritional Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada. ctaylor@cc.umanitoba.ca

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effects of dietary consumption of milled flaxseed or 
flaxseed oil on glycemic control, n-3 fatty acid status, anthropometrics, and
adipokines in individuals with type 2 diabetes.
DESIGN: Thirty-four participants were randomized into a parallel, controlled
trial.
SUBJECTS: The participants were adults with type 2 diabetes (age 52.4 +/- 1.5
years, body mass index 32.4 +/- 1.0 kg/m(2), n = 17 men and 17 women).
INTERVENTIONS: Participants consumed a selection of bakery products containing no
flax (control group [CTL], n = 9), milled flaxseed (FXS, n = 13; 32 g/d), or
flaxseed oil (FXO, n = 12; 13 g/d) daily for 12 weeks. The FXS and FXO groups
received equivalent amounts of alpha-linolenic acid (ALA; 7.4 g/day).
MEASURES OF OUTCOME: The primary outcome measures were fasting plasma hemoglobin 
A(1c), glucose, insulin, and phospholipid fatty acid composition. The secondary
outcome measures were fasting circulating leptin and adiponectin, as well as body
weight, body mass index, and waist circumference. Dietary intake assessment and
calculations for homeostasis model assessment for insulin resistance and
quantified insulin sensitivity check were also completed.
RESULTS: The FXS and FXO groups had increases in plasma phospholipid n-3 fatty
acids (ALA, eicosapentaenoic acid [EPA], or decosapentaenoic acid [DPA], but not 
docosahexaenoic acid), and the FXO group had more EPA and DPA in plasma
phospholipids compared to the FXS group. All groups had similar caloric intakes; 
however, the CTL group experienced a 4% weight gain compared to baseline (p <
0.05), while both flax groups had constant body weights during the study period. 
All other parameters, including glycemic control, were unchanged by dietary
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Milled FXS and FXO intake does not affect glycemic control in adults
with well-controlled type 2 diabetes. Possible prevention of weight gain by flax 
consumption warrants further investigation.

PMID: 20595648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Neuropathology. 2011 Feb;31(1):77-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2010.01134.x.

Early-stage progressive supranuclear palsy with degenerative lesions confined to 
the subthalamic nucleus and substantia nigra.

Sakai K(1), Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Noto General Hospital, Nanao, Japan.
ksakai@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

We describe a 78-year-old Japanese woman with early-stage progressive
supranuclear palsy (PSP). She had a 3-week history of postural instability and
gait disturbance. On examination, upper vertical gaze palsy, akinesia,
hyperreflexia with pathological reflexes, hesitation, and postural instability
were observed. Rigidity and resting tremors were not apparent. Brain MRI revealed
atrophy of the frontotemporal lobes and dilatation of the third ventricle. A
month later, she died of cerebral infarction. The total duration of her clinical 
course was approximately 2 months. The brain weighed 1180 g after fixation.
Macroscopically, mild atrophy of the frontal lobes and mild depigmentation of the
substantia nigra were observed. The conspicuous findings included degeneration
confined to the subthalamic nucleus and substantia nigra and widespread but
infrequent tau-positive neurofibrillary tangles/pretangles and glial fibrillary
tangles (tuft-shaped astrocytes, coiled bodies and argyrophilic threads) in the
brain. It has been reported that the most affected areas in PSP are the globus
pallidus, subthalamic nucleus and substantia nigra. We suggest that degeneration 
in PSP would start with involvement of the substantia nigra and subthalamic
nucleus.

© 2010 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

PMID: 20573028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2011 Jun;82(6):678-80. doi:
10.1136/jnnp.2010.205369. Epub 2010 Jun 20.

POEMS syndrome with Guillan-Barre syndrome-like acute onset: a case report and
review of neurological progression in 30 cases.

Isose S(1), Misawa S, Kanai K, Shibuya K, Sekiguchi Y, Nasu S, Fujimaki Y, Noto
Y, Nakaseko C, Kuwabara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1 
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba, 260-8670, Japan.

POEMS (polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M-protein and skin changes) 
syndrome is a rare cause of demyelinating neuropathy with monoclonal plasma cell 
proliferation, and POEMS neuropathy is usually chronically progressive. Herein,
the authors report a 34-year-old woman with POEMS syndrome presenting as acute
polyneuropathy. Within 2 weeks of disease onset, she became unable to walk with
electrodiagnostic features of demyelination and was initially diagnosed as having
Guillan-Barré syndrome. Other systemic features (oedema and skin changes)
developed later, and an elevated serum level of vascular endothelial growth
factor led to the diagnosis of POEMS syndrome. She received high-dose
chemotherapy with autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation,
resulting in good recovery. The authors also reviewed patterns and speed of
progression of neuropathy in the 30 patients with POEMS syndrome; 22 (73%) of
them were unable to walk independently with the median period of 9.5 months from 
POEMS onset (range 0.5-51 months). Whereas the speed of neuropathy progression
varies considerably among patients, some POEMS patients can show acute or
subacute polyneuropathy. The early diagnosis and treatment could result in rapid 
improvement as shown in the present patient.

PMID: 20562460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Org Chem. 2010 Jul 16;75(14):4828-34. doi: 10.1021/jo100914p.

Electronic and steric effects: how do they work in ionic liquids? The case of
benzoic acid dissociation.

D'Anna F(1), Marullo S, Vitale P, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica E. Paternò, Università degli Studi di
Palermo, Viale delle Scienze-Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
fdanna@unipa.it

The need to have a measure of the strength of some substituted benzoic acids in
ionic liquid solution led us to use the protonation equilibrium of sodium
p-nitrophenolate as a probe reaction, which was studied by means of
spectrophotometric titration at 298 K. In order to evaluate the importance of
electronic effect of the substituents present on the aromatic ring, both
electron-withdrawing and -donor substituents were taken into account.
Furthermore, to have a measure of the importance of the steric effect of the
substituents both para- and ortho-substituted benzoic acids were analyzed. The
probe reaction was studied in two ionic liquids differing for the ability of the 
cation to give hydrogen bond and pi-pi interactions, namely [bm(2)im][NTf(2)] and
[bmpyrr][NTf(2)]. Data collected show that benzoic acids are less dissociated in 
ionic liquid than in water solution. Furthermore, the equilibrium constant values
seem to be significantly affected by both the nature of ionic liquid cation and
the structure of the acid. In particular, the ortho-steric effect seems to
operate differently in water and in the aromatic ionic liquid, determining in
this solvent medium a particular behavior for ortho-substituted benzoic acids.

PMID: 20560656  [PubMed]


121. J Org Chem. 2009 Aug 21;74(16):6224-30. doi: 10.1021/jo901172j.

Determination of basic strength of aliphatic amines through ion pair formation in
some ionic liquid solutions.

D'Anna F(1), Vitale P, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica E. Paternò, Università degli Studi di
Palermo, Viale delle Scienze-Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
fdanna@unipa.it

To have an evaluation of the basic strength of aliphatic amines in ionic liquid
solution, the stability constants relevant to the formation of
amine/p-nitrophenol ion pairs were determined in different ionic liquids at 298
K. In particular, aliphatic (pyrrolidinium) and aromatic (imidazolium) ionic
liquids were used. Imidazolium ions, bmim(+) and bm(2)im(+), having different
hydrogen bond donor abilities were taken into account. Anions were chosen
([BF(4)(-)], [PF(6)(-)], and [NTf(2)(-)]; where NTf(2) =
bis(trifluoromethansulfonyl)imide) showing different shape, size, and
coordination ability. Several primary, secondary (cyclic or not), and tertiary
amines were used to study the effect of amine structure on the ion pair
stability. The comparison between data collected in this work and those
previously obtained in ordinary molecular solvents evidence that ionic liquids
are solvent media able to exalt the amine basicity. Furthermore, the experimental
trends obtained in different ionic liquids can only be rationalized considering
the whole of parameters affecting their tridimensional structure.

PMID: 20560570  [PubMed]


122. Intern Med. 2010;49(12):1209-12. Epub 2010 Jun 15.

Familial ALS with G298S mutation in TARDBP: a comparison of CSF tau protein
levels with those in sporadic ALS.

Nozaki I(1), Arai M, Takahashi K, Hamaguchi T, Yoshikawa H, Muroishi T,
Noguchi-Shinohara M, Ito H, Itokawa M, Akiyama H, Kawata A, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University
Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa, Japan. nozaki@noto-hospital.jp

We report a 52-year-old Japanese man showing both upper and lower motor neuron
signs with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Analysis of the TAR
DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43) gene (TARDBP) revealed a glycine-to-serine
substitution at position 298 (G298S). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) level of total
tau protein (CSF-tau) of our patient was found to be highly elevated compared
with those of sporadic ALS cases and controls. The elevated CSF-tau level might
be related to the damage of neurons exhibiting a large number of TDP-43
inclusions in familial ALS with this mutation.

PMID: 20558945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Dig Liver Dis. 2011 Jan;43(1):34-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2010.05.005. Epub 2010 Jun
15.

Searching for wheat plants with low toxicity in celiac disease: Between direct
toxicity and immunologic activation.

Carroccio A(1), Di Prima L, Noto D, Fayer F, Ambrosiano G, Villanacci V, Lammers 
K, Lafiandra D, De Ambrogio E, Di Fede G, Iacono G, Pogna N.

Author information: 
(1)Ospedali Civili Riuniti di Sciacca, Università di Palermo, Italy.
acarroccio@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Natural or induced variations in the noxiousness of gluten proteins
for celiac disease (CD) patients are currently being investigated for their
potential in breeding wheat crops with reduced toxicity.
AIMS: We evaluated the bread wheat line C173 for its effects on the in
vitro-grown duodenal mucosa of CD patients.
METHODS: In vitro-grown duodenal mucosa biopsies of 19 CD patients on a
gluten-free diet were exposed to peptic/tryptic-digested prolamins from bread
wheat line C173 lacking gliadin-glutenin subunits, analyzed for morphology,
cytokine and anti-tTG antibody production, and compared with mucosa biopsies
exposed to prolamins from wild-type cv. San Pastore.
RESULTS: Duodenal mucosa biopsies exposed to prolamins from C173 and San Pastore 
released higher amounts of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-2, IL-10 and anti-tTG antibodies in the
culture medium than untreated controls. The line C173 differed from cv. San
Pastore as it did not produce negative effects on enterocyte height, suggesting
that manipulating prolamin composition can affect innate immune responses of CD
mucosa to wheat gluten.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrated that this gliadin-deficient wheat has a lower 
direct toxicity but activates an immunologic reaction of the duodenal mucosa like
that of the common wheat species.

Copyright © 2010 Editrice Gastroenterologica Italiana S.r.l. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20554485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Toxicol Pathol. 2010 Jun;23(2):85-9. doi: 10.1293/tox.23.85. Epub 2010 Jun 30.

Goblet cell hyperplasia and muscular layer thickening in the small intestine of a
cynomolgus monkey.

Murakami Y(1), Okazaki Y, Okayama S, Fujihira S, Noto T, Nakatsuji S, Oishi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Toxicologic Pathology, Drug Safety Research Labs., Astellas Pharma Inc., 2-1-6
Kashima, Yodogawa-ku, Osaka 532-8514, Japan.

We report here the interesting case of a 5-year-old male cynomolgus monkey with
goblet cell hyperplasia and thickening of the muscular layer throughout the small
intestine without exhibiting any clinical symptoms. Necropsy examination showed
diffuse thickening of the intestinal wall from the jejunum to the ileum, with an 
appearance likened to a rubber tube. Histopathologically, marked thickening was
observed in both the mucosal and muscular layers in the jejunum and ileum, and
slight thickening was observed in the duodenum. Goblet cell hyperplasia with
extension of the circular folds and villi was prominently observed. The mucosal
surface was covered with a thick mucus layer containing desquamated mucosal
epithelial cells, and both the inner and outer muscular layers were markedly
thickened due to smooth muscle hypertrophy. Neither macroscopic nor
histopathological examination identified any causative factors, such as
infection, enteritis and intestinal stenosis, or obstruction that may have caused
development of this lesion. Given these observations, this case may simply be
considered of spontaneous goblet cell hyperplasia and muscular layer thickening
in the small intestine of a cynomolgus monkey.

PMCID: PMC3234638
PMID: 22272016  [PubMed]


125. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Aug;95(8):4056-60. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-0055. Epub 
2010 May 19.

Autoimmune diabetes in HIV-infected patients on highly active antiretroviral
therapy.

Takarabe D(1), Rokukawa Y, Takahashi Y, Goto A, Takaichi M, Okamoto M, Tsujimoto 
T, Noto H, Kishimoto M, Kaburagi Y, Yasuda K, Yamamoto-Honda R, Tsukada K, Honda 
M, Teruya K, Kajio H, Kikuchi Y, Oka S, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine, AIDS Clinical Center, National 
Center for Global Health and Medicine, Toyama 1-21-1, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo
162-8655, Japan.

CONTEXT: Various autoimmune diseases, especially autoimmune thyroid disease, are 
known to occur in HIV-infected patients on highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART). However, no reports have described the development of autoimmune
diabetes during HAART.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to investigate the clinical course of the
development of autoantibodies and diabetes during HAART.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Based on their high antiislet autoantibody titers and
requirement for insulin therapy, we diagnosed three HIV-infected patients with
autoimmune diabetes. To clarify the relationship between the development of an
autoimmune reaction against pancreatic beta-cells and recovery of CD4+ T
lymphocyte (CD4) counts, we retrospectively assayed stored samples of the
patients' plasma for antiglutamic acid decarboxylase antibody (GAD-Ab).
RESULTS: No GAD-Ab was detected in the plasma samples of any of the three
patients prior to HAART, and their CD4 counts were below 20 cells/microl at their
nadir. The GAD-Ab tests became positive from 6 to 38 months after the start of
HAART, and their conversion to positive followed a dramatic increase in the
patients' CD4 count. Two patients developed diabetes after testing positive for
GAD-Ab. Although one patient had mild diabetes prior to testing positive for
GAD-Ab, the rapid worsening of glycemic control and introduction of insulin
therapy almost coincided with the detection of GAD-Ab. The high magnitude of the 
CD4 increase during HAART and the timing of the detection of autoantibody were
similar to the magnitude and timing reported in HAART-associated autoimmune
thyroid disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Autoimmune diabetes develops in some HIV-infected patients after
immune restoration during HAART.

PMID: 20484483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Qual Health Res. 2010 Sep;20(9):1241-53. doi: 10.1177/1049732310370967. Epub 2010
May 17.

Diversity of contexts in drug use among street adolescents.

Goncalves de Moura Y(1), van der Meer Sanchez Z, Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)Federal University of Sao Paulo, Rua Napoleao de Barros n.925-Sao Paulo-SP
04024-002, Brazil. yone@psicobio.epm.br

In this study we aimed to investigate through ethnographic methods the different 
contexts of drug use by street adolescents in Sao Paulo, Brazil. Participant
observations and semistructured interviews were performed at 11 major points of
adolescent concentration in the streets of the city and in 10 care institutions. 
The sample was composed of 17 adolescents between 12 and 17 years of age. Data
showed diverse patterns of drug use distributed by geographic situation and
street circumstances. Observations were grouped into three main contexts: (a)
immersion: greater intensity of drug use associated with greater involvement in
the street culture; (b) surface: less drug use associated with family closeness; 
and (c) alternative-migratory: greater involvement with drug trafficking and
prostitution associated with less family closeness and street culture. The drug
use patterns varied in accordance with the diversity of street situations.
Therefore, the peculiarities of each context should be taken into consideration
in the development of social/ health policies.

PMID: 20479135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Int J Cancer. 2011 Feb 15;128(4):998-1000. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25406.

Divergent expression of CD133 in different studies on HCT-116 cell line.

Gemei M, Mirabelli P, Di Noto R, Fortunato G, Del Vecchio L.

Comment in
    Int J Cancer. 2011 May 1;128(9):2247-9.

PMID: 20473896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Cien Saude Colet. 2010 May;15(3):725-31.

[Tobacco in the media: analysis of journalistic texts in the year of 2006].

[Article in Portuguese]

Lacerda AE(1), Mastroianni Fde C, Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, 04039-002.
alexminasepm@gmail.com

Aiming at understanding the relation among health, press and public policies on
Tobacco in Brazil, this article analyses the texts about Tobacco published in the
Brazilian press in 2006. In the clipping process of eight newspapers and
magazines, the information about Tobacco were identified and then submitted to
content analysis allowing categorization and classification of the texts. The
frequency of the texts in 2006 was compared to that of in 2000 and 2003. We
observed a higher prevalence of factual approach among the texts (46.7%). Most of
the texts mentioned the negative consequences, such as physical health problems
(44.2%), death (20%) and dependence (14.2%). The analysis of the headlines and
lead-ins showed control policies, anti-smoking movements and spreading of results
as the main categories observed. The frequency of the articles in 2006 was
similar to that of in 2003 and lower to that of in 2000. The journalistic
coverage on Tobacco in 2006 was restricted predominantly to harm to health and
anti-smoking movements. The high proportion of the factual approach and the
stabilization in the frequency of texts (2003-2006) might suggest an
impoverishment of the discussion on this issue in the country.

PMID: 20464185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Cien Saude Colet. 2010 May;15(3):663-70.

Comparison between two household surveys on psychotropic drug use in Brazil: 2001
and 2004.

Fonseca AM(1), Galduróz JC, Noto AR, Carlini EL.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Nove de Julho.

CEBRID (Brazilian Center of Information on Psychotropic Drugs) conducted two
household surveys on drug use in Brazil, the first in 2001 and the second in
2005, making it possible for researchers, for the first time ever, to have a
timeline comparison using this type of methodology. The universe studied
corresponded to the Brazilian population living in 107 Brazilian cities with more
than 200.00 inhabitants. 8,589 people were interviewed in the first survey in
2001, and 7,939 people in the second. Data on prevalence of lifetime use for
psychotropic drugs showed that there was a significant increase only in the
number of people who had made lifetime use of psychotropic substances (including 
tobacco and alcohol). In 2001, 19.4% of the interviewees reported having used
some type of drug, and the ranking of lifetime drug use in 2004 was 22.8%, a
statistically significant increase. There was also a statistically significant
increase in lifetime use of alcohol and tobacco in comparison between the two
surveys.

PMID: 20464178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Intern Med. 2010;49(9):857-9. Epub 2010 Apr 30.

Multiple cranial nerve enhancement on MRI in primary Sjögren's syndrome.

Sakai K(1), Hamaguchi T, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Noto General Hospital, Nanao.
ksakai@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

A 77-year-old man showed bilateral abducens palsies and multiple cranial nerve
enhancement on magnetic resonance images (MRI) and aseptic meningitis. He had
xerophthalmia and xerostomia. Serum anti-SS-A and anti-SS-B antibodies were
present. He had Sjögren's syndrome (SjS) and corticosteroid therapy ameliorated
the symptoms. The cranial nerve enhancement and the cerebrospinal fluid findings 
were normalized. In patients with SjS, there have not been any reports of
multiple areas of cranial nerve enhancement on MRI. We propose that in this case 
the aseptic meningitis and subsequent lymphocytic infiltration to the cranial
nerves contributed to the multiple cranial neuropathy and multiple cranial nerve 
enhancement on MRI.

PMID: 20453408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Intern Emerg Med. 2010 Oct;5(5):427-32. doi: 10.1007/s11739-010-0401-x. Epub 2010
May 7.

The prevalence of the cardiac origin of chest pain: the experience of a rural
area of southeast Italy.

Cilia C(1), Malatino LS, Puccia G, Iurato MA, Noto G, Tripepi G, Rosen P,
Stancanelli B.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Internal Medicine, University of Catania, c/o Ospedale Cannizzaro, Via
Messina 829, Catania, Italy. chiara.cilia@tin.it

This study was designed to assess the application of diagnostic guidelines to the
management of chest pain by an observational study carried out in a small town
(Ragusa) of southeast Sicily. This study was an attempt to compare a Sicilian
experience with the literature. In this observational study, we examined all the 
patients referred for chest pain to the Emergency Department (ED) of "Civile-M.
P. Arezzo" Hospital during a period of 6 months (from January 1st 2008 to June
30th 2008). As much as 857 patients were studied. The results of our study show
that musculoskeletal chest pain is the most common final diagnosis (49%),
followed by cardiac chest pain (26.3%), gastrointestinal chest pain (13%),
pulmonary chest pain (7%) and psychiatric chest pain (4%). The majority of
patients (95%) never made contact with their primary care providers, and came
straight to ED. These results emphasize the need for reworking a strategy to
avoid the situation in which all cases of non-emergency chest pain, such as
musculoskeletal ones, come to the hospital for evaluation, thereby overwhelming
the ED, particularly in rural areas where the management of any emergency is
centralized in a single hospital.

PMID: 20449691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Am Surg. 2010 Apr;76(4):457-9.

Long-term survival after colonic stenting and restenting for malignant colonic
obstruction.

Noto KA, Almario C, Maxwell PJ, Mitchell EP, Isenberg GA, Goldstein SD.

PMID: 20420267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2010 Jul;54(6):696-702. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-6576.2010.02234.x. Epub 2010 Apr 15.

Classification of a traumatic brain injury: the Glasgow Coma scale is not enough.

Chieregato A(1), Martino C, Pransani V, Nori G, Russo E, Noto A, Simini B.

Author information: 
(1)UO Anestesia e Rianimazione, Rianimazione per la Traumatologia e le
Neuroscienze, Ospedale Bufalini, Cesena, Italy. achiere@ausl-cesena.emr.it

BACKGROUND: Classifying the severity of a traumatic brain injury (TBI) solely by 
means of the Glasgow Coma scale (GCS) is under scrutiny, because it overlooks
other important clinical signs. Clinicians treating patients with acute TBI are
well placed to suggest which variables, in addition to the GCS, should concur in 
a new classification of TBI.
METHODS: In Italy, acute TBI patients are treated by anaesthetists, and so we
asked them, in a questionnaire survey, to rate the weight they give to the GCS
and to other clinical variables in their approach to TBI. Because sedation may
underestimate GCS scores, we also inquired whether anaesthetists select sedatives
that allow drug-free GCS scores. The questionnaire was distributed to 1334
anaesthetists attending courses on neurotrauma; the response rate was 63%.
RESULTS: Two thirds of the respondents believe that the definition of severe TBI 
should include, in addition to GCS scores, pupil reactivity to light and computer
tomogram (CT) findings, the variables that guide Italian anaesthetists in TBI
management. Most respondents (68.2%) administer sedation which allows prompt
neurological evaluation and reliable GCS scoring. A minority of respondents
(9.3%) withhold or antagonize sedation, delay tracheal intubation or allow
patient-ventilator asynchrony.
CONCLUSIONS: Italian anaesthetists would welcome a definition of TBI severity
that includes CT findings and pupil reactivity in addition to the GCS.

PMID: 20397980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2010 Jun 21;12(23):5993-7. doi: 10.1039/b924811k. Epub 2010 
Apr 15.

A formalism relating the conductivity of functionalized nanoparticles to
constituent ligand molecules and application to water-containing silica.

Di Noto V(1), Lavina S, Wintersgill MC, Fontanella JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Padova, Via Marzolo 1, 35131-I 
Padova, Italy. vito.dinoto@unipd.it

A formalism is presented that relates adsorption-desorption phenomena to the
charge transfer events that take place on the surface of functionalized
nanoparticles. The equations are applied to experimental results for the scaled
electrical conductivity of a hydrophilic fumed silica with a nanoparticle
diameter of 7 nm. Insight into the distribution of water on the surface of the
nanoparticles is obtained.

PMID: 20396820  [PubMed]


135. BMC Cancer. 2010 Mar 30;10:120. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-120.

The percentage of CD133+ cells in human colorectal cancer cell lines is
influenced by Mycoplasma hyorhinis infection.

Mariotti E(1), Gemei M, Mirabelli P, D'Alessio F, Di Noto R, Fortunato G, Del
Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE - Biotecnologie Avanzate, via Comunale Margherita 482, Napoli 80145,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Mollicutes contamination is recognized to be a critical issue for the
cultivation of continuous cell lines. In this work we characterized the effect of
Mycoplasma hyorhinis contamination on CD133 expression in human colon cancer cell
lines.
METHODS: MycoAlert and mycoplasma agar culture were used to detect mycoplasma
contamination on GEO, SW480 and HT-29 cell lines. Restriction fragment length
polymorphism assay was used to determine mycoplasma species. All cellular models 
were decontaminated by the use of a specific antibiotic panel (Enrofloxacin,
Ciprofloxacin, BM Cyclin 1 and 2, Mycoplasma Removal Agent and MycoZap). The
percentage of CD133 positive cells was analyzed by flow cytometry on GEO, SW480
and HT-29 cell lines, before and after Mycoplasma hyorhinis eradication.
RESULTS: Mycoplasma hyorhinis infected colon cancer cell lines showed an
increased percentage of CD133+ cells as compared to the same cell lines rendered 
mycoplasma-free by effective exposure to antibiotic treatment. The percentage of 
CD133 positive cells increased again when mycoplasma negative cells were
re-infected by Mycoplasma hyorhinis.
CONCLUSIONS: Mycoplasma hyorhinis infection has an important role on the quality 
of cultured human colon cancer cell lines giving a false positive increase of
cancer stem cells fraction characterized by CD133 expression. Possible
explanations are (i) the direct involvement of Mycoplasma on CD133 expression or 
(ii) the selective pressure on a subpopulation of cells characterized by
constitutive CD133 expression.In keeping with United Kingdom Coordinating
Committee on Cancer Research (UKCCCR) guidelines, the present data indicate the
mandatory prerequisite, for investigators involved in human colon cancer research
area, of employing mycoplasma-free cell lines in order to avoid the production of
non-reproducible or even false data.

PMCID: PMC2854114
PMID: 20353562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jun;38(11):e122. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq199. Epub 2010 Mar
28.

An inducible RNA interference system for the functional dissection of mouse
embryogenesis.

Vidigal JA(1), Morkel M, Wittler L, Brouwer-Lehmitz A, Grote P, Macura K,
Herrmann BG.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Department of Developmental
Genetics, Ihnestrasse 63-73, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Functional analysis of multiple genes is key to understanding gene regulatory
networks controlling embryonic development. We have developed an integrated
vector system for inducible gene silencing by shRNAmir-mediated RNA interference 
in mouse embryos, as a fast method for dissecting mammalian gene function. For
validation of the vector system, we generated mutant phenotypes for Brachyury,
Foxa2 and Noto, transcription factors which play pivotal roles in embryonic
development. Using a series of Brachyury shRNAmir vectors of various strengths we
generated hypomorphic and loss of function phenotypes allowing the identification
of Brachyury target genes involved in trunk development. We also demonstrate
temporal control of gene silencing, thus bypassing early embryonic lethality.
Importantly, off-target effects of shRNAmir expression were not detectable. Taken
together, the system allows the dissection of gene function at unprecedented
detail and speed, and provides tight control of the genetic background minimizing
intrinsic variation.

PMCID: PMC2887975
PMID: 20350929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Eur J Neurosci. 2010 Apr;31(7):1155-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07152.x.
Epub 2010 Mar 19.

In vitro differentiation of lineage-negative bone marrow cells into
microglia-like cells.

Noto D(1), Takahashi K, Miyake S, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University
Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa, Japan.

Microglia are believed to be the only resident immune cells in the CNS,
originating from hematopoietic-derived myeloid cells and invading the CNS during 
development. However, the detailed mechanisms of differentiation and
transformation of microglial cells are not fully understood. Here, we demonstrate
that murine microglial cells show two morphological forms in vitro, namely, small
round cells expressing CD11b, Iba1, triggering receptor expressing on myeloid
cells-2 (TREM2), and weakly expressing major histocompatibility complex class II 
and large flat cells expressing only CD11b and Iba1. Moreover, lineage-negative
bone marrow (LN) cells cultured with primary mixed glial culture cells could
differentiate into only the small round microglia-like cells, despite the absence
of CCR2 and Gr-1 expression. Addition of macrophage colony stimulating factor
(M-CSF) to LN cell culture allowed the proliferation and expression of TREM2 in
LN cells, and the addition of neutralizing anti-M-CSF antibodies suppressed the
proliferation of LN cells despite the expression of TREM2. When LN cells were
cultured with M-CSF, the number of small round cells in the culture was
considerably low, indicating that the small round morphology of the immature
cells is not maintained in the presence of only M-CSF. On the other hand, when LN
cells were grown in the presence of astrocytes, the small round cells were
maintained at a concentration of approximately 30% of the total population.
Therefore, cell-cell contact with glial cells, especially astrocytes, may be
necessary to maintain the small round shape of the immature cells expressing
TREM2.

PMID: 20345919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Rev Saude Publica. 2010 Apr;44(2):267-73.

Factors associated with heavy alcohol use among students in Brazilian capitals.

Galduróz JC(1), Sanchez Zv, Opaleye ES, Noto AR, Fonseca AM, Gomes PL, Carlini
EA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Psicobiologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo,
SP, Brasil. galduroz@psicobio.epm.br

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association between heavy use of alcohol among
students and family, personal and social factors.
METHODS: Cross-sectional study including public school students aged ten to 18
from 27 Brazilian capital cities in 2004. Data was collected using an anonymous, 
self-report questionnaire that was adapted from a World Health Organization
instrument. A representative sample comprising 48,155 students was stratified by 
census tracts and clusters (schools). The associations between heavy alcohol use 
and the factors studied were analyzed using logistic regression at a 5%
significance level.
RESULTS: Of all students, 4,286 (8.9%) reported heavy alcohol use in the month
prior to the interview. The logistic regression analysis showed an association
between fair or poor relationship with the father (OR = 1.46) and the mother (OR 
= 1.61) and heavy use of alcohol. Following a religion (OR = 0.83) was inversely 
associated with heavy alcohol consumption. Sports practice and mother perceived
as a 'liberal' person had no significance in the model. However, a higher
prevalence of heavy use of alcohol was seen among working students.
CONCLUSIONS: Stronger family ties and religion may help preventing alcohol abuse 
among students.

PMID: 20339625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Methods Mol Biol. 2010;617:539-54. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327-323-7_39.

Current and emerging pharmacologic therapies for pain and challenges which still 
lay ahead.

Noto C(1), Pappagallo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY,
USA.

This chapter seeks to provide a concise overview of the pharmacologic
armamentarium available to treat pain. Drugs will be discussed in terms of their 
indications, mechanisms of action, and major side effects. For the purposes of
this chapter, analgesics will be divided into two groups: current and emerging;
current analgesics will be further subdivided into older analgesics and newer
analgesics. Older analgesics will refer to drugs that have had FDA approval or
were used off label for pain before 1990. Newer analgesics will refer to drugs
developed or approved for treating pain since 1990. Finally, emerging analgesics 
will refer to drugs that have pre-clinical data or phase I/II data to suggest
efficacy in treating pain but have not been validated by larger Phase III
clinical trials. The chapter concludes with a chart that seeks to highlight
current problems involved in pain pharmacotherapy.

PMID: 20336447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2010 Jun;54(6):2312-22. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01550-09.
Epub 2010 Mar 22.

Novel synthetic, salt-resistant analogs of human beta-defensins 1 and 3 endowed
with enhanced antimicrobial activity.

Scudiero O(1), Galdiero S, Cantisani M, Di Noto R, Vitiello M, Galdiero M,
Naclerio G, Cassiman JJ, Pedone C, Castaldo G, Salvatore F.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy. salvator@unina.it

Human beta-defensins (hBDs) are antimicrobial peptides of human innate immunity. 
The antibacterial activities of hBDs 1, 2, and 4 but not the activity of hBD3 are
impaired by high salt levels. We have designed and synthesized seven novel hBD
analogs, constituted by different domains of hBD1 (which is constitutively
expressed in humans) and of hBD3 (which is induced by microorganisms and
inflammatory factors in humans), that would maintain and potentially increase the
wild-type antimicrobial activities and be salt resistant. We have compared the
antibacterial, antiviral, and chemotactic activities of the analogs with those of
hBD1 and hBD3. We show that the hBD1 internal region and the hBD3 C-terminal
region are critical for antibacterial activity also at high salt concentrations, 
whereas deletion of the N-terminal region of hBD3 results in an increase in
antibacterial activity. All analogs inhibited herpes simplex virus; antiviral
activity was enhanced by the hBD1 internal region and the hBD3 C-terminal region.
Wild-type and analog peptides were chemotactic for granulocytes and monocytes,
irrespective of the salt concentrations. These new peptides may have therapeutic 
potential.

PMCID: PMC2876405
PMID: 20308372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Eur J Dermatol. 2010 May-Jun;20(3):405-7. doi: 10.1684/ejd.2010.0936. Epub 2010
Mar 19.

Acrodermatitis chronic atrophicans and morphea.

Carlesimo M, Abruzzese C, Narcisi A, La Pietra M, Fardella A, Noto S, Cacchi C,
Camplone G.

PMID: 20299311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Rev Sci Instrum. 2010 Feb;81(2):02B112.

Achievement and improvement of the JT-60U negative ion source for JT-60 Super
Advanced (invited).

Kojima A(1), Hanada M, Tanaka Y, Inoue T, Watanabe K, Taniguchi M, Kashiwagi M,
Umeda N, Tobari H, Grisham LR; JT-60 NBI Group.

Collaborators: Akino N, Usui K, Endo Y, Oasa K, Oshima K, Kazawa M, Kawai M,
Kikuchi K, Kojima A, Komata M, Sasaki S, Simizu T, Seki N, Nemoto S, Tanaka Y,
Noto K, Hanada M, Mogaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Naka, Ibaraki 311-0193, Japan.
kojima.atsushi@jaea.go.jp

Developments of the large negative ion source have been progressed in the
high-energy, high-power, and long-pulse neutral beam injector for JT-60 Super
Advanced. Countermeasures have been studied and tested for critical issues of
grid heat load and voltage holding capability. As for the heat load of the
acceleration grids, direct interception of D- ions was reduced by adjusting the
beamlet steering. As a result, the heat load was reduced below an allowable level
for long-pulse injections. As for the voltage holding capability, local electric 
field was mitigated by tuning gap lengths between large-area acceleration grids
in the accelerator. As a result, the voltage holding capability was improved up
to the rated value of 500 kV. To investigate the voltage holding capability
during beam acceleration, the beam acceleration test is ongoing with new extended
gap.

PMID: 20225407  [PubMed]


143. Rev Sci Instrum. 2010 Feb;81(2):02A719.

Improvement of voltage holding capability in the 500 keV negative ion source for 
JT-60SA.

Tanaka Y(1), Hanada M, Kojima A, Akino N, Shimizu T, Ohshima K, Inoue T, Watanabe
K, Taniguchi M, Kashiwagi M, Umeda N, Tobari H, Grisham LR; JT-60 NBI Group.

Collaborators: Akino N, Usui K, Endo Y, Oasa K, Oshima K, Kazawa M, Kawai M,
Kikuchi K, Kojima A, Komata M, Sasaki S, Simizu T, Seki N, Nemoto S, Tanaka Y,
Noto K, Hanada M, Mogaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Naka, Ibaraki 311-0193, Japan.
tanaka.yutaka@jaea.go.jp

Voltage holding capability of JT-60 negative ion source that has a large
electrostatic negative ion accelerator with 45 cm x 1.1 m acceleration grids was 
experimentally examined and improved to realize 500 keV, 22 A, and 100 s D- ion
beams for JT-60 Super Advanced. The gap lengths in the acceleration stages were
extended to reduce electric fields in a gap between the large grids and at the
corner of the support flanges from the original 4-5 to 3-4 kV/mm. As a result,
the voltage holding capability without beam acceleration has been successfully
improved from 400 to 500 kV. The pulse duration to hold 500 kV reached 40 s of
the power supply limitation.

PMID: 20225405  [PubMed]


144. Org Lett. 2010 Apr 2;12(7):1636-9. doi: 10.1021/ol100431m.

Stereoselective synthesis of substituted tetrahydropyrans via domino olefin
cross-metathesis/intramolecular oxa-conjugate cyclization.

Fuwa H(1), Noto K, Sasaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biostructural Chemistry, Graduate School of Life Sciences,
Tohoku University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8577, Japan.
hfuwa@bios.tohoku.ac.jp

A novel strategy for the stereoselective synthesis of substituted
tetrahydropyrans has been developed on the basis of a domino olefin
cross-metathesis/intramolecular oxa-conjugate cyclization catalyzed by the
Hoveyda-Grubbs second-generation catalyst.

PMID: 20222688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Cell. 2010 Mar 5;140(5):692-703. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.02.010.

The Tetrahymena argonaute-binding protein Giw1p directs a mature argonaute-siRNA 
complex to the nucleus.

Noto T(1), Kurth HM, Kataoka K, Aronica L, DeSouza LV, Siu KW, Pearlman RE,
Gorovsky MA, Mochizuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
(IMBA), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Emerging evidence suggests that RNA interference (RNAi)-related processes act
both in the cytoplasm and in the nucleus. However, the process by which the RNAi 
machinery is transported into the nucleus remains poorly understood. The
Tetrahymena Argonaute protein Twi1p localizes to the nucleus and is crucial for
small RNA-directed programmed DNA elimination. In this study, we identify Giw1p, 
which binds to Twi1p and is required for its nuclear localization. Furthermore,
the endoribonuclease (Slicer) activity of Twi1p plays a vital role in the removal
of one of the two strands of Twi1p-associated small interfering RNAs (siRNAs),
leading to a functionally mature Twi1p-siRNA complex. Slicer activity is also
shown to be required for nuclear localization of Twi1p and for its association
with Giw1p. These results suggest that Giw1p senses the state of Twi1p-associated
siRNAs and selectively transports the mature Twi1p-siRNA complex into the
nucleus.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2845462
PMID: 20211138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Nat Med. 2010 Apr;16(4):452-9. doi: 10.1038/nm.2106. Epub 2010 Mar 7.

Programmed death-1-induced interleukin-10 production by monocytes impairs CD4+ T 
cell activation during HIV infection.

Said EA(1), Dupuy FP, Trautmann L, Zhang Y, Shi Y, El-Far M, Hill BJ, Noto A,
Ancuta P, Peretz Y, Fonseca SG, Van Grevenynghe J, Boulassel MR, Bruneau J,
Shoukry NH, Routy JP, Douek DC, Haddad EK, Sekaly RP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche du Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal
(CRCHUM), Hôpital St.-Luc, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Viral replication and microbial translocation from the gut to the blood during
HIV infection lead to hyperimmune activation, which contributes to the decline in
CD4+ T cell numbers during HIV infection. Programmed death-1 (PD-1) and
interleukin-10 (IL-10) are both upregulated during HIV infection. Blocking
interactions between PD-1 and programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1) and between IL-10
and IL-10 receptor (IL-10R) results in viral clearance and improves T cell
function in animal models of chronic viral infections. Here we show that high
amounts of microbial products and inflammatory cytokines in the plasma of
HIV-infected subjects lead to upregulation of PD-1 expression on monocytes that
correlates with high plasma concentrations of IL-10. Triggering of PD-1 expressed
on monocytes by PD-L1 expressed on various cell types induced IL-10 production
and led to reversible CD4+ T cell dysfunction. We describe a new function for
PD-1 whereby microbial products inhibit T cell expansion and function by
upregulating PD-1 levels and IL-10 production by monocytes after binding of PD-1 
by PD-L1.

PMCID: PMC4229134
PMID: 20208540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Transpl Immunol. 2010 May;23(1-2):18-23. doi: 10.1016/j.trim.2010.02.003. Epub
2010 Mar 3.

Prevention of renal interstitial fibrosis via histone deacetylase inhibition in
rats with unilateral ureteral obstruction.

Kinugasa F(1), Noto T, Matsuoka H, Urano Y, Sudo Y, Takakura S, Mutoh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Pharmacology 1, Applied Pharmacology Research
Laboratories, Astellas Pharma Inc, Miyukigaoka 21, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8585,
Japan. fumitaka.kinugasa@jp.astellas.com

Acute rejection following renal transplantation has become manageable with the
introduction of calcineurin inhibitors, FK506 and cyclosporine A. However,
chronic allograft dysfunction accompanied by renal interstitial fibrosis, which
induces graft loss, remains unresolved. Here, we evaluated the effect of
FR276457, a pan-histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, on interstitial fibrosis in
the injured kidneys of a rat model of unilateral ureteral obstruction. The
injured kidneys, harvested on Day 14 following the operation, showed progression 
of interstitial fibrosis, increases of hydroxyproline contents, and mRNA
expression of collagen type Ialpha1 and monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1).
However, these changes were found to be prevented with daily oral administration 
of FR276457. In addition, given that MCP-1 is believed to contribute to
progressive fibrosis, we investigated the direct effect of FR276457 on MCP-1
production by activated THP-1 cells in vitro. Results showed that FR276457
administration decreased MCP-1 production in these cells in a
concentration-dependent manner. Findings from the present study suggested that a 
pan-HDAC inhibitor may exert a prophylactic effect against renal interstitial
fibrosis by inhibiting MCP-1 production.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20206695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Cells Tissues Organs. 2010;192(2):85-92. doi: 10.1159/000291015. Epub 2010 Feb
27.

The mouse gene Noto is expressed in the tail bud and essential for its
morphogenesis.

Zizic Mitrecic M(1), Mitrecic D, Pochet R, Kostovic-Knezevic L, Gajovic S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Neurogenetics and Developmental Genetics, Croatian Institute
for Brain Research, University of Zagreb, School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia.

The mouse transcription factor Noto is expressed in the notochord and involved in
its development. Noto mouse mutants, Noto(tc/tc)(truncate) and Noto(GFP/GFP)
(Noto null mutant), exhibit a segmental lack of the notochord in the caudal part 
of the embryo and subsequent tail truncation in adult animals. In order to
address the relationship between the tail bud (the undifferentiated mesenchymal
cells in the tip of the embryo tail) and the caudal notochord, Noto(GFP/GFP), a
loss- of-function mutant, was analyzed. Taking advantage of Noto(GFP/+)
heterozygotes, we could track Noto-GFP-expressing cells from the tail bud over
the tail cord to the caudal notochord, and confirm a morphological continuum from
the tail bud mesenchyme to the caudal notochord. Loss of Noto affected tail bud
morphogenesis: Noto-GFP-expressing cells were scattered in the tail bud
mesenchyme. They segregated in the notochord-like structure within the medullary 
cord instead at the tail cord, which subsequently disappeared. In the tail cord, 
instead of the notochord, additional lumen of the tail gut was formed. These
findings suggest that Noto is involved in both rearrangement and morphogenesis of
the tail bud during notochord formation.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20197654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Eur J Radiol. 2011 Aug;79(2):283-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2010.02.002. Epub 2010
Mar 2.

A head phantom study for intraocular dose evaluation of 64-slice multidetector CT
examination in patients with suspected cranial trauma.

Matsubara K(1), Koshida K, Noto K, Takata T, Suzuki M, Shimono T, Yamamoto T,
Matsui O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Quantum Medical Technology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Kanazawa
University, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan.
matsuk@mhs.mp.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

PURPOSE: In cases of suspected cranial trauma, cranial CT examinations should be 
performed to rule out pathology. There are some methods available for reducing
intraocular doses; however, it is difficult for the operators to conduct the
necessary measurements because of restrictions in time and patient mobility,
especially in high-energy trauma cases. Therefore, we performed a head phantom
study for intraocular dose evaluation of 64-slice multidetector CT examination in
patients with suspected cranial trauma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Assuming that the orbitomeatal (OM) line and bed were
vertical, a head phantom was tilted from 10 degrees caudally to 25 degrees
cranially at 5-degree intervals. At each tilted position, the phantom was
examined using a 64-section multidetector CT device using three acquisition
protocols. Intraocular doses during each examination were measured using small
dosimeters.
RESULTS: Assuming that the OM line and bed were vertical, intraocular doses
varied between 52 and 140%, 17-138%, and 90-142% during helical, non-helical, and
helical CT angiographic examinations, respectively. Intraocular doses increased
when the phantom was tilted cranially.
CONCLUSION: If possible, the best way to reduce the intraocular dose is by
angling the gantry cranially, tilting the head of each patient caudally and
adopting a non-helical acquisition method. During procedure, the acquisition
angle should be angled cranially more than 0 degrees based on the OM line. The
estimation of intraocular dose using the acquisition angle and displayed
volumetric CT dose index might be useful to evaluate the deterministic effect
risks and to inform patients about the associated risks.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20193995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Intern Med. 2010;49(5):471-4. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

Multifocal conduction blocks in sarcoid peripheral neuropathy.

Sawai S(1), Misawa S, Kobayashi M, Kanai K, Isose S, Shibuya K, Sekiguchi Y, Nasu
S, Noto Y, Fujimaki Y, Koga S, Ohtani R, Kuwabara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University.

Peripheral neuropathy is a rare manifestation of sarcoidosis, and previous
studies have shown axonal degeneration as the main pathology. We herein report
three patients with sarcoidosis who presented with multiple mononeuropathy as the
initial manifestation. Nerve conduction studies showed prominent multifocal
conduction blocks in the intermediate nerve trunk. In all three patients,
corticosteroid treatment resulted in a dramatic clinical improvement associated
with rapid resolution of conduction blocks. The sequential electrodiagnostic
findings suggest that demyelinative or ischemic-functional conduction block is
responsible for their neuropathy. To date, only three cases of acute conduction
block neuropathy associated with sarcoidosis have been reported, but it may occur
more frequently than expected.

PMID: 20190486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 23;285(17):12882-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.113035. Epub
2010 Feb 19.

A proprotein convertase subtilisin-like/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) C-terminal domain
antibody antigen-binding fragment inhibits PCSK9 internalization and restores low
density lipoprotein uptake.

Ni YG(1), Condra JH, Orsatti L, Shen X, Di Marco S, Pandit S, Bottomley MJ,
Ruggeri L, Cummings RT, Cubbon RM, Santoro JC, Ehrhardt A, Lewis D, Fisher TS, Ha
S, Njimoluh L, Wood DD, Hammond HA, Wisniewski D, Volpari C, Noto A, Lo Surdo P, 
Hubbard B, Carfí A, Sitlani A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, Merck Research Laboratories, Rahway,
New Jersey 07065, USA. yan_ni@merck.com

PCSK9 binds to the low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) and leads to LDLR
degradation and inhibition of plasma LDL cholesterol clearance. Consequently, the
role of PCSK9 in modulating circulating LDL makes it a promising therapeutic
target for treating hypercholesterolemia and coronary heart disease. Although the
C-terminal domain of PCSK9 is not involved in LDLR binding, the location of
several naturally occurring mutations within this region suggests that it has an 
important role for PCSK9 function. Using a phage display library, we identified
an anti-PCSK9 Fab (fragment antigen binding), 1G08, with subnanomolar affinity
for PCSK9. In an assay measuring LDL uptake in HEK293 and HepG2 cells, 1G08 Fab
reduced 50% the PCSK9-dependent inhibitory effects on LDL uptake. Importantly, we
found that 1G08 did not affect the PCSK9-LDLR interaction but inhibited the
internalization of PCSK9 in these cells. Furthermore, proteolysis and
site-directed mutagenesis studies demonstrated that 1G08 Fab binds a region of
beta-strands encompassing Arg-549, Arg-580, Arg-582, Glu-607, Lys-609, and
Glu-612 in the PCSK9 C-terminal domain. Consistent with these results, 1G08 fails
to bind PCSK9DeltaC, a truncated form of PCSK9 lacking the C-terminal domain.
Additional studies revealed that lack of the C-terminal domain compromised the
ability of PCSK9 to internalize into cells, and to inhibit LDL uptake. Together, 
the present study demonstrate that the PCSK9 C-terminal domain contribute to its 
inhibition of LDLR function mainly through its role in the cellular uptake of
PCSK9 and LDLR complex. 1G08 Fab represents a useful new tool for delineating the
mechanism of PCSK9 uptake and LDLR degradation.

PMCID: PMC2857140
PMID: 20172854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Metallomics. 2009;1(3):249-55. doi: 10.1039/b902860a.

Hijacking transferrin bound iron: protein-receptor interactions involved in iron 
transport in N. gonorrhoeae.

Siburt CJ(1), Roulhac PL, Weaver KD, Noto JM, Mietzner TA, Cornelissen CN,
Fitzgerald MC, Crumbliss AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708-0346, USA.

Neisseria gonorrhoeae has the capacity to acquire iron from its human host by
removing this essential nutrient from serum transferrin. The transferrin binding 
proteins, TbpA and TbpB constitute the outer membrane receptor complex
responsible for binding transferrin, extracting the tightly bound iron from the
host-derived molecule, and transporting iron into the periplasmic space of this
Gram-negative bacterium. Once iron is transported across the outer membrane,
ferric binding protein A (FbpA) moves the iron across the periplasmic space and
initiates the process of transport into the bacterial cytosol. The results of the
studies reported here define the multiple steps in the iron transport process in 
which TbpA and TbpB participate. Using the SUPREX technique for assessing the
thermodynamic stability of protein-ligand complexes, we report herein the first
direct measurement of periplasmic FbpA binding to the outer membrane protein
TbpA. We also show that TbpA discriminates between apo- and holo-FbpA; i.e. the
TbpA interaction with apo-FbpA is higher affinity than the TbpA interaction with 
holo-FbpA. Further, we demonstrate that both TbpA and TbpB individually can
deferrate transferrin and ferrate FbpA without energy supplied from TonB
resulting in sequestration by apo-FbpA.

PMCID: PMC2749328
PMID: 20161024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int. 2010 Feb;9(1):97-9.

Synchronous gastric adenocarcinoma and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Muroni M(1), D'Angelo F, Pezzatini M, Sebastiani S, Noto S, Pilozzi E, Ramacciato
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, La Sapienza University of Rome, St. Andrea
Hospital, viale Gino Cervi 53 L, 00139, Rome, Italy. mirkomuroni@libero.it

BACKGROUND: The association between gastric and pancreatic carcinoma is a
relatively rare condition. In gastric carcinoma patients, the prevalence of
second tumors varies 2.8% to 6.8% according to the reported statistics. Gastric
cancer associated with pancreatic cancer is uncommon.
METHODS: We report a case of a 73-year-old patient hospitalized for vomiting and 
weight loss. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy demonstrated an ulcerative lesion of the 
gastric antrum. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance showed a gastric
thickening in the antral and pyloric portion and a nodular mass (3 X 1.7 cm) in
the uncinate portion of the pancreas.
RESULTS: The patient underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy according to Whipple
regional type I Fortner. Histological examination of the specimen demonstrated a 
moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the stomach and a poorly
differentiated ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.
CONCLUSIONS: Long survival is rare in patients with associated gastric and
pancreatic cancer. Surgical resection remains the only potentially curative
treatment.

PMID: 20133238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Bras Pneumol. 2009 Dec;35(12):1204-11.

[Random sample survey on the prevalence of smoking in the major cities of
Brazil].

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Leitão Filho FS(1), Galduróz JC, Noto AR, Nappo SA, Carlini EA, Nascimento OA,
Santos SR, Jardim JR.

Author information: 
(1)Técnico de Apoio em Pesquisa. Instituto Adolfo Lutz, São Paulo, Brasil.

OBJECTIVE: To provide access to the results of a randomized cross-sectional study
conducted by the Brazilian Center for Information on Psychotropic Drugs in 2001.
METHODS: This survey involved a random sample of individuals ranging from 12 to
65 years of age and residing in the 107 largest cities (over 200,000 inhabitants)
in Brazil, which represented 27.7% of the Brazilian population, estimated to be
169,799,170 inhabitants at the time. A total of 8,589 interviews were conducted. 
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration questionnaire,
translated and adapted for use in Brazil, was used in the interviews.
RESULTS: Of the sample as a whole, 41.1% of the interviewees reported having
experimented with tobacco products. The prevalence of daily smokers was 17.4%
(20.3% among males and 14.8% among females). We found that 9% of the sample
(10.1% of the men and 7.9% of the women) were nicotine-dependent, according to
the criteria of the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of current smoking in the 107 largest cities of
Brazil is significantly lower in this decade than was the national prevalence at 
the end of last century.

PMID: 20126922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Am Chem Soc. 2010 Feb 24;132(7):2183-95. doi: 10.1021/ja906975z.

Structure-relaxation interplay of a new nanostructured membrane based on
tetraethylammonium trifluoromethanesulfonate ionic liquid and neutralized nafion 
117 for high-temperature fuel cells.

Di Noto V(1), Negro E, Sanchez JY, Iojoiu C.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Università di Padova, Via Marzolo 1, I-35131
Padova (PD), Italy. vito.dinoto@unipd.it

In this report, the electrical performance at T > 100 degrees C and low relative 
humidity of proton-conducting Nafion-based membranes was improved by preparing
new materials based on Nafion 117 (N117) neutralized with triethylammonium
(TEA(+)) and doped with the ionic liquid (IL) trifluoromethanesulfonate of
triethylammonium (TEA-TF). In particular, a new two-step protocol for the
preparation of [N117(x-)(TEA(+))(x)/(TEA-TF)(y)] is proposed.
[N117(x-)(TEA(+))(x)/(TEA-TF)(y)] membrane is composed of ca. 30 wt % of TEA-TF. 
The structure of the different nanophases composing the materials and their
interactions were investigated by FT-IR ATR and micro-Raman spectroscopy. The
thermal stability, water uptake, and mechanical properties of the membranes were 
studied by thermogravimetric analysis and dynamic mechanical analysis
measurements. With respect to pristine N117, the thermal and mechanical
properties of the proposed materials were improved. The electric response of
[N117(x-)(TEA(+))(x)/(TEA-TF)(y)] was studied by broad band dielectric
spectroscopy in the frequency range from 10(-2) Hz to 10 MHz and for temperatures
between 5 and 155 degrees C. In comparison to the N117 reference, the following
was observed: (a) the stability range of conductivity (SRC) of the
[N117(x-)(TEA(+))(x)] membrane increases up to 155 degrees C, while its sigma(DC)
at T = 100 degrees C is lowered by ca. 2 orders of magnitude; (b) the SRC of
[N117(x-)(TEA(+))(x)/(TEA-TF)(y)] is similar to that of [N117(x-)(TEA(+))(x)],
while the sigma(DC) at 145 degrees C decreases in the order 7.3 x 10(-3) > 6.1 x 
10(-3) > 9.7 x 10(-4) S x cm(-1) for [N117(x-)(TEA(+))(x)/(TEA-TF)(y)], N117, and
[N117(x-)(TEA(+))(x)] membranes, respectively. In conclusion, the lower water
uptake, the improved thermal and mechanical stability, and the good conductivity 
make [N117(x-)(TEA(+))(x)/(TEA-TF)(y)] a promising membrane to improve for
application in proton exchange membrane fuel cells operating under anhydrous
conditions at T > 100 degrees C.

PMID: 20102239  [PubMed]


156. Clin Neurophysiol. 2010 May;121(5):719-24. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2009.12.034.
Epub 2010 Jan 22.

Mexiletine suppresses nodal persistent sodium currents in sensory axons of
patients with neuropathic pain.

Isose S(1), Misawa S, Sakurai K, Kanai K, Shibuya K, Sekiguchi Y, Nasu S, Noto Y,
Fujimaki Y, Yokote K, Kuwabara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1,
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate changes in axonal persistent Na(+) currents in patients
with neuropathic pain and the effects of mexiletine, an analogue of lidocaine, on
axonal excitability properties.
METHODS: The technique of latent addition was used to estimate nodal persistent
Na(+) currents in superficial radial sensory axons of 17 patients with
neuropathic pain/paresthesias before and after mexiletine treatment. Brief
hyperpolarizing conditioning currents were delivered, and threshold change at the
conditioning-test interval of 0.2 ms was measured as an indicator of the
magnitude of persistent Na(+) currents.
RESULTS: Threshold changes at 0.2 ms in latent addition were greater in the
neuropathic patients than in the normal controls (p<0.001). After mexiletine
treatment, there was a reduction in clinical pain scores (p<0.001), associated
with decreased threshold changes at 0.2 ms (p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with neuropathy, nodal persistent Na(+) currents in
large sensory fibers increase, and the abnormal currents can be suppressed by
mexiletine. Pain reduction after mexiletine treatment raises the possibility that
excessive Na(+) currents are also suppressed in small fibers mediating
neuropathic pain.
SIGNIFICANCE: Latent addition can be used for indirect in vivo monitoring of
nodal Na(+) currents in large sensory fibers, and future studies using this
approach in small fibers would provide new insights into the peripheral mechanism
of neuropathic pain.

Copyright 2010 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20097124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Scand J Urol Nephrol. 2010 Feb;44(1):38-45. doi: 10.3109/00365590903335221.

Long-term treatment and prognostic factors of alpha 1-blockers for lower urinary 
tract symptoms associated with benign prostatic hyperplasia: a pilot study
comparing naftopidil and tamsulosin hydrochloride.

Kawachi Y(1), Sakurai T, Sugimura S, Iwata S, Noto K, Honda S, Maruyama O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Juntendo University Urayasu Hospital, Urayasu City,
Japan Urayasu City, Japan. urjunur@sepia.ocn.ne.jp

Comment in
    J Urol. 2011 Jan;185(1):227.

OBJECTIVE: This study evaluated the 5-year failure rate of naftopidil (NAF) or
tamsulosin hydrochloride (TAM) in lower urinary tract symptoms associated with
benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH/LUTS) and compared the prognostic factor of two
alpha(1)-blockers.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 131 patients with International Prostate Symptom
Score (IPSS) >or= 8 or IPSS quality of life (IPSS-QOL) >or= 3 with BPH/LUTS
receiving treatment with alpha(1)-blockers had been administered NAF or TAM, and 
failure rates were calculated for 5 years. Age, prostate volume (PV), acute
urinary retention (AUR), overactive bladder (OAB), IPSS, IPSS-QOL and postvoiding
residual volume (PVR) were evaluated as prognostic factors.
RESULTS: No significant differences in failure rate were observed between the
drugs. The failure rate was significantly high for patients with a PV >or= 35 ml,
PVR >or= 30 ml, a history of AUR or complications of OAB symptoms. The failure
rate for patients with a history of AUR was significantly higher than in those
without AUR in the NAF group. By contrast, in the TAM group, it was significantly
higher in patients who had OAB symptoms than in those without OAB.
CONCLUSIONS: No significant differences were observed between the drugs for the
failure rate. Each treatment had a unique factor for prognosis, such as history
of AUR for NAF and complications of OAB for TAM. Therefore, it will be necessary 
to use the two alpha(1)-blockers properly, considering the patient's background.

PMID: 20095868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Pediatr Res. 2010 Feb;67(2):200-4. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181c8f035.

Plasma non-cholesterol sterols: a useful diagnostic tool in pediatric
hypercholesterolemia.

Noto D(1), Cefalù AB, Barraco G, Martino E, Fayer F, Minà M, Montali A, Arca M,
Averna M, Martino F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Emerging Diseases, University of Palermo, 
Palermo I90127, Italy.

Current guidelines strongly recommend the identification of genetic forms of
hypercholesterolemia (HC) during childhood.The usefulness of non-cholesterol
sterols (NCS) in the diagnosis of genetic HC has not been fully explored. Plasma 
NCS were measured by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) in 113 children
with hypercholesterolemia affected by: autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia
(ADH), familial combined hyperlipidemia(FCHL), polygenic hypercholesterolemia
(PHC), and in 79 controls to evaluate: i) plasma NCS profile in different genetic
HC and ii) the usefulness of NCS for the diagnosis of HC beyond current clinical 
criteria. ADH was characterized by raised lathosterol/total cholesterol (TC) and 
reduced phytosterols/TC ratios, indicative of increased cholesterol synthesis.
FCHL showed a slight increase of lathosterol/TC ratio, whereas PHC showed
increased phytosterols/TC ratios, indicative of increased cholesterol absorption.
In a post hoc discriminant analysis of patients with HC, lipid values correctly
classified the 73% (14 of 19) of ADH, whereas the inclusion of plasma sterols
allowed the correct identification of all 19 patients with ADH. FCHL was not
differentiated from PHC (62 versus 69%).In conclusion, NCS measurement showed
that cholesterol plasma levels are related to the cholesterol synthesis in ADH
and to cholesterol absorption in PHC. NCS improve the detection of ADH in
pediatric patients, whereas FCHL diagnosis is not improved.

PMID: 20091938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Am J Dermatopathol. 2010 May;32(3):251-6. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0b013e3181b7fc56.

T regulatory cells and plasmocytoid dentritic cells in hansen disease: a new
insight into pathogenesis?

Massone C(1), Nunzi E, Ribeiro-Rodrigues R, Talhari C, Talhari S, Schettini AP,
Parente JN, Brunasso AM, Puntoni M, Clapasson A, Noto S, Cerroni L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
cesare.massone@klinikum-graz.at

Leprosy is characterized by spectrum of histologically different granulomatous
skin lesions that reflects the patient's immune response to Mycobacterium leprae.
Presence, frequency, and distribution of both CD4+ CD25+ FoxP3+ T regulatory
cells (T-regs) and CD123+ plasmacytoid dendritic cells in leprosy have never been
investigated. We performed a retrospective immunohistochemical study on 20 cases 
of leprosy [tuberculoid tuberculoid (TT): 1 patient; borderline tuberculoid (BT):
3 patients; borderline lepromatous (BL): 5 patients; lepromatous lepromatous
(LL): 5 patients; borderline borderline in reversal reaction (BB-RR): 1 patient; 
BT-RR: 2 patients; and erythema nodosum leprosum (ENL): 3 patients].
FoxP3-positive cells were present in 95% of the cases with an average density of 
2.9% of the infiltrate. Their distribution was not related to granulomatous
structures or special locations. There was no statistical difference of FoxP3
expression between TT, BT, BL, and LL, whereas a statistical significant
increment (P = 0.042) was observed in patients affected by reversal leprosy
reactions (BT-RR and BB-RR) compared with patients affected by ENL and patients
with nonreactional disease forms (BL, LL, BT, TT). CD123 expression was not
observed in any of the biopsy specimens evaluated; with the exception of 2 cases 
of ENL, in which a focal positivity for CD123 was observed. Our results show that
plasmacytoid dendritic cells are not involved in the immune response against M.
leprae while T-regs are present in leprosy skin lesions. These data raise the
question if T-regs have a pathogenetic role in HD as previously demonstrated in
Leishmania major and Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

PMID: 20075708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Eur Respir J. 2010 Aug;36(2):362-9. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00123509. Epub 2010 Jan
14.

A European survey of noninvasive ventilation practices.

Crimi C(1), Noto A, Princi P, Esquinas A, Nava S.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Internal and Specialistic Medicine, Section of Respiratory Diseases,
University of Catania, Catania, Italy.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2011 Jun;37(6):1536; author reply 1537.

Although noninvasive ventilation (NIV) is becoming very popular, little is known 
about its pattern of clinical and technical utilisation in different
environments. We conducted a web-based survey in Europe to identify the perceived
pattern of NIV utilisation and the reason for choosing a specific ventilator and 
interface type in four common clinical scenarios: acute hypercapnic respiratory
failure (AHRF), cardiogenic pulmonary oedema (CPE), de novo hypoxic respiratory
failure and weaning/post-extubation failure (W/PE). A response was obtained from 
272 (51.3%) out of 530 selected European physicians involved in NIV practice. The
NIV utilisation rate was higher for pulmonologists than
intensivists/anesthesiologists (p<0.05). The most common indication for all the
physicians was AHRF (48%). Physicians were more likely to use NIV dedicated
ventilator in AHRF and CPE and an intensive care unit (ICU) ventilator with NIV
module in de novo hypoxic respiratory failure and W/PE, mainly because of the
possibility of using the double circuit and inspiratory oxygen fraction control. 
Overall, the oro-nasal mask was the most frequently used interface, irrespective 
of clinical scenarios. The use of NIV in Europe is generally relatively high,
especially among pulmonologists and in AHRF. Dedicated NIV ventilators and ICU
ventilators with NIV modules are preferably in AHRF and in de novo hypoxic
respiratory failure, respectively, together with oro-nasal masks.

PMID: 20075052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 1;70(1):30-5. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2899.

Matrix metalloproteinase-7 and premalignant host responses in Helicobacter
pylori-infected mice.

Ogden SR(1), Noto JM, Allen SS, Patel DA, Romero-Gallo J, Washington MK,
Fingleton B, Israel DA, Lewis ND, Wilson KT, Chaturvedi R, Zhao Z, Shyr Y, Peek
RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee
37232-2279, USA.

Helicobacter pylori-induced gastritis is the strongest singular risk factor for
gastric adenocarcinoma. Matrix metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7) is a proteolytic
enzyme that can modify the intestinal microbial replicative niche as well as
affect tumorigenesis, and H. pylori stimulates expression of MMP-7 in gastric
epithelial cells in vitro. Utilizing a transgenic murine model of H.
pylori-mediated injury, our experiments now show that gastric inflammation is
increased within the context of MMP-7 deficiency, which involves both Th1- and
Th17-mediated pathways. Enhanced gastritis in H. pylori-infected mmp-7-/- mice is
strongly linked to accelerated epithelial cellular turnover. However, more severe
inflammation and heightened proliferation and apoptosis are not dependent on
MMP-7-mediated bacterial eradication. Collectively, these studies indicate that
H. pylori-mediated induction of MMP-7 may serve to protect the gastric mucosa
from pathophysiologic processes that promote carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2804939
PMID: 20048070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Atherosclerosis. 2010 Jun;210(2):493-6. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2009.11.051. Epub 2009 Dec 5.

Identification and functional characterization of LDLR mutations in familial
hypercholesterolemia patients from Southern Italy.

Romano M(1), Di Taranto MD, D'Agostino MN, Marotta G, Gentile M, Abate G,
Mirabelli P, Di Noto R, Del Vecchio L, Rubba P, Fortunato G.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE S.C.a r.l. Biotecnologie Avanzate, Napoli, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: Autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemias are due to defects in the LDL
receptor (LDLR) gene, in the apolipoprotein B-100 gene or in the proprotein
convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 gene. The aim of this study was to identify
and functionally characterize mutations in the LDLR gene that account for most
cases of familial hypercholesterolemia (FH).
METHODS: We enrolled 56 unrelated patients from Southern Italy with a clinical
diagnosis of FH. The mutation screening was performed by direct sequencing of the
promoter and the 18 exons of the LDLR gene and by multiplex ligation-dependent
probe amplification (MLPA) analysis to search for large rearrangements.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: We found 5 new mutations, the causative role of which was
demonstrated by functional characterization performed by quantification of
fluorescent LDL uptake in EBV-transformed B lymphocytes. These results enlarge
the spectrum of FH-causative LDLR mutations. Lastly, screening for large
rearrangements is highly recommended for the genetic diagnosis of FH.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20045108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Org Chem. 2010 Feb 5;75(3):767-71. doi: 10.1021/jo9022952.

Aryl azides formation under mild conditions: a kinetic study in some ionic liquid
solutions.

D'Anna F(1), Marullo S, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica E. Paternò, Università degli Studi di
Palermo, Viale delle Scienze-Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
fdanna@unipa.it

The kinetics of nucleophilic aromatic substitution of three nitrothiophene
derivatives in different [1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium][N(3)]/ionic liquid binary 
mixtures was studied spectrophotometrically at 298 K. Ionic liquids differing for
cation structure (imidazolium or pyrrolidinium) and for size, shape, and
coordination ability of the anion ([BF(4)(-)], [PF(6)(-)], [SbF(6)(-)], and
[NTf(2)(-)]) were used. Furthermore, in order to have a comparison with
conventional organic solvents, the target reaction was also carried out in DMF
solution at increasing concentration of NaN(3) or [bmim][N(3)]. Data collected
show that the reaction occurs faster in DMF than in ionic liquid solution.
Furthermore, as a consequence of the ability of all solvent media to favor the
leaving group departure, a simple linear dependence of the pseudo-first-order
kinetic constant from nucleophile concentration was detected. The results of this
kinetic investigation once more underline that ionic liquids are able to exert
peculiar effects that can be understood also considering their three-dimensional 
organization.

PMID: 20039644  [PubMed]


164. J Math Biol. 2010 Nov;61(5):695-714. doi: 10.1007/s00285-009-0318-z. Epub 2009
Dec 24.

An application of the central limit theorem to coalescence times in the
structured coalescent model with strong migration.

Notohara M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Natural Sciences, Nagoya City University, Mizuho, Nagoya,
467-8501, Japan. noto@nsc.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

The structured coalescent describes the ancestral relationship among sampled
genes from a geographically structured population. The aim of this article is to 
apply the central limit theorem to functionals of the migration process to study 
coalescence times and population structure. An application of the law of large
numbers to the migration process leads to the strong migration limit for the
distributions of coalescence times. The central limit theorem enables us to
obtain approximate distributions of coalescence times for strong migration. We
show that approximate distributions depend on the population structure. If
migration is conservative and strong, we can define a kind of effective
population size N(e)(*), with which the entire population approximately behaves
like a panmictic population. On the other hand, the approximate distributions for
nonconservative migration are qualitatively different from those for conservative
migration. And the entire population behaves unlike a panmictic population even
though migration is strong.

PMID: 20033692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Bone Miner Metab. 2010 May;28(3):351-8. doi: 10.1007/s00774-009-0140-0. Epub
2009 Dec 23.

How does long-term parenteral nutrition impact the bone mineral status of
children with intestinal failure?

Diamanti A(1), Bizzarri C, Basso MS, Gambarara M, Cappa M, Daniele A, Noto C,
Castro M.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology and Nutrition Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome,
Italy.

Erratum in
    J Bone Miner Metab. 2010 May;28(3):359. Bizzarri, Claudia [corrected to Bizzarri,
Carla].

Patients on long-term parenteral nutrition (PN) are at significantly increased
risk for the development of metabolic bone disease (MBD); this condition is
characterized by incomplete mineralization of osteoid with consequent
disturbances ranging from osteopenia to severe bone disease with fractures. The
aim of the study was: (1) to evaluate the prevalence of MBD, (2) to identify the 
PN- or intestinal failure (IF)-related factors and (3) to assess annual changes
of bone mineral status. Since September 2005 all patients affected by IF and
treated with PN started a BMD evaluation program using dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry (DXA). Twenty-four IF patients were included [15 with short bowel 
syndrome (SBS), 5 with severe protracted diarrhea and 4 with chronic intestinal
pseudostruction]. The bone mineral density (BMD) Z-score was significantly lower 
in patients than in the control group. In our series SBS patients showed a BMD
Z-score significantly higher in comparison with the medical causes of IF. No
significant correlations were found between bone mineral status and PN duration
and nutrient intake. Nine IF patients were submitted to a second DXA evaluation
after 1 year from the baseline. All bone mineral variables were significantly
increased at the second DXA evaluation. The high prevalence of MBD in IF patients
undergoing long-term treatment with PN requires that these patients undergo
careful and periodic monitoring of their bone mineral status; patients with
congenital gut dysfunctions, such as epithelium defects and motility anomalies,
are at major risk of developing this complication, probably due to the
association with extra-intestinal causes of bone loss.

PMID: 20033239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Hepatology. 2010 Jan;51(1):297-305. doi: 10.1002/hep.23354.

Highly efficient generation of human hepatocyte-like cells from induced
pluripotent stem cells.

Si-Tayeb K(1), Noto FK, Nagaoka M, Li J, Battle MA, Duris C, North PE, Dalton S, 
Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Division of Pediatric Pathology, Medical College
of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

Erratum in
    Hepatology. 2010 Mar;51(3):1094.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2010 Mar;51(3):1088-9.
    Hepatology. 2010 Jan;51(1):20-2.

There exists a worldwide shortage of donor livers available for orthotropic liver
transplantation and hepatocyte transplantation therapies. In addition to their
therapeutic potential, primary human hepatocytes facilitate the study of
molecular and genetic aspects of human hepatic disease and development and
provide a platform for drug toxicity screens and identification of novel
pharmaceuticals with potential to treat a wide array of metabolic diseases. The
demand for human hepatocytes, therefore, heavily outweighs their availability. As
an alternative to using donor livers as a source of primary hepatocytes, we
explored the possibility of generating patient-specific human hepatocytes from
induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells.CONCLUSION: We demonstrate that mouse iPS
cells retain full potential for fetal liver development and describe a procedure 
that facilitates the efficient generation of highly differentiated human
hepatocyte-like cells from iPS cells that display key liver functions and can
integrate into the hepatic parenchyma in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2946078
PMID: 19998274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2010 Jun;11(6):450-61. doi:
10.2459/JCM.0b013e328335233e.

Epidemiology and patterns of care of patients admitted to Italian Intensive
Cardiac Care units: the BLITZ-3 registry.

Casella G(1), Cassin M, Chiarella F, Chinaglia A, Conte MR, Fradella G, Lucci D, 
Maggioni AP, Pirelli S, Scorcu G, Visconti LO; BLITZ-3 Investigators.

Collaborators: Lucci D, Gonzini L, Visconti LO, Chiarella F, Cassin M, Chinaglia 
A, Pirelli S, Scorcu G, Casella G, Conte MR, Fradella G, Ferrara L, Greco A,
Ciociola G, Genchi C, Scarsi G, Stocco A, Bazzanini F, Moda L, Zarbo G, Ingrao V,
Giordano F, De Cristofaro A, Fonti S, Paruzzo E, Patruno N, Piras P, Rodio G,
Tria E, Aceto G, Schifalacqua AM, Ripa C, Canestrale R, Costantini C, Longo F,
Matera A, Lamanna R, Iorizzo M, Romagnoli D, Leone G, Arvat I, Guida R, Caneschi 
P, Lo Conte C, Li Pizzi G, Perrone C, Tomasi S, Gregori G, Partemi L, Alciati M, 
Porta V, Di Pasquale P, Di Mare M, Mariello C, Di Nardo P, Iodice P, De Bellis I,
Carrozza M, Olivieri A, Nannini M, Mando' R, Ciriello N, Cagnetta R, Zanna D,
Rubini A, Franchini G, Amoruso G, De Gennaro L, Colovitti M, Palella M, Caferra
F, Mascolo AR, Dargenio A, Libardoni M, Zarpellon AM, Palatini O, Rossi A,
Santopietro S, Apicella R, Ciampi Q, Maiale AM, Coutsoumbas GV, Fabbri S, Veritti
U, Chinelli N, Savasta C, Borghini E, Marenna B, Fontanel M, Musuraca AC, Attana'
R, Cemin R, Stanchina A, Bielli M, Sacco G, Bertola B, Marchino E, Cirillo R,
Bove A, Affatato A, Rinaldi M, Ghizzoni G, Conti C, Forgione C, Tosoni S,
Guadalupi M, Tredici S, Macchi M, Onnis E, Melis O, Bonomo P, Sessini P, Scorcu
G, Boi V, Cinnirella C, Nobile G, Amici R, Greco R, Di Marco A, Peggio M,
Costanza G, Antolini R, Ferrara D, Manzi RC, Mocci W, Patrizi G, Ardente V,
Bassano F, Quattrini L, Piscicelli C, Castoldi F, Greco A, Memmi E, Catanzaro M, 
Chirico S, Colangeli G, Visentin M, Madonna S, Zingone E, Pera I, Gozzi F,
Mariani PR, Turriani A, Ingurgio NC, Bonafede M, Manes E, Mitidieri M, Bellanuova
IA, Agricola P, Romeo C, La Rosa A, Branca B, Licciardello G, Florio C, Palazzo
G, Calvo D, Scotti E, Condito AM, Venturini E, Signorini F, Lo Iacono S, Manna G,
Alboni P, Balboni D, Giordano WS, Castro M, Tisselli A, Baschetti S, Ibello L,
D'Andrea C, Rodella P, Mazzoldi G, De Cesare M, Toto E, Cirino D, Grassi C,
Severini D, De Ritis D, Rossi M, Zanarella P, Baldoni M, Friscolanti D, Usai TL, 
Gasbarri C, Guasconi C, Pisaroni G, Mennuni M, Cacciotti C, Acquati F, Lucini M, 
Turiano G, Tonon M, Greco EL, Caldararo M, Misuraca G, Corrado M, De Vuono T,
Statzu P, Tovena D, Franzoni S, Boldini A, Mariani M, Giordano L, Montaruli B,
Morena L, Garnerone M, De Cristan B, Ceresara D, Avanzini F, Cotza R, Mazzuero A,
De Felice M, Vicinanza E, Rizzo R, Nieri M, Checcucci R, Battaglia C, Cagliari G,
Agnelli D, Urso A, Abrignani MG, Sorrentino A, Targa L, Scabello T, Merli E,
Prudente R, Romano S, Gobbis D, Ciliberti D, Monterubbianesi L, Buia E, Binini S,
Battelli P, Litta L, Valente S, Navari L, Valoti P, Cavicchi S, Liberati R,
Tartaglia D, Caravita L, Bacchilega E, Treglia A, Italo G, Giaccari R,
Legrottaglie AM, Podimani N, Crotti F, Cavalieri F, Papa A, Di Domenico E, Saleri
B, Spadaro C, Vella G, Secchi GL, Farina R, Toselli A, Manco T, Giuliano G, Noto 
ME, Lonati A, Canu S, De Rosa P, Zammartino L, Strangi T, Di Sante MG, Mattei L, 
Narduzzi C, Chianca R, Barini S, Guerrini F, Draoli N, Regni O, Ghiandoni N,
Mazza V, De Filippis A, Musso P, Grosso R, Rizzo M, Pasquinelli M, Pileggi V,
Cristiano A, Scimia A, Di Domenico P, De Lisi A, De Luca R, Giorgi AD, Coia I,
Achilli F, Colli F, Barbiero M, Guardalben S, Poletti F, Lorenzano E, Arcidiacono
S, D'Anna A, Comella A, Marchetti R, Galli M, Croce L, Rossi M, Franco A,
Marangoni E, Ferrari A, Boni A, Gianni P, Gobbi M, Bacchilega F, Morgagni GL,
Carpineti G, Bardelli G, Monfredini M, Pierri F, Di Mitri G, Masa A, Spagnoli J, 
Izzo A, Ciulla A, Panzarella A, Molendi V, Grassi C, Magnante A, Galtieri A, Di
Giovanni P, Puccio M, Erckert M, Azzouzi D, De Fazio G, Gallucci F, Paleologo G, 
Barbaro F, Giannetto M, Calatozzo D, Cutolo A, Vianello M, Mafrici A, Viola V,
Negrini M, Camozzi B, Capozi A, Ornago M, Terranova P, Girardi F, Sala R, Mura M,
Annoni L, Grignani M, Coppolino C, Costa A, Sternieri S, Malaguti F, Pasquetto G,
Carraro C, Tosoni G, Sorrentino S, Fantini G, Bardelli C, Parenzan T, Ancalepore 
T, Bruna C, Rossi T, Perazza L, Micheluzzi G, Mannarini A, Fiume C, Crosato M,
Sartor F, Catellani E, Cocconi A, Taddei T, Donati S, Bozzano A, Pirovano M,
Mortara A, Castaneda C, Elia LR, Sparano E, Irace L, Sanfilippo M, Cudemo G,
Micillo C, Siciliano S, Zingarini M, Golia B, Ricci V, Tammaro P, Pardo N, Mario 
FD, Marsili D, Romano C, Esposito F, Picardi G, Stampati E, Bacchini S, Sanna F, 
Agosti S, Gemme O, Secci T, Rubanu I, Orecchioni G, Silecchia T, Bianchi V, Duca 
L, Safari D, Beatrici B, Pozzi R, Cappello S, Caddeo A, Bonu G, Baragli D,
Gentile T, Marra MP, Brugnaro L, Smecca IM, Cannova C, Celona G, Di Salvo G,
Ajello A, Calabrese L, Cicero S, Cavalieri A, Guarneri A, Pellitteri G, Falletta 
C, Navanzino F, Crivaro A, Pantanella M, Sartorio D, Marletta G, Rancati V,
Lombardi F, Bottaro G, Fazzio O, Del Pinto M, Ponziani R, Tarsi G, Donninelli C, 
Di Clemente D, Cornacchione N, Civitarese G, Cicalo' RA, Rossini D, Grassi C,
Ferraro S, Oronte L, De Risi L, Vetere A, Rossi F, Aicardi S, Pasqualini MF,
Marcomin C, Sappe' D, Isidori S, Agostini V, Lattanzi F, Saviozzi G, Coceani M,
Corelli L, Chiti M, Parenti K, Romei M, Francardi R, Truncellito L, Graziano V,
Meduri G, Guerrisi G, La Creta C, Petrillo N, Nardiello V, Montella A, Ricci D,
Pipia T, Leonardi T, Casati AG, Viani SM, Caruso M, Rellini G, Spicca A, Murena
E, Tortorella S, Tedeschi D, Agostini D, Guarrella ML, Battaglia G, Scollo V,
Cavalieri L, Parollo R, Babini E, Tortorella G, Battitori A, Vittori G, Bottini
M, Marchese I, Simeoni S, Belletti G, Lombardi D, Bongioanni S, De Luca E, Oppo
I, Buono NC, Fera MS, Fiori F, Finocchiaro ML, Pierini S, Burattini M, Fabrizi S,
Lo Bianco F, Zecca R, Tubaro M, Chisari P, Tozzi Q, Gervasio G, Liuzzo G, Mattu
L, Vitucci NC, Caldironi S, Grotti PL, Tatullo A, Martina C, Gasbarro V, Scioli
R, Piccininno V, Federici A, Fortunato A, Trambaiolo P, Esposito D, Melfi R,
Autore C, Gargiulo A, Salituri S, Petrone F, Vaccarini C, Carraro M, Zaninati M, 
Barbaro C, Gabriele G, Naddeo C, Iannaccone O, Floris F, Di Teodoro D, Giovinazzo
P, Barro S, Villella M, Tartaglione S, Mileto F, Fattore L, Valentini G,
Matarazzo MM, Propato F, Palumbo B, Zanchi P, Meloni S, Legnani M, Pes R, Pense' 
G, Melandri F, Francesconi A, Coppolino A, Morra G, Aykut V, Mottolo D, Villani
P, Longobardi G, Sanzone G, Lentini S, De Iaco MR, Castelluzzo A, Falchetti E,
Piersanti D, Costalunga A, Terzi A, Santoro R, Montiglio C, Barbieri L, Anduena
M, Maffei S, Vinci E, De Luca D, Pontiggia G, Poli C, Fontana D, Caiazzo A,
Sisani S, Cilento A, Di Iorio G, Mascio E, Russo NR, Lamperti C, Morrone V,
Matichecchia F, Pascente T, Serio MR, John N, Nicolardi A, Piccioni LL, Cecchini 
E, Cuonzo M, Ficco A, Colonna N, Staniscia C, De Bonis P, Cosso IC, Callegarin L,
Marcante S, Amati R, De Flavis A, Usmiani T, Tarantino E, Bergerone S, Ferraro A,
Gandolfo N, Bordino C, Ferro S, Saraceno A, Nejrotti A, Gagliardi S, Noussan P,
Labriola M, Guastaferro C, Orazzo P, Mutti EM, Cogotti F, Gianni M, Savoia L,
Spadaro R, Iori R, Centonze F, Nichetti W, Totis O, Sallemi P, Accogli M, Micello
L, Milo M, Pintarelli M, Fresco C, Fonseca T, Bersigotti G, Ceccarini S, Aloia A,
Gallo G, Limido A, Marchesi P, Prisco GD, Sommacal R, Gubelli S, Mastrangelo V,
Mazzuero A, Scorpiniti S, Proietti R, Curacanova M, Morando G, Signorini M, Teti 
G, Moscato S, Spanghero M, Zuccon S, Villani R, Argese I, Bassani F, Bonomi G,
Sommariva L, Faina C, Osti R, Barone D, Maffei M.

Comment in
    J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2010 Jun;11(6):406-7.

BACKGROUND: Intensive cardiac care units (ICCUs) have shifted from the
observation of patients with myocardial infarction to the care of different acute
cardiac diseases. However, few data on such an evolution are available.
METHODS AND RESULTS: From 7 to 20 April 2008, 6986 consecutive patients admitted 
to 81% of Italian ICCUs were prospectively enrolled. Patients observed were
mainly elderly men (median age 72 years) with several co-morbidities. Most of
them were triaged to ICCU from the emergency room, but 15% of admissions were
transfer-in from other hospitals. Several diagnostic and therapeutic procedures
were applied (78% had echocardiography and 35% coronary angiography) during the
ICCU stay [median length 4 days, interquartile range (IQR) 2-5]. The discharge
diagnosis was ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome (ACS) in 21%, non-ST-elevation
ACS in 31%, acute heart failure (AHF) in 14% and other acute non-ACS, non-AHF
cardiac diseases in 34%. Of those with ST-elevation ACS, 60% received reperfusion
(15% fibrinolysis and 45% primary percutaneous coronary intervention). The
overall in-ICCU crude mortality was 3.3%.
CONCLUSION: The BLITZ-3 survey provides a unique snapshot of current epidemiology
and patterns of care of patients admitted to ICCUs. Although ACS still remains
the most frequent admission diagnosis, the number of non-ACS patients is
substantial. However, the correct standard of care for these non-ACS patients has
to be defined.

PMID: 19952775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Int J Eat Disord. 2011 Jan;44(1):91-3. doi: 10.1002/eat.20778.

Digestive complication in severe malnourished anorexia nervosa patient: a case
report of necrotizing colitis.

Diamanti A(1), Basso MS, Cecchetti C, Monti L, Noto C, De Maria F, Castro M.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology and Nutrition Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Piazza 
S. Onofrio 4, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Necrotizing colitis (NC) represents a severe, although rare,
complication in patients with anorexia nervosa.
OBJECTIVE: We report the only case of NC with good prognosis in a severely
malnourished AN patient.
METHOD: Available patient records, imaging, and biochemical data were evaluated.
DISCUSSION: This case represents an unusual gastrointestinal complication and
underlines the important clinical role that Parenteral Nutrition (PN) has for
some selected very malnourished AN patients. The severe starvation may compromise
the normal function of gastrointestinal tract and it can also lead to an
incomplete tolerance of enteral refeeding thus making PN required to reach the
nutritional rehabilitation.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 19950113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Genes Cells. 2009 Dec;14(12):1359-67. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01353.x. Epub
2009 Nov 16.

oleed, a medaka Polycomb group gene, regulates ciliogenesis and left-right
patterning.

Arai D(1), Hatano A, Higashinakagawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku, Tokyo
162-8480, Japan.

Left-right (LR) patterning is an essential part of the animal body plan. Primary 
cilia are known to play a pivotal role in this process. In humans, genetic
disorders of ciliogenesis cause serious congenital diseases. A comprehensive
mechanism that regulates ciliogenesis has not been proposed so far. Here, we show
that EED, a core member of the Polycomb group (PcG) genes and a presumed player
in many epigenetic processes, is required for ciliogenesis and subsequent LR
patterning in the medaka fish, Oryzias latipes. Moderate knockdown of oleed, a
medaka homolog of EED, preferentially caused situs inversus. In the affected
embryo, the cilia in Kupffer's vesicle showed various defects in their structure,
position and motility. Furthermore, we demonstrated that oleed maintains the
expression of Noto, which, in mice, regulates ciliogenesis and LR patterning.
This study provides the first evidence for the involvement of epigenetic
plasticity in LR patterning through ciliogenesis.

PMID: 19919648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2009 Sep;14(3):151-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1529-8027.2009.00226.x.

Utility of the distal compound muscle action potential duration for diagnosis of 
demyelinating neuropathies.

Isose S(1), Kuwabara S, Kokubun N, Sato Y, Mori M, Shibuya K, Sekiguchi Y, Nasu
S, Fujimaki Y, Noto Y, Sawai S, Kanai K, Hirata K, Misawa S; Tokyo Metropolitan
Neuromuscular Electrodiagnosis Study Group.

Collaborators: Sonoo M, Shimizu T, Komori T, Hirashima F, Inaba A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Chiba University Hospital, Chiba, Japan.

To assess the significance of distal compound muscle action potential (CMAP)
duration for diagnosis of demyelinating neuropathies, electrophysiologic data
were reviewed from 471 subjects, including 145 normal controls, 60 patients with 
chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP), 205 with other
neuropathy, and 61 with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). The duration of
distally evoked CMAP was measured in the median, ulnar, tibial, and peroneal
nerves. Optimal cut-off values were calculated with receiver-operating
characteristic (ROC) curves. In comparison of normal controls and CIDP patients, 
ROC analyses showed the sufficient area under the curves (82-93%). When the
cut-off values in the detection of demyelination were determined as the point
with 98% specificity vs. normal on the ROC curves (median, 6.6 ms; ulnar, 6.7 ms;
peroneal, 7.6 ms; tibial, 8.8 ms), the sensitivity was 77% for CIDP, with a
specificity of 90% vs. ALS and 95% vs. diabetic neuropathy. The distal CMAP
duration is a useful index for the detection of distal demyelination. We suggest 
the above cut-off values for each nerve as one of the electrodiagnostic criteria 
for demyelinating neuropathies, preferentially affecting the distal nerve
terminals, such as CIDP.

PMID: 19909478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Chem Commun (Camb). 2009 Dec 7;(45):7006-8. doi: 10.1039/b913870f. Epub 2009 Oct 
13.

First time-resolved EPR observation of Nafion photochemistry.

Conti F(1), Negro E, Di Noto V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Padova, via Marzolo 1, I-35131 
Padova, Italy. fosca.conti@unipd.it

Time-resolved EPR spectra of UV-irradiated Nafion reveal the formation of
spin-polarized excited triplet states and allow the detection of photoinduced
triplet-triplet energy transfer processes through hydrogen bonds between water
and sulfonic acid groups.

PMID: 19904376  [PubMed]


172. JAMA. 2009 Nov 11;302(18):1977-84. doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.1614.

Prone positioning in patients with moderate and severe acute respiratory distress
syndrome: a randomized controlled trial.

Taccone P(1), Pesenti A, Latini R, Polli F, Vagginelli F, Mietto C, Caspani L,
Raimondi F, Bordone G, Iapichino G, Mancebo J, Guérin C, Ayzac L, Blanch L,
Fumagalli R, Tognoni G, Gattinoni L; Prone-Supine II Study Group.

Collaborators: Gattinoni L, Tognoni G, Fumagalli R, Latini R, Pesenti A, Taccone 
P, Malacrida R, Valsecchi MG, Suter P, Barlera S, Polli F, Milani V, Amigoni M,
Scanziani M, Serio C, Cabello B, Lisi A, Valetti MT, Marchesi G, Cerchiari E,
Cilloni N, Gordini G, Maioli A, Servadio G, Greco S, Solca M, Ronzoni G, Beck E, 
Pallavicini FB, Ardidi E, Radrizzani D, Porta V, Castelli A, Colombo R, Russo R, 
Savioli M, Zaniboni M, Noto A, Rossi N, Tagliabue P, Rialp G, Trabanco S, Pittoni
G, Bonaccorso G, Michielan F, Gagliardi G, Braschi A, Rodi G, Botazzi A, Peta M, 
Bellato V, Gavazzeni V, Salati G, Bottari W, Capra C, Frattini F, Dan M, Zaro G, 
Borelli M, Ferraris S, Rossi S, Marafon S, Gallioli G, Muttini S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Anestesia e Rianimazione, Fondazione IRCCS-Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, Mangiagalli, Regina Elena di Milano, 20122 Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2009 Nov 11;302(18):2030-2.
    JAMA. 2010 Mar 3;303(9):832; author reply 832-3.

CONTEXT: Post hoc analysis of a previous trial has suggested that prone
positioning may improve survival in patients with severe hypoxemia and with acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
OBJECTIVE: To assess possible outcome benefits of prone positioning in patients
with moderate and severe hypoxemia who are affected by ARDS.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PATIENTS: The Prone-Supine II Study, a multicenter,
unblinded, randomized controlled trial conducted in 23 centers in Italy and 2 in 
Spain. Patients were 342 adults with ARDS receiving mechanical ventilation,
enrolled from February 2004 through June 2008 and prospectively stratified into
subgroups with moderate (n = 192) and severe (n = 150) hypoxemia.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomized to undergo supine (n = 174) or prone (20 
hours per day; n = 168) positioning during ventilation.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary outcome was 28-day all-cause mortality.
Secondary outcomes were 6-month mortality and mortality at intensive care unit
discharge, organ dysfunctions, and the complication rate related to prone
positioning.
RESULTS: Prone and supine patients from the entire study population had similar
28-day (31.0% vs 32.8%; relative risk [RR], 0.97; 95% confidence interval [CI],
0.84-1.13; P = .72) and 6-month (47.0% vs 52.3%; RR, 0.90; 95% CI, 0.73-1.11; P =
.33) mortality rates, despite significantly higher complication rates in the
prone group. Outcomes were also similar for patients with moderate hypoxemia in
the prone and supine groups at 28 days (25.5% vs 22.5%; RR, 1.04; 95% CI,
0.89-1.22; P = .62) and at 6 months (42.6% vs 43.9%; RR, 0.98; 95% CI, 0.76-1.25;
P = .85). The 28-day mortality of patients with severe hypoxemia was 37.8% in the
prone and 46.1% in the supine group (RR, 0.87; 95% CI, 0.66-1.14; P = .31), while
their 6-month mortality was 52.7% and 63.2%, respectively (RR, 0.78; 95% CI,
0.53-1.14; P = .19).
CONCLUSION: Data from this study indicate that prone positioning does not provide
significant survival benefit in patients with ARDS or in subgroups of patients
with moderate and severe hypoxemia.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00159939.

PMID: 19903918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2009 Nov-Dec;81(5-6):331-9. doi:
10.1016/j.plefa.2009.09.008. Epub 2009 Oct 28.

Improved n-3 fatty acid status does not modulate insulin resistance in fa/fa
Zucker rats.

Gillam M(1), Noto A, Zahradka P, Taylor CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutritional Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
MB, Canada R2H 2A6.

Erratum in
    Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2010 Jan;82(1):61-2.

The objective was to examine the effect of polyunsaturated fatty acid type (plant
vs fish oil-derived n-3, compared to n-6 fatty acids in the presence of constant 
proportions of saturated, monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids) on
obesity, insulin resistance and tissue fatty acid composition in genetically
obese rats. Six-week-old fa/fa and lean Zucker rats were fed with a 10% (w/w)
mixed fat diet containing predominantly flax-seed, menhaden or safflower oils for
9 weeks. There was no effect of dietary lipid on obesity, oral glucose tolerance 
(except t=60min insulin), pancreatic function or molecular markers related to
insulin, glucose and lipid metabolism, despite increased n-3 fatty acids in
muscle and adipose tissue. The menhaden oil diet reduced fasting serum free fatty
acids in both fa/fa and lean rats. These data suggest that n-3 composition does
not alter obesity and insulin resistance in the fa/fa Zucker rat model when
dietary lipid classes are balanced.

PMID: 19864121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Metabolism. 2010 Apr;59(4):463-7. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2009.07.042. Epub 2009
Oct 20.

Variable phenotypic expression of chylomicron retention disease in a kindred
carrying a mutation of the Sara2 gene.

Cefalù AB(1), Calvo PL, Noto D, Baldi M, Valenti V, Lerro P, Tramuto F, Lezo A,
Morra I, Cenacchi G, Barbera C, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Departmet of Clinical Medicine and Emerging Diseases, University of Palermo,
I-90127 Palermo, Italy.

Chylomicron retention disease is a recessive inherited disorder characterized by 
fat malabsorption and steatorrhea and is associated with failure to thrive in
infancy. We describe a kindred carrying a mutation of Sara2 gene causing a
chylomicron retention phenotype. The proband was a 5-month-old baby, born of
consanguineous, apparently healthy parents from Morocco, with failure to thrive. 
There was a large quantity of fats in feces and malabsorption of fat-soluble
vitamins. Intestinal biopsies showed a diffused enterocyte vacuolization with
large cytosolic lipid droplets. Chylomicron retention disease or Anderson disease
was hypothesized, and the Sara2 gene was analyzed by direct sequencing. Analysis 
of the Sara2 gene in the proband identified a 2-nucleotide homozygous deletion in
exon 3 leading to a premature stop codon (c.75-76 del TG-L28fsX34). The father
was heterozygous for the same mutation, whereas the proband's mother was
homozygous, suggesting a variable phenotypic expression of the molecular defect. 
More studies are needed to understand the reasons of the phenotypic variability
of the same molecular defect in the same family.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19846172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Chemistry. 2009 Dec 7;15(47):13059-68. doi: 10.1002/chem.200901788.

Geminal ionic liquids: a combined approach to investigate their three-dimensional
organisation.

D'Anna F(1), Ferrante F, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica E. Paternò, Università degli Studi di
Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy.

Different investigations, such as 1D and 2D NMR spectroscopy, resonance light
scattering spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulations, have been jointly
used to achieve a deeper understanding of the degree of structural order in two
geminal ionic liquids. In particular,
3,3'-di-n-butyl-1,1'-(1,3-phenylenedimethylene)diimidazolium and
3,3'-di-n-butyl-1,1'-(1,4-phenylenedimethylene)diimidazolium
bis[bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide] have been studied. These geminal ionic
liquids were chosen because of the presence of both a rigid phenylenedimethylene 
link between two imidazolium rings, which should give a high degree of order to
the solvent system, and the different shapes of the two cations of the isomers,
which could induce different properties and packing in the liquid state. Data
collected here show that the two geminal ionic liquids are characterised by a
different degree of structural order that induces, for example, a different
sensitivity of the two solvent systems to temperature changes or to the presence 
of a co-solvent such as methanol.

PMID: 19844926  [PubMed]


176. J Oleo Sci. 2009;58(11):581-94.

Melanogenesis inhibitory, anti-inflammatory, and chemopreventive effects of
limonoids from the seeds of Azadirachta indicia A. Juss. (neem).

Akihisa T(1), Noto T, Takahashi A, Fujita Y, Banno N, Tokuda H, Koike K, Suzuki
T, Yasukawa K, Kimura Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Science and Technology, Nihon University, Tokyo, Japan.
akihisa@chem.cst.nihon-u.ac.jp

Thirty-one nortriterpenoids, including 28 limonoids (1-28) and 3 degraded
limonoids (29-31), and one diterpenoid (32), were isolated from the seed extract 
of Azadirachta indica (neem). Among these, six were new compounds and their
structures were established to be 15-hydroxyazadiradione (3),
7-benzoyl-17-hydroxynimbocinol (5), 23-deoxyazadironolide (12), limocin E (13),
23-epilimocin E (14), and 7alpha-acetoxy-3-oxoisocopala-1,13-dien-15-oic acid
(32). Upon evaluation of compounds 1-32 on the melanogenesis in the B16 melanoma 
cells, five compounds, 20, 26, 27, 29, and 31, exhibited marked inhibitory effect
(74-91% reduction of melanin content at 25 microg/mL) with no or almost no
toxicity to the cells. Seven compounds, 1, 6, 9, 10, 18, 20, and 26, on
evaluation for their inhibitory effect against
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-induced inflammation (1 microg/ear) in
mice, exhibited, except for compound 26, marked anti-inflammatory activity
(ID(50) values 0.09-0.26 mg/ear). In addition, all of the 32 compounds exhibited 
moderate or potent inhibitory effects (IC(50) values of 230-501 mol ratio/32 pmol
TPA) against the Epstein-Barr virus early antigen (EBV-EA) activation induced by 
TPA. Furthermore, on evaluation of azadirachtin B (21) for its
anti-tumor-initiating activity on the two-stage carcinogenesis of mouse skin
tumor induced by peroxynitrite (ONOO-; PN) as an initiator and TPA as a promoter,
this exhibited marked inhibitory activity.

PMID: 19844073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2009 Aug;49(8):497-500.

[Subacute sensory neuronopathy associated with squamous cell carcinoma of the
lung: a case report].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto Y(1), Shiga K, Fujinami J, Mizuno T, Nakagawa M, Tanaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine.

We report a 59-year-old man who developed dysesthesia in all extremities with
severe loss of deep sensation over three months. A radiating radicular pain was
also noted in the extremities. The nerve conduction study barely elicited sensory
nerve action potentials both in the median and in the sural nerve. An extensive
search for anti-neuronal antibodies including anti-Hu and anti-CV2 antibody was
negetive. The biopsy specimen of an enlarged tracheobronchial lymph node revealed
squamous cell carcinoma. The subsequent chemotherapy and radiation therapy for
the neoplasm improved the radicular pain and the deep sensation to a moderate
extent, leading to the diagnosis of paraneoplastic subacute sensory neuropathy
(SSN). In general, cases with paraneoplastic SSN are associated mostly with small
cell lung cancer, and quite rarely with squamous cell lung cancer. The early
detection and the treatment of the primary tumor are crucial in a patient with
subacute progression of sensory-dominant neuropathy.

PMID: 19827601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Nov;94(11):4584-90. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-0594. Epub
2009 Oct 9.

Novel LMF1 nonsense mutation in a patient with severe hypertriglyceridemia.

Cefalù AB(1), Noto D, Arpi ML, Yin F, Spina R, Hilden H, Barbagallo CM, Carroccio
A, Tarugi P, Squatrito S, Vigneri R, Taskinen MR, Péterfy M, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Emerging Diseases, University of Palermo, 
90127 Palermo, Italy.

Erratum in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jan;95(1):465.

CONTEXT: Lipase maturation factor 1 (LMF1) gene is a novel candidate gene in
severe hypertriglyceridemia. Lmf1 is involved in the maturation of lipoprotein
lipase (LPL) and hepatic lipase in endoplasmic reticulum. To date only one
patient with severe hypertriglyceridemia and related disorders was found to be
homozygous for a nonsense mutation in LMF1 gene (Y439X).
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to investigate LMF1 gene in
hypertriglyceridemic patients in whom mutations in LPL, APOC2, and APOA5 genes
had been excluded.
RESULTS: The resequencing of LMF1 gene led to the discovery of a novel homozygous
nonsense mutation in one patient with severe hypertriglyceridemia and recurrent
episodes of pancreatitis. The mutation causes a G>A substitution in exon 9
(c.1395G>A), leading to a premature stop codon (W464X). LPL activity and mass
were reduced by 76 and 50%, respectively, compared with normolipidemic controls. 
The proband over the years has shown a good response to treatment. The proband's 
son, heterozygous for the W464X, shows normal plasma triglyceride levels.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified the second novel pathogenic mutation in LMF1 gene in a
patient with severe hypertriglyceridemia. LPL deficiency in our patient was
milder than in the carrier of the Y439X previously described.

PMCID: PMC2819827
PMID: 19820022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2009 Sep;31(3):208-13.

Recreational use of benzydamine as a hallucinogen among street youth in Brazil.

Opaleye ES(1), Noto AR, Sanchez Zv, Moura YG, Galduróz JC, Carlini EA.

Author information: 
(1)Brazilian Center of Information on Psychotropic Drugs, Universidade Federal de
São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. emerita@psicobio.epm.br

OBJECTIVE: To describe the recreational use of benzydamine, an anti-inflammatory 
drug, among street youth in Brazil.
METHOD:
DESIGN: a descriptive, cross sectional survey.
SETTING: 93 welfare services for the street youth in 27 Brazilian capitals.
PARTICIPANTS: 2807 street youth, 10 to 18 years old.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: demographic characteristics, drug use pattern (lifetime
use, use in the past 30 days, frequency, and characteristics of use in the past
month) and effects of benzydamine through the use of a questionnaire.
RESULTS: 78 reported lifetime recreational benzydamine use (67 cases identified
only in three capitals). Among the 30 respondents reporting drug use in the last 
month (the month preceding the survey), 66.7% (n = 20) used the drug on 4 or more
days (in the month preceding the survey). The most frequently (50%) pleasure
effects reported were hallucination and nonspecific sensory changes described as 
'trips'. Unwanted effects were reported by 75% of respondents, they were
especially nausea and vomiting (21.4%). In the majority of the cases, drug was
obtained from drugstores without a medical prescription.
CONCLUSION: This study identifies the recreational use of benzydamine among
street youth, mainly in the Northeast of Brazil, and also indicates the need for 
special controls on the dispensation of this substance.

PMID: 19784487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Interdiscip Perspect Infect Dis. 2009;2009:476150. doi: 10.1155/2009/476150. Epub
2009 Sep 10.

Antibiotic-resistant gram negative bacilli in meals delivered at a general
hospital, Italy.

Plano MR(1), Di Noto AM, Firenze A, Sciortino S, Mammina C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sciences for Health Promotion "G. D'Alessandro," University of
Palermo, 90127 Palermo, Italy.

This study aimed at detecting the presence of antibiotic-resistant Gram-negatives
in samples of meals delivered at the University General Hospital of Palermo,
Italy. Antibiotic resistant Gram negatives were isolated in July-September 2007
ffrom cold dishes and food contact surfaces and utensils. Bacterial strains were 
submitted to susceptibility test and subtyped by random amplification of
polymorphic DNA (RAPD). Forty-six of 55 (83.6%) food samples and 14 of 17 (82.3%)
environmental swabs were culture positive for Gram negative bacilli resistant to 
at least one group of antibacterial drugs. A total of 134 antibiotic resistant
strains, 51 fermenters and 83 non-fermenters, were recovered. Fermenters and
non-fermenters showed frequencies as high as 97.8% of resistance to two or more
groups of antibiotics and non fermenters were 28.9% resistant to more than three 
groups. Molecular typing detected 34 different profiles among the fermenters and 
68 among the non-fermenters. Antibiotic resistance was very common among both
fermenters and non-fermenters. However, the wide heterogeneity of RAPD patterns
seems to support a prominent role of cross-contamination rather than a clonal
expansion of a few resistant isolates. A contribution of commensal Gram negatives
colonizing foods to a common bacterial resistance pool should not been
overlooked.

PMCID: PMC2740853
PMID: 19750189  [PubMed]


181. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2010 Jan;20(1):72-7. doi:
10.1016/j.numecd.2009.06.002. Epub 2009 Sep 10.

A novel component of the metabolic syndrome: the oxidative stress.

Hopps E(1), Noto D, Caimi G, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardiovascular and Renal Diseases, University
of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

The metabolic syndrome (MS) represents a cluster of cardiovascular (CV) risk
factors associated to CV disease and type 2 diabetes. It is still under debate
whether MS is a mere aggregation of risk factors or it represents a clinical
entity with visceral obesity as underlying pathophysiological trigger. The
publication of several diagnostic criteria of MS by scientific associations or
experts panels reflects this uncertainty in understanding the real nature of MS. 
Besides the metabolic disturbances of MS, as visceral obesity,
hypertriglyceridemia, low HDL cholesterol, hypertension and hyperglycemia, novel 
mechanisms of arterial damage have been identified. This paper reviews the
evidence showing that MS and MS factors are characterized by increased oxidative 
stress, a relevant factor contributing to the development of metabolic and
cardiovascular complications. In the next future, the measure of plasma oxidative
stress may contribute to identify a subset of MS patients at increased CV risk,
candidates to more intensive therapies.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19747805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2010 Jan;112(1):62-4. doi: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2009.08.020.
Epub 2009 Sep 11.

CSF tau protein is a useful marker for effective treatment of superficial
siderosis of the central nervous system: two case reports.

Ikeda T(1), Noto D, Noguchi-Shinohara M, Ono K, Takahashi K, Ishida C, Yoshita M,
Kawaguchi M, Kawahara N, Iwasa K, Tomita K, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University
Graduate School of Medical Science, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa 920-8640, Japan. 
tokuhei@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

We report two cases of superficial siderosis (SS) of the central nervous system
(CNS), which is caused by chronic haemorrhaging into the subarachnoid space with 
haemosiderin deposition in the superficial portion of the CNS. Patient 1 had
fluid collection in the spinal canal, which was reported as the source of the
chronic bleeding. Patient 2 was bleeding from thickened dura at the level of the 
sacral vertebrae. Both of the patients had xanthochromic cerebrospinal fluid. We 
surgically repaired the sources of bleeding. Subsequently the cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) cleared and their symptoms were not aggravated for about 1 year. We
measured several CSF markers of SS before and after surgery. Total tau protein
(CSF-t-tau), phosphorylated tau protein (CSF-p-tau), iron (CSF-iron) and ferritin
(CSF-ferritin) in the CSF were highly elevated at diagnosis. After surgery, the
levels of CSF-t-tau and CSF-p-tau were markedly reduced while CSF-iron and
CSF-ferritin had not decreased. It is suggested that CSF-t-tau and CSF-p-tau
reflected the neural damage in SS and were useful to evaluate the effectiveness
of SS therapies.

2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19747766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Clin Biochem. 2009 Nov;42(16-17):1713-8. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2009.08.014. 
Epub 2009 Sep 2.

C-reactive protein but not soluble CD40 ligand and homocysteine is associated to 
common atherosclerotic risk factors in a cohort of coronary artery disease
patients.

Vivona N(1), Bivona G, Noto D, Sasso BL, Cefalù AB, Chiarello G, Falletta A,
Ciaccio M, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Emerging Diseases, Via del Vespro 141,
Palermo, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: One third to one half of the variation in vascular disease occurrence
remains unexplained by traditional risk factors. Since atherosclerosis may, in
part, be an inflammatory disease, circulating factors related to inflammation may
be predictors of cardiovascular disease. The aim of this study was to evaluate
the association between common atherosclerotic risk factors and markers of
inflammation.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Serum levels of soluble CD40 (sCD40L), high-sensitive
C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) and homocysteine (Hcy) were measured in 251 patients 
selected from a series of 438 subjects affected by previous myocardial
infarction, angina or other cardiovascular diseases.
RESULTS: sCD40L levels were lower in patients with previous myocardial infarction
while no association was observed between sCD40L and Hcy levels and other risk
factors. Only hs-CRP levels positively correlated with increased number of risk
factors.
CONCLUSION: In a setting of patients affected with coronary artery disease no
association between sCD40L and homocysteine levels and atherosclerotic risk
factors was observed; only hs-CRP showed increased levels according to the number
of risk factors. Future studies using larger cohorts will be needed to validate
the clinical use of markers of inflammation in the prediction of cardiovascular
events.

PMID: 19732763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Rev Saude Publica. 2009 Oct;43(5):743-9. Epub 2009 Sep 4.

Alcohol-related domestic violence: a household survey in Brazil.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Fonseca AM(1), Galduróz JC, Tondowski CS, Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação, Departamento de Psicobiologia, Escola Paulista de
Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

OBJECTIVE: To describe situations of domestic violence committed by perpetrators 
under the influence of alcohol in the largest Brazilian cities.
METHODS: A household survey was carried out in the 108 Brazilian cities with more
than 200,000 inhabitants in 2005. A multistage probabilistic self-weighted sample
stratified in terms of conglomerate units was performed in three selection
stages: census tracts, households, and respondents (population between 12 and 65 
years old). The instrument to collect the data was the Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration, with questions on sociodemographics and
psychotropic drug abuse..
RESULTS: The survey encompassed 7,939 households. In 33.5% of them there were
reports of domestic violence, 17.1% out of which involving intoxicated
perpetrators. The most frequently reported types of violence associated with the 
use of alcohol were: arguments among the people in the household (81,8%), loud
arguments not aimed at a specific person (70.9%), threats of assault (39.5%), and
breaking households objects (38.7%). The respondents also reported physical
assault (27.8%), physical assault with weapon (5.5%), and sexual abuse (3.2%).
More than half of perpetrators lived in the household and 88.8% were male. Most
of the victims were female (63.9%); 33.9% were wives and 18.2% were children. In 
terms of recidivism, 14.1% of the cases lasted for a period between 1 and 5
years, and in 14.3% they lasted for over a decade. Most of the victims (86%) and 
perpetrators (77.9%) did not look for the help of either the health services or
the police.
CONCLUSIONS: In addition to the considerable number of Brazilian households with 
a history of violence involving intoxicated abusers, this kind of abuse has many 
specific characteristics. The low rate for the search for help at the health
services/police stations point to the importance of actively identifying cases of
domestic violence.

PMID: 19722004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mech Dev. 2009 Oct;126(10):791-803. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2009.08.003. Epub 2009 Aug
29.

Wnt signaling maintains the notochord fate for progenitor cells and supports the 
posterior extension of the notochord.

Ukita K(1), Hirahara S, Oshima N, Imuta Y, Yoshimoto A, Jang CW, Oginuma M, Saga 
Y, Behringer RR, Kondoh H, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
Chuo, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

The notochord develops from notochord progenitor cells (NPCs) and functions as a 
major signaling center to regulate trunk and tail development. NPCs are initially
specified in the node by Wnt and Nodal signals at the gastrula stage. However,
the underlying mechanism that maintains the NPCs throughout embryogenesis to
contribute to the posterior extension of the notochord remains unclear. Here, we 
demonstrate that Wnt signaling in the NPCs is essential for posterior extension
of the notochord. Genetic labeling revealed that the Noto-expressing cells in the
ventral node contribute the NPCs that reside in the tail bud. Robust Wnt
signaling in the NPCs was observed during posterior notochord extension. Genetic 
attenuation of the Wnt signal via notochord-specific beta-catenin gene ablation
resulted in posterior truncation of the notochord. In the NPCs of such mutant
embryos, the expression of notochord-specific genes was down-regulated, and an
endodermal marker, E-cadherin, was observed. No significant alteration of cell
proliferation or apoptosis of the NPCs was detected. Taken together, our data
indicate that the NPCs are derived from Noto-positive node cells, and are not
fully committed to a notochordal fate. Sustained Wnt signaling is required to
maintain the NPCs' notochordal fate.

PMCID: PMC2757446
PMID: 19720144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Hepatol Res. 2009 Sep;39(9):939-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1872-034X.2009.00530.x.

Clinical significance of serum ornithine carbamoyltransferase in patients with
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis.

Tokushige K(1), Hashimoto E, Noto H, Yatsuji S, Tobari M, Torii N, Taniai M,
Shiratori K, Murayama H.

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo Women's Medical University, Department of Medicine and Gastroenterology,
Tokyo, Japan.

AIM: Ornithine carbamoyltransferase (OCT) is reported to be a liver-specific
marker for the evaluation of hapatocellular damage. In this study, we
investigated its clinical significance in non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).
METHODS: Serum OCT levels were measured by the ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay) method. One hundred and twenty patients with NASH (18 liver cirrhosis
induced by NASH and 9 NASH combined with hepatocellular carcinoma) were measured.
RESULTS: The serum levels of OCT and the ratios of OCT : alanine amino
transferase (ALT) and OCT : aspartate amino transferase (AST) were increased in
parallel with the progression of NASH. Especially, OCT and both ratios were
markedly increased in hepatocellular carcinoma. As for the relationship between
fibrosis grade and OCT, the serum OCT levels and the ratio of OCT : ALT levels
were increased in parallel with liver fibrosis. In NASH patients with ALT within 
normal range, about 30% showed elevation of OCT.
CONCLUSION: Serum OCT levels and the ratios of OCT : ALT and OCT : AST increase
in parallel with the progression of NASH. It was suggested that OCT is a useful
marker in the progression of NASH.

PMID: 19712272  [PubMed]


187. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2009 May-Jun;13(3):197-200.

Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin: a novel biomarker for the early
diagnosis of acute kidney injury in the emergency department.

Di Grande A(1), Giuffrida C, Carpinteri G, Narbone G, Pirrone G, Di Mauro A,
Calandra S, Noto P, Le Moli C, Alongi B, Nigro F.

Author information: 
(1)U.O.C. di Medicina e Chirurgia d'Accettazione e d'Urgenza, Azienda Ospedaliera
Elia, Caltanissetta, Italy. adigrande@yahoo.it

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a common medical problem among critical patients. In
current clinical practice, AKI is diagnosed by measuring serum creatinine
concentration, which is an unreliable and delayed marker of the deterioration of 
kidney function. Its rise occurs when a significant amount of renal function has 
been lost. Many are the factors able to modify physiological levels, such as age,
gender, ethnicity, dietary protein intake, muscle mass or metabolism, hydration
status and drugs. Definitely, creatinine, as well as blood urea nitrogen (BUN) or
urine markers of kidney injury (fractional excretion of sodium, urinary
concentrating ability, casts), do not directly reflect cell injury, but rather
the delayed functional consequences of the damage. Due to the lack of sensitive
and specific biomarkers, the identification of early stages of AKI has been
impossible but, recently, neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) is
emerging as a novel biomarker of AKI from several etiologies, such as cardiac
surgery, contrast nephropathy, kidney transplantation and sepsis. This protein,
produced in a number of human tissues and particularly in the distal nephron, has
siderophore-chelating property and acts as an iron-trasporting shuttle. NGAL
increases in both serum and urine 48 hours before the rise of creatinine, and
shows a strong correlation with change in creatinine concentrations. An early
diagnosis of AKI allows the early institution of therapeutic measures for the
protection of renal function and improves the prognosis. This possibility is
particularly important in the Emergency Department for the treatment of critical 
patients with potential nefrotoxic therapies. Use of NGAL as early marker of AKI 
in the Emergency Department is discussed.

PMID: 19673171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Clin Ophthalmol. 2008 Dec;2(4):897-905.

Latanoprost ophthalmic solution in the treatment of open angle glaucoma or raised
intraocular pressure: a review.

Russo A(1), Riva I, Pizzolante T, Noto F, Quaranta L.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di Malattie dell'Apparato Visivo, Università degli studi di Brescia, 
USVD "Centro per lo studio del Glaucoma" Spedali Civili di Brescia.

Latanoprost is a prostaglandin F2-alpha isopropyl ester prodrug which is rapidly 
hydrolyzed by esterases in the cornea to the biologically active latanoprost
acid. When latanoprost is topically administered into the eye, the cornea seems
to act like as a slow-release depot to the anterior segment. One hour after
administration maximum concentration is found in the iris, followed by the
anterior chamber and the ciliary body. Despite extensive research, controversy
remains about the real mechanism of action of this drug. Immunohistochemical data
have shown that the intraocular pressure (IOP) reduction with topical
prostaglandin F2-alpha is associated with a reduction of collagens within the
uveoscleral outflow pathway. Evidence from several experimental and clinical
studies suggests that latanoprost is a valuable addition first-line treatment
alternatives for glaucoma, ocular hypertension and even angle-closure glaucoma.
Strong points are its efficacy, which is demonstrated to be higher than that of
brimonidine, dorzolamide and timolol with fewer systemic adverse effects; a
convenient administration schedule; and the IOP-controlling pattern, which is
relatively flat compared with timolol and dorzolamide, and enables better control
in glaucoma progression, since large fluctuations may be associated with the risk
of developing glaucoma in untreated ocular hypertensive subjects.

PMCID: PMC2699817
PMID: 19668444  [PubMed]


189. Pharmacol Res. 2010 Feb;61(2):116-20. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2009.07.014. Epub 2009 
Aug 8.

High mobility group box-1 expression correlates with poor outcome in lung injury 
patients.

Bitto A(1), Barone M, David A, Polito F, Familiari D, Monaco F, Giardina M, David
T, Messina R, Noto A, Di Stefano V, Altavilla D, Bonaiuto A, Minutoli L, Guarini 
S, Ottani A, Squadrito F, Venuti FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine and Pharmacology, Section of 
Pharmacology, University of Messina, Italy.

Chest trauma is frequently followed by pulmonary contusion and sepsis. High
mobility group box-1 (HMGB-1) is a late mediator of severe sepsis that has been
associated with mortality under experimental conditions. We studied HMGB-1 mRNA
expression in patients with lung injury and its relationship with the severity of
trauma and survival. A total of 24 consecutive patients with chest trauma
referring to the Intensive Care Unit of Messina University Hospital, were
enrolled. Lung trauma was established on the basis of chest X-ray and computed
tomography. Injury Severity Score (ISS), Revised Trauma Score (RTS) and Glasgow
Coma Scale (GCS) were also assessed. Accordingly to these results 6 patients were
considered as controls because of no penetrating trauma and low ISS. Blood and
broncho-alveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from chest trauma patients were withdrawn at
admission and 24h after the beginning of the standard therapeutic protocol.
HMGB-1 mRNA increased significantly in blood (r=0.84) and BALF (r=0.87) from
patients with trauma and pulmonary contusion and positively correlated with the
severity of trauma (based on ISS and RTS) and the final outcome. HMGB-1 protein
levels were also elevated in BALF macrophages from severe trauma patients
compared to control subjects, furthermore TNF-alpha and its receptor TNFR-1 mRNA 
levels were also markedly increased in patients with a poor outcome respect to
other subjects. Our study suggests that HMGB-1 may be an early indicator of poor 
clinical outcome in patients with chest trauma.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19666121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Brain Res. 2009 Oct 27;1295:99-118. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.07.069. Epub
2009 Jul 29.

Saccade trajectories evoked by sequential and colliding stimulation of the monkey
superior colliculus.

Noto CT(1), Gnadt JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Georgetown University, USA.

Using microstimulation we employed an explicit experimental control of activity
in the superior colliculus at two sites within the motor map. We compared saccade
metrics and dynamics evoked at each site independently with those caused by
sequential presentation and collisions of the two stimulation trains.
Essentially, we forced controlled spatio-temporal patterns of activity into the
saccade control circuit with various timing relationships from known sites within
the collicular motor map, thus revealing the spatio-temporal transformation from 
superior colliculus to eye movement dynamics under experimentally controlled
conditions. We extend prior findings about decreasing time intervals between
sequential presentations of stimulations to include mid-flight combinations and
dynamic modifications of trajectory. We explore how asynchronous collisions
between two movements systematically engage a normalization mechanism of movement
metrics, and demonstrate how dynamic patterns of activity across the SC motor map
can create mid-flight curvature of movement through the post-collicular dynamics 
of a displacement controller. The explicit control addresses feasibility for
systems control models and provides benchmark data for experimental verification 
of model mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2753695
PMID: 19646422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Clin Neurophysiol. 2009 Sep;120(9):1683-6. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2009.06.025.
Epub 2009 Jul 28.

The effects of age, gender, and body mass index on amplitude of sensory nerve
action potentials: multivariate analyses.

Fujimaki Y(1), Kuwabara S, Sato Y, Isose S, Shibuya K, Sekiguchi Y, Nasu S, Noto 
Y, Taniguchi J, Misawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1,
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Previous studies have shown that age, gender, and body mass index
(BMI) affect amplitude of sensory nerve action potentials (SNAP), but the total
effects of multiple factors or the most prominently affected nerves have not been
elucidated. This study systematically investigated effects of these factors.
METHODS: Amplitude of SNAP of the median, ulnar, superficial radial, superficial 
peroneal, and sural nerves was measured in 105 healthy subjects. The effects of
age, gender, and BMI on each nerve were estimated by multivariate linear
regression analysis.
RESULTS: SNAP amplitude decreased with age in all five nerves. Women had greater 
SNAP amplitude than men in the upper limb nerves (median, ulnar, and radial), but
not in the lower limb nerves (peroneal and sural). Similarly, greater BMI was
associated with smaller amplitudes in the upper limb nerves, but not in the lower
limb nerves. Multivariate analyses showed the three factors explained 50% of the 
variation in the median nerve, 46% in the ulnar nerve, and 22-32% in the
remaining nerves.
CONCLUSIONS: The effects of age, gender, and BMI on SNAP amplitudes are not
identical in different sensory nerves. Age was strongly correlated with SNAP
amplitude in the nerves tested, whereas gender and BMI affect amplitudes only in 
the upper limb nerves.
SIGNIFICANCE: Age, gender, and BMI should be taken into account in clinical
practice, but the extent of influence depends on the sensory nerves examined.

PMID: 19640782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Atherosclerosis. 2010 Jan;208(1):177-82. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2009.06.023. Epub 2009 Jun 27.

Effects of PCSK9 variants on common carotid artery intima media thickness and
relation to ApoE alleles.

Norata GD(1), Garlaschelli K, Grigore L, Raselli S, Tramontana S, Meneghetti F,
Artali R, Noto D, Cefalù AB, Buccianti G, Averna M, Catapano AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via 
Balzaretti 9, Milan, Italy. Danilo.Norata@unimi.it

BACKGROUND: PCSK9 plays a key role in plasma cholesterol metabolism by modulating
the expression of LDL receptors.
OBJECTIVE AND METHODS: In this study we investigated the effects of two common
polymorphism of the PCSK9 gene (E670G and I474V) on the intima media thickness of
the common carotid artery and the possible relation with polymorphisms of
apolipoprotein E in 1541 middle aged subjects selected from the general
population enrolled in the PLIC study and confirmed the major findings in a
second free-living population enrolled in the Ventimiglia study.
RESULTS: 670G carriers showed significantly increased plasma total cholesterol,
LDL-cholesterol, and Apo levels B while no significant differences were observed 
between carriers of the I474V SNP. IMT was significantly increased in 670G
carriers compared to individuals homozygous for the E allele (0.640+/-0.102mm vs.
0.652+/-0.092mm, P<0.05). The presence of the 670G allele was also significantly 
associated with a greater progression of IMT compared to 670EE subjects. Plasma
total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, apolipoprotein B, and IMT significantly
increased from ApoE2;PCSK9-670EE carriers to ApoE4-PCSK9-670G carriers, while no 
significant differences were observed when the presence of the ApoE alleles was
combined with that of the PCSK9 I474V SNP. In silico analysis on wild type and
670G variant showed several structural differences on the interactions of the
loops of the "V" domain.
CONCLUSIONS: The E670G polymorphism of the PCSK9 gene is associated with
increased IMT progression in the general population. When the presence of 670G
allele is stratified according to the ApoE gene alleles, ApoE2;PCSK9-670EE
carriers show a more favorable plasma lipid profile and decreased IMT compared to
ApoE4-PCSK9-670G carriers.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19619878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Sep;29(18):5020-30. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00076-09. Epub 2009 Jul 
13.

Two GW repeat proteins interact with Tetrahymena thermophila argonaute and
promote genome rearrangement.

Bednenko J(1), Noto T, DeSouza LV, Siu KW, Pearlman RE, Mochizuki K, Gorovsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627, USA.

In conjugating Tetrahymena thermophila, massive DNA elimination occurs upon the
development of the new somatic genome from the germ line genome. Small,
approximately 28-nucleotide scan RNAs (scnRNAs) and Twi1p, an Argonaute family
member, mediate H3K27me3 and H3K9me3 histone H3 modifications, which lead to
heterochromatin formation and the excision of the heterochromatinized germ
line-limited sequences. In our search for new factors involved in developmental
DNA rearrangement, we identified two Twi1p-interacting proteins, Wag1p and CnjBp.
Both proteins contain GW (glycine and tryptophan) repeats, which are
characteristic of several Argonaute-interacting proteins in other organisms.
Wag1p and CnjBp colocalize with Twi1p in the parental macronucleus early in
conjugation and in the new developing macronucleus during later developmental
stages. Around the time DNA elimination occurs, Wag1p forms multiple nuclear
bodies in the developing macronuclei that do not colocalize with heterochromatic 
DNA elimination structures. Analyses of DeltaWAG1, DeltaCnjB, and double
DeltaWAG1 DeltaCnjB knockout strains revealed that WAG1 and CnjB genes need to be
deleted together to inhibit the downregulation of specific scnRNAs, the formation
of DNA elimination structures, and DNA excision. Thus, Wag1p and CnjBp are two
novel players with overlapping functions in RNA interference-mediated genome
rearrangement in Tetrahymena.

PMCID: PMC2738283
PMID: 19596782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2009 Oct;9(4):588-92. doi:
10.1510/icvts.2009.209890. Epub 2009 Jul 6.

A retrospective analysis of terlipressin in bolus for the management of
refractory vasoplegic hypotension after cardiac surgery.

Noto A(1), Lentini S, Versaci A, Giardina M, Risitano DC, Messina R, David A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Anaesthesia, Policlinico
Universitario G. Martino, University of Messina, Italy.

Cardiac surgery performed with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) may be complicated by
hypotension due to low systemic vascular resistance (SVR). Often in those cases, 
hypotension is resistant to pressor catecholamines. We report six cases of
norepinephrine-resistant postcardiotomy hypotension, treated by terlipressin
(TP), a potent vasopressor agent. Between May 2007 and May 2008, we treated six
patients with TP administration (1 mg bolus) for post CPB refractory vasodilatory
hypotension. Analyzed parameters were: mean arterial pressure (m-AP), SVR,
cardiac output index (CI), mean pulmonary pressure (m-PP), and lactate, at
baseline (before TP bolus) and 3 h after injection. Before TP bolus, the average 
m-AP was 53.32+/-8.86 mmHg, the CI was 3.45+/-0.24 l/min/m(2), the SVR was
650+/-62.03 dyne*s/cm(5) and the arterial lactate level was 4.6+/-0.95 mmol/l.
Three hours after the TP bolus, the m-AP increased to 81.83+/-9.71 mmHg
(P=0.002), the CI decreased to 2.88+/-0.14 l/min/m(2) (P=0.002), the SVR
increased to 1154+/-116 dyne*s/cm(5) (P=0.002), and arterial lactates decreased
to 3.13+/-0.78 mmol/l (P=0.015), without significant modification of m-PP and
CVP. We treated postoperative refractory low SVR hypotension by TP administration
in bolus. Exogenous administration of TP normalized SVR and increased the
systemic arterial pressure with a minimum effect on pulmonary pressure.
Subsequently, the effect on systemic blood pressure enhanced urine output. No
major collateral effects were observed. The administration of TP in bolus may
result as a useful alternative for treating refractory low SVR hypotension post
CPB.

PMID: 19581293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Curr Opin Investig Drugs. 2009 Jul;10(7):702-10.

NGX-4010, a high-concentration capsaicin dermal patch for lasting relief of
peripheral neuropathic pain.

Noto C(1), Pappagallo M, Szallasi A.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Department of Anesthesiology, New York, NY
10029, USA.

NeurogesX Inc is developing NGX-4010, a rapid-delivery dermal patch application
system that contains high-concentration trans-capsaicin, for the treatment of
peripheral neuropathic pain. Capsaicin evokes a lasting and reversible refractory
state in primary sensory neurons involved in the generation and maintenance of
neuropathic pain. NGX-4010 can be applied to the painful skin area up to a total 
surface area of 1120 cm2. In phase I clinical trials, NGX-4010 increased the
threshold for warmth detection, reduced epidermal sensory nerve fiber density and
was well tolerated. In phase II trials, NGX-4010 was effective in reducing pain
in patients with post-herpetic neuralgia (PHN), HIV-associated distal sensory
neuropathy (HIV-DSP) and painful diabetic neuropathy (PDN). Data from phase III
trials in patients with PHN demonstrated that significantly more pain relief was 
achieved by NGX-4010 (30 to 32% reduction from baseline) compared with a
low-concentration capsaicin active control (20 to 24% reduction); however, only
one of two studies involving patients with HIV-DSP met the primary endpoint.
NGX-4010 appears to have the potential to be an effective adjunctive or a
stand-alone therapy for PHN, as well as potentially for HIV-DSP and PDN. NGX-4010
has been granted approval by the European Commission and an NDA has been accepted
for filing by the FDA.

PMID: 19579176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Environ Health Prev Med. 2009 Sep;14(5):255-60. doi: 10.1007/s12199-009-0090-0.
Epub 2009 Jun 4.

Relationship between the Noto-Peninsula earthquake and maternal postnatal
depression and child-rearing.

Hibino Y(1), Takaki J, Kambayashi Y, Hitomi Y, Sakai A, Sekizuka N, Ogino K,
Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Preventive Medicine, Graduate School of
Medical Science, Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takaramachi, Kanazawa, Japan,
hibino@pub.m.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: The aim of our study was to explore the relationship between a
medium-scale earthquake and maternal depression and child-rearing in a
depopulated community in the Noto Peninsula of Japan.
METHODS: Three months after a major earthquake, self-rating questionnaires were
distributed to women who were pregnant at the time of the earthquake or who
became pregnant immediately thereafter, and who were receiving care at any of
four major hospitals in the most devastated area. A total of 155 women who had
given birth returned the completed questionnaire for analysis. Maternal postnatal
depression among the participants was assessed using the Edinburgh Postnatal
Depression Scale (EPDS).
RESULTS: The EPDS score was significantly associated with decreased "satisfaction
with delivery" (beta = -0.28, p = 0.01), increased artificial "lactation" (beta =
0.31, p = 0.002), and increased "trouble with infant care" (beta = 0.47, p <
0.001) in multivariate analysis. It was also significantly associated with
increased "anxiety about earthquakes" (beta = 0.30, p = 0.001), and "anxiety
about earthquakes" was significantly associated with increased "fear of the
earthquake" (beta = 0.20, p = 0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: Earthquake-related factors such as "anxiety about earthquakes" and
"fear of the earthquake" did not have a direct effect on child-rearing factors;
however, they did have a significant relationship with increased EPDS. Based on
these results, we conclude that screening strategies for maternal depression in
peri- and postnatal women under emergency circumstances are necessary.

PMCID: PMC2728250
PMID: 19568831  [PubMed]


197. Radiol Phys Technol. 2009 Jul;2(2):138-44. doi: 10.1007/s12194-009-0057-2. Epub
2009 Apr 8.

Investigation of scatter fractions for estimating leakage dose in medical X-ray
imaging facilities.

Noto K(1), Koshida K, Iida H, Yamamoto T, Kobayashi I, Kawabata C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Kanazawa University Hospital, Takaramachi, Kanazawa, 
Japan. knoto@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

It is essential to make accurate estimates of the scatter of radiation from the
human body when calculating the leakage dose in medical X-ray imaging facilities.
The scatter fraction varies with the size and shape of the radiation field in a
way that is not exactly proportional to the area of the field. Japanese law
quotes values for the scatter fraction that are provided by the National Council 
on Radiation Protection and Measurements, but these data were obtained 30 years
ago, using equipment that differed considerably from that employed nowadays. To
date, no attempt has been made to confirm whether these data accurately describe 
current Japanese equipment. In the present study, we used an ion chamber
dosimeter to measure scattered radiation fractions, and new scatter factor data
are presented that resolve these problems.

PMID: 20821112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Chemistry. 2009 Aug 10;15(32):7896-902. doi: 10.1002/chem.200900148.

A study of the influence of ionic liquids properties on the Kemp elimination
reaction.

D'Anna F(1), La Marca S, Lo Meo P, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica E. Paternò, Università degli Studi di
Palermo, Viale delle Scienze-Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
fdanna@unipa.it

The morpholino-induced elimination of 5-nitrobenzisoxazole into the relevant
2-cyano-4-nitrophenolate has been used as a sample reaction in order to
investigate molecular properties of some room temperature ionic liquids. The
kinetic study was carried out at 298 K by means of spectrophotometric
measurements. Ionic liquids, which differ in both their cation and anion
properties, were used as solvent systems. In particular, aliphatic
(pyrrolidinium, piperidinium, and ammonium) and aromatic (imidazolium and
pyridinium) ionic liquids were used. For aromatic cations, imidazolium ions
having different hydrogen-bond donor ability or a different alkyl-chain length
were taken into account. The anions chosen ([BF(4)(-)], [PF(6)(-)], [SbF(6)(-)], 
and [NTf(2)(-)]; where NTf(2) = bis(trifluoromethansulfonyl)imide) showed
different shape, size, and coordination ability. Solvent parameters of all ionic 
liquids used were determined by using spectroscopic probes, such as
4-nitroaniline, N,N-diethyl-4-nitroaniline, Nile Red, and Reichardt's dye.
Finally, in order to obtain information on the structural organization of the
solvent systems, resonance light-scattering measurements were carried out. The
collected data provide evidence that ionic liquids are solvent media which
exhibit peculiar features, whose effects can be rationalized only considering all
parameters affecting their three-dimensional structure.

PMID: 19562783  [PubMed]


199. Exp Hematol. 2009 Aug;37(8):887-8. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2009.05.013. Epub 2009
Jun 12.

Nanon effects on mammalian cell long-term cultures: a caveat for experimental
hematologists dealing with in vitro long-term culture assays.

Mirabelli P, D'Alessio F, Mariotti E, Romano M, Fortunato G, Gemei M, Di Noto R, 
Del Vecchio L.

PMID: 19524638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Rinsho Byori. 2009 May;57(5):411-6.

[Deep vein thrombosis in Noto Peninsula earthquake victims].

[Article in Japanese]

Terakami T(1), Ohba N, Morishita E, Yoshida T, Asakura H, Kimura K, Ohtake H,
Watanabe G, Fujita S, Wada T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Sciences, Kanazawa University Hospital, Kanazawa
920-8641, Japan.

The earthquake occurred in the Noto Peninsula in the northern part of Ishikawa
prefecture, Japan, at 9:25 a.m. on March 25th 2007. Medical activities for
prevention of deep vein thrombosis (DVT), early detection of DVT, and early
treatment of DVT were performed immediately after the earthquake on the basis of 
a previous report regarding earthquake disasters. This report described the
conditions involved in the development of DVT. General inhabitants in shelters
were examined by questionnaires, venous ultrasonography of lower limb, and blood 
tests. The DVT-positive rate was 10.6% (21 cases/198 cases), and the soleal vein 
was the most common location of DVT accounting for 71.4% of cases(20 lower
limbs/28 lower limbs). Plasma levels of fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products
and D-dimer in the DVT-positive group (20 cases) were significantly higher than
those in the DVT-negative group(162 cases) (P<0.03). No deaths or cases of
serious illness caused by DVT were reported in the earthquake. The medical
activities described here were effective due to the past experience and the
cooperation of many people.

PMID: 19522245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Phys Rev Lett. 2009 Apr 24;102(16):167203. Epub 2009 Apr 23.

Adsorption-induced switching of magnetic anisotropy in a single iron(II)
phthalocyanine molecule on an oxidized Cu(110) surface.

Tsukahara N(1), Noto K, Ohara M, Shiraki S, Takagi N, Takata Y, Miyawaki J,
Taguchi M, Chainani A, Shin S, Kawai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Advanced Materials Science, University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba 
277-8561, Japan.

We examined the zero-field splitting of an iron(II) phthalocyanine (FePc)
attached to clean and oxidized Cu(110) surfaces and the dependence on an applied 
magnetic field by inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy with STM. The
symmetry of the ligand field surrounding the Fe atom is lowered on the oxidized
surface, switching the magnetic anisotropy from the easy plane of the bulk to the
easy axis. The zero-field splitting was not observed for FePc on a clean Cu(110) 
surface, and the spin state converts from triplet to singlet due to the strong
coupling of Fe d states with the Cu substrate, as is also confirmed by
photoelectron spectroscopy. These findings demonstrate the importance of coupling
at the molecule-substrate interface for manipulating the magnetic properties of
adsorbates.

PMID: 19518750  [PubMed]


202. Lipids. 2009 Jul;44(7):577-80. doi: 10.1007/s11745-009-3312-8. Epub 2009 Jun 3.

Low and high fat diets inconsistently induce obesity in C57BL/6J mice and obesity
compromises n-3 fatty acid status.

Tallman DL, Noto AD, Taylor CG.

PMID: 19495822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Sci Total Environ. 2009 Aug 1;407(16):4681-6. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2009.05.005. Epub 2009 Jun 2.

Long-range transport of fluoride in East Asia monitored at Noto Peninsula, Japan.

Yang XY(1), Yamada M, Tang N, Lin JM, Wang W, Kameda T, Toriba A, Hayakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences, Kanazawa University,
Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan. yang@p.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Airborne particulate matter was collected at Wajima, the Noto Peninsula,
Ishikawa, Japan by a high-volume air sampler with a quartz fiber filter every
week from September 17, 2004 to September 16, 2005. The filter was newly changed 
every week. There are no major emission sources of atmospheric pollutants near
the sampling site. Water-soluble fluoride anion extracted from the filters was
analyzed by ion chromatography. The concentration of non-sea-salt fluoride was
higher during the heating period of China (from October 15, 2004 to April 15,
2005), significantly higher during the period of Asian Dust (from the mid of
April to the beginning of May in 2005), than that in the other seasons. This
result suggests that the main contributor of fluoride in the period of Asian Dust
was high-fluoride-concentrated soil from the arid area of China. A noticeable
positive correlation (r=0.54, n=28, p<0.01) between the level of non-sea-salt
fluoride and PAHs was observed, when only the data obtained during the period of 
Asian Dust was excluded. In view of the fact that PAHs emitted from Northeast
China were long-range transported to Japan during the heating period of China,
fluoride emitted from coal combustion long-range transported from the Asian
continent to Japan during the same period appears to be another main source of
fluoride.

PMID: 19493560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Trace Elem Med Biol. 2009;23(3):176-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jtemb.2009.03.005. Epub 
2009 May 8.

Renal metallothionein responds rapidly and site specifically to zinc repletion in
growing rats.

Szczurek EI(1), Bjornsson CS, Noto AD, Taylor CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutritional Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB
R3T 2N2, Canada.

Metallothionein (MT) is important for heavy metals and free radical protection in
the kidney. MT is responsive to zinc and primarily localized within the renal
cortex. However, site-specific renal responses to dietary zinc repletion are
understudied. The objective of this study was to examine the effects of dietary
zinc deficiency and repletion on renal MT concentration and immunolocalization in
rats. Weanling male Sprague Dawley rats were randomly assigned to either a
zinc-deficient, zinc control, or pair-fed to zinc-deficient group. Half of the
zinc-deficient and pair-fed rats were repleted with the control diet ad libitum
for an additional 24h. Renal tissue samples were assessed for total zinc, MT
concentrations and MT immunostaining. Dietary zinc deficiency reduced renal zinc 
and MT concentrations, and attenuated intensity and localization of MT. Dietary
zinc repletion for 24h restored renal zinc and MT concentrations, the latter
primarily in the proximal convoluted tubules of the cortex. Concentrations of
renal MT, but not zinc, were elevated by diet restriction and MT (microg/mg
protein) and partially normalized by 24h diet repletion. In conclusion, renal MT 
modification due to zinc deficiency or diet restriction can be rapidly normalized
in a site-specific manner with normal dietary zinc intake. The results support a 
role for MT in kidney homeostasis, in particular at the level of the proximal
tubules in the cortex. The speed of MT repletion may have clinical implications
for dietary zinc in the treatment of acute and chronic renal pathology due to
toxins and free radicals.

PMID: 19486827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Gastroenterol. 2009;44(9):976-82. doi: 10.1007/s00535-009-0085-z. Epub 2009 May
30.

Influence of adiponectin gene polymorphisms in Japanese patients with
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.

Tokushige K(1), Hashimoto E, Noto H, Yatsuji S, Taniai M, Torii N, Shiratori K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Gastroenterology, Tokyo Women's Medical University,
8-1 Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 162-8666, Japan. ktoku@pg7.so-net.ne.jp

PURPOSE: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the adiponectin gene have been
reported to be associated with insulin resistance and the prevalence of type-2
diabetes. We investigated the SNPs of adiponectin in non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD) patients.
METHODS: One hundred nineteen patients histologically diagnosed as having NAFLD
and 115 control subjects were examined. Adiponectin SNP sites were investigated
at +45 of exon 2 and at +276 of intron 2; these sites have been thought to be
associated with diabetes or insulin resistance.
RESULTS: Regarding the +276 SNP, the frequency of G/G tended to be higher in
NAFLD patients than in controls, but not significantly. Among females only,
however, the G/G frequency was significantly higher in NAFLD patients. As for the
+45 SNP, in the severe fibrosis group, the frequency of G/G homozygotes was
significantly higher than that in the mild fibrosis group, and G/G homozygotes of
the +45 SNP proved by multivariate analysis to be an independent factor in severe
fibrosis. In NAFLD patients with adiponectin +45 G/G, homeostasis model
assessment-insulin resistance was significantly higher than in NAFLD patients
without adiponectin +45 G/G.
CONCLUSION: Adiponectin SNPs were found to be associated with the progression of 
liver fibrosis and insulin resistance, suggesting that adiponectin SNPs might
play roles in the occurrence and progression of NAFLD.

PMID: 19484180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2009;44(8):1017-8. doi: 10.1080/00365520903030803.

Benign pancreatic hyperenzymemia: a pediatric experience.

Diamanti A, Basso MS, Monti L, Daniele A, Noto C, Castro M.

Comment in
    Scand J Gastroenterol. 2009;44(9):1148-9.

Comment on
    Scand J Gastroenterol. 2009;44(7):888-93.

PMID: 19479633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Hinyokika Kiyo. 2009 Apr;55(4):219-21.

[Mixed epithelial and stromal tumor of the kidney: a case report].

[Article in Japanese]

Tsuchiyama K(1), Ueki O, Minami H, Kawaguchi K, Sato K, Katsuda S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Noto General Hospital.

We report a case of a mixed epithelial and stromal tumor of the kidney. A
64-year-old female who had no complaint was found to have a left renal tumor by
computed tomography (CT) for an examination of a right breast tumor and was
referred to our department. CT revealed a gradually enhancing 5 cm mass in the
left kidney. The patient underwent left radical nephrectomy, and the tumor was
histologically diagnosed as a mixed epithelial and stromal tumor. The patient has
been followed up for 6 months with no evidence of local recurrence or metastasis.

PMID: 19462828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2009 Jun;15(6):724-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbmt.2009.03.003.

Incidence and risk of postherpetic neuralgia after varicella zoster virus
infection in hematopoietic cell transplantation recipients: Hokkaido Hematology
Study Group.

Onozawa M(1), Hashino S, Haseyama Y, Hirayama Y, Iizuka S, Ishida T, Kaneda M,
Kobayashi H, Kobayashi R, Koda K, Kurosawa M, Masauji N, Matsunaga T, Mori A,
Mukai M, Nishio M, Noto S, Ota S, Sakai H, Suzuki N, Takahashi T, Tanaka J,
Torimoto Y, Yoshida M, Fukuhara T.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Transplantation Center, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. masahiro.onozawa@nifty.ne.jp).

To assess the incidence of and risk factors associated with postherpetic
neuralgia (PHN) after hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) varicella zoster
virus (VZV) infection, we conducted a retrospective chart review of 418
consecutive patients who underwent HCT between April 2005 and March 2007. The
male/female ratio was 221/197, median age at HCT was 47 years (range: 0-69
years), and autologous/allogeneic/syngeneic HCT ratio was 154/263/1.
Seventy-eight patients developed VZV infection after HCT. Sixty-two patients had 
localized zoster, 11 patients had disseminated zoster (rash like chicken pox),
and 4 patients had visceral zoster. All cases were treated with acyclovir (ACV)
or valacyclovir (VACV), and there was no VZV infection-related death.
Twenty-seven (35%) of the 78 patients with VZV infection suffered PHN after
resolution of VZV infection. Multivariate analysis showed that advanced age is
the only risk factor in autologous HCT (P = .0075; odds ratio [OR] = 1.14; 95%
confidence interval [CI], 0.97-1.33). On the other hand, advanced age (P = .0097;
OR = 1.06; 95% CI, 1.01-1.12), male gender (P = .0055; OR = 12.7; 95% CI,
1.61-100.1), and graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis with a
tacrolimus-based regimen (P = .0092; OR = 9.56; 95% CI, 1.44-63.3) were
associated with increased risk of PHN in allogeneic HCT. This study for the first
time clarified the risk of PHN in HCT recipients.

PMID: 19450757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Circ J. 2009 Jul;73(7):1243-7. Epub 2009 May 13.

Impact of severe earthquake on the occurrence of acute coronary syndrome and
stroke in a rural area of Japan.

Tsuchida M(1), Kawashiri MA, Teramoto R, Takata M, Sakata K, Omi W, Okajima M,
Takamura M, Ino H, Kita Y, Takegoshi T, Inaba H, Yamagishi M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Japan.

Comment in
    Circ J. 2009 Jul;73(7):1195-6.

BACKGROUND: Although acute coronary syndrome (ACS) and stroke are known to
increase after earthquake, few data exist regarding the effect of earthquake on
these cardiovascular events in rural areas.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The Noto Peninsula earthquake with a magnitude of 6.9
occurred at 9:45 a.m. on 25 March 2007. The first case of ACS occurred
approximately 15 min later, whereas cerebral hemorrhage (CH) occurred 72 h after 
the onset of earthquake. During the 35 days after earthquake, among 49 patients
who were attended by local ambulance, 5 patients with ACS (10.2%) and 8 with CH
(16.3%) were documented and 4 died. The total number of both ACS and CH cases was
greater than the averages for the same period of the past 3 years in this area
(2.0 vs 5 and 2.3 vs 8, P<0.01). Interestingly, the most cases of ACS had
occurred within 7 days after earthquake and for CH not until 35 days later.
CONCLUSIONS: Even in rural areas a severe earthquake results in increased
incidence of ACS and CH, which can occur at different times after the event,
although the effects of other environmental factors should be further
investigated.

PMID: 19436118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Int J Urol. 2009 Apr;16(4):427. doi: 10.1111/j.1442-2042.2009.02255.x.

Elevated serum IgG4 may predict sensitivity to steroid therapy in retroperitoneal
fibrosis.

Marumo K, Tatsuno S, Noto K.

PMID: 19416408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Anticancer Res. 2009 Apr;29(4):1079-88.

Heparin induces apoptosis through suppression of AKt in oral squamous cell
carcinoma cells.

Ueda K(1), Inoue S, Zhang Y, Kutsuna T, Inoue S, Noto K, Arai N, Noguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Toyama University, 2630
Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Heparin is a polysulfated glycosaminoglycan that has been shown to
have antiproliferative and apoptotic effects in addition to its anticoagulant
effects.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The present work investigated the effects of unfractioned 
heparin (UFH) on cell growth and apoptosis in four oral squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) cell lines and the mechanism(s) underlying its actions using MTT assay,
Annexin-V-FITC and Western blotting.
RESULTS: Treatment with UFH resulted in significant reduction in cell viability
and increase in apoptosis in three of the four tested cell lines. Further, such
treatment resulted in a significant decrease in phosphorylated AKt, and
consequently led to activation of the mitochondrial pathway in heparin-sensitive 
cells. Moreover, pretreatment with UFH significantly increased the apoptosis
induced by cisplatin.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that heparin induces apoptosis through
suppression of AKt, and suggest a potential utility of heparin for development of
less toxic chemotherapy in treatment of oral SCC.

PMID: 19414349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Transpl Immunol. 2009 Sep;21(4):198-202. doi: 10.1016/j.trim.2009.04.006. Epub
2009 May 4.

Effect of the immunosuppressant histone deacetylase inhibitor FR276457 in a
canine renal transplant model.

Kinugasa F(1), Nagatomi I, Nakanishi T, Noto T, Mori H, Matsuoka H, Sudo Y, Mutoh
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Pharmacology Research Labs, Astellas Pharma Inc.,
Yodogawa-ku, Osaka, Japan. fumitaka.kinugasa@jp.astellas.com

The histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor FR276457, a hydroxamic derivative, was
identified during chemical library screening and was found to exhibit potent
inhibitory effects on the activity of mammalian HDACs. It has been shown that
FR276457 exhibited marked immunosuppressive effects in a rat heterotopic cardiac 
transplant model. To predict clinical efficacy of FR276457, we investigated the
inhibitory effect of the proliferation of Jurkat cells in vitro and
immunosuppressive effect of orally administered FR276457 on allograft rejection
as a monotherapy or in combination with tacrolimus (0.04 mg/kg) injected
intramuscularly (i.m.) in a canine renal transplant model. Animal survival, the
plasma creatinine level, and histopathology were evaluated. FR276457 inhibited
the proliferation of Jurkat cells probably by targeting activity of NF-kappaB.
FR276457 prolonged the median survival time (MST) of transplanted grafts from
11.5 days (untreated group) to 29.0 days (FR276457-treated group). FR276457
administered 1 mg/kg twice a day in combination with tacrolimus prevented
allograft rejection. In addition, a dose of 1.5 mg/kg twice a day or 5.0 mg/kg
once a day prolonged the MST from 18 days (control group) to >73 or >90 days,
respectively. Histopathological analysis showed that FR276457 suppressed the
score for mononuclear cell infiltration and vasculitis. In conclusion, the HDAC
inhibitor FR276457 inhibited the proliferation of T cell line established from
human in vitro. And more, FR276457 clinically prolonged allograft survival when
administered as a monotherapy, and had additive or synergistic effects when
combined with tacrolimus with the canine renal transplant model. These results
showed HDAC inhibitor is a promising biological target for treatment in
transplant field.

PMID: 19409992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2009;611:375-8.

Synergy between a lead proline-rich antibacterial peptide derivative and small
molecule antibiotics.

Otvos L Jr(1), Cassone M, Inacio VO, Noto P, Rux JJ, Wade JD, Cudic P.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Temple
University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA.

PMID: 19400232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Neurosurgery. 2009 Apr;64(4):705-17; discussion 717-8. doi:
10.1227/01.NEU.0000341872.17024.44.

Hyperemia beneath evacuated acute subdural hematoma is frequent and prolonged in 
patients with an unfavorable outcome: a xe-computed tomographic study.

Chieregato A(1), Noto A, Tanfani A, Bini G, Martino C, Fainardi E.

Author information: 
(1)Neurosurgical and Trauma Intensive Care Unit, Maurizio Bufalini Hospital,
Cesena, Italy. achiere@ausl-cesena.emr.it

OBJECTIVE: To verify the values and the time course of regional cerebral blood
flow (rCBF) in the cortex located beneath an evacuated acute subdural hematoma
(SDH) and their relationship with neurological outcome.
METHODS: rCBF levels were measured in multiple regions of interest, by means of a
Xe-computed tomographic technique, in the cortex underlying an evacuated SDH and 
contralaterally in 20 patients with moderate or severe traumatic brain injury and
an evacuated acute SDH. Twenty-three patients with moderate or severe traumatic
brain injury and an evacuated extradural hematoma or diffuse injury served as the
control group. Outcome was evaluated by means of the Glasgow Outcome Scale at 12 
months.
RESULTS: Values for the maximum (rCBFmax) and the mean of all rCBF levels in the 
cortex beneath the evacuated SDH were more frequently consistent with hyperemia. 
The side-to-side differences in the mean of all rCBF and rCBFmax levels between
lesioned and nonlesioned hemispheres were greater in patients with evacuated SDH 
than in controls (P = 0.0013 and P = 0.0018, respectively). The side-to-side
difference in the maximum rCBF value was higher in SDH patients with unfavorable 
outcomes than in controls at 24 to 96 hours and at 4 to 7 days and higher than in
patients with favorable outcomes at 4 to 7 days. The widest side-to-side
difference in rCBFmax value was more elevated in patients with an evacuated SDH
with unfavorable outcome than in patients with a favorable outcome (P = 0.047),
whereas no differences were found in controls. The SDH thickness and the
associated midline shift were greater in patients with unfavorable outcomes than 
in those with favorable outcomes.
CONCLUSION: On average, hyperemic long-lasting rCBF values frequently occur in
the cortex located beneath an evacuated SDH and seem to be associated with
unfavorable outcome.

PMID: 19349828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Atherosclerosis. 2009 Sep;206(1):193-8. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2009.01.037. Epub 2009 Feb 2.

Familial hypobetalipoproteinemia due to apolipoprotein B R463W mutation causes
intestinal fat accumulation and low postprandial lipemia.

Noto D(1), Cefalù AB, Cannizzaro A, Minà M, Fayer F, Valenti V, Barbagallo CM,
Tuttolomondo A, Pinto A, Sciumè C, Licata G, Averna M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Emerging Diseases, University of Palermo, 
Italy.

OBJECTIVE: Familial hypobetalipoproteinemia (FHBL) is characterized by inherited 
low plasma levels of apolipoprotein B (apoB)-containing lipoproteins. In this
paper we investigated whether the already described APOB R463W missense mutation,
a FHBL mutation able to impair the activity of microsomal triglyceride transfer
protein (MTP), may cause intestinal fat accumulation and reduced postprandial
lipemia.
METHODS: Four out of five probands harboring APOB R463W mutation were compared
with six healthy controls and six patients with celiac disease (CD). An oral fat 
load supplemented with retinyl palmitate (RP) was administered and a
gastro-duodenal endoscopy with biopsy was performed.
RESULTS: Plasma triglyceride area under curves was significantly reduced in FHBL 
probands compared to controls and CD patients; the proportion of absorbed RP was 
similar to that of CD patients. Only the intestinal biopsies of FHBL patients
showed lipids accumulating within the duodenal mucosa.
CONCLUSIONS: FHBL due to R463W apoB mutation is a cause of intestinal fat
accumulation and postprandial lipid absorption impairment.

PMID: 19344897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Br J Haematol. 2009 Jun;145(5):665-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2009.07644.x. Epub
2009 Mar 12.

CD200/OX2, a cell surface molecule with immuno-regulatory function, is
consistently expressed on hairy cell leukaemia neoplastic cells.

Brunetti L, Di Noto R, Abate G, Gorrese M, Gravetti A, Raia M, Scalia G,
Pascariello C, Camera A, Del Vecchio L.

PMID: 19344398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2009 Jan-Feb;27(1):165.

Efficacy and safety of intravenous neridronate in pediatric bone loss associated 
to Crohn's disease: a case report.

Diamanti A, Noto C, Basso MS, Papadatou B, Bracci F, Castro M.

Comment on
    Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2007 Mar-Apr;25(2):329-35.

PMID: 19327248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Clin Biochem Nutr. 2009 Mar;44(2):131-41. doi: 10.3164/jcbn.08-217. Epub 2009
Feb 28.

Intestinal inflammation in rats induces metallothionein in colonic submucosa.

Al-Gindan Y(1), Shawarby M, Noto A, Taylor CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutritional Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, MB R3T 2N2, Canada.

The aim of the current study was to determine if induction of metallothionein
(MT) via acute or chronic dietary zinc supplementation attenuates intestinal
inflammation, and to investigate the relationship with site-specific intestinal
MT determined by immunolocalization. Growing rats were assigned to zinc-deficient
(ZD), acute zinc-treated (ZT), pair-fed, control or chronic Zn-supplemented (ZS) 
groups. Half the rats in each dietary group received 5% dextran sulphate sodium
(DSS) in their drinking water for 4 days. DSS treatment produced acute intestinal
inflammation in the colon only, however, dietary zinc deficiency, acute zinc
treatment or chronic zinc supplementation did not alter the severity of
ulceration. Serum zinc concentrations were attenuated in the DSS-challenged ZT
and ZS groups suggesting that zinc was being utilized in some capacity in
response to inflammation. DSS-challenge induced MT immunostaining in the colonic 
submucosa, however, MT was not associated with histological improvements in the
present study. The site-specific MT induction in colonic submucosa during
intestinal inflammation requires further clarification as a component of the host
defense.

PMCID: PMC2654469
PMID: 19308267  [PubMed]


219. Radiat Prot Dosimetry. 2009 Feb;133(3):144-52. doi: 10.1093/rpd/ncp037. Epub 2009
Mar 23.

Evaluation of transmission data of diagnostic X rays through concrete using Monte
Carlo simulation.

Noto K(1), Koshida K, Iida H, Fukuda A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiological Technology, Kanazawa University Hospital, 13-1
Takaramachi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8641, Japan. kimiyanoto@hotmail.com

The transmittance of diagnostic X-ray beams through concrete of two different
densities were measured. Broad-beam X-ray transmissions were estimated using a
Monte Carlo simulation at tube voltages of 50-150 kV and compared with National
Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP) data. The observed levels
were higher than those predicted by the NCRP data; that is, the NCRP data
underestimate the leakage radiation from widely used inverter systems. Some of
the issues were resolved and new data were proposed.

PMID: 19307234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Life Sci. 2009 Mar 27;84(13-14):482-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2009.01.008. Epub 2009 
Feb 3.

Monohydroxylated polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons inhibit both osteoclastic and
osteoblastic activities in teleost scales.

Suzuki N(1), Hayakawa K, Kameda T, Triba A, Tang N, Tabata MJ, Takada K, Wada S, 
Omori K, Srivastav AK, Mishima H, Hattori A.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University, Noto-cho, Ishikawa 927-0553, Japan.
nobuo@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

AIMS: We previously demonstrated that monohydroxylated polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (OHPAHs) bound to a human estrogen receptor (ER) by a yeast
two-hybrid assay, but polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons did not have a binding
activity. Therefore, the direct effect of 3-hydroxybenz[a]anthracene (3-OHBaA)
and 4-hydroxybenz[a]anthracene (4-OHBaA) on osteoclasts and osteoblasts in
teleosts was examined. As a negative control, 1-hydroxypyrene (1-OHPy), which has
no binding activity to human ER, was used.
MAIN METHODS: The effect of OHPAHs on osteoclasts and osteoblasts was examined by
an assay system using teleost scale as each marker: tartrate-resistant acid
phosphatase for osteoclasts and alkaline phosphatase for osteoblasts. Changes in 
cathepsin K (an osteoclastic marker) and insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) (an
osteoblastic marker) mRNA expressions in 4-OHBaA-treated goldfish scales were
examined by using a reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
KEY FINDINGS: In both goldfish (a freshwater teleost) and wrasse (a marine
teleost), the osteoclastic activity in the scales was significantly suppressed by
3-OHBaA and 4-OHBaA, although 1-OHPy did not affect the osteoclastic activity. In
reference to osteoblasts, the osteoblastic activity decreased with both 3-OHBaA
and 4-OHBaA and did not change with the 1-OHPy treatment. However,
17beta-estradiol (E(2)) significantly increased both the osteoclastic and
osteoblastic activities in the scales of both goldfish and wrasse. The mRNA
expressions of both cathepsin K and IGF-I decreased in the 4-OHBaA-treated scales
but increased in the E(2)-treated scales.
SIGNIFICANCE: The current data are the first to demonstrate that 3-OHBaA and
4-OHBaA inhibited both osteoclasts and osteoblasts and disrupted the bone
metabolism in teleosts.

PMID: 19302814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Thromb Haemost. 2009 Jun;7(6):938-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2009.03345.x.
Epub 2009 Mar 19.

Risk stratification and outcomes in hemodynamically stable patients with acute
pulmonary embolism: a prospective, multicentre, cohort study with three months of
follow-up.

Bova C(1), Pesavento R, Marchiori A, Palla A, Enea I, Pengo V, Visonà A, Noto A, 
Prandoni P; TELESIO Study Group.

Collaborators: Rossi PG, Della Valle F, Minotto I, Padayattil JS, Stendardo A,
Tona F, Nudo G, La Rosa G, Serafini O, Spaguolo V, Fiaschi E, Ribas C, Marconi L,
Enea I, Rosello F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Azienda ospedaliera, Cosenza, Italy.
carbova@libero.it

Comment in
    J Thromb Haemost. 2009 Sep;7(9):1601-2; author reply 1602.

BACKGROUND: The role of risk stratification in normotensive patients with acute
pulmonary embolism (PE) is still unclear.
OBJECTIVES: We evaluated, in these patients, the usefulness of six prognostic
markers for predicting in-hospital adverse events related to PE and 3-month
mortality.
PATIENTS/METHODS: Two hundred and one consecutive patients with confirmed acute
PE and normal blood pressure, who were administered conventional anticoagulation,
were recruited in a multicentre prospective cohort study with 3 months of
follow-up. At baseline, they received a comprehensive risk-evaluation including
echocardiographic assessment of right ventricular dysfunction, determination of
troponin I, brain natriuretic peptide and D-dimer, arterial blood gas analysis
and a clinical score. Primary outcome of the study was PE-related in-hospital
death or clinical deterioration. Secondary outcomes were in-hospital and 3-month 
all-cause mortality.
RESULTS: The primary outcome occurred in one patient (0.5%), who died from PE
during hospitalization. The in-hospital and 3-month all-cause mortality were 2%
and 9%, respectively. None of the prognostic markers was predictive of the
primary outcome. Clinical score, troponin I and hypoxemia predicted in-hospital
all-cause mortality (P = 0.02, 0.01 and < 0.01, respectively). Clinical score
(HR, 4.7; 95% CI, 1.9-12.0), D-dimer (4.8; 1.4-16.3), hypoxemia (5.7; 2.1-15.1)
and troponin I (7.5; 2.5-22.7) were predictors of 3-month all-cause mortality on 
univariate analysis. On multivariate analysis clinical score and troponin I
remained independently predictive.
CONCLUSIONS: We did not find prognostic markers useful as predictors of
in-hospital PE-related adverse events. Clinical score, troponin I and hypoxemia
predicted in-hospital all-cause mortality. Clinical score and troponin I
independently predicted 3-month all-cause mortality.

PMID: 19302447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Tissue Eng Part A. 2009 Sep;15(9):2525-36. doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.2008.0509.

Culture conditions allow selection of different mesenchymal progenitors from
adult mouse bone marrow.

Esposito MT(1), Di Noto R, Mirabelli P, Gorrese M, Parisi S, Montanaro D, Del
Vecchio L, Pastore L.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate sca r l, Naples, Italy.

The use of adult stem cells in tissue engineering approaches will benefit from
the establishment of culture conditions that allow the expansion and maintenance 
of cells with stem cell-like activity and high differentiation potential. In the 
field of adult stem cells, bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) are promising
candidates. In the present study, we define, for the first time, conditions for
optimizing the yields of cultures enriched for specific progenitors of bone
marrow. Using four distinct culture conditions, supernatants from culture of bone
fragments, marrow stroma cell line MS-5, embryonic fibroblast cell line NIH3T3,
and a cocktail of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and platelet-derived growth
factor (PDGF), we isolated four different sub-populations of murine BMSCs
(mBMSCs). These cells express a well-known marker of undifferentiated embryonic
stem cells (Nanog) and show interesting features in immunophenotype, self-renewal
ability, and differentiation potency. In particular, using NIH3T3 conditioned
medium, we obtained cells that showed impairment in osteogenic and chondrogenic
differentiation while retaining high adipogenic potential during passages. Our
results indicate that the choice of the medium used for isolation and expansion
of mBMSCs is important for enriching the culture of desired specific progenitors.

PMID: 19298168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Neurol Sci. 2009 Jun 15;281(1-2):127-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.02.003. Epub
2009 Mar 13.

A case of adult onset type II citrullinemia with portal-systemic shunt.

Noto D(1), Takahashi K, Hamaguchi T, Inamura K, Nobata K, Yazaki M, Ikeda S,
Kobayashi K, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University
Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.
d-noto@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

A 48-year-old woman who had conscious disturbance and abnormal behaviors had been
misdiagnosed as having hepatic encephalopathy due to hyperammonemia and
portal-systemic shunt, and retrograde transvenous obliteration of the shunt did
not improve her symptoms. Thereafter, analyses of plasma amino acids and citrin
gene revealed a diagnosis of adult onset type II citrullinemia (CTLN2). She
underwent auxiliary partial orthotopic liver transplantation (APOLT) using a left
lobe graft from her brother, and her symptoms as well as hyperammonemia improved.
Our case demonstrates the importance of CTLN2 as a differential diagnosis in
patients with hyperammonemia and consciousness disturbance, even if they present 
with a portal-systemic shunt.

PMID: 19285691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Clin Infect Dis. 2009 Apr 15;48(8):1138-51. doi: 10.1086/597468.

Variable impact on mortality of AIDS-defining events diagnosed during combination
antiretroviral therapy: not all AIDS-defining conditions are created equal.

Antiretroviral Therapy Cohort Collaboration (ART-CC), Mocroft A, Sterne JA, Egger
M, May M, Grabar S, Furrer H, Sabin C, Fatkenheuer G, Justice A, Reiss P,
d'Arminio Monforte A, Gill J, Hogg R, Bonnet F, Kitahata M, Staszewski S,
Casabona J, Harris R, Saag M.

Collaborators: Casabona J, Chêne G, Costagliola D, Dabis F, D'Arminio Monforte A,
de Wolf F, Egger M, Fatkenheuer G, Gill J, Hogg R, Justice A, Kitahata M,
Ledergerber B, Mocroft A, Phillips A, Reiss P, Saag M, Sabin C, Staszewski S,
Weller I, May M, Harris R, Sterne J, Abgrall S, Barin F, Bentata M, Billaud E,
Boué F, Burty C, Cabié A, Cotte L, De Truchis P, Duval X, Duvivier C, Enel P,
Fredouille-Heripret L, Gasnault J, Gaud C, Gilquin J, Grabar S, Katlama C, Khuong
MA, Lang JM, Lascaux AS, Launay O, Mahamat A, Mary-Krause M, Matheron S, Meynard 
JL, Pavie J, Pialoux G, Pilorgé F, Poizot-Martin I, Pradier C, Reynes J, Rouveix 
E, Simon A, Tattevin P, Tissot-Dupont H, Viard JP, Viget N, Pariente-Khayat A,
Salomon V, Jacquemet N, Rivet A, Guiguet M, Kousignian I, Lanoy E, Lièvre L,
Potard V, Selinger-Leneman H, Bouvet E, Crickx B, Ecobichon JL, Leport C,
Picard-Dahan C, Yeni P, Tisne-Dessus D, Weiss L, Salmon D, Sicard D, Auperin I,
Roudière L, Fior R, Delfraissy JF, Goujard C, Jung C, Lesprit P, Desplanque N,
Meyohas MC, Picard O, Cadranel J, Mayaud C, Bricaire F, Herson S, Clauvel JP,
Decazes JM, Gerard L, Molina JM, Diemer M, Sellier P, Berthé H, Dupont C,
Chandemerle C, Mortier E, Honoré P, Jeantils V, Tassi S, Mechali D, Taverne B,
Gourdon F, Laurichesse H, Fresard A, Lucht F, Eglinger P, Faller JP, Bazin C,
Verdon R, Boibieux A, Peyramond D, Livrozet JM, Touraine JL, Trepo C, Ravaux I,
Delmont JP, Moreau J, Gastaut JA, Retornaz F, Soubeyrand J, Allegre T, Blanc PA, 
Galinier A, Ruiz JM, Lepeu G, Granet-Brunello P, Esterni JP, Pelissier L,
Cohen-Valensi R, Nezri M, Chadapaud S, Laffeuillade A, May T, Rabaud C, Raffi F, 
Arvieux C, Michelet C, Borsa-Lebas F, Caron F, Fraisse P, Rey D, Arlet-Suau E,
Cuzin L, Massip P, Thiercelin Legrand MF, Yasdanpanah Y, Pradinaud R, Sobesky M, 
Contant M, Montroni M, Scalise G, Braschi MC, Riva A, Tirelli U, Martellotta F,
Pastore G, Ladisa N, Suter F, Arici C, Chiodo F, Colangeli V, Fiorini C, Carosi
G, Cristini G, Torti C, Minardi C, Bertelli D, Quirino T, Manconi PE, Piano P,
Cosco L, Scerbo A, Vecchiet J, D'Alessandro M, Santoro D, Pusterla L, Carnevale
G, Lorenzotti S, Viganò P, Mena M, Ghinelli F, Sighinolfi L, Leoncini F, Mazzotta
F, Pozzi M, Lo Caputo S, Grisorio B, Ferrara S, Grima P, Grima PF, Pagano G,
Cassola G, Alessandrini A, Piscopo R, Toti M, Trezzi M, Soscia F, Tacconi L,
Orani A, Perini P, Scasso A, Vincenti A, Chiodera F, Castelli P, Scalzini A,
Palvarini L, Moroni M, Lazzarin A, Rizzardini G, Caggese L, Cicconi P, Galli A,
Merli S, Pastecchia C, Moioli MC, Esposito R, Mussini C, Abrescia N, Chirianni A,
Izzo CM, Piazza M, De Marco M, Viglietti R, Manzillo E, Nappa S, Colomba A,
Abbadessa V, Prestileo T, Mancuso S, Ferrari C, Pizzaferri P, Filice G, Minoli L,
Bruno R, Novati S, Baldelli F, Camanni G, Petrelli E, Cioppi A, Alberici F,
Ruggieri A, Menichetti F, Martinelli C, De Stefano C, La Gala A, Ballardini G,
Rizzo E, Magnani G, Ursitti MA, Arlotti M, Ortolani P, Cauda R, Dianzani F,
Ippolito G, Antinori A, Antonucci G, Ciardi M, Narciso P, Petrosillo N, Vullo V, 
De Luca A, Zaccarelli M, Acinapura R, De Longis P, Trotta MP, Noto P, Lichtner M,
Capobianchi MR, Carletti F, Girardi E, Pezzotti P, Rezza G, Mura MS, Mannazzu M, 
Caramello P, Di Perri G, Orofino GC, Sciandra M, Grossi PA, Basilico C, Poggio A,
Bottari G, Raise E, Ebo F, Pellizzer G, Buonfrate D, Resta F, Loso K, Cozzi Lepri
A, Battegay M, Bernasconi E, Böni J, Bucher H, Bürgisser P, Cattacin S, Cavassini
M, Dubs R, Elzi L, Erb P, Fischer M, Flepp M, Fontana A, Francioli P, Furrer H,
Gorgievski M, Günthard H, Hirsch H, Hirschel B, Hösli I, Kahlert C, Kaiser L,
Karrer U, Kind C, Klimkait T, Martinetti G, Martinez B, Müller N, Nadal D,
Opravil M, Paccaud F, Pantaleo G, Rickenbach M, Rudin C, Schmid P, Schultze D,
Schüpbach J, Speck R, Taffé P, Tarr P, Telenti A, Trkola A, Vernazza P, Weber R, 
Yerly S, Gras LA, van Sighem AI, Smit C, Bronsveld W, Hillebrand-Haverkort ME,
Prins JM, Branger J, Eeftinck Schattenkerk JK, Gisolf J, Godfried MH, Lange JM,
Lettinga KD, van der Meer JT, Nellen FJ, van der Poll T, Ruys TA, Steingrover R, 
Vermeulen JN, Vrouenraets SM, van Vugt M, Wit FW, Kuijpers TW, Pajkrt D,
Scherpbier HJ, van Eeden A, Brinkman K, van den Berk GE, Blok WL, Frissen PH,
Roos JC, Schouten WE, Mulder JW, van Gorp EC, Wagenaar J, Veenstra J, Danner SA, 
Van Agtmael MA, Claessen FA, Perenboom RM, Rijkeboer A, van Vonderen MG, Richter 
C, van der Berg J, Vriesendorp R, Jeurissen FJ, Kauffmann RH, Pogány K,
Bravenboer B, ten Napel CH, Kootstra GJ, Sprenger HG, van Assen S, van Leeuwen
JT, Doedens R, Scholvinck EH, ten Kate RW, Soetekouw R, van Houte D, Polée MB,
Kroon FP, van den Broek PJ, van Dissel JT, Schippers EF, Schreij G, van der Geest
S, Lowe S, Verbon A, Koopmans PP, Van Crevel R, de Groot R, Keuter M, Post F, van
der Ven AJ, Warris A, van der Ende ME, Gyssens IC, van der Feltz M, Nouwen JL,
Rijnders BJ, de Vries TE, Driessen G, van der Flier M, Hartwig NG, Juttman JR,
van Kasteren ME, Van de Heul C, Hoepelman IM, Schneider MM, Bonten MJ, Borleffs
JC, Ellerbroek PM, Jaspers CA, Mudrikove T, Schurink CA, Gisolf EH, Geelen SP,
Wolfs TF, Faber T, Tanis AA, Groeneveld PH, den Hollander JG, Duits AJ, Winkel K,
Back NK, Bakker ME, Berkhout B, Jurriaans S, Zaaijer HL, Cuijpers T, Rietra PJ,
Roozendaal KJ, Pauw W, van Zanten AP, Smits PH, von Blomberg BM, Savelkoul P,
Pettersson A, Swanink CM, Franck PF, Lampe AS, Jansen CL, Hendriks R, Benne CA,
Veenendaal D, Storm H, Weel J, van Zeijl JH, Kroes AC, Claas HC, Bruggeman CA,
Goossens VJ, Galama JM, Melchers WJ, Poort YA, Doornum GJ, Niesters MG, Osterhaus
AD, Schutten M, Buiting AG, Swaans CA, Boucher CA, Schuurman R, Boel E, Jansz AF,
Veldkamp A, Beijnen JH, Huitema AD, Burger DM, Hugen PW, van Kan HJ, Losso M,
Duran A, Vetter N, Karpov I, Vassilenko A, Mitsura VM, Suetnov O, Clumeck N, De
Wit S, Poll B, Colebunders R, Kostov K, Begovac J, Machala L, Rozsypal H,
Sedlacek D, Nielsen J, Lundgren J, Benfield T, Kirk O, Gerstoft J, Katzenstein T,
Hansen AB, Skinhøj P, Pedersen C, Oestergaard L, Zilmer K, Ristola M, Girard PM, 
Vanhems P, Rockstroh J, Schmidt R, van Lunzen J, Degen O, Stellbrink HJ, Bogner
J, Kosmidis J, Gargalianos P, Xylomenos G, Perdios J, Panos G, Filandras A,
Karabatsaki E, Sambattakou H, Banhegyi D, Mulcahy F, Yust I, Turner D, Burke M,
Pollack S, Hassoun G, Maayan S, Chiesi A, Mazeu I, Pristera R, Gabbuti A,
Montesarchio E, Gargiulo M, Iacomi F, Vlassi C, Finazzi R, Galli M, Ridolfo A,
Rozentale B, Aldins P, Chaplinskas S, Hemmer R, Staub T, Bruun J, Maeland A,
Ormaasen V, Knysz B, Gasiorowski J, Horban A, Prokopowicz D, Wiercinska-Drapalo
A, Boron-Kaczmarska A, Pynka M, Beniowski M, Mularska E, Trocha H, Antunes F,
Valadas E, Mansinho K, Maltez F, Duiculescu D, Rakhmanova A, Vinogradova E,
Buzunova S, Jevtovic D, Mokrás M, Staneková D, González-Lahoz J, Soriano V,
Martin-Carbonero L, Labarga P, Clotet B, Jou A, Conejero J, Tural C, Gatell JM,
Miró JM, Domingo P, Gutierrez M, Mateo G, Sambeat MA, Karlsson A, Persson PO,
Flamholc L, Boffi E, Kravchenko E, Chentsova N, Barton S, Johnson AM, Mercey D,
Johnson MA, Murphy M, Weber J, Scullard G, Fisher M, Brettle R, Gatell J, Gazzard
B, Friis-Møller N, Bannister W, Ellefson M, Borch A, Podlekareva D, Holkmann
Olsen C, Kjaer J, Peters L, Reekie J, Raffanti S, Dieterch D, Becker S, Scarsella
A, Fusco G, Most B, Balu R, Rana R, Beckerman R, Ising T, Fusco J, Irek R,
Johnson B, Hirani A, DeJesus E, Pierone G, Lackey P, Irek C, Johnson A, Burdick
J, Leon S, Arch J, Helm EB, Carlebach A, Müller A, Haberl A, Nisius G, Lennemann 
T, Stephan C, Bickel M, Mösch M, Gute P, Locher L, Lutz T, Klauke S, Knecht G,
Khaykin P, Doerr HW, Stürmer M, Babacan E, von Hentig N, Beylot J, Dupon M,
Longy-Boursier M, Pellegrin JL, Ragnaud JM, Salamon R, Thiébaut R, Lewden C,
Lawson-Ayayi S, Dupon M, Mercié P, Moreau JF, Morlat P, Bernard N, Lacoste D,
Malvy D, Neau D, Blaizeau MJ, Decoin M, Delveaux S, Hannapier C, Labarrère S,
Lavignolle-Aurillac V, Uwamaliya-Nziyumvira B, Palmer G, Touchard D, Balestre E, 
Alioum A, Jacqmin-Gadda H, Bonarek M, Bonnet F, Coadou B, Gellie P, Nouts C,
Bocquentin F, Dutronc H, Lafarie S, Aslan A, Pistonne T, Thibaut P, Vatan R,
Chambon D, De La Taille C, Cazorla C, Ocho A, Viallard JF, Caubet O, Cipriano C, 
Lazaro E, Couzigou P, Castera L, Fleury H, Lafon ME, Masquelier B, Pellegrin I,
Breilh D, Blanco P, Loste P, Caunègre L, Bonnal F, Farbos S, Ferrand M, Ceccaldi 
J, Tchamgoué S, De Witte S, Buy E, Alexander C, Barrios R, Braitstein P, Brumme
Z, Chan K, Cote H, Gataric N, Geller J, Guillemi S, Harrigan PR, Harris M, Joy R,
Levy A, Montaner J, Montessori V, Palepu A, Phillips E, Phillips P, Press N,
Tyndall M, Wood E, Yip B, Bhagani S, Breen R, Byrne P, Carroll A, Cuthbertson Z, 
Dunleavy A, Geretti AM, Heelan B, Johnson M, Kinloch-de Loes S, Lipman M, Madge
S, Marshall N, Nair D, Nebbia G, Prinz B, Shah S, Swader L, Tyrer M, Youle M,
Chaloner C, Grabowska H, Holloway J, Puradiredja J, Ransom D, Tsintas R, Bansi L,
Fox Z, Harris E, Hill T, Lampe F, Lodwick R, Smith C, Amoah E, Booth C, Clewley
G, Garcia Diaz A, Gregory B, Janossy G, Labbett W, Thomas M, Read R, Krentz H,
Beckthold B, Schmeisser N, Alquézar A, Esteve A, Podzamczer D, Murillas J, Romero
A, Agustí C, Agüero F, Ferrer E, Riera M, Segura F, Navarro G, Force L, Vilaró J,
Masabeu A, García I, Guadarrama M, Montoliu A, Ortega N, Lazzari E, Puchol E,
Sanchez M, Blanco JL, Garcia-Alcaide F, Martinez E, Mallolas J, López-Dieguez M, 
García-Goez JF, Sirera G, Romeu J, Negredo E, Miranda C, Capitan MC, Olmo M,
Barragan P, Saumoy M, Bolao F, Cabellos C, Peña C, Sala M, Cervantes M, Jose
Amengual M, Navarro M, Penelo E, Barrufet P, Raper JL, Mugavero MJ, Willig JH,
Schumacher J, Chang PW, Westfall AO, Cloud G, Lin HY, Acosta EP, Colette-Kempf M,
Allison JJ, Pisu M.

BACKGROUND: The extent to which mortality differs following individual acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-defining events (ADEs) has not been assessed
among patients initiating combination antiretroviral therapy.
METHODS: We analyzed data from 31,620 patients with no prior ADEs who started
combination antiretroviral therapy. Cox proportional hazards models were used to 
estimate mortality hazard ratios for each ADE that occurred in >50 patients,
after stratification by cohort and adjustment for sex, HIV transmission group,
number of antiretroviral drugs initiated, regimen, age, date of starting
combination antiretroviral therapy, and CD4+ cell count and HIV RNA load at
initiation of combination antiretroviral therapy. ADEs that occurred in <50
patients were grouped together to form a "rare ADEs" category.
RESULTS: During a median follow-up period of 43 months (interquartile range,
19-70 months), 2880 ADEs were diagnosed in 2262 patients; 1146 patients died. The
most common ADEs were esophageal candidiasis (in 360 patients), Pneumocystis
jiroveci pneumonia (320 patients), and Kaposi sarcoma (308 patients). The
greatest mortality hazard ratio was associated with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
(hazard ratio, 17.59; 95% confidence interval, 13.84-22.35) and progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy (hazard ratio, 10.0; 95% confidence interval,
6.70-14.92). Three groups of ADEs were identified on the basis of the ranked
hazard ratios with bootstrapped confidence intervals: severe (non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma and progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy [hazard ratio, 7.26; 95% 
confidence interval, 5.55-9.48]), moderate (cryptococcosis, cerebral
toxoplasmosis, AIDS dementia complex, disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex,
and rare ADEs [hazard ratio, 2.35; 95% confidence interval, 1.76-3.13]), and mild
(all other ADEs [hazard ratio, 1.47; 95% confidence interval, 1.08-2.00]).
CONCLUSIONS: In the combination antiretroviral therapy era, mortality rates
subsequent to an ADE depend on the specific diagnosis. The proposed
classification of ADEs may be useful in clinical end point trials, prognostic
studies, and patient management.

PMCID: PMC3032444
PMID: 19275498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Acad Radiol. 2009 Apr;16(4):450-5. doi: 10.1016/j.acra.2008.11.005.

Chest CT performed with 3D and z-axis automatic tube current modulation
technique: breast and effective doses.

Matsubara K(1), Takata T, Koshida K, Noto K, Shimono T, Horii J, Yamamoto T,
Matsui O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Quantum Medical Technology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Kanazawa
University, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, 920-0942, Japan.
matsuk@mhs.mp.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES: Chest computed tomographic (CT) scans are the most
effective examinations for detecting lung cancer at an early stage. In chest CT
examinations, it is important to consider the reduction of radiation dose,
particularly to the mammary gland. The objective of this study was to assess
breast doses and effective doses on chest CT examinations between
three-dimensional and z-axis automatic tube current modulation (ATCM) techniques.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Absorbed dose to the breast, lung, mediastinum, and skin
was evaluated with an anthropomorphic phantom and radiophotoluminescence glass
dosimeters using two different CT scanners. The dosimeters were placed inside and
outside the phantom. The phantom was scanned using three-dimensional and z-axis
ATCM techniques after scanning localizer radiographs from the horizontal and
vertical directions. After scanning, each organ dose was calculated. Moreover,
the dose-length product recorded in the dose reports was examined, and each
effective dose was calculated.
RESULTS: Compared with z-axis ATCM, three-dimensional ATCM reduced breast dose by
0.7% to 18.6% and effective dose by 4.9% to 10.2%. In particular,
three-dimensional ATCM reduced frontal breast dose. For other organs,
three-dimensional ATCM reduced absorbed doses by 3.4% to 13.6% compared to z-axis
ATCM.
CONCLUSION: Three-dimensional ATCM can reduce absorbed doses to the breast and
other organs, in addition to reducing effective dose, compared to z-axis ATCM.

PMID: 19268857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2009 Nov;19(9):620-5. doi:
10.1016/j.numecd.2008.12.003. Epub 2009 Mar 3.

Obesity and the metabolic syndrome in a student cohort from Southern Italy.

Noto D(1), Niglio T, Cefalù AB, Martino E, Fayer F, Mina M, Valenti V,
Notarbartolo A, Averna M, Martino F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Emerging Diseases, University of Palermo, 
Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Cardiovascular (CV) risk factors present in childhood predict
future CV events. Few data regarding the metabolic syndrome (MS) prevalence are
available in adolescents from Mediterranean areas where obesity is becoming a
social emergency. This study presents data of MS prevalence in a student cohort
from southern Italy.
METHODS AND RESULTS: 1629 students between 7 and 14 years of age underwent
anthropometric measurements and a blood sample was obtained to assess biochemical
parameters. MS risk factors were calculated based on age and gender adjusted
percentiles of parameter distributions. MS prevalence rate was 0.022 using
paediatric, age-adjusted criteria; the rate increased to 0.029 using a 90th
percentile criteria for fasting blood glucose instead of >100mg/dL. Using the
criteria issued by the International Diabetes Federation the MS prevalence rate
dropped to 0.005. The exploratory factor analysis identified four factors:
age/fat related, lipids, blood pressure and blood glucose. Family history of type
2 diabetes mellitus was associated with triglyceride [OR=1.55 (1.0-2.3)] and BMI 
[OR=1.71 (1.2-2.4)] but not to blood glucose by logistic regression analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: In a student cohort from Southern Italy, obesity is associated with 
the features of MS.

PMID: 19261454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Hum Mutat. 2009 Apr;30(4):E575-90. doi: 10.1002/humu.20991.

Functional characterization of ryanodine receptor (RYR1) sequence variants using 
a metabolic assay in immortalized B-lymphocytes.

Zullo A(1), Klingler W, De Sarno C, Ferrara M, Fortunato G, Perrotta G, Gravino
E, Di Noto R, Lehmann-Horn F, Melzer W, Salvatore F, Carsana A.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy.

Mutations in the RYR1 gene are linked to malignant hyperthermia (MH), central
core disease and multi-minicore disease. We screened by DHPLC the RYR1 gene in 24
subjects for mutations, and characterized functional alterations caused by some
RYR1 variants. Three novel sequence variants and twenty novel polymorphisms were 
identified. Immortalized lymphoblastoid cell lines from patients with RYR1
variants and from controls were stimulated with 4-chloro-m-cresol (4-CmC) and the
rate of extracellular acidification was recorded. We demonstrate that the
increased acidification rate of lymphoblastoid cells in response to 4-CmC is
mainly due to RYR1 activation. Cells expressing RYR1 variants in the N-terminal
and in the central region of the protein (p.Arg530His, p.Arg2163Pro,
p.Asn2342Ser, p.Glu2371Gly and p.Arg2454His) displayed higher activity compared
with controls; this could account for the MH-susceptible phenotype. Cell lines
harboring RYR1(Cys4664Arg) were significantly less activated by 4-CmC. This
result indicates that the p.Cys4664Arg variant causes a leaky channel and
depletion of intracellular stores. The functional changes detected corroborate
the variants analyzed as disease-causing alterations and the acidification rate
measurements as a means to monitor Ca(2+)-induced metabolic changes in cells
harboring mutant RYR1 channels.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19191333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2009 Jun 1;103(2):282-95. doi: 10.1002/bit.22249.

Conditions for partial nitrification in biofilm reactors and a kinetic
explanation.

Pérez J(1), Costa E, Kreft JU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Autonomous University of Barcelona,
ETSE-Campus de UAB, 08193 Bellaterra (Cerdanyola del Vallès), Barcelona, Spain.
julio.perez@uab.es

Nitrification is a two-step process in which ammonia is incompletely oxidized by 
ammonia-oxidizing bacteria or archaea (AOB) to nitrite, which is then further
oxidized to nitrate by nitrite-oxidizing bacteria (NOB). Literature reports show 
that segregation of initially coexisting ammonia and nitrite oxidizing
populations co-immobilized in gel cubes and cultured in a set-up with three
reactors in series (without recirculation) is attained. In those studies NOB were
present and nitrite was oxidized mainly in the last reactor. We developed a
mathematical model for immobilized biomass that allows for one-dimensional
gradients of metabolites and changes of porosity within the gel due to growth.
The model reproduced the experimentally observed compartmentalization under the
conditions used by Noto et al. (Noto et al., 1998. Water Res 32(3): 769- 773),
using standard kinetic parameters of nitrifying bacteria including free ammonia
inhibition of AOB and NOB. The model predicted compartmentalization when the
ammonium load was sufficiently high and liquid phase mixing sufficiently limited 
(close to plug-flow). Modeling results demonstrated that inhibition of NOB by
free ammonia did not substantially contribute to the compartmentalization in
biofilm reactors. Additional simulations identified the higher oxygen affinity of
AOB as the key parameter leading to compartmentalization (i.e., partial
nitrification) in artificial and natural biofilms since they enable the formation
of oxygen gradients. As a result, a tendency for compartmentalization was found
even at equal competitiveness.

Copyright 2009 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 19189394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Org Chem. 2009 Mar 6;74(5):1952-6. doi: 10.1021/jo802473p.

p-Nitrophenolate: a probe for determining acid strength in ionic liquids.

D'Anna F(1), La Marca S, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica E. Paterno, Università degli Studi di
Palermo, Viale delle Scienze-Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
fdanna@unipa.it

In order to obtain an acidity scale in room-temperature ionic liquid solutions,
the protonation equilibrium of sodium p-nitrophenolate in [bm(2)im][NTf(2)] and
in [bmpyrr][NTf(2)], at 298 K, has been studied by means of spectrophotometric
titration. Carboxylic acids differing in both structure and in water solution
strength have been used. Data collected indicate that in the analyzed ionic
liquid solutions carboxylic acids are less dissociated than in water solution.
Furthermore, by virtue of a mutual interaction, the studied equilibrium seems to 
be affected by both the nature of the ionic liquids and the carboxylic acids.

PMID: 19170605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2009 Feb;63(1):107-15. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1819.2008.01911.x.

Health impact of disaster-related stress on pregnant women living in the affected
area of the Noto Peninsula earthquake in Japan.

Hibino Y(1), Takaki J, Kambayashi Y, Hitomi Y, Sakai A, Sekizuka N, Ogino K,
Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Preventive Medicine, Kanazawa University,
Kanazawa, Japan. hibino@pub.m.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

AIMS: The present study assessed the health impact of stress on women who were
pregnant during, or immediately after, a major earthquake and were living in the 
disaster area. Inherent resistance against the stress induced by the earthquake
was also assessed.
METHODS: The panel study consisted of 99 women who provided responses before and 
after delivery (response rate, 77.9%). Psychological impact was assessed on the
Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS), and stress resistance was assessed
on the Sense of Coherence Scale (SOC).
RESULTS: In adjusted multivariate models, the significant earthquake factor that 
predicted postnatal depression (EPDS) was 'existing anxiety about an earthquake' 
(beta = 0.27, P = 0.01) and 'parity' (beta = -0.26, P = 0.02). The SOC during
pregnancy significantly moderated between 'existing anxiety about an earthquake' 
and 'EPDS' (beta = -0.21, P = 0.02). During pregnancy the EDPS was a significant 
predictor of a physical abnormality during pregnancy or childbirth (odds ratio,
1.21; 95% confidence interval: 1.04-1.41). The SOC during pregnancy did not
moderate between a physical abnormality and earthquake-related stress.
CONCLUSIONS: Provision of an adequate support system and improvement of the SOC
of young women affected by a disaster may be two ways of reducing the deleterious
effects of disaster-related stress on maternal well-being.

PMID: 19154216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Jan 6;150(1):19-26.

Outcomes of patients hospitalized with community-acquired, health
care-associated, and hospital-acquired pneumonia.

Venditti M(1), Falcone M, Corrao S, Licata G, Serra P; Study Group of the Italian
Society of Internal Medicine.

Collaborators: Salerno F, Filetti S, D'Erasmo E, Rossi Fanelli F, Fiorentini A,
Cricco L, Gasbarrone L, Serafini C, Ghio R, Zoppoli G, Cortellaro M, Magenta M,
Nuti R, Valenti R, Milano V, Brandimarte C, Carfagna P, Di Sciacca R,
Tuttolomondo A, Serra MG, Bernardi M, Li Bassi S, Stanghellini V, Boschi E,
Antonaci S, Vella F, Antonaci S, Vella F, Zeneroli ML, Ascari E, Veggetti A,
Manfredini R, Gamberoni S, Guarnieri G, Fioretto A, Di Michele D, Parisi D,
Liberato NL, Ronchi E, Sturbini S, Canafoglia P, Gallerani M, Boari B, Nielsen I,
Annoni G, Rossetti A, Bernasconi M, Giannatempo C, Turconi R, Colombo M, Tedeschi
A, Rossi R, Cappelli R, Guidi V, Tassara R, De Melis D, Cosentini R, Arioli M,
Salerno F, Gobbo G, Presotto F, Gallana S, Balduini C, Bertolino G, Fera G,
Corazza GR, Capriglione I, Cappellini MD, Fabio G, Carrabba M, Wu SC, Secchi MB, 
Leone M, De Feudis L, Gunelli M, Ferri O, Doroldi C, Pistis R, Sabbadini MG,
Tresoldi M, Lambelet P, Fascetti S, Vanoli M, Casella G, Rosei EA, Salvi A, Noto 
A, Perciaccante A, Santini C, Galie M, Gasbarrini G, Grieco A, Nardi B,
Baritussio AG, Vannuccini R, Cappelletti M, Gentiloni-Silveri N, Lechi A, Montesi
G.

Summary for patients in
    Ann Intern Med. 2009 Jan 6;150(1):I36.

BACKGROUND: Traditionally, pneumonia has been classified as either community- or 
hospital-acquired. Although only limited data are available, health
care-associated pneumonia has been recently proposed as a new category of
respiratory infection. "Health care-associated pneumonia" refers to pneumonia in 
patients who have recently been hospitalized, had hemodialysis, or received
intravenous chemotherapy or reside in a nursing home or long-term care facility.
OBJECTIVE: To ascertain the epidemiology and outcome of community-acquired,
health care-associated, and hospital-acquired pneumonia in adults hospitalized in
internal medicine wards.
DESIGN: Multicenter, prospective observational study.
SETTING: 55 hospitals in Italy comprising 1941 beds.
PATIENTS: 362 patients hospitalized with pneumonia during two 1-week surveillance
periods.
MEASUREMENTS: Cases of radiologically and clinically assessed pneumonia were
classified as community-acquired, health care-associated, or hospital-acquired
and rates were compared.
RESULTS: Of the 362 patients, 61.6% had community-acquired pneumonia, 24.9% had
health care-associated pneumonia, and 13.5% had hospital-acquired pneumonia.
Patients with health care-associated pneumonia had higher mean Sequential Organ
Failure Assessment scores than did those with community-acquired pneumonia (3.0
vs. 2.0), were more frequently malnourished (11.1% vs. 4.5%, and had more
frequent bilateral (34.4% vs. 19.7%) and multilobar (27.8% vs. 21.5%) involvement
on a chest radiograph. Patients with health care-associated pneumonia also had
higher fatality rates (17.8% [CI, 10.6% to 24.9%] vs. 6.7% [CI, 2.9% to 10.5%])
and longer mean hospital stay (18.7 days [CI, 15.9 to 21.5 days] vs. 14.7 days
[CI, 13.4 to 15.9 days]). Logistic regression analysis revealed that depression
of consciousness (odds ratio [OR], 3.2 [CI, 1.06 to 9.8]), leukopenia (OR, 6.2
[CI, 1.01 to 37.6]), and receipt of empirical antibiotic therapy not recommended 
by international guidelines (OR, 6.4 [CI, 2.3 to 17.6]) were independently
associated with increased intrahospital mortality.
LIMITATIONS: The number of patients with health care-associated pneumonia was
relatively small. Microbiological investigations were not always homogeneous. The
study included only patients with pneumonia that required hospitalization;
results may not apply to patients treated as outpatients.
CONCLUSION: Health care-associated pneumonia should be considered a distinct
subset of pneumonia associated with more severe disease, longer hospital stay,
and higher mortality rates. Physicians should differentiate between patients with
health care-associated pneumonia and those with community-acquired pneumonia and 
provide more appropriate initial antibiotic therapy.

PMID: 19124816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Amyloid. 2009;16(2):99-102. doi: 10.1080/13506120902879335.

Cardiomyopathy in a Japanese family with the Glu61Lys transthyretin variant: a
new phenotype.

Noto Y(1), Tokuda T, Shiga K, Tsuchiya A, Yazaki M, Matoba S, Nakagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurology and Gerontology, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

We report a Japanese family with transthyretin (TTR) amyloidosis caused by
ATTRGlu61Lys that was associated with progressive cardiomyopathy, peripheral
neuropathy, and bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. Amyloidotic polyneuropathy in
association with ATTRGlu61Lys was previously described in a Japanese family by
Shiomi et al., (Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1993;194:1090-1096), and the main
clinical features of that family were late-onset sensorimotor polyneuropathy and 
severe autonomic disturbance. However, there have been no descriptions of either 
cardiac involvement or carpal tunnel syndrome. The Japanese family, we present
here, had severe cardiomyopathy as a cardinal symptom, which is a new phenotype
of the TTR amyloidosis with ATTRGlu61Lys. This report, alongwith a previous one, 
demonstrates the clinical variety of TTR amyloidosis caused by ATTRGlu61Lys.

PMID: 20536403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Phys Chem B. 2009 Jan 22;113(3):632-9. doi: 10.1021/jp806761h.

Investigation of water structure in nafion membranes by infrared spectroscopy and
molecular dynamics simulation.

Hofmann DW(1), Kuleshova L, D'Aguanno B, Di Noto V, Negro E, Conti F, Vittadello 
M.

Author information: 
(1)CRS4, Parco Scientifico e Tecnologico, POLARIS, Edificio 1, 09010 Pula, Italy.

The structure and interactions of water species in hydrated Nafion membranes as a
function of water content were investigated on the basis of medium-infrared
spectral analysis and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The spectral
decomposition of the FT-IR data in the stretching OH region was performed on
different levels of hydration of the sulfate functional groups (lambdaH2O/RSO3- =
2-22). Quantum mechanical calculations of two model systems
[perfluoroethanesulfonic acid/(H2O)6 cluster] and a [perfluorobutanesulfonic
acid/(H2O)6 crystal] were carried out in order to account for the band
assignments of Nafion in the stretching OH region (2500-4000 cm-1). Our findings 
indicated that the secondary structure of water species in Nafion can be
accurately explained in terms of our reactive force field for water. The
distinction between "surface" and "bulk" water contributions in Nafion membrane
pores is proposed along with a quantitative estimate of the different types of OH
groups present in the system. The average pore size was calculated and supported 
by the spectral results.

PMID: 19113878  [PubMed]


234. Brain Res. 2009 Feb 13;1254:99-108. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.11.080. Epub
2008 Dec 3.

Tacrolimus (FK506) suppresses rt-PA-induced hemorrhagic transformation in a rat
thrombotic ischemia stroke model.

Maeda M(1), Furuichi Y, Noto T, Matsuoka N, Mutoh S, Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Research Labs, Astellas Pharma Inc., Kashima, Osaka, Japan.
masashi.maeda@jp.astellas.com

The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of tacrolimus on recombinant
tissue-plasminogen activator (rt-PA)-induced hemorrhagic transformation, and to
characterize its suppressive action for hemorrhage. Thrombotic occlusion of the
middle cerebral artery (MCA) was induced by photochemical reaction in
spontaneously hypertensive rats, and hemorrhagic scores and brain damage were
measured 24 h after MCA occlusion. Administration of rt-PA 3 h after MCA
occlusion significantly worsened spontaneous hemorrhagic changes and tended to
aggravate brain damage. Hematoma was observed in 7 of 15 rats treated with rt-PA,
and 0 of 15 rats in the control group. Tacrolimus alone administered
intravenously 3 h after MCA occlusion did not produce any hemorrhagic changes.
The combined treatment of tacrolimus followed by rt-PA significantly decreased
the incidence of hematoma and brain damage in comparison with that of the rt-PA
treated group. Permeability of the blood-brain-barrier (BBB) detected by
extravasations of Evans blue was investigated 6 h after MCA occlusion, as was the
integrity of microvascular endothelial cells as determined by immunohistochemical
assessment of the prevalence of platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1
(PECAM-1/CD31). Combined treatment of rt-PA with tacrolimus reduced the
rt-PA-induced extravasation of Evans blue and preserved CD31-positive cells in
the ischemic hemisphere. Thus, tacrolimus was able to reduce the rt-PA-induced
hemorrhagic transformation, which might be due to the protective effects on
cerebral microvascular endothelial cells after thrombotic cerebral ischemia
during the acute phase of cerebral ischemia. In conclusion, the combination of
rt-PA with tacrolimus may be useful for decreasing the risk of thrombolytic
therapy.

PMID: 19101526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Pharmacol Sci. 2008 Dec;108(4):529-34.

Efficacy of oral treatment with tacrolimus in the renal transplant model in
cynomolgus monkeys.

Kinugasa F(1), Nagatomi I, Ishikawa H, Nakanishi T, Maeda M, Hirose J, Fukahori
H, Ooshima S, Noto T, Higashi Y, Seki N, Mutoh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Pharmacology Research Labs, Astellas Pharma, Inc.,
Japan. fumitaka.kinugasa@jp.astellas.com

Many studies have examined the efficacy of tacrolimus in rats and dogs, but few
have reported its evaluation in cynomolgus monkeys. The aim of this study was to 
clarify the efficacy of tacrolimus in a cynomolgus monkey renal transplant model 
based on the efficacy of various doses. Monkeys that had undergone renal
transplant were treated with a vehicle or 0.5, 1.0, or 2.0 mg/kg of tacrolimus by
oral administration. Tacrolimus administration prolonged animal survival in a
dose-dependent manner, and the median survival time (MST) was 11, 21, and >90
days for the 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 mg/kg tacrolimus groups, respectively. The MST of 
the vehicle group was 6 days. Histopathological analyses of all transplanted
kidneys were also performed. Typical pathological findings of acute rejection
were observed in both the vehicle and tacrolimus (0.5 and 1.0 mg/kg)-treated
groups. Only limited mononuclear cell infiltration and hemorrhage were present in
the tacrolimus (2.0 mg/kg)-treated group. In conclusion, 2.0 mg/kg was considered
to be a therapeutic dose in this model, and 0.5 or 1.0 mg/kg could be used for a 
study when efficacy of a new compound is evaluated in a combination therapy with 
tacrolimus.

PMID: 19098392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Thromb Res. 2009 Apr;123(6):881-6. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2008.10.016. Epub 2008
Dec 14.

Elevated levels of platelet microparticles in carotid atherosclerosis and during 
the postprandial state.

Michelsen AE(1), Notø AT, Brodin E, Mathiesen EB, Brosstad F, Hansen JB.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Internal Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
annika.michelsen@rr-research.no

BACKGROUND: Platelet microparticles (PMPs) possess proatherogenic and
procoagulant properties which may play a role in atherogenesis and subsequent
thromboembolic complications. The present study was conducted to investigate the 
possible relationship between carotid atherosclerosis and plasma concentrations
of PMPs, and elucidate if plasma levels of PMPs were affected by postprandial
hypertriglyceridemia.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Subjects with ultrasound-assessed carotid atherosclerotic
plaques (echogenic; n=20 and echolucent; n=20), assessed by ultrasonography, and 
subjects without carotid plaques (n=20) were recruited from a population-based
study and underwent a standard fat tolerance test. Subjects with carotid plaques 
had significantly higher levels of large PMPs than subjects without carotid
atherosclerotic plaques (96.7+/-50.4 microg/l versus 56.1+/-34.9 microg/l), after
adjustments for traditional cardiovascular risk factors and use cardiovascular
drugs (p=0.021). Plasma PMPs were not associated with plaque echogenicity.
Postprandial hypertriglyceridemia induced a similar increase in plasma PMPs
within all groups. Significant correlations were found between an increase in
plasma triglycerides and percent elevation in total PMPs (r=0.29, p<0.05) and
large PMPs (r=0.34, p<0.01) in the postprandial phase.
CONCLUSIONS: Individuals with echogenic and echolucent carotid atherosclerotic
plaques have statistically significant elevation of large plasma PMPs compared to
age/sex-matched normal controls. Postprandial hypertriglyceridemia induces a
significant, similar increase in plasma PMPs in individuals with and without
carotid atherosclerotic plaques which could be of pathophysiological importance
in atherogenesis.

PMID: 19073340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Chir Ital. 2008 Sep-Oct;60(5):685-95.

[Thyroid carcinoma: from diagnosis to therapy].

[Article in Italian]

Marrazzo A(1), Taormina P, David M, Riili I, Casà L, Noto A, Romano G, Marrazzo
E, Buscemi G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Oncologia Sperimentale e Applicazioni Cliniche, Università
degli Studi di Palermo.

From 1999 to 2007 we performed 104 surgical operations for thyroid malignancies. 
Over the same period, 312 patients underwent surgery for benign lesions of the
thyroid gland. The patients were subdivided on the basis of age bracket and
gender and the distribution of cancer and benign nodules was evaluated.
Feasibility and diagnostic accuracy of ultrasonography, scintigraphy and fine
needle aspiration cytology were also evaluated. The incidence of thyroid cancer
was 25% in all patients. Patients aged < 30 years and > 71 had the highest rate
of malignancies: 52% of patients under 30 years of age and 46% over 70 years.
Males showed a higher incidence than females. The scintigraphic findings were an 
area of low uptake in 19 cases (47.5%), an irregular pattern in 12 patients (30%)
and a high uptake in 9 cases (22.5%); in 3 of them (7.5%), cancer was in the
contralateral lobe and in 2 cases (5%) the dimensions were 8 and 4 mm.
Forty-three patients had a single hypoechoic nodule at ultrasonography (41.3%), 3
(3%) were found with hypoechoic nodules containing calcifications and 1 (0.9%) a 
single anechoic nodule. Fifty-six patients (53.9%) had multiple nodules and 1
(0.9%) was admitted for a latero-cervical lymph node. FNAC revealed 11 cases of
fibronectin expression (14.4%): in particular, 3 patients (4%) had cancer in the 
contralateral lobe and 3 patients (4%) had tumours measuring less than 5 mm.
Thyroid surgery is safe and the morbidity rate is about 2%. We observed only one 
lesion of recurrent nerve (0.5% of patients), temporary recurrent palsy in 2.8%
of patients and transient hypocalcaemia in 6.7% of cases.

PMID: 19062491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Clin J Gastroenterol. 2008 Dec;1(4):153-6. doi: 10.1007/s12328-008-0023-2. Epub
2008 Sep 26.

Superior mesenteric artery syndrome resulting from acute massive gastric
dilatation caused by Helicobacter pylori-induced acute antral gastritis.

Hashimoto H(1), Seno A(2), Ishizaki A(3), Terasaki S(4), Kimoto T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kanazawa Red Cross Hospital, 2-251 Minma, Kanazawa, 
921-8162, Japan. doct1189@kanazawa-rc-hosp.jp. (2)Department of Pediatrics,
Kanazawa Red Cross Hospital, 2-251 Minma, Kanazawa, 921-8162, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Noto General Hospital, Nanao, Japan. (4)Department
of Gastroenterology, Kanazawa Red Cross Hospital, Kanazawa, Japan. (5)Department 
of Radiology, Kanazawa Red Cross Hospital, Kanazawa, Japan.

A previously well, slender 14-year-old boy developed right epigastric pain with
vomiting. His vomiting gradually changed to bile-stained fluid for 8 h. He was
diagnosed with superior mesenteric artery syndrome with acute massive gastric
dilatation by contrast-enhanced computed tomography, which also showed markedly
thickened prepyloric gastric wall that may have caused gastric outlet stenosis.
Acute gastric mucosal lesions of the antrum were confirmed by endoscopic and
histological studies. Endoscopic biopsy specimens using rapid urease test and
histopathology detected Helicobacter pylori. Serum anti-H. pylori antibody was
negative. He did well after conservative treatment. We conclude that an acute
form of superior mesenteric artery syndrome resulted from compression of the
artery by acute massive gastric dilatation associated with transient gastric
outlet stenosis caused by acute antral gastritis, which resulted from the initial
H. pylori infection.

PMID: 26193694  [PubMed]


239. J Phys Chem B. 2008 Dec 25;112(51):16590-600. doi: 10.1021/jp804117w.

Vibrational studies and properties of hybrid inorganic-organic proton conducting 
membranes based on Nafion and hafnium oxide nanoparticles.

Vittadello M(1), Negro E, Lavina S, Pace G, Safari A, Di Noto V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Rutgers University, 607
Taylor Road, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA.

In this report, we will describe the effect of different concentrations of HfO2
nanopowders on the structure and properties of [Nafion/(HfO2)n] membranes with n 
= 0, 3, 5, 9, 11, 13, and 15 wt %, respectively. Films were prepared by a solvent
casting procedure using HfO2 oxoclusters and Nafion. Seven new homogeneous
membranes were obtained with thicknesses ranging from 200 to 350 microm. Each
membrane is characterized by a rough HfO2-rich surface and a smooth Nafion-rich
surface, with different physical-chemical properties. Membrane characterization
was accomplished by means of thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), morphological
measurements (environmental scanning electron microscopy) and vibrational
spectroscopy (Fourier transform infrared attenuated total reflectance
spectroscopy and Fourier transform Raman spectroscopy). These systems can be
described in terms of five types of water domains, Nafion-HfO2 species with
well-defined stoichiometry surrounded by Nafion and hydrated hafnia. The highest 
conductivity at 125 degrees C (3.2 x 10-2 S x cm(-1)) was measured on the
[Nafion/(HfO2)5] film by electrical spectroscopy, with a stability range of
conductivity between 5 and 115 degrees C.

PMID: 19032059  [PubMed]


240. J Chemother. 2008 Oct;20(5):648-51.

Bone marrow toxicity in HCV genotype 5a-infected patient after peg-IFN alpha-2a
and ribavirin therapy.

Drapeau CM(1), Remotti D, Noto P, Capone A, Boumis E, Petrosillo N.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Infectious Diseases Division, National Institute for Infectious Diseases
L. Spallanzani, Rome, Italy.

The optimal therapy for HCV-related chronic hepatitis is the combination of
pegylated interferon alpha (peg-IFN alpha) plus ribavirin (RBV). Unfortunately,
both peg-IFN alpha and RBV are responsible for a wide range of adverse events and
potentially severe toxicities, particularly hematological alterations. Indeed,
RBV is generally responsible for anemia through hemolysis, while peg-IFN alpha
induces more commonly leukopoenia and thrombocytopenia, presumably through bone
marrow toxicity. Actually, data regarding histopathological bone marrow
alterations in HCV-infected patients following IFN-alpha therapy is scanty. We
report a case of a HCV-infected cirrhotic patient, who developed bone marrow
alterations following one-year peg-IFN alpha plus RBV treatment, and we describe 
the associated histopathological features. Our case report provides new
significant insight on the histopathological changes occurring in bone marrow of 
HCV-infected cirrhotic patients during peg-IFN alpha-2a plus RBV treatment,
providing also additional information on potential bone marrow toxicity in the
course of IFN-based treatments.

PMID: 19028630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Jan;37(Database issue):D274-8. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn862.
Epub 2008 Nov 20.

The Transporter Classification Database: recent advances.

Saier MH Jr(1), Yen MR, Noto K, Tamang DG, Elkan C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences and Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0116, USA.
msaier@ucsd.edu

The Transporter Classification Database (TCDB), freely accessible at
http://www.tcdb.org, is a relational database containing sequence, structural,
functional and evolutionary information about transport systems from a variety of
living organisms, based on the International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology-approved transporter classification (TC) system. It is a curated
repository for factual information compiled largely from published references. It
uses a functional/phylogenetic system of classification, and currently
encompasses about 5000 representative transporters and putative transporters in
more than 500 families. We here describe novel software designed to support and
extend the usefulness of TCDB. Our recent efforts render it more user friendly,
incorporate machine learning to input novel data in a semiautomatic fashion, and 
allow analyses that are more accurate and less time consuming. The availability
of these tools has resulted in recognition of distant phylogenetic relationships 
and tremendous expansion of the information available to TCDB users.

PMCID: PMC2686586
PMID: 19022853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Pediatr Cardiol. 2009 Apr;30(3):262-8. doi: 10.1007/s00246-008-9329-6. Epub 2008 
Nov 20.

Age-related acceleration of endothelial dysfunction and subclinical
atherosclerosis in subjects with coronary artery lesions after Kawasaki disease.

Noto N(1), Okada T, Karasawa K, Ayusawa M, Sumitomo N, Harada K, Mugishima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
info@noto-clinic.com

The objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that accelerated
endothelial dysfunction and the development of premature atherosclerosis are
associated with age in subjects with coronary artery lesions after Kawasaki
disease (KD). A case-control study was performed at a university hospital that
included 35 post-KD subjects across a wide age range (range, 8-42 years) without 
traditional cardiovascular risk factors and 35 age- and sex-matched healthy
control subjects (Cont). Flow-mediated dilatation (FMD) of the brachial
artery-induced by reactive hyperemia, intima media thickness (IMT), and elastic
modulus (Ep) of the common carotid artery were compared between KD and Cont
subjects assessed against age. KD subjects had slightly higher levels of body
mass index, lipid profile, and HbA1c than Cont subjects, but the differences were
not significant. The mean IMT (p < 0.001), age-adjusted percentage normal IMT (%N
IMT; p < 0.0001), and Ep (p < 0.001) were significantly higher in KD than Cont
subjects, and the peak FMD% (p < 0.01) was significantly lower in KD than Cont
subjects. There were significant correlations between FMD% and age (r = -0.51 p <
0.0001), IMT and age (r = 0.68, p < 0.001), and Ep and age (r = 0.58, p < 0.01)
in KD but not Cont subjects. When the difference in FMD% between KD and matched
Cont subjects (DeltaFMD%) was plotted against age, no significant relationship
was found, although significant correlations between DeltaIMT and age (r = 0.52, 
p < 0.01) as well as between DeltaEp and age (r = 0.46, p < 0.05) were observed. 
When we defined values that were +2.0 SD over the mean control values (i.e., %N
IMT >or= 120% and/or Ep >or= 50 kPa) as markers of subclinical atherosclerosis,
15 subjects met the criteria. Subjects over the age of 22 years were more likely 
to have (OR = 16.54, p = 0.0001) subclinical atherosclerosis in this cohort. Our 
results suggest that endothelial dysfunction and the development of premature
atherosclerosis were accelerated in adult post-KD compared to Cont subjects.

PMID: 19020792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. AIDS. 2008 Nov 30;22(18):2481-92. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e328318f130.

Does short-term virologic failure translate to clinical events in
antiretroviral-naïve patients initiating antiretroviral therapy in clinical
practice?

Antiretroviral Therapy Cohort Collaboration (ART-CC), Mugavero MJ, May M, Harris 
R, Saag MS, Costagliola D, Egger M, Phillips A, Günthard HF, Dabis F, Hogg R, de 
Wolf F, Fatkenheuer G, Gill MJ, Justice A, D'Arminio Monforte A, Lampe F, Miró
JM, Staszewski S, Sterne JA.

Collaborators: Casabona J, Geneviè C, Costagliola D, Dabis F, D'Arminio Monforte 
A, del Amo J, de Wolf F, Egger M, Fätkenheuer G, Gill J, Guest J, Hogg R, Justice
A, Kitahata M, Lampe F, Ledergerber B, Mocroft A, Reiss P, Saag M, Staszewski S, 
Egger M, May M, Harris R, Sterne J, Mugavero MJ, May M, Harris R, Saag MS,
Costagliola D, Egger M, Phillips A, Günthard HF, Dabis F, Hogg R, de Wolf F,
Fatkenheuer G, Gill MJ, Justice A, D'Arminio Monforte A, Lampe F, Miró JM,
Staszewski S, Sterne JA, Abgrall S, Barin F, Bentata M, Billaud E, Boué F, Burty 
C, Cabié A, Costagliola D, Cotte L, De Truchis P, Duval X, Duvivier C, Enel P,
Fredouille-Heripret L, Gasnault J, Gaud C, Gilquin J, Grabar S, Katlama C, Khuong
MA, Lang JM, Lascaux AS, Launay O, Mahamat A, Mary-Krause M, Matheron S, Meynard 
JL, Pavie J, Pialoux G, Pilorgé F, Poizot-Martin I, Pradier C, Reynes J, Rouveix 
E, Simon A, Tattevin P, Tissot-Dupon H, Viard JP, Viget N, Pariente-Khayat A,
Salomon V, Jacquemet N, Rivet A, Abgral S, Costagliola D, Grabar S, Guiguet M,
Kousignian I, Lanoy E, Lièvre L, Mary-Krause M, Potard V, Selinger-Leneman H,
Bouvet E, Crickx B, Ecobichon JL, Leport C, Matheron S, Picard-Dahan C, Yeni P,
Tisne-Dessus D, Weiss L, Salmon D, Sicard D, Auperin I, Gilquin J, Roudière L,
Viard JP, Boué F, Fior R, Delfraissy JF, Goujard C, Jung C, Lesprit P, Desplanque
N, Meynard JL, Meyohas MC, Picard O, Cadranel J, Mayaud C, Pialoux G, Bricaire F,
Herson S, Katlama C, Simon A, Clauvel JP, Decazes JM, Gerard L, Molina JM, Diemer
M, Sellier P, Berthé H, Dupont C, Chandemerle C, Mortier E, de Truchis P, Bentata
M, Honoré P, Jeantils V, Tassi S, Mechali D, Taverne B, Gourdon F, Laurichesse H,
Fresard A, Lucht F, Eglinger P, Faller JP, Bazin C, Verdon R, Boibieux A,
Peyramond D, Livroze JM, Touraine JL, Cotte L, Trepo C, Ravaux I, Tissot-Dupont
H, Delmont JP, Moreau J, Gastaut JA, Poizot-Martin I, Retornaz F, Soubeyrand J,
Allegre T, Blanc PA, Galinier A, Ruiz JM, Lepeu G, Granet-Brunello P, Esterni JP,
Pelissier L, Cohen-Valensi R, Nezri M, Chadapaud S, Laffeuillade A, Laffeuillade 
J, May T, Rabaud C, Billaud E, Raffi F, Pugliese P, Pradier C, Arvieux C,
Michelet C, Borsa-Lebas F, Caron F, Fraisse P, Lang JM, Rey D, Arlet-Suau E,
Cuzin L, Massip P, Thiercelin Legrand MF, Yasdanpanah Y, Pradinaud R, Sobesky M, 
Gaud C, Contant M, Montroni M, Scalise G, Braschi MC, Riva A, Tirelli U, Cinelli 
R, Pastore G, Ladisa N, Suter F, Arici C, Chiodo F, Colangeli V, Fiorini C,
Carosi G, Cristini G, Torti C, Minardi C, Bertelli D, Quirino T, Manconi PE,
Piano P, Cosco L, Scerbo A, Vecchiet J, D'Alessandro M, Santoro D, Pusterla L,
Carnevale G, Zoncada A, Viganò P, Mena M, Ghinelli F, Sighinolfi L, Leoncini F,
Mazzotta F, Pozzi M, Lo Caputo S, Angarano G, Grisorio B, Saracino A, Ferrara S, 
Grima P, Grima F, Pagano G, Cassola G, Alessandrini A, Piscopo R, Toti M, Trezzi 
M, Soscia F, Tacconi L, Orani A, Perini P, Scasso A, Vincenti A, Chiodera F,
Castelli P, Scalzini A, Palvarini L, Moroni M, Lazzarin A, Rizzardini G,
d'Arminio Monforte A, Galli A, Merli S, Pastecchia C, Moioli MC, Esposito R,
Mussini C, Abresci N, Chirianni A, Izzo CM, Piazza M, De Marco M, Viglietti R,
Manzillo E, Nappa S, Colomba A, Abbadessa V, Prestileo T, Mancuso S, Ferrari C,
Pizzaferri P, Filice G, Minoli L, Bruno R, Novati S, Baldelli F, Tinca M,
Petrelli E, Cioppi A, Cioppi F, Ruggieri A, Menichetti F, Martinelli C, De
Stefano C, La Gala A, Ballardini G, Rizzo E, Magnani G, Ursitti MA, Arlotti M,
Ortolani P, Cauda R, Dianzani F, Ippolito G, Antinori A, Antonucci G, Ciardi M,
Narciso P, Petrosillo N, Vullo V, De Luca A, Zaccarelli M, Acinapura R, De Longis
P, Brandi A, Trotta MP, Noto P, Lichtne M, Capobianch MR, Carletti F, Girardi E, 
Pezzotti P, Rezza G, Mura MS, Mannazzu M, Caramello P, Di Perri G, Sciandra M,
Orofino GC, Grossi PA, Basilico C, Poggio A, Bottari G, Raise E, Ebo F, Pellizzer
G, Buonfrate D, Resta F, Loso K, Cozzi Lepri A, Battegay M, Bernasconi E, Böni J,
Bucher HC, Bürgisser P, Calmy A, Cattacin S, Cavassini M, Dubs R, Egger M, Elzi
L, Fischer M, Flepp M, Fontana A, Francioli P, Furrer H, Fux C, Gorgievski M,
Günthard H, Hirsch H, Hirschel B, Hösli I, Kahlert Ch, Kaiser L, Karrer U, Kind
C, Klimkait T, Ledergerber B, Martinetti G, Martinez B, Martinez N, Nadal D,
Opravil M, Paccaud F, Pantaleo G, Rauch A, Regenass S, Rickenbach M, Rudin C,
Schmid P, Schultze D, Schüpbach J, Speck R, Taffé P, Telenti A, Trkola A,
Vernazza P, Weber R, Yerly S, Gras LA, van Sighem AI, Smit C, de Wolf F, Prins
JM, Branger J, Eeftinck Schattenkerk JK, Gisolf J, Godfried MH, Lange JM,
Lettinga KD, van der Meer JT, Nellen FJ, van der Poll T, Reiss P, Ruys TA,
Steingrover R, Vermeulen JN, Vrouenraets SM, van Vugt M, Wit FW, Kuijpers TW,
Pajkrt D, Scherpbier HJ, van Eeden A, Brinkman K, van den Berk GE, Blok WL,
Frissen PH, Roos JC, Schouten WE, Mulder JW, van Gorp EC, Wagenaar J, Veenstra J,
Danner SA, Van Agtmael MA, Claessen FA, Perenboom RM, Rijkeboer A, van Vonderen
MG, Richter C, van der Berg J, Vriesendorp R, Jeurissen FJ, Kauffmann RH, Pogány 
K, Bravenboer B, Sprenger HG, van Assen S, van Leeuwen JT, Doedens R, Scholvinck 
EH, ten Kate RW, Soetekouw R, van Houte D, Polée MB, Kroon FP, van den Broek PJ, 
van Dissel JT, Schippers EF, Schreij G, van der Geest S, Lowe S, Verbon A,
Koopmans PP, Van Crevel R, de Groot R, Keuter M, Post F, van der Ven AJ, Warris
A, van der Ende ME, Gyssens IC, van der Feltz M, Nouwen JL, Rijnders BJ, de Vries
TE, Driessen G, van der Flier M, Hartwig NG, Juttman JR, van Kasteren ME, Van de 
Heul C, Hoepelman IM, Schneider MM, Bonten MJ, Borleffs JC, Ellerbroek PM,
Jaspers CA, Mudrikove T, Schurink CA, Gisolf EH, Geelen SP, Wolfs TF, Faber T,
Tanis AA, Groeneveld PH, den Hollander JG, Duits AJ, Winkel K, Back NK, Bakker
ME, Berkhout B, Jurriaans S, Zaaijer HL, Cuijpers T, Rietra PJ, Roozendaal KJ,
Pauw W, van Zanten AP, Smits PH, von Blomberg BM, Savelkoul P, Pettersson A,
Swanink CM, Franck PF, Lampe AS, Jansen CL, Hendriks R, Benne CA, Veenendaal D,
Storm H, Weel J, van Zeijl JH, Kroes AC, Claas HC, Bruggeman CA, Goossens VJ,
Galama JM, Melchers WJ, Poort YA, Doornum GJ, Niesters MG, Osterhaus AD, Schutten
M, Buiting AG, Swaans CA, Boucher CA, Schuurman R, Boel E, Jansz AF, Veldkamp A, 
Beijnen JH, Huitema AD, Burger DM, Hugen PW, van Kan HJ, Losso M, Duran A, Vetter
N, Karpov I, Vassilenko A, Clumeck N, De Wit S, Poll B, Colebunders R, Machala L,
Rozsypal H, Sedlacek D, Nielsen J, Lundgren J, Benfield T, Kirk O, Gerstoft J,
Katzenstein T, Hansen AB, Skinhøj P, Pedersen C, Zilmer K, Katlama C, Viard JP,
Girard PM, Saint-Marc T, Vanhems P, Pradier C, Dabis F, Dietrich M, Manegold C,
van Lunzen J, Stellbrink HJ, Staszewsk S, Bickel M, Goebel FD, Fätkenheuer G,
Rockstroh J, Schmidt R, Kosmidis J, Gargalianos P, Sambatakou H, Perdios J, Panos
G, Filandras A, Karabatsaki E, Banhegyi D, Mulcahy F, Yust I, Turner D, Burke M, 
Pollack S, Hassoun G, Sthoeger Z, Maayan S, Chiesi A, Esposito R, Borghi R, Arici
C, Pristera R, Mazzott F, Gabbuti A, Vullo, Lichtner M, Chirianni A, Montesarchio
E, Antonucci G, Iacomi F, Narciso P, Zaccarelli M, Lazzarin A, Finazzi R,
D'Arminio Monforte A, Viksna L, Chaplinskas S, Hemmer R, Staub T, Reiss P, Bruun 
J, Maeland A, Ormaasen V, Knysz B, Gasiorowski J, Horban A, Prokopowicz D,
Wiercinska-Drapalo A, Boron-Kaczmarska A, Pynka M, Beniowski M, Mularska E,
Trocha H, Antunes F, Valadas E, Mansinho K, Matez F, Duiculescu D, Babes V,
Streinu-Cercel A, Vinogradova E, Rakhmanova A, Jevtovic D, Mokrás M, Staneková D,
González-Lahoz J, Sánchez-Conde M, García-Benayas T, Martin-Carbonero L, Soriano 
V, Clotet B, Jou A, Conejero J, Tural C, Gatell JM, Miró JM, Blaxhult A, Karlsson
A, Pehrson P, Ledergerber B, Weber R, Francioli P, Telenti A, Hirschel B,
Soravia-Dunand V, Furrer H, Kravchenko E, Chentsova N, Barton S, Johnson AM,
Mercey D, Phillips A, Johnson MA, Mocroft A, Murphy M, Weber J, Scullard G,
Fisher M, Brettle R, Loveday C, Clotet B, Antunes F, Blaxhult A, Clumeck N,
Gatell J, Horban A, Johnson A, Katlama C, Ledergerber B, Loveday C, Phillips A,
Reiss P, Vella S, Lundgren J, Gjørup I, Kirk O, Friis-Moeller N, Mocroft A,
Cozzi-Lepri A, Bannister W, Mollerup D, Podlevkareva D, Holkmann Olsen C, Kjaer
J, Raffanti S, Dieterch D, Justice A, Becker S, Scarsella A, Fusco G, Most B,
Balu R, Rana R, Beckerman R, Ising T, Fusco J, Irek R, Johnson B, Hirani A,
DeJesus E, Pierone G, Lackey P, Irek C, Johnson A, Burdick J, Leon S, Arch J,
Staszewski S, Helm EB, Carlebach A, Müller A, Haberl A, Nisius G, Lennemann T,
Stephan C, Bickel M, Mösch M, Gute P, Locher L, Lutz T, Klauke S, Knecht G,
Khaykin P, Doerr HW, Stürmer M, Babacan E, von Hentig N, Beylot J, Chêne G, Dabis
F, Dupon M, Longy-Boursier M, Pellegrin JL, Ragnaud JM, Salamon R, Dabis F, Chêne
G, Thiébaut R, Lewden C, Lawson-Ayayi S, Dupon M, Mercié P, Moreau JF, Morlat P, 
Pellegrin JL, Ragnaud JM, Bernard N, Lacoste D, Malvy D, Neau D, Blaizeau MJ,
Decoin M, Delveaux S, Hannapier C, Labarrère S, Lavignolle-Aurillac V,
Uwamaliya-Nziyumvira B, Palmer G, Touchard D, Balestre E, Alioum A, Jacqmin-Gadda
H, Thiébaut R, Beylot J, Morlat P, Bernard N, Bonarek M, Bonnet F, Coadou B,
Gellie P, Lacoste D, Nouts C, Dupon M, Bocquentin F, Dutronc H, Lafarie S,
Longy-Boursier M, Mercié P, Aslan A, Malvy D, Pistonne T, Thibaut P, Vatan R,
Ragnaud JM, Chambon D, De La Taille C, Cazorla C, Neau D, Ocho A, Pellegrin JL,
Viallard JF, Caubet O, Cipriano C, Lazaro E, Couzigou P, Castera L, Fleury H,
Lafon ME, Masquelier B, Pellegrin I, Breilh D, Moreau JF, Blanco P, Loste P,
Caunègre L, Bonna F, Farbos S, Ferrand M, Ceccaldi J, Tchamgoué S, De Witte S,
Buy E, Akagi L, Brandson E, Druyts E, Gataric KF, Harrigan PR, Harris M, Hayden
A, Hogg R, Lima V, Montaner J, Moore D, Wood E, Yip B, Zhang W, Bhagani S, Byrne 
P, Carroll A, Cuthbertson Z, Dunleavy A, Geretti AM, Heelan B, Johnson M,
Kinloch-de Loes S, Lipman M, Madge S, Marshall N, Nair D, Nebbia G, Prinz B,
Swaden L, Tyrer M, Youle M, Chaloner C, Grabowska H, Holloway J, Puradiredja J,
Ransom D, Tsintas R, Bannister W, Bansi L, Cozzi-Lepri A, Fox Z, Harris E, Hill
T, Lampe F, Lodwick R, Mocroft A, Phillips A, Reekie J, Sabin C, Smith C, Amoah
E, Booth C, Clewley G, Garcia Diaz A, Gregory B, Labbett W, Tahami F, Thomas M,
Gill MJ, Read R, Krentz H, Beckthold B, Faetkenheuer G, Rockstroh J, Casabona J, 
Miró JL, Alquézar A, Casabona J, Esteve A, Alquézar A, Miró JM, Podzamczer D,
Murillas J, Romero A, Agustí C, Gatell JM, Agüero F, Tural C, Clotet B, Ferrer E,
Riera M, Segura F, Segura G, Force L, Vilaró J, Masabeu A, García I, Guadarrama
M, Esteve A, Montoliu A, Ortega N, Lazzari E, Puchol E, Sanchez M, Blanco JL,
Garcia-Alcaide F, Martinez E, Mallolas J, López-Dieguez M, García-Goez JF, Sirera
G, Romeu J, Jou A, Negredo E, Miranda C, Capitan MC, Olmo M, Barragan P, Saumoy
M, BolaoF F, Cabellos C, Peña C, Sala M, Cervantes M, Amengual MJ, Navarro M,
Penelo E, Barrufet P, Guadarrama M, Saag MS, Mugavero MJ, Willig JH, Raper JL,
Allison JJ, Kempf MC, Schumacher JE, Wes AO, Lin HY, Pisu M, Moneyham L, Vance D,
Bachmann L, Davies SL, Berner E, Acosta E, King J, Savage K, Nevin C, Walton FB, 
Marler ML, Lawrence S, Files-Kennedy B, Batey DS, Patil MA, Patil U, Varshney M, 
Gibson E, Guzman A, Rinehart D, Justice AC, Fiellin DA, Bryant K, Rimland D,
Jones-Taylor C, Oursler KA, Titanji R, Brown S, Garrison S, Rodriguez-Barradas M,
Masozera N, Goetz M, Leaf D, Simberkoff M, Blumenthal D, Leung J, Butt A, Hoffman
E, Gibert C, Peck R, Mattocks K, Braithwaite S, Brandt C, Cook R, Conigliaro J,
Crothers K, Chang J, Crystal S, Day N, Erdos J, Freiberg M, Kozal M, Gaziano M,
Gerschenson M, Good B, Gordon A, Goulet J, Kraemer K, Lim J, Maisto S, Miller P, 
O'Connor P, Papas R, Rinaldo C, Roberts M, Samet J, Cohen D, Consorte A, Gordon
K, Kidwai F, Levin F, McGinnis K, Rambo M, Rogers J, Skanderson M, Whitsett F.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether differences in short-term virologic failure among
commonly used antiretroviral therapy (ART) regimens translate to differences in
clinical events in antiretroviral-naïve patients initiating ART.
DESIGN: Observational cohort study of patients initiating ART between January
2000 and December 2005.
SETTING: The Antiretroviral Therapy Cohort Collaboration (ART-CC) is a
collaboration of 15 HIV cohort studies from Canada, Europe, and the United
States.
STUDY PARTICIPANTS: A total of 13 546 antiretroviral-naïve HIV-positive patients 
initiating ART with efavirenz, nevirapine, lopinavir/ritonavir, nelfinavir, or
abacavir as third drugs in combination with a zidovudine and lamivudine
nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor backbone.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Short-term (24-week) virologic failure (>500 copies/ml)
and clinical events within 2 years of ART initiation (incident AIDS-defining
event, death, and a composite measure of these two outcomes).
RESULTS: Compared with efavirenz as initial third drug, short-term virologic
failure was more common with all other third drugs evaluated; nevirapine
(adjusted odds ratio = 1.87, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.58-2.22),
lopinavir/ritonavir (1.32, 95% CI = 1.12-1.57), nelfinavir (3.20, 95% CI =
2.74-3.74), and abacavir (2.13, 95% CI = 1.82-2.50). However, the rate of
clinical events within 2 years of ART initiation appeared higher only with
nevirapine (adjusted hazard ratio for composite outcome measure 1.27, 95% CI =
1.04-1.56) and abacavir (1.22, 95% CI = 1.00-1.48).
CONCLUSION: Among antiretroviral-naïve patients initiating therapy, between-ART
regimen, differences in short-term virologic failure do not necessarily translate
to differences in clinical outcomes. Our results should be interpreted with
caution because of the possibility of residual confounding by indication.

PMCID: PMC2793403
PMID: 19005271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Psychoactive Drugs. 2008 Sep;40(3):293-300.

Newsmaking on drugs: a qualitative study with journalism professionals.

Mastroianni FC(1), Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology, Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP),
Brazilian Center for Information on Psychotropic Drugs (CEBRID).
mastroianni@psicobio.emp.br

Drugs are a frequent subject in the news media. Despite the existence of an
important dynamic interplay between the print media, public opinion, and public
policies, studies on these relationships are still scarce regarding the drug
issue. The objective of this study is to understand the newsmaking process
regarding drugs from the vantage point of Brazilian journalism professionals.
Using qualitative research, semistructured interviews were conducted among an
intentional sample of 22 professionals who write news stories and articles about 
drugs in nationwide news media. Interviewees mentioned illegality and crime as
the main factors leading to the production of stories and articles. They claimed 
that by instilling fear among readers, newspapers and magazines tend to increase 
their audiences and/or sales. Most interviewees considered the coverage of drugs 
in Brazil as weak. Main problems reported include lack of knowledge on the
subject, and not enough time to prepare the stories. It was concluded that the
newsmaking process regarding drugs undergoes a series of interferences that
compromise the content of the stories, therefore social strategies are needed in 
order to improve the quality of the material published in Brazil.

PMID: 19004421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 9;284(2):1313-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808363200. Epub 2008
Nov 10.

Structural and biochemical characterization of the wild type PCSK9-EGF(AB)
complex and natural familial hypercholesterolemia mutants.

Bottomley MJ(1), Cirillo A, Orsatti L, Ruggeri L, Fisher TS, Santoro JC, Cummings
RT, Cubbon RM, Lo Surdo P, Calzetta A, Noto A, Baysarowich J, Mattu M, Talamo F, 
De Francesco R, Sparrow CP, Sitlani A, Carfí A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Istituto di Ricerca di Biologia Molecolare "P.
Angeletti", Via Pontina Km 30.600, 00040 Pomezia (Rome), Italy.
matthew_bottomley@merck.com

PCSK9 regulates low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) levels and consequently
is a target for the prevention of atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease.
Here we studied the interaction, of LDLR EGF(A/AB) repeats with PCSK9. We show
that PCSK9 binds the EGF(AB) repeats in a pH-dependent manner. Although the PCSK9
C-terminal domain is not involved in LDLR binding, PCSK9 autocleavage is
required. Moreover, we report the x-ray structure of the PCSK9DeltaC-EGF(AB)
complex at neutral pH. Compared with the low pH PCSK9-EGF(A) structure, the new
structure revealed rearrangement of the EGF(A) His-306 side chain and disruption 
of the salt bridge with PCSK9 Asp-374, thus suggesting the basis for enhanced
interaction at low pH. In addition, the structure of PCSK9DeltaC bound to
EGF(AB)(H306Y), a mutant associated with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH),
reveals that the Tyr-306 side chain forms a hydrogen bond with PCSK9 Asp-374,
thus mimicking His-306 in the low pH conformation. Consistently, Tyr-306 confers 
increased affinity for PCSK9. Importantly, we found that although the
EGF(AB)(H306Y)-PCSK9 interaction is pH-independent, LDLR(H306Y) binds PCSK9
50-fold better at low pH, suggesting that factors other than His-306 contribute
to the pH dependence of PCSK9-LDLR binding. Further, we determined the structures
of EGF(AB) bound to PCSK9DeltaC containing the FH-associated D374Y and D374H
mutations, revealing additional interactions with EGF(A) mediated by
Tyr-374/His-374 and providing a rationale for their disease phenotypes. Finally, 
we report the inhibitory properties of EGF repeats in a cellular assay measuring 
LDL uptake.

PMID: 19001363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Vertex. 2008 May-Jun;19(79):99-111.

[Delusion of parasitosis: report of twelve cases].

[Article in Spanish]

Pavlovsky F(1), Peskin V, Di Noto L, Stagnaro JC.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Psiquiatría, Hospital T. Alvarez. fpavlovsky@hotmail.com

In this paper, the history of the chronic delusional syndrome known as delusional
parasitosis or Ekbom syndrome is reviewed as well as its main clinical
characteristics, evolution, nosographic position and therapeutic approaches. The 
findings in the published literature are compared with the clinical experience of
the authors who have studied twelve cases. The possible connection with other
mental diseases, specifically Obsessive Compulsive Spectrum, is evaluated.

PMID: 18997903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Atherosclerosis. 2009 May;204(1):202-7. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2008.08.031. Epub 2008 Sep 4.

Novel mutations of CETP gene in Italian subjects with hyperalphalipoproteinemia.

Cefalù AB(1), Noto D, Magnolo L, Pinotti E, Gomaraschi M, Martini S, Vigna GB,
Calabresi L, Tarugi P, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Emerging Diseases, Policlinico Paolo
Giaccone, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) is a plasma glycoprotein that catalyses
the transfer of cholesteryl esters from HDL to the other plasma lipoproteins.
Genetic deficiency of CETP is one of the known causes of elevation of plasma
HDL-C (primary hyperalphalipoproteinemia, HALP). We sequenced CETP gene in a
group of 24 Italian subjects with primary HALP (HDL-C>80 mg/dl) suspected to have
CETP deficiency. Two unrelated subjects both coming from the same geographical
district, were found to be heterozygous for a nucleotide substitution in exon 6
(c.544C>T) and another subject was found to be heterozygous for a C>T transition 
in exon 9 (c.802C>T). Both mutations introduce a premature stop codon and are
predicted to cause the production of truncated proteins (Q165X and R268X,
respectively) devoid of function. The fourth proband was found to carry a T>C
substitution in intron 15 (c.1407+2T>C) predicted to abolish the function of the 
donor splice site. To define the effect of this mutation on CETP pre-mRNA
splicing we analysed CETP mRNA in COS-1 cells expressing a CETP minigene
harbouring the mutation. The analysis of minigene transcript in COS-1 cells
showed that IVS15+2T>C mutation caused the formation of an abnormal mRNA in which
exon 14 joins directly to exon 16, predicted to encode a truncated peptide of 435
amino acids. In mutation carriers plasma CETP activity was found to be reduced by
38-60%. These are the first mutations in the CETP gene found in Italian subjects 
with HALP.

PMID: 18926541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Clin Monit Comput. 2008 Oct;22(5):355-9. doi: 10.1007/s10877-008-9142-z. Epub
2008 Oct 9.

Pulse and systolic pressure variation assessment in partially assisted
ventilatory support.

Zaniboni M(1), Formenti P, Umbrello M, Galimberti A, Noto A, Iapichino G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Anestesiologia e Rianimazione, Università degli Studi, Polo San
Paolo, via Di Rudinì, Milan, Italy. mattezani@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: The use of pulse pressure variation (PPV) and systolic pressure
variation (SPV) is possible during controlled ventilation (MV). Even in acute
respiratory failure, controlled MV tends to be replaced by assisted ventilatory
support. We tested if PPV and SPV during flow triggered synchronized intermittent
mechanical ventilation (SIMV) could be as accurate as in controlled MV.
METHODS: Prospective case-controlled study. Thirty patients who met criteria of
weaning from controlled MV. Twenty minutes pressure support ventilation with 3
min(-1) flow triggered SIMV breathes (10 ml kg(-1)) T1, then three consecutive
breaths in controlled MV (respiratory rate 12 min(-1),10 ml kg(-1)) T2. PPV and
SPV were measured in T1 and T2. Correlation and Bland-Altman analysis were used
to compare respective values of PPV and SPV in the two modes of ventilation.
RESULTS: Significant correlations were found between dynamic indices in SIMV
during pressure support ventilation and those in controlled MV mode. The mean
differences between two measurements were: PPV 0.6+/-2.8% (limit of agreement:
-5.0 and 6.2), SPV 0.5+/-2.3 mmHg (limit of agreement: -4.0 and 5.1).
CONCLUSIONS: PPV and SPV measured during SIMV fitted with the findings in
controlled MV. Dynamic indexes could be accurately monitored in patients
breathing with assisted respiratory assistance adding an imposed large enough
SIMV breath.

PMID: 18841485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2008 Oct;105(10):1462-81.

[The current status of laparoscopic examination: a discussion].

[Article in Japanese]

Ueno Y, Arase Y, Kurosaki M, Hashimoto E, Noto H.

PMID: 18840985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. JAMA. 2008 Oct 8;300(14):1653-9. doi: 10.1001/jama.300.14.1653.

Serial 2-point ultrasonography plus D-dimer vs whole-leg color-coded Doppler
ultrasonography for diagnosing suspected symptomatic deep vein thrombosis: a
randomized controlled trial.

Bernardi E(1), Camporese G, Büller HR, Siragusa S, Imberti D, Berchio A,
Ghirarduzzi A, Verlato F, Anastasio R, Prati C, Piccioli A, Pesavento R, Bova C, 
Maltempi P, Zanatta N, Cogo A, Cappelli R, Bucherini E, Cuppini S, Noventa F,
Prandoni P; Erasmus Study Group.

Collaborators: Zotta L, Franz F, Chiarion C, Nardi M, Andreozzi GM, Malato A, Lo 
Coco L, Milio G, Cormaci O, Cavallotti P, Orlando S, Rolfo E, Valenzano C, Iotti 
M, Cattabiani ML, Visonà A, Salsa F, Pagnan A, Ricchio R, Noto A, Settembrini PG,
Santonastaso M, Mognol D, Bicchi M, Maggi F, Zamboni S, Baccaglini U, Spreafico
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency and Accident Medicine, Civic Hospital, Conegliano,
Italy. enrico.bernardi@ulss7.it

Comment in
    JAMA. 2008 Oct 8;300(14):1696-7.
    JAMA. 2009 Mar 4;301(9):933-4; author reply 934-935.
    JAMA. 2009 Mar 4;301(9):933; author reply 934-935.

CONTEXT: Patients with suspected deep vein thrombosis (DVT) of the lower
extremities are usually investigated with ultrasonography either by the proximal 
veins (2-point ultrasonography) or the entire deep vein system (whole-leg
ultrasonography). The latter approach is thought to be better based on its
ability to detect isolated calf vein thrombosis; however, it requires skilled
operators and is mainly available only during working hours. No randomized
comparisons are yet available evaluating the relative values of these 2
strategies.
OBJECTIVE: To assess if the 2 diagnostic strategies are equivalent for the
management of symptomatic outpatients with suspected DVT of the lower
extremities.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PATIENTS: A prospective, randomized, multicenter study of
consecutive symptomatic outpatients (n = 2465) with a first episode of suspected 
DVT of the lower extremities who were randomized to undergo 2-point or whole-leg 
ultrasonography. Data were taken from ultrasound laboratories of 14 Italian
universities or civic hospitals between January 1, 2003, and December 21, 2006.
Patients with normal ultrasound findings were followed up for 3 months, with
study completion on March 20, 2007.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Objectively confirmed 3-month incidence of symptomatic
venous thromboembolism in patients with an initially normal diagnostic workup.
RESULTS: Of 2465 eligible patients, 345 met 1 or more exclusion criteria and 22
refused to participate; therefore, 2098 patients were randomized to either
2-point (n = 1045) or whole-leg (n = 1053) ultrasonography. Symptomatic venous
thromboembolism occurred in 7 of 801 patients (incidence, 0.9%; 95% confidence
interval [CI], 0.3%-1.8%) in the 2-point strategy group and in 9 of 763 patients 
(incidence, 1.2%; 95% CI, 0.5%-2.2%) in the whole-leg strategy group. This met
the established equivalence criterion (observed difference, 0.3%;95% CI, -1.4% to
0.8%).
CONCLUSION: The 2 diagnostic strategies are equivalent when used for the
management of symptomatic outpatients with suspected DVT of the lower
extremities.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00353093.

PMID: 18840838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Epileptic Disord. 2008 Sep;10(3):241.

Refusal of consent for video recording during standard EEG.

Noto MP, Vercueil L.

PMID: 18833668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2008 Jun;143(3):225-6.

A case of ''silk route disease'' in a patient from Congo.

Nunzi E(1), Clapasson A, Di Negro G, Noto S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Dermatology, Department of Health Sciences, University of Genoa,
Genoa, Italy. enrico.nunzi@hsanmartino.it

The authors describe a case of Behçet's syndrome or ''silk route disease'' in a
patient from the Democratic Republic of Congo. The patient arrived in hospital
suffering from an acute episode of febrile erythema nodosum, which was diagnosed 
as type 2 leprosy reaction. His history reported recurrent oral aphthae and
during hospitalization ulcers on the scrotum and pathergy were observed. A
diagnosis of Behçet's disease was made. The patient is HLA B51 negative and the
scientific literature confirms that testing for the presence of this allele is
negative in the 10 cases of Behçet's disease reported from Sub-Saharan countries.

PMID: 18833066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Crit Care Med. 2008 Nov;36(11):2993-9. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e31818b3a9d.

Effect of laboratory testing guidelines on the utilization of tests and order
entries in a surgical intensive care unit.

Kumwilaisak K(1), Noto A, Schmidt UH, Beck CI, Crimi C, Lewandrowski K, Bigatello
LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care, Critical Care Division,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Comment in
    Crit Care Med. 2008 Nov;36(11):3102-3.

OBJECTIVE: Diagnostic testing is frequently overused in the intensive care unit. 
We devised guidelines to optimize blood tests utilization, and designed this
study to quantify their efficacy over time, their safety, and their possible
benefits.
DESIGN: Laboratory testing guidelines were created by consensus and implemented
through repeated staff education. The guidelines included: a) the tests to be
obtained daily: complete blood count, serum electrolytes, urea nitrogen,
creatinine, and blood glucose concentration; b) the need to discuss laboratory
testing at daily patient's rounds; c) the need to provide a written order for all
tests. The number of tests performed, corresponding physician orders, and various
outcome measures were collected for two 6-month study periods, before and after
the first day of implementation of the guidelines.
SETTING: Twenty-bed surgical intensive care unit in a tertiary care teaching
hospital.
PATIENTS: All patients admitted during the two study periods.
METHODS: Laboratory tests and related physician orders, demographics, blood
products transfusion, and outcomes were collected from hospital databases. In
prospectively defined subgroups, additional outcome measures were obtained by
ad-hoc chart review.
RESULTS: One thousand one hundred seventeen patients were enrolled. After the
institution of the guidelines, the number of laboratory tests decreased by 37%
(from 64,305 to 40,877), and the number of respective physician orders increased 
by 38% (from 20,940 to 35,472), p < 0.001. These results were manifest within 1
month, sustained through the study period, and still present at 1 yr. No changes 
in outcomes or in the rates of selected complications were detected. Red blood
cells utilization correlated linearly (r .47) with the number of blood tests
performed in both study periods.
CONCLUSIONS: Guidelines designed to optimize laboratory tests use in an intensive
care unit can produce rapid and long-lasting effects, can be safe, and may affect
the number of red blood cell units transfused.

PMID: 18824907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2009 Jan;24(1):19-25. doi: 10.1007/s00384-008-0578-x. Epub 
2008 Sep 17.

Positive impact of blocking tumor necrosis factor alpha on the nutritional status
in pediatric Crohn's disease patients.

Diamanti A(1), Basso MS, Gambarara M, Papadatou B, Bracci F, Noto C, Castro M.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology and Nutrition Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Piazza 
S. Onofrio, 4-00165, Rome, Italy. diamanti@opbg.net

BACKGROUND: TNFalpha seems to contribute to inflammation and malnutrition in
Crohn's disease (CD) patients. In CD patients, the comparative effects on
nutritional status of infliximab and traditional therapy have not yet been
determined. The aim of our study was to assess the effects of infliximab as
compared with those of standard therapy on nutritional status, disease activity, 
resting energy expenditure (REE), and food intake in CD children and adolescents.
METHODS: From September 1999 to September 2005, all CD patients treated with
infliximab (group A) were reviewed and matched with CD patients treated with
traditional therapy (mesalazine and azathioprine) (group B).
RESULTS: Fourteen CD patients from group A and 14 from group B were included;
median interval before follow-up investigation was 10 months. Baseline and final 
values of weight, height, body mass index (BMI), pediatric CD activity index
(pCDAI), REE, and food intake were studied. In treated patients, but not in
control group, mean baseline weight (kg) and BMI values, 39.7 +/- 13.1 and 17.9
+/- 3.3, respectively, were significantly lower than their final values 42.6 +/- 
13.2 and 18.9 +/- 3.1, and median pCDAI values 23.5 were significantly higher
than their final values 10 (P < 0.05). Significant changes in height, REE, and
food intake were not found in either group.
CONCLUSIONS: In pediatric CD patients, infliximab seems to impact positively on
the nutritional status as demonstrated by the improvement in weight and BMI, but 
not in linear growth; effects on nutritional status seem to be due to
amelioration of disease activity, rather than to REE reduction or food intake
increase.

PMID: 18797887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Arerugi. 2008 Aug;57(8):1061-6.

[A case of idiopathic pulmonary alveolar proteinosis with multiple localized
ground-glass opacities].

[Article in Japanese]

Taniguchi H(1), Abo H, Touge M, Shinnou H, Miyazawa H, Noto H, Uchiyama A, Miwa
A, Shimura S, Izumi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Prefectural Central Hospital.
tan@tch.pref.toyama.jp

A 58-year-old Japanese female consulted our staff with multiple localized
ground-glass opacities in chest CT. She underwent video assisted thoracoscopic
surgery for diagnosis. Histopathologic finding from surgery specimen in one of
ground-glass opacities revealed bronchioloalveolar carcinoma. Six months later,
we performed second video assisted thoracoscopic surgery, and histopathologic
finding of all other ground-glass opacities revealed pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis. Serum anti GM-CSF antibody elevated, and she was diagnosed as having
idiopathic pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. A case of idiopathic pulmonary
alveolar proteinosis presenting multiple localized ground-glass opacities is
rare. And, differentiating ground-glass opacities of pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis and bronchioloalveolar carcinoma by chest CT is difficult.

PMID: 18781111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2008 Sep;6(5):311-4. doi: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2008.05.004.
Epub 2008 Aug 8.

Tuberculoid leprosy and Type 1 lepra reaction.

Bongiorno MR(1), Pistone G, Noto S, Aricò M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Palermo, Via del Vespro 131, 90127
Palermo, Italy. istderm@unipa.it

A patient is described with tuberculoid leprosy and Type 1 (lepra) reaction from 
Sicily a non-endemic region, who lived previously in Manila from 2000 to 2005.
The skin lesions became acutely inflamed and edematous. The plaques were painless
to touch or pinprick, and there was swelling of the nerves in the fibro-osseous
tunnels under the surface of the skin, including both the ulnar nerve at the
elbow, and the posterior tibial nerve (medial malleolus). During the course of
electro-neurographic studies, conduction velocity in the motory nerves indicated 
a slowing-down. The diagnosis of leprosy was confirmed by residence in an endemic
area for about 5 years, by simultaneous skin lesions and peripheral nerve
abnormalities, and by skin biopsy. Outside of endemic areas, diagnosis remains a 
challenge for physicians for mainly two reasons. Firstly, the incubation period
of leprosy is uniquely long among bacterial diseases and varies from a month to
over 40 years. Secondly, outside leprosy-endemic areas, the diagnosis of leprosy 
is usually not considered, and patients are likely to be examined by a wide range
of specialists. Physicians outside endemic areas should consider leprosy as a
possible differential diagnosis if a patient from leprosy-endemic regions
presents with painless skin lesions, nerve enlargement, or persistent skin
lesions.

PMID: 18760255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2008 Sep;128(9):1275-83.

Pharmaceutical supply for disaster victims who need chronic disease management in
region with aging population based on lessons learned from the Noto Peninsula
Earthquake in 2007.

Okumura J(1), Nishita Y, Kimura K.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi,
Kanazawa City, Japan. jokumura@p.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

The lessons from the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake and Chuuetsu Earthquake
showed us how difficult it is to keep chronic disease management for survivors of
such large-scale earthquakes, particularly for elderly people. To solve the
problem, an ordinance for enforcement on exceptional practices was issued for the
Pharmaceutical Affairs Law Article 49 Clause 1. The law allows selling
prescription medicines for patients with chronic diseases who have difficulties
to continue their medications due to a large-scale disaster. To make it work, the
patient should demonstrate that he or she continuously received the medication by
presenting either Medication Notebook or prescription book recorded by the
pharmacist. However, the Separation Rate of Prescription and Dispensing in Japan 
is still low; in particular, that in Ishikawa prefecture, where the Noto
Peninsula Earthquake (M 6.9) occurred on March 25, 20007, is very low. It means
that few victims hold a Medication Notebook. In consideration of this situation, 
we conducted a questionnaire survey of elderly victims of the Noto Peninsula
Earthquake with a key-informant-interview during the period from July through
August, 2007. This study revealed that: 1) Only 16% (18/110) of respondents kept 
a Medication Notebook; 2) 75% (82/110) had chronic diseases and received
medication regularly; 3) Of 81 who had chronic diseases, 42% (34/91) were
dispensed at the same pharmacy always, (The rest received from either clinic or
changing pharmacy according to clinic location); and 4) Diseases that the
respondents had were hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and so on. 
Based on these results, we discuss the establishment of a pharmaceutical supply
system that can effectively distribute appropriate medicines to patients under
difficult situations following a large-scale disaster in Japan.

PMID: 18758141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Biol Pharm Bull. 2008 Sep;31(9):1723-6.

Effect of a new immunosuppressant histon deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor FR276457 in
a rat cardiac transplant model.

Kinugasa F(1), Yamada T, Noto T, Matsuoka H, Mori H, Sudo Y, Mutoh S.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Research Laboratory, Astellas Pharmaceutical Inc, Yodogawa-ku,
Osaka, Japan. fumitaka.kinugasa@jp.astellas.com

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) is a known modulator of gene transcription, and the
immunosuppressive activity of HDAC inhibitors has been demonstrated in recent
several reports. In this study, the HDAC inhibitor FR276457, a hydroxamic
derivative, was found to have a similar inhibitory effect on all mammalian HDACs 
tested, but no isozyme selectivity. Both FR276457 and tacrolimus exerted an
immunosuppressive effect on in vitro rat splenocyte proliferation stimulated with
Concanavalin A. Next, the effect of FR276457 on allograft rejection when
administered either as a monotherapy or in combination with tacrolimus was
investigated in a rat heterotopic cardiac transplant model. Orally administered
FR276457 prolonged the median survival times (MST) of the transplanted grafts in 
the vehicle group from 6 d to 17 or 21 d at doses of 20 or 40 mg/kg,
respectively. Histopathological analysis showed the structures of the myocardium 
were not affected, but interstitial cellular infiltration could not be suppressed
completely. Tacrolimus (0.032 mg/kg) prolonged allograft MST to 16 d. FR276457,
when combined with tacrolimus, prevented allograft rejection at a dose lower than
that of the monotherapy. The combination dose prolonged the MST in the groups
treated with 10 and 20 mg/kg to >28 d, and cellular infiltration was suppressed
completely. In conclusion, this study demonstrated that the oral administration
of HDAC inhibitor FR276457 can prevent allograft rejection as a monotherapy, and 
has additive or synergistic effects when combined with tacrolimus.

PMID: 18758066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Rev Saude Publica. 2008 Oct;42(5):968-71. Epub 2008 Aug 14.

Psychoactive drug advertising: content analysis.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Mastroianni PC(1), Vaz AC, Noto AR, Galduróz JC.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal
de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brasil. pmastro@fcfar.unesp.br

The goal of this study was to describe the human figures portrayed in
psychoactive drug advertising in terms of gender, age, ethnic group, and social
context. Content analysis for 86 new pieces of printed advertisements released in
2005 was carried out. Fisher exact test was used to analyze the association
between categories. There was a preponderance of women (62.8%) who were four
times more present in advertisements for antidepressants and anxyolitics than
men. Most of the people shown were Caucasian (98.8%) young adults (72%). These
people were pictured in leisure activities (46.5%), at home (29%), or in contact 
with nature (16.2%). The message conveyed was that the drugs treat routinely felt
subjective symptoms of discomfort, inducing in an irrational appeal that may
affect drug prescription.

PMID: 18719733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Stem Cells Dev. 2008 Dec;17(6):1039-41. doi: 10.1089/scd.2008.0212.

Comparative characteristics of mesenchymal stem cells from human bone marrow and 
placenta: CD10, CD49d, and CD56 make a difference.

Mariotti E, Mirabelli P, Abate G, Schiattarella M, Martinelli P, Fortunato G, Di 
Noto R, Del Vecchio L.

Comment on
    Stem Cells Dev. 2008 Oct;17(5):929-40.

PMID: 18713024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Lepr Rev. 2008 Jun;79(2):124-7.

Global and regional annual 'new case detection' of leprosy reported by World
Health Organization.

Noto S, Nunzi E.

PMID: 18711933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Genes Dev. 2008 Aug 15;22(16):2228-41. doi: 10.1101/gad.481908.

Study of an RNA helicase implicates small RNA-noncoding RNA interactions in
programmed DNA elimination in Tetrahymena.

Aronica L(1), Bednenko J, Noto T, DeSouza LV, Siu KW, Loidl J, Pearlman RE,
Gorovsky MA, Mochizuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
(IMBA), Vienna, Austria.

Tetrahymena eliminates micronuclear-limited sequences from the developing
macronucleus during sexual reproduction. Homology between the sequences to be
eliminated and approximately 28-nucleotide small RNAs (scnRNAs) associated with
an Argonaute family protein Twi1p likely underlies this elimination process.
However, the mechanism by which Twi1p-scnRNA complexes identify
micronuclear-limited sequences is not well understood. We show that a
Twi1p-associated putative RNA helicase Ema1p is required for the interaction
between Twi1p and chromatin. This requirement explains the phenotypes of EMA1 KO 
strains, including loss of selective down-regulation of scnRNAs homologous to
macronuclear-destined sequences, loss of H3K9 and K27 methylation in the
developing new macronucleus, and failure to eliminate DNA. We further demonstrate
that Twi1p interacts with noncoding transcripts derived from parental and
developing macronuclei and this interaction is greatly reduced in the absence of 
Ema1p. We propose that Ema1p functions in DNA elimination by stimulating
base-pairing interactions between scnRNAs and noncoding transcripts in both
parental and developing new macronuclei.

PMCID: PMC2518816
PMID: 18708581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Ann Ig. 2008 May-Jun;20(3):211-21.

[The results of the experimental prospective study on the effectiveness and
efficiency of the implementation of clinical pathways].

[Article in Italian]

Panella M(1), Marchisio S, Apicella A, Lazzarino L, Dardanelli L, Demarchi ML,
Fraternali P, Gardini A, Noto G, Tangolo D, Di Stanislao F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Sperimentale, Facoltà di Medicina e
Chirurgia, Università degli Studi del Piemonte Orientale Amedeo Avogadro, Novara,
Italia. panella@med.unipmn.it

Our study was undertaken to determine how the use of care pathways in hospital
affected the quality of the care of the patients. We performed a
cluster-randomized trial. The use of diagnostic procedures and of medical
treatments was more appropriate in the care pathways group, as well as the
discharge process. As a consequence the outcomes indicators adopted in our study 
showed better performances in the care pathways group when compared to the usual 
care group. Our study added evidences on the value of clinical pathways that can 
be effectively used to improve the quality of hospital care. The use of CP helped
to create a constant dialogue within the clinicians, ensured that important areas
of treatment were not overlooked and unnecessary delays were prevented by timely 
interventions. We think that our results are reliable because we adopted a
cluster-randomized controlled trial design that is widely accepted as the most
reliable method of determining effectiveness of complex interventions in
healthcare.

PMID: 18693399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Pineal Res. 2008 Oct;45(3):229-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2008.00623.x. Epub 
2008 Aug 5.

Novel bromomelatonin derivatives as potentially effective drugs to treat bone
diseases.

Suzuki N(1), Somei M, Seki A, Reiter RJ, Hattori A.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University, Housu-gun, Ishikawa, Japan. nobuo@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Several reports indicate that melatonin is involved in the regulation of bone
metabolism. To examine the direct effect of melatonin on osteoclasts and
osteoblasts, we developed an in vitro assay using fish scales that contain
osteoclasts, osteoblasts, and bone matrix, all of which are similar to those
found in mammalian membrane bone. Using the assay, we demonstrated that melatonin
suppressed osteoclastic and osteoblastic activities. These findings are in
agreement with the reports from in vivo studies in mice and rats. In an attempt
to develop molecules that increase bone mass, novel bromomelatonin derivatives
were synthesized, and the effects of these chemicals on osteoclasts and
osteoblasts using the scale assay were examined. As a result, novel
bromomelatonin derivatives with the ability to possibly increase bone formation
were identified. In scale osteoclasts, particularly,
1-benzyl-2,4,6-tribromomelatonin had a more potent activity than melatonin. In
reference to osteoblasts, this agent (10(-9)-10(-6)M) significantly activated
osteoblasts. The effect of 1-benzyl-2,4,6-tribromomelatonin on bone formation was
confirmed in ovariectomized rats. Thus, the oral administration of
1-benzyl-2,4,6-tribromomelatonin augmented the total bone mineral density of the 
femoral metaphysis of ovariectomized rats. The stress-strain index of the
diaphysis in 1-benzyl-2,4,6-tribromomelatonin-treated rats significantly
increased in comparison with that in ovariectomized rats. In rats fed a
low-calcium diet, the total bone mineral density of the femoral metaphysis
significantly increased following the oral administration of
1-benzyl-2,4,6-tribromomelatonin. These studies identified a melatonin derivative
that may have potential use in the treatment of bone diseases, such as
osteoporosis.

PMID: 18691356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2009 Feb;19(2):105-9. doi:
10.1016/j.numecd.2008.05.001. Epub 2008 Aug 3.

Down regulation of CD11b and CD18 expression in children with
hypercholesterolemia: a preliminary report.

Martino F(1), Martino E, Iacobini M, Ferrara E, Pacifico L, Noto D, Cefalu AB,
Averna M, Chiesa C.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Clinic Lipid Research, Department of Pediatrics, La Sapienza
University of Rome, Viale Regina Elena 324, 00161 Rome, Italy.
francesco.martino30@tin.it

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Cell adhesion molecules play an important role in the
development of atherosclerosis mediating the attachment of monocytes to the
endothelium. The aim of our study was to assess the cell surface expression of
CD11b/CD18 integrin on the phagocytes of children affected by
hypercholesterolemia.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Twenty-six children with hypercholesterolemia (15 males,
mean age 8.3, range 2-18) with a family history of early cardiovascular disease, 
as well as 26 children with normocholesterolemia matched for gender and age (15
males, mean age 8.3) were studied. Cell surface expression of CD11b/CD18 on
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were analyzed by flow cytometry. The
geometric mean percentages of CD11b and CD18 expression were significantly lower 
in the hypercholesterolemic group [52 (95% confidence intervals, 40-68) and 88
(84-93)] than in the control group [87 (83-91), P<0.0001 and 93 (89-96), P<0.05],
respectively. After correction for age, gender, and pubertal status, CD11b cell
surface expression on PBMC was inversely and independently correlated with total 
cholesterol concentrations (r=-0.395; P<0.01) and LDL (r=-0.307; P<0.05), as well
as with triglycerides (r=-0.406; P<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: In children with hypercholesterolemia, cell surface expression of
CD11b and CD18 on PBMC was significantly decreased. Follow-up studies are
necessary to determine the clinical implications of these findings in the context
of the natural course and progression of atherosclerosis in high risk children.

PMID: 18676132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Liver Int. 2008 Dec;28(10):1417. doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2008.01771.x. Epub 2008
Jul 21.

An old disease makes a comeback.

Noto P(1), Boumis E, Passarelli F, Licci S.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Infectious Diseases Division, National Institute for Infectious Diseases
'L. Spallanzani', IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

PMID: 18662270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Chem Soc Rev. 2008 Aug;37(8):1666-88. doi: 10.1039/b800704g. Epub 2008 Jun 13.

Supported proline and proline-derivatives as recyclable organocatalysts.

Gruttadauria M(1), Giacalone F, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica E Paternó, University of Palermo, Palermo,
Italy. mgrutt@unipa.it

In the last eight years, L-proline and L-proline derivatives, such as substituted
prolinamides or pyrrolidines, have been successfully used as organocatalysts in
several reactions. In this critical review we summarize the immobilization
procedures of such organocatalysts highlighting their application, recoverability
and reusability (86 references).

PMID: 18648689  [PubMed]


268. J Org Chem. 2008 Aug 15;73(16):6224-8. doi: 10.1021/jo800676d. Epub 2008 Jul 15.

Ionic liquids/[bmim][N3] mixtures: promising media for the synthesis of aryl
azides by SNAr.

D'Anna F(1), Marullo S, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica E. Paternò, Università degli Studi di
Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
fdanna@unipa.it

The nucleophilic aromatic substitution of some activated aryl or heteroaryl
halides has been performed in ionic liquid solution, using the
1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium azide as a nucleophile. The reaction course was
studied varying the structures of both substrates and ionic liquids. In
particular, in the latter case, the reaction of 2-bromo-5-nitrothiophene was
carried out in five different ionic liquids ([bmim][BF 4], [bmim][PF 6],
[bmim][NTf 2], [bm 2im][NTf 2], and [bmpyrr][NTf 2]). Finally, for all the
substrates considered, a comparison with data obtained in MeOH solution in the
presence of NaN 3 was also performed. Data collected indicate that in some cases 
it is possible to obtain aromatic or heteroaromatic azide derivatives in
satisfactory yield by means of a S NAr reaction using [bmim][N 3] as the
nucleophile.

PMID: 18624414  [PubMed]


269. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2008;43(11):1315-21. doi: 10.1080/00365520802200044.

Clinical symptoms in celiac patients on a gluten-free diet.

Carroccio A(1), Ambrosiano G, Di Prima L, Pirrone G, Iacono G, Florena AM,
Porcasi R, Noto D, Fayer F, Soresi M, Geraci G, Sciumè C, Di Fede G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Palermo, Hospital of Sciacca
(AG), Italy. acarroccio@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Persistent villous atrophy in patients with celiac disease (CD) on a
gluten-free diet (GFD) is reported with increasing frequency. The aim of this
study was to evaluate a possible association between persistent damage of the
villi and "atypical" gastrointestinal symptoms in CD patients on a GFD.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Sixty-nine CD patients on a GFD were divided into two
groups: Group A included 42 patients (6 M, 36 F, age range 17-62 years)
undergoing esophagogastroduodenoscopies (EGDs) due to the presence of symptoms;
Group B included 27 control patients (6 M, 21 F, age range 24-71 years) who were 
asymptomatic at the time of the study. Both groups underwent EGDs and a duodenal 
histologic study.
RESULTS: Persistent endoscopic lesions were more frequent in Group A (30/42) than
in Group B (12/27; p=0.01). Villous atrophy was significantly more frequent in
Group A than in Group B: 85% versus 33% (p<0.0001; odds ratio (OR)=12; 95% CI
3.7-38.9). Gastrointestinal symptoms in the Group A patients were different from 
those present at CD diagnosis: anemia/diarrhea/weight loss in 6 cases;
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)-like symptoms in 12 cases; abdominal
pain/constipation in 24 cases. In Group A there was no difference in gender
distribution, age and duration of GFD between subjects with normal villi and
those with persistent partial villous atrophy. Patients with persistent symptoms 
showed a higher intraepithelial eosinophil count (p=0.005) than the asymptomatic 
patients (p=0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Persistent intestinal villous atrophy in CD patients on a GFD is
associated with gastrointestinal symptoms considered "atypical" for CD and not
present at CD diagnosis.

PMID: 18609166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Uncertain Artif Intell. 2008 Jul 9;2008:444-451.

Learning Hidden Markov Models for Regression using Path Aggregation.

Noto K(1), Craven M.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California San Diego,
La Jolla, CA 92093.

We consider the task of learning mappings from sequential data to real-valued
responses. We present and evaluate an approach to learning a type of hidden
Markov model (HMM) for regression. The learning process involves inferring the
structure and parameters of a conventional HMM, while simultaneously learning a
regression model that maps features that characterize paths through the model to 
continuous responses. Our results, in both synthetic and biological domains,
demonstrate the value of jointly learning the two components of our approach.

PMCID: PMC3141580
PMID: 21785575  [PubMed]


271. Molecules. 2008 Jun 3;13(6):1246-52.

Density functional theory study of the trans-trans-cis (TTC)-->trans-trans-trans 
(TTT) isomerization of a photochromic spiropyran merocyanine.

Cottone G(1), Noto R, La Manna G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Fisiche ed Astronomiche, Università di Palermo, Via
Archirafi 36, I-90123 Palermo, Italy. cottone@fisica.unipa.it

Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations have been performed on the TTC-->TTT
isomerization reaction of the open forms of the
1',3'-dihydro-8-bromo-6-nitro-1',3',3'-trimethylspiro[2H-1-benzopyran-2,2'-(2H)in
dole (8-Br-6-nitro-BIPS) system. The calculations were carried out in vacuo and
in methylene chloride solution at different temperatures. Results are compared
with the available experimental values of free energy difference and activation
energy in solution.

PMID: 18596651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2009 Jun;19(5):321-6. doi:
10.1016/j.numecd.2008.03.002. Epub 2008 Jun 20.

Hypertension and diabetes mellitus are associated with cardiovascular events in
the elderly without cardiovascular disease. Results of a 15-year follow-up in a
Mediterranean population.

Noto D(1), Cefalù AB, Barbagallo CM, Sapienza M, Cavera G, Nardi I, Pagano M,
Vivona N, Notarbartolo A, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Emerging Diseases, University of Palermo, 
Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Epidemiological prospective data on cardiovascular (CV)
events in elderly subjects from Mediterranean populations are lacking. We aimed
to investigate 15-year incidence of CV events and to evaluate the association
with CV risk factors in an elderly Mediterranean population.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The population of a small Sicilian village were enrolled,
visited and a blood sample was drawn at baseline. CV events were recorded in the 
15 years of follow-up. From 1351 subjects (75% of the resident population); 315
were in the age range 65-85 years; 266 subjects free from CV disease were
analysed. Seventy-seven CV events were recorded in 73 out of 266 subjects, with a
19.7% rate (in 10 years). Hypertension (HTN) (hazards ratio=2.1) and diabetes
mellitus (DM) (hazards ratio=1.8) were independently associated with CV events.
Subjects with both DM and HTN showed a lower survival free of CV events compared 
to those with DM or HTN.
CONCLUSIONS: In a 15-year follow-up of an elderly Mediterranean population free
from CV disease, diabetes mellitus and hypertension were related to CV events.
The control of risk factors in the elderly needs to be reinforced to achieve
better results in terms of CV prevention.

PMID: 18571394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Lepr Rev. 2008 Mar;79(1):118.

Observing the skin: papules and nodules in leprosy.

Nunzi E, Noto S.

PMID: 18540242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. BMC Physiol. 2008 May 29;8:13. doi: 10.1186/1472-6793-8-13.

Extended flow cytometry characterization of normal bone marrow progenitor cells
by simultaneous detection of aldehyde dehydrogenase and early hematopoietic
antigens: implication for erythroid differentiation studies.

Mirabelli P(1), Di Noto R, Lo Pardo C, Morabito P, Abate G, Gorrese M, Raia M,
Pascariello C, Scalia G, Gemei M, Mariotti E, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Immunoematologia e Medicina Trasfusionale, Ospedale A. Cardarelli,
Napoli, Italy. mirabelli@ceinge.unina.it

BACKGROUND: Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) is a cytosolic enzyme highly expressed 
in hematopoietic precursors from cord blood and granulocyte-colony stimulating
factor mobilized peripheral blood, as well as in bone marrow from patients with
acute myeloblastic leukemia. As regards human normal bone marrow, detailed
characterization of ALDH+ cells has been addressed by one single study (Gentry et
al, 2007). The goal of our work was to provide new information about the
dissection of normal bone marrow progenitor cells based upon the simultaneous
detection by flow cytometry of ALDH and early hematopoietic antigens, with
particular attention to the expression of ALDH on erythroid precursors. To this
aim, we used three kinds of approach: i) multidimensional analytical flow
cytometry, detecting ALDH and early hematopoietic antigens in normal bone marrow;
ii) fluorescence activated cell sorting of distinct subpopulations of progenitor 
cells, followed by in vitro induction of erythroid differentiation; iii)
detection of ALDH+ cellular subsets in bone marrow from pure red cell aplasia
patients.
RESULTS: In normal bone marrow, we identified three populations of cells, namely 
ALDH+CD34+, ALDH-CD34+ and ALDH+CD34- (median percentages were 0.52, 0.53 and
0.57, respectively). As compared to ALDH-CD34+ cells, ALDH+CD34+ cells expressed 
the phenotypic profile of primitive hematopoietic progenitor cells, with brighter
expression of CD117 and CD133, accompanied by lower display of CD38 and CD45RA.
Of interest, ALDH+CD34- population disclosed a straightforward erythroid
commitment, on the basis of three orders of evidences. First of all, ALDH+CD34-
cells showed a CD71bright, CD105+, CD45- phenotype. Secondly, induction of
differentiation experiments evidenced a clear-cut expression of glycophorin A
(CD235a). Finally, ALDH+CD34- precursors were not detectable in patients with
pure red cell aplasia (PRCA).
CONCLUSION: Our study, comparing surface antigen expression of ALDH+/CD34+,
ALDH-/CD34+ and ALDH+/CD34- progenitor cell subsets in human bone marrow, clearly
indicated that ALDH+CD34- cells are mainly committed towards erythropoiesis. To
the best of our knowledge this finding is new and could be useful for basic
studies about normal erythropoietic differentiation as well as for enabling the
employment of ALDH as a red cell marker in polychromatic flow cytometry
characterization of bone marrow from patients with aplastic anemia and
myelodysplasia.

PMCID: PMC2426712
PMID: 18510759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Lipids. 2008 Jul;43(7):673-9. doi: 10.1007/s11745-008-3193-2. Epub 2008 May 29.

The ApoC-I content of VLDL particles is associated with plaque size in persons
with carotid atherosclerosis.

Notø AT(1), Mathiesen EB, Brox J, Björkegren J, Hansen JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tromsø, 
9037, Tromsø, Norway. anntrude@fagmed.uit.no

Previous studies have shown that postprandial triglyceride-rich lipoproteins
(TRLs) are enriched with apolipoprotein-C-I (apoC-I) in healthy individuals with 
increased intima-media thickness and in patients with coronary artery disease.
The purpose of the present study was to determine apoC-I in TRL in persons with
carotid atherosclerosis and its relation to plaque area. A population-based case 
(n = 42)-control (n = 39) study was conducted in persons with carotid
atherosclerosis, assessed by B-mode ultrasound, and healthy controls. VLDL (Sf
20-400) was isolated in the fasting state and 4 h after ingestion of a standard
fat meal. In the fasting state, persons with carotid atherosclerosis had
increased number of apoC-I per VLDL-particle compared to persons without carotid 
atherosclerosis (8.6 +/- 5.4 vs. 6.3 +/- 4.2, P = 0.018). Total plaque area
increased linearly (P = 0.017) across tertiles of apoC-I per VLDL-particle. In
the postprandial state, a similar increase in the number of apoC-I per
VLDL-particle occurred in both cases and controls (P < 0.001), but no significant
difference was observed between groups. The number of apoC-I per VLDL-particle in
the fasting state was accompanied by delayed clearance of TRL in the postprandial
state, and associated with cholesterol enrichment of the VLDL-particles. Our
findings support the concept that the number of apoC-I per VLDL-particle may be
of importance for initiation and progression of atherosclerosis.

PMID: 18509687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Pediatr (Rio J). 2008 May-Jun;84(3):244-50.doi:10.2223/JPED.1795. Epub 2008 May
23.

Community violence and alcohol abuse among adolescents: a sex comparison.

Moreira TC(1), Belmonte EL, Vieira FR, Noto AR, Ferigolo M, Barros HM.

Author information: 
(1)Fundação Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre, Porto
Alegre, RS. tais.moreira@bol.com.br

OBJECTIVE: To verify whether there is an association between victimization and
alcohol use among boys and girls in Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study of students from public schools, aged
10 to 19 years, from the fifth grade of primary education to the third grade of
secondary education, selected by two-stage cluster sampling, defined by the
socioeconomic characteristics of the neighborhood in which each school is located
and by school class. Data collection was by means of a questionnaire which was
completed anonymously and voluntarily.
RESULTS: Fifty-four percent of the older adolescent boys (aged 14-19) drank
alcohol, compared to 17% of the younger adolescent boys (10-13), as did 58% of
the older adolescent girls and 19% of the younger adolescent girls. Fifty-seven
percent of the students had suffered severe victimization, and 53% had suffered
moderate victimization. When the samples were separated by sex, it was observed
that boys and girls who drank alcohol reported 2.6 and 1.8 times more severe
victimization respectively, while alcohol was associated with 3.1 and 2.5 times
greater prevalence of moderate victimization, among boys and girls respectively. 
When episodes of drunkenness were analyzed, it was observed that adolescents got 
drunk more than pre-adolescents and that exposure to violence exhibited an
increased association with drunkenness. Thirty-two percent of the boys
(prevalence ratio, PR = 4.4; 95%CI 2.6-7.3) and 22% of the girls (PR = 2.2; 95%CI
1.2-4.1) who had been the victims of severe violence reported being drunk at
least once.
CONCLUSIONS: Adolescents of both sexes who consume more alcohol are at greater
risk of suffering community violence.

PMID: 18500407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Minerva Med. 2008 Jun;99(3):341-5.

Right leg swelling as primary presentation of metastatic Merkel cell carcinoma.

Noto R(1), Giaquinta A, Alessandria I, Soma P, Latteri S, Grasso G, Fraggetta F.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Medicina Interna, Università degli Studi di Catania, Azienda
Ospedaliera Cannizzaro, Catania, Italia. noto@unict.it

Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a rare malignant cutaneous neuroendocrine tumour
with an aggressive behaviour and frequent regional lymph node and distant
metastases. It mostly occurs in old patients and the commonest sites are the skin
of the head, neck and the extremities. Typically, the primary tumour presents as 
a fast-growing, painless, reddish nodule with an iceberg-like effect, broadening 
in the depth. Although the pathogenesis of MCC remains largely unknown,
ultraviolet radiation and immunosuppression are likely to play a significant
pathogenetic role. The authors describe an unusual case of MCC clinically
presenting as lymphedema on the right leg due to an inguinal lymphonodal
metastasis. Although extensive investigations were performed the authors were
unable to discover the cutaneous primary tumor. The authors examine the
etiopathogenesis and hypothesis of this rare tumour and describe the clinical
differential diagnosis. They suggest that clinical features together with imaging
studies and morphological and immuno-histochemical findings are important for the
correct diagnosis.

PMID: 18497730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Apr 1;46(7):1101-10. doi: 10.1086/528862.

Changes over time in risk factors for cardiovascular disease and use of
lipid-lowering drugs in HIV-infected individuals and impact on myocardial
infarction.

Data Collection on Adverse Events of Anti-HIV Drugs Study Group(1), Sabin CA,
d'Arminio Monforte A, Friis-Moller N, Weber R, El-Sadr WM, Reiss P, Kirk O,
Mercie P, Law MG, De Wit S, Pradier C, Phillips AN, Lundgren JD.

Collaborators: Lundgren JD, Collins S, Loeliger E, Tressler R, Weller I,
Friis-Møller N, Worm SW, Sabin CA, Sjøl A, Sawitz A, Rickenbach M, Pezzotti P,
Krum E, Gras L, Balestre E, Sundström A, Poll B, Fontas E, Torres F, Petoumenos
K, Kjaer J, de Wolf F, Zaheri S, Bronsveld W, Hillebrand-Haverkort ME, Prins JM, 
Bos JC, Eeftinck Schattenkerk JK, Geerlings SE, Godfried MH, Lange JM, van Leth
FC, Lowe SH, van der Meer JT, Nellen FJ, Pogány K, van der Poll T, Reiss P, Ruys 
TA, Sankatsing S, Steingrover R, van Twillert G, van der Valk M, van Vonderen MG,
Vrouenraets SM, van Vugt M, Wit FW, van Eeden A, ten Veen JH, van Dam PS, Roos
JC, Brinkman K, Frissen PH, Weigel HM, Mulder JW, van Gorp EC, Meenhorst PL,
Mairuhu AT, Veenstra J, Danner SA, Van Agtmael MA, Claessen FA, Perenboom RM,
Rijkeboer A, van Vonderen M, Richter C, van der Berg J, van Leusen R, Vriesendorp
R, Jeurissen FJ, Kauffmann RH, Koger EL, Bravenboer B, ten Napel CH, Kootstra GJ,
Sprenger HG, Miesen WM, Doedens R, Scholvinck EH, ten Kate RW, van Houte DP,
Polee M, Kroon FP, van den Broek PJ, van Dissel JT, Schippers EJ, Schreij G, van 
de Geest PJ, Verbon A, Koopmans PP, Keuter M, Post F, van der Ven AJ, van der
Ende ME, Gyssens IC, van der Feltz M, den Hollander JG, de Marie S, Nouwen JL,
Rijnders BJ, de Vries TE, Juttmann JR, van de Heul C, van Kasteren ME, Elisabeth 
S, Schneider MM, Bonten MJ, Borleffs JC, Ellerbroek PM, Hoepelman IM, Jaspers CA,
Schouten I, Schurink CA, Blok WL, Tanis AA, Groeneveld PH, Salamon R, Beylot J,
Dupon M, Le Bras M, Pellegrin JL, Ragnaud JM, Dabis F, Chêne G, Jacqmin-Gadda H, 
Thiébaut R, Lawson-Ayayi S, Lavignolle V, Balestre E, Blaizeau MJ, Decoin M,
Formaggio AM, Delveaux S, Labarerre S, Uwamaliya B, Vimard E, Merchadou L, Palmer
G, Touchard D, Dutoit D, Pereira F, Boulant B, Morlat P, Bernard N, Bonarek M,
Bonnet F, Coadou B, Gelie P, Jaubert D, Nouts C, Lacoste D, Dupon M, Dutronc H,
Cipriano G, Lafarie S, Chossat I, Lacut JY, Leng B, Mercié P, Viallard JF, Faure 
I, Rispal P, Cipriano C, Tchamgoué S, Le Bras M, Djossou F, Malvy D, Pivetaud JP,
Ragnaud JM, Chambon D, De La Taille C, Galperine T, Lafarie S, Neau D, Ochoa A,
Beylot C, Doutre MS, Bezian JH, Moreau JF, Taupin JL, Conri C, Constans J,
Couzigou P, Castera L, Fleury H, Lafon ME, Masquelier B, Pellegrin I, Trimoulet
P, Moreau F, Mestre C, Series C, Taytard A, Law M, Petoumenos K, Anderson J, Lowe
K, Mijch A, Watson K, Roth N, Wood H, Bloch M, Gowers A, Baker D, McFarlane R,
Carr A, Cooper D, Chuah J, Fankhauser W, Mallal S, Skett J, Calvo G, Torres F,
Mateu S, Domingo P, Sambeat MA, Gatell J, Del Cacho E, Cadafalch J, Fuster M,
Codina C, Sirera G, Vaqué A, Clumeck N, De Wit S, Gerard M, Kabeya K, Konopnicki 
D, Libois A, Payen MC, Poll B, Van Laethem Y, Neaton J, El-Sadr WM, Krum E,
Thompson G, Wentworth D, Luskin-Hawk R, Telzak E, Abrams DI, Cohn D, Markowitz M,
Crane LR, Arduino R, Mushatt D, Friedland G, Perez G, Tedaldi E, Fisher E, Gordin
F, Sampson J, Baxter J, Kirk O, Olsen CH, Mocroft A, Phillips AN, Lundgren JD,
Vetter N, Karpov I, Vassilenko A, Clumeck N, De Wit S, Poll B, Colebunders R,
Machala L, Rozsypal H, Sedlacek D, Nielsen J, Benfield T, Gerstoft J, Katzenstein
T, Hansen AB, Skinhøj P, Pedersen C, Zilmer K, Katlama C, Viard JP, Girard PM,
Saint-Marc T, Vanhems P, Pradier C, Dabis C, Dietrich M, Manegold C, van Lunzen
J, Stellbrink HJ, Staszewski S, Bieckel M, Goebel FD, Fätkenheuer G, Rockstroh J,
Schmidt RE, Kosmidis J, Gargalianos P, Sambatakou H, Perdios J, Panos G,
Filandras A, Banhegyi D, Mulcahy F, Yust I, Burke M, Turner D, Pollack S, Hassoun
J, Sthoeger Z, Maayan S, Vella S, Chiesi A, Arici C, Pristerá R, Mazzotta F,
Gabbuti A, Esposito R, Bedini A, Chirianni A, Montesarchio E, Vullo V, Santopadre
P, Narciso P, Antinori A, Franci P, Zaccarelli M, Lazzarin A, Castagna A,
D'Arminio Monforte A, Viksna L, Chaplinskas S, Hemmer R, Staub T, Reiss P, Bruun 
J, Maeland A, Ormaasen V, Knysz B, Gasiorowski J, Horban A, Prokopowicz D,
Wiercinska-Drapalo A, Boron-Kaczmarska A, Pynka M, Beniowski M, Mularska E,
Trocha H, Antunes F, Mansinho K, Maltez F, Duiculescu D, Babes V, Streinu-Cercel 
A, Vinogradova E, Rakhmanova A, Jevtovic D, Mokrás M, Staneková D, González-Lahoz
J, Sanchez-Conde M, García-Benayas T, Martin-Carbonero L, Soriano V, Clotet B,
Jou A, Conejero J, Ruiz L, Tural C, Gatell JM, Miró JM, Zamora L, Blaxhult A,
Karlsson A, Pehrson P, Ledergerber B, Weber R, Francioli P, Telenti A, Hirschel
B, Soravia-Dunand V, Furrer H, Kravchenko E, Chentsova N, Fisher M, Brettle R,
Barton S, Johnson AM, Mercey D, Murphy M, Johnson MA, Weber J, Scullard G,
Morfeldt L, Thulin G, Sundström A, Akerlund B, Koppel K, Karlsson A, Flamholc L, 
Håkangård C, d'Arminio Monforte A, Pezzotti P, Moroni M, Cargnel A, Merli S,
Rizzardini G, Pastecchia C, Lazzarin A, Castagna A, Caggese L, Moioli C, Mura MS,
Mannazzu M, Suter F, Arici C, Manconi PE, Piano P, Mazzotta F, Lo Caputo S,
Poggiom A, Bottari G, Pagano G, Alessandrini A, Scasso A, Vincenti A, Abbadessa
V, Mancuso S, Alberici F, Ruggieri A, Arlotti M, Ortolani P, De Lalla F, Tositti 
G, Cassola G, Piscopo R, Raise E, Ebo F, Soscia F, Tacconi L, Tirelli U, Di
Gennaro G, Santoro D, Pusterla L, Carosi G, Torti C, Cadeo G, Bertelli D,
Carnevale G, Galloni D, Filice G, Bruno R, Di Perri G, Arnaudo I, Caramello P,
Orofino GC, Soranzo ML, Bonasso M, Quirino T, Melzi S, Chiodo F, Colangeli V,
Magnani G, Ursitti M, Menichetti F, Martinelli C, Esposito R, Mussini C, Ghinelli
F, Sighinolfi L, Coronado O, Ballardini G, Rizzo E, Montroni M, Braschi MC,
Petrelli E, Cioppi A, Cauda R, De Luca A, Petrosillo N, Noto P, Narciso P,
Bontempo G, Antinori A, Acinapura A, Antonucci G, De Longis P, Vullo V, Lichtner 
M, Pastore G, Ladisa N, Chirianni A, Viglietti R, Piazza M, Nappa S, Abrescia N, 
De Marco M, Colomba A, Prestileo T, De Stefano C, La Gala A, Cosco L, Scerbo A,
Grima P, Tundo P, Vecchiet J, D'Alessandro M, Grisorio B, Ferrara S, Pradier C,
Fontas E, Caissotti C, Dellamonica P, Bentz L, Bernard E, De Salvador-Guillouet
F, Durant J, Mondain-Miton V, Perbost I, Prouvost-Keller B, Pugliese P,
Rahelinirina V, Roger PM, Vandenbos F, Battegay M, Bernasconi E, Böni J, Bucher
H, Bürgisser P, Cattacin S, Cavassini M, Dubs R, Egger M, Elzi L, Erb P, Fischer 
M, Flepp M, Fontana A, Francioli P, Furrer HJ, Gorgievski M, Günthard H, Hirschel
B, Kaiser L, Kind C, Klimkait T, Lauper U, Ledergerber B, Opravil M, Paccaud F,
Pantaleo G, Perrin L, Piffaretti JC, Rickenbach M, Rudin C, Schmid P, Schüpbach
J, Speck R, Telenti A, Trkola A, Vernazza P, Weber R, Yerly S.

BACKGROUND: Because of the known relationship between exposure to combination
antiretroviral therapy and cardiovascular disease (CVD), it has become
increasingly important to intervene against risk of CVD in human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV)-infected patients. We evaluated changes in risk factors for CVD and
the use of lipid-lowering therapy in HIV-infected individuals and assessed the
impact of any changes on the incidence of myocardial infarction.
METHODS: The Data Collection on Adverse Events of Anti-HIV Drugs Study is a
collaboration of 11 cohorts of HIV-infected patients that included follow-up for 
33,389 HIV-infected patients from December 1999 through February 2006.
RESULTS: The proportion of patients at high risk of CVD increased from 35.3%
during 1999-2000 to 41.3% during 2005-2006. Of 28,985 patients, 2801 (9.7%)
initiated lipid-lowering therapy; initiation of lipid-lowering therapy was more
common for those with abnormal lipid values and those with traditional risk
factors for CVD (male sex, older age, higher body mass index [calculated as the
weight in kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters], family and
personal history of CVD, and diabetes mellitus). After controlling for these, use
of lipid-lowering drugs became relatively less common over time. The incidence of
myocardial infarction (0.32 cases per 100 person-years [PY]; 95% confidence
interval [CI], 0.29-0.35 cases per 100 PY) appeared to remain stable. However,
after controlling for changes in risk factors for CVD, the rate decreased over
time (relative rate in 2003 [compared with 1999-2000], 0.73 cases per 100 PY [95%
CI, 0.50-1.05 cases per 100 PY]; in 2004, 0.64 cases per 100 PY [95% CI,
0.44-0.94 cases per 100 PY]; in 2005-2006, 0.36 cases per 100 PY [95% CI,
0.24-0.56 cases per 100 PY]). Further adjustment for lipid levels attenuated the 
relative rates towards unity (relative rate in 2003 [compared with 1999-2000],
1.06 cases per 100 PY [95% CI, 0.63-1.77 cases per 100 PY]; in 2004, 1.02 cases
per 100 PY [95% CI, 0.61-1.71 cases per 100 PY]; in 2005-2006, 0.63 cases per 100
PY [95% CI, 0.36-1.09 cases per 100 PY]).
CONCLUSIONS: Although the CVD risk profile among patients in the Data Collection 
on Adverse Events of Anti-HIV Drugs Study has decreased since 1999, rates have
remained relatively stable, possibly as a result of a more aggressive approach
towards managing the risk of CVD.

PMCID: PMC2702541
PMID: 18461712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Rev Saude Publica. 2008 Jun;42(3):529-35. Epub 2008 Apr 18.

[Psychoactive drug advertising: analysis of scientific information].

[Article in Portuguese]

Mastroianni PC(1), Noto AR, Galduróz JC.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fármacos e Medicamentos, Faculdade de Ciências Farmacêuticas, 
Universidade Estadual Paulista Júlio Mesquita, Araraquara, SP, Brazil.
pmastro@fcfar.unesp.br

OBJECTIVE: According to the World Health Organization, medicinal drug promotion
should be reliable, accurate, truthful, informative, balanced, up-to-date and
capable of substantiation. The objective of the present study was to review
psychoactive drug advertisements to physicians as for information consistency
with the related references and accessibility of the cited references.
METHODS: Data was collected in the city of Araraquara, Southeastern Brazil, in
2005. There were collected and reviewed 152 drug advertisements, a total of 304
references. References were requested directly from pharmaceutical companies'
customer services and searched in UNESP (Ibict, Athenas) and BIREME (SciELO,
PubMed, free-access indexed journals) library network and CAPES journals.
Advertisement statements were checked against references using content analysis.
RESULTS: Of all references cited in the advertisements studied, 66.7% were
accessed. Of 639 promotional statements identified, 346 (54%) were analyzed. The 
analysis showed that 67.7% of promotional statements in the advertisements were
consistent with their references, while the remaining was either partially
consistent or inconsistent. Of the material analyzed, an average 2.5 (1-28)
references was cited per advertisement. In the text body, there were identified
639 pieces of information clearly associated with at least one cited reference
(average 3.5 pieces of information per advertisement).
CONCLUSIONS: The study results evidenced difficult access to the references.
Messages on efficacy, safety and cost, among others, are not always supported by 
scientific studies. There is a need for regulation changes and effective
monitoring of drug promotional materials.

PMID: 18438590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Protein Sci. 2008 Jul;17(7):1249-55. doi: 10.1110/ps.034330.108. Epub 2008 Apr
15.

Alternative stabilities of a proline-rich antibacterial peptide in vitro and in
vivo.

Noto PB(1), Abbadessa G, Cassone M, Mateo GD, Agelan A, Wade JD, Szabo D, Kocsis 
B, Nagy K, Rozgonyi F, Otvos L Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Temple
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA.

The proline-rich designer antibacterial peptide dimer A3-APO is currently under
preclinical development for the treatment of systemic infections caused by
antibiotic-resistant Gram-negative bacteria. The peptide showed remarkable
stability in 25% mouse serum in vitro, exhibiting a half-life of approximately
100 min as documented by reversed-phase chromatography. Indeed, after a 30-min
incubation period in undiluted mouse serum ex vivo, mass spectrometry failed to
identify any degradation product. The peptide was still a major peak in full
blood ex vivo, however, with degradation products present corresponding to
amino-terminal cleavage. When injected into mice intravenously, very little, if
any unmodified peptide could be detected after 30 min. Nevertheless, the major
early metabolite, a full single-chain fragment, was detectable until 90 min, and 
this fragment exhibited equal or slightly better activity in the broth
microdilution antimicrobial assay against a panel of resistant Enterobactericeae 
strains. The Chex1-Arg20 metabolite, when administered three times at 20 mg/kg to
mice infected with a sublethal dose (over LD(50)) of an extended spectrum
beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia coli strain, completely sterilized the mouse
blood, similar to imipenem added at a higher dose. The longer and presumably more
immunogenic prodrug A3-APO, injected subcutaneously twice over a 3-wk period, did
not induce any antibody production, indicating the suitability of this peptide or
its active metabolite for clinical development.

PMCID: PMC2442003
PMID: 18413862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Brain Nerve. 2008 Mar;60(3):247-55.

[Development of shunt technology especially for idiopathic normal pressure
hydrocephalus].

[Article in Japanese]

Hashimoto MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Noto General Hospital, 6-4 Abu Fujihashi-cho,
Nanao-shi, Ishikawa 926 8610, Japan.

Outcome of the treatment on hydrocephalus especially in idiopathic normal
pressure hydrocephalus (iNPH) shows the better outcome after shunting operation
according to the evolution of the shunt system and the better management of shunt
complications, and also, comprehension of the pathophysiology of NPH. The history
of shunt system is benefit for the understanding of the now available shunt
system. The first generation system is emerge as the typical standard
differential pressure valves. The second generation valves was developed for the 
management of overdrainage problems and siphoning control. Japanese guidelines of
iNPH recommended the use of the programmable valve for shunt system. Now, various
shunt system have been developed for the treatment of hydrocephalus. After
millennium, the new third generation shunt systems that are consisted with
programmable valve and anti-siphon devices, are now line up for the management of
iNPH. The new recognition of NPH and the familiarity with these various shunt
devices are enable to the new stage of the clinical sciene of the diagnosis and
the management of iNPH.

PMID: 18402072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Lancet. 2008 Apr 26;371(9622):1417-26. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60423-7. Epub
2008 Apr 2.

Use of nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors and risk of myocardial
infarction in HIV-infected patients enrolled in the D:A:D study: a multi-cohort
collaboration.

D:A:D Study Group, Sabin CA, Worm SW, Weber R, Reiss P, El-Sadr W, Dabis F, De
Wit S, Law M, D'Arminio Monforte A, Friis-Møller N, Kirk O, Pradier C, Weller I, 
Phillips AN, Lundgren JD.

Collaborators: Collins S, Dabis F, D'Arminio Monforte A, De Wit S, El-Sadr WM,
Kirk O, Law M, Pradier C, Phillips A, Reiss P, Rosseau F, Storfer SP, Weber I,
Lundgren JD, Worm SW, Friis-Møller N, Sabin CA, Sjøl A, Lundgren JD, Sawitz A,
Rickenbach M, Pezzotti P, Krum E, Gras L, Balestre E, Sundström A, Poll B, Fontas
E, Torres F, Petoumenos K, Kjaer J, Hammer S, Neaton J, Sjøl A, de Wolf F, Zaheri
S, Gras L, Bronsveld W, Hillebrand-Haverkort ME, Prins JM, Bos JC, Eeftinck
Schattenkerk JK, Geerlings SE, Godfried MH, Lange JM, van Leth FC, Lowe SH, van
der Meer JT, Nellen FJ, Pogány K, van der Poll T, Reiss P, Ruys TA, Sankatsing,
Steingrover R, van Twillert G, van der Valk M, van Vonderen MG, Vrouenraets SM,
van Vugt M, Wit FW, van Eeden A, ten Veen JH, van Dam PS, Roos JC, Brinkman K,
Frissen PH, Weigel HM, Mulder JW, van Gorp EC, Meenhorst PL, Mairuhu AT, Veenstra
J, Danner SA, Van Agtmael MA, Claessen FA, Perenboom RM, Rijkeboer A, van
Vonderen M, Richter C, van der Berg J, van Leusen R, Vriesendorp R, Jeurissen FJ,
Kauffmann RH, Koger EL, Bravenboer B, ten Napel CH, Kootstra GJ, Sprenger HG,
Miesen WM, Doedens R, Scholvinck EH, ten Kate RW, van Houte DP, Polee M, Kroon
FP, van den Broek, van Dissel JT, Schippers EF, Schreij G, van de Geest S, Verbon
A, Koopmans PP, Keuter M, Post F, van der Ven AJ, van der Ende ME, Gyssens IC,
van der Feltz M, den Hollander JG, de Marie S, Nouwen JL, Rijnders BJ, de Vries
TE, Juttmann JR, van de Heul C, van Kasteren ME, St Elisabeth, Schneider MM,
Bonten MJ, Borleffs JC, Ellerbroek PM, Hoepelman IM, Jaspers CA, Schouten I,
Schurink CA, Blok WL, Tanis AA, Groeneveld PH, Salamon R, Beylot J, Dupon M, Le
Bras M, Pellegrin JL, Ragnaud JM, Dabis F, Chêne G, Jacqmin-Gadda H, Thiébaut R, 
Lawson-Ayayi S, Lavignolle V, Balestre E, Blaizeau MJ, Decoin M, Formaggio AM,
Delveaux S, Labarerre S, Uwamaliya B, Vimard E, Merchadou L, Palmer G, Touchard
D, Dutoit D, Pereira F, Boulant B, Beylot J, Morlat P, Bernard N, Bonarek M,
Bonnet F, Coadou B, Gelie P, Jaubert D, Nouts C, Lacoste D, Dupon M, Dutronc H,
Cipriano G, Lafarie S, Chossat I, Lacut JY, Leng B, Pellegrin JL, Mercié P,
Viallard JF, Faure I, Rispal P, Cipriano C, Tchamgoué S, Le Bras M, Djossou F,
Malvy D, Pivetaud JP, Ragnaud JM, Chambon D, De La Taille C, Galperine T, Lafarie
S, Neau D, Ochoa A, Beylot C, Doutre MS, Bezian JH, Moreau JF, Taupin JL, Conri
C, Constans J, Couzigou P, Castera L, Fleury H, Lafon ME, Masquelier B, Pellegrin
I, Trimoulet P, Moreau F, Mestre C, Series C, Taytard A, Law M, Petoumenos K,
Anderson J, Cortossis P, Hoy J, Watson K, Roth N, Bloch M, Franic T, Baker D,
McFarlane R, Carr A, Cooper D, Chuah J, Fankhauser W, Mallal S, Forsdyke C, Calvo
G, Torres F, Mateu S, Domingo P, Sambeat MA, Gatel J, Del Cacho E, Cadafalch J,
Fuster M, Codina C, Sirera G, Vaqué A, Clumeck N, De Wit S, Gerard M, Kabeya K,
Konopnicki D, Libois A, Payen MC, Poll B, Van Laethem Y, Neaton J, Bartsch G,
El-Sadr WM, Krum E, Thompson G, Wentworth D, Luskin-Hawk R, Telzak E, El-Sadr WM,
Abrams DI, Cohn D, Markowitz N, Arduino R, Mushatt D, Friedland G, Perez G,
Tedaldi E, Fisher E, Gordin F, Crane LR, Sampson J, Baxter J, Kirk O, Mocroft A, 
Phillips AN, Lundgren JD, Vetter N, Karpov I, Vassilenko A, Clumeck N, De Wit S, 
Poll B, Colebunders R, Machala L, Rozsypal H, Sedlacek D, Nielsen J, Benfield T, 
Gerstoft J, Katzenstein T, Hansen AB, Skinhøj P, Pedersen C, Zilmer K, Katlama C,
Viard JP, Girard PM, Saint-Marc T, Vanhems P, Pradier C, Dabis F, Dietrich M,
Manegold C, van Lunzen J, Stellbrink HJ, Staszewski S, Bieckel M, Goebel FD,
Fätkenheuer G, Rockstroh J, Schmidt RE, Kosmidis J, Gargalianos P, Sambatakou H, 
Perdios J, Panos G, Filandras A, Banhegyi D, Mulcahy F, Yust I, Burke M, Turner
D, Pollack S, Hassoun J, Sthoeger Z, Maayan S, Vella S, Chiesi A, Arici C,
Pristerá R, Mazzotta F, Gabbuti A, Esposito R, Bedini A, Chirianni A,
Montesarchio E, Vullo V, Santopadre P, Narciso P, Antinori A, Franci P,
Zaccarelli M, Lazzarin A, Castagna A, D'Arminio Monforte A, Viksna L, Chaplinskas
S, Hemmer R, Staub T, Reiss P, Bruun J, Maeland A, Ormaasen V, Knysz B,
Gasiorowski J, Horban A, Prokopowicz D, Wiercinska-Drapalo A, Boron-Kaczmarsk A, 
Pynka M, Beniowski M, Mularska E, Trocha H, Antunes A, Mansinho K, Maltez F,
Duiculescu D, Streinu-Cercel A, Vinogradova E, Rakhmanova A, Jevtovic D, Mokrás
M, Staneková D, González-Lahoz J, Sanchez-Conde M, García-Benayas T,
Martin-Carbonero L, Soriano V, Clotet B, Jou A, Conejero J, Ruiz L, Tural C,
Gatell JM, Miró JM, Zamora L, Domingo P, Gutierrez M, Mateo G, Sambeat MA,
Blaxhult A, Karlsson A, Pehrson P, Ledergerber B, Weber R, Francioli P, Telenti
A, Hirschel B, Soravia-Dunand V, Furrer H, Kravchenko E, Chentsova N, Fisher M,
Brettle R, Barton S, Johnson AM, Mercey D, Murphy M, Johnson MA, Weber J,
Scullard G, Morfeld L, Thulin G, Sundström A, Akerlund B, Koppel K, Karlsson A,
Flamholc L, Håkangård C, d'Arminio Monforte A, Pezzotti P, Moroni M, d'Arminio
Monforte A, Cargnel A, Merli S, Vigevani GM, Pastecchia C, Lazzarin A, Morsica G,
Caggese L, Moioli C, Mura MS, Mannazzu M, Suter F, Arici C, Manconi PE, Piano P, 
Mazzotta F, Lo Caputo S, Poggio A, Bottari G, Pagano G, Alessandrini A, Scasso A,
Abbadessa V, Mancuso S, Alberici F, Ruggieri A, Arlotti M, Ortolani P, De Lalla
F, Tositti G, Cassola G, Piscopo R, Raise E, Ebo F, Soscia F, Tacconi L, Tirelli 
U, Cinelli R, Santoro D, Pusterla L, Carosi G, Torti C, Cadeo G, Bertelli D,
Carnevale G, Citterio P, Filice G, Bruno R, Di Perri G, Arnaudo I, Caramello P,
Orofino GC, Soranzo ML, Bonasso M, Rizzardini G, Melzi S, Chiodo F, Colangeli V, 
Magnani G, Ursitti M, Menichetti F, Martinelli C, Esposito R, Mussini C, Ghinelli
F, Sighinolfi L, Coronado O, Ballardini G, Rizzo E, Montroni M, Braschi MC,
Petrelli E, Cioppi A, Cauda R, De Luca A, Petrosillo N, Noto P, Narciso P,
Bontempo G, Antinori A, Acinapura R, Antonucci G, De Longis P, Vullo V, Lichtner 
M, Pastore G, Ladisa N, Chirianni A, Viglietti R, Piazza M, Nappa S, Abrescia N, 
De Marco M, Colomba A, Prestileo T, De Stefano C, La Gala A, Cosco L, Scerbo A,
Grima P, Tundo P, Vecchiet J, D'Alessandro M, Grisorio B, Ferrara S, Pradier C,
Fontas E, Caissotti C, Dellamonica P, Bentz L, Bernard E, De Salvador-Guillouet
F, Durant J, Mondain-Miton V, Perbost I, Prouvost-Keller B, Pugliese P,
Rahelinirina V, Roger PM, Vander F, Battegay M, Bernasconi E, Böni J, Buche H,
Bürgisser P, Cattacin S, Cavassini M, Dubs R, Egger M, Elzi L, Erb P, Fischer M, 
Flepp M, Fontana A, Francioli P, Furrer HJ, Gorgievski M, Günthard H, Hirschel B,
Kaiser L, Kind C, Klimkait T, Lauper U, Ledergerber B, Opravil M, Paccaud F,
Pantaleo G, Perrin L, Piffaretti JC, Rickenbach M, Rudin C, Schmid P, Schüpbach
J, Speck R, Telenti A, Trkola A, Vernazza P, Weber R, Yerly S.

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2008 Jul 26;372(9635):292.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2008 Sep 6;372(9641):803; author reply 804-5.
    Lancet. 2008 Apr 26;371(9622):1413.
    Lancet. 2008 Apr 26;371(9622):1391-2.
    Lancet. 2008 Sep 6;372(9641):805.
    Lancet. 2008 Sep 6;372(9641):803-4; author reply 804-5.

BACKGROUND: Whether nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors increase the risk
of myocardial infarction in HIV-infected individuals is unclear. Our aim was to
explore whether exposure to such drugs was associated with an excess risk of
myocardial infarction in a large, prospective observational cohort of
HIV-infected patients.
METHODS: We used Poisson regression models to quantify the relation between
cumulative, recent (currently or within the preceding 6 months), and past use of 
zidovudine, didanosine, stavudine, lamivudine, and abacavir and development of
myocardial infarction in 33 347 patients enrolled in the D:A:D study. We adjusted
for cardiovascular risk factors that are unlikely to be affected by
antiretroviral therapy, cohort, calendar year, and use of other antiretrovirals.
FINDINGS: Over 157,912 person-years, 517 patients had a myocardial infarction. We
found no associations between the rate of myocardial infarction and cumulative or
recent use of zidovudine, stavudine, or lamivudine. By contrast, recent-but not
cumulative-use of abacavir or didanosine was associated with an increased rate of
myocardial infarction (compared with those with no recent use of the drugs,
relative rate 1.90, 95% CI 1.47-2.45 [p=0.0001] with abacavir and 1.49, 1.14-1.95
[p=0.003] with didanosine); rates were not significantly increased in those who
stopped these drugs more than 6 months previously compared with those who had
never received these drugs. After adjustment for predicted 10-year risk of
coronary heart disease, recent use of both didanosine and abacavir remained
associated with increased rates of myocardial infarction (1.49, 1.14-1.95
[p=0.004] with didanosine; 1.89, 1.47-2.45 [p=0.0001] with abacavir).
INTERPRETATION: There exists an increased risk of myocardial infarction in
patients exposed to abacavir and didanosine within the preceding 6 months. The
excess risk does not seem to be explained by underlying established
cardiovascular risk factors and was not present beyond 6 months after drug
cessation.

PMCID: PMC2688660
PMID: 18387667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Org Chem. 2008 May 2;73(9):3397-403. doi: 10.1021/jo702662z. Epub 2008 Mar 21.

Kemp elimination: a probe reaction to study ionic liquids properties.

D'Anna F(1), La Marca S, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica E. Paternò, Università degli Studi di
Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
fdanna@unipa.it; rnoto@unipa.it

The amino induced elimination of benzisoxazole into the relevant o-cyanophenolate
ion (Kemp elimination) has been studied in [bmim][BF 4] solution at 298 K. To
have information about the interactions between reactants and ionic liquid, the
reaction has been carried out at different temperatures (293-313 K). Several
primary, secondary, and tertiary amines have been used to study the effect of
amine structure on the reaction rate. The collected data show that the amine
structure seems to have a crucial role in determining the reaction rate.
Furthermore, as different cation or anion structures of an ionic liquid can
significantly affect its properties, the title reaction has been performed in
four different ionic liquids ([bmim][PF6], [bmim][NTf 2], [bm 2im][NTf 2], and
[bmpyrr][NTf 2]), using pyrrolidine and piperidine as model amines. An H-donor
negative solvent (MeOH and [bmim][NTf 2]) effect on reaction rate was detected.
Finally, a narrow range of activation parameters was calculated both for the
reaction induced by different amines and for pyrrolidine and piperidine, in the
presence of different ILs. This fact suggests the occurrence of an "early"
transition state.

PMID: 18355034  [PubMed]


284. Infect Immun. 2008 May;76(5):1960-9. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00020-08. Epub 2008 Mar 17.

Identification of TbpA residues required for transferrin-iron utilization by
Neisseria gonorrhoeae.

Noto JM(1), Cornelissen CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University
Medical Center, Richmond, VA 23298-0678, USA.

Neisseria gonorrhoeae requires iron for survival in the human host and therefore 
expresses high-affinity receptors for iron acquisition from host iron-binding
proteins. The gonococcal transferrin-iron uptake system is composed of two
transferrin binding proteins, TbpA and TbpB. TbpA is a TonB-dependent, outer
membrane transporter critical for iron acquisition, while TbpB is a
surface-exposed lipoprotein that increases the efficiency of iron uptake. The
precise mechanism by which TbpA mediates iron acquisition has not been
elucidated; however, the process is distinct from those of characterized
siderophore transporters. Similar to these TonB-dependent transporters, TbpA is
proposed to have two distinct domains, a beta-barrel and a plug domain. We
hypothesize that the TbpA plug coordinates iron and therefore potentially
functions in multiple steps of transferrin-mediated iron acquisition. To test
this hypothesis, we targeted a conserved motif within the TbpA plug domain and
generated single, double, and triple alanine substitution mutants. Mutagenized
TbpAs were expressed on the gonococcal cell surface and maintained wild-type
transferrin binding affinity. Single alanine substitution mutants internalized
iron at wild-type levels, while the double and triple mutants showed a
significant decrease in iron uptake. Moreover, the triple alanine substitution
mutant was unable to grow on transferrin as a sole iron source; however,
expression of TbpB compensated for this defect. These data indicate that the
conserved motif between residues 120 and 122 of the TbpA plug domain is critical 
for transferrin-iron utilization, suggesting that this region plays a role in
iron acquisition that is shared by both TbpA and TbpB.

PMCID: PMC2346694
PMID: 18347046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Pineal Res. 2008 Apr;44(3):326-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2007.00533.x.

Novel bromomelatonin derivatives suppress osteoclastic activity and increase
osteoblastic activity: implications for the treatment of bone diseases.

Suzuki N(1), Somei M, Kitamura K, Reiter RJ, Hattori A.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University, Housu-gun, Ishikawa, Japan.

The teleost scale is a calcified tissue that contains osteoclasts, osteoblasts,
and bone matrix, all of which are similar to those found in mammalian membrane
bone. Using the goldfish scale, we recently developed a new in vitro assay system
and previously demonstrated that melatonin suppressed both osteoclastic and
osteoblastic activities in this assay system. In mammals, 2-bromomelatonin
possesses a higher affinity for the melatonin receptor than does melatonin. Using
a newly developed synthetic method, we synthesized 2-bromomelatonin,
2,4,6-tribromomelatonin and novel bromomelatonin derivatives
(1-allyl-2,4,6-tribromomelatonin, 1-propargyl-2,4,6-tribromomelatonin,
1-benzyl-2,4,6-tribromomelatonin, and 2,4,6,7-tetrabromomelatonin) and then
examined the effects of these chemicals on osteoclasts and osteoblasts. All
bromomelatonin derivatives, as well as melatonin, had an inhibitory action on
osteoclasts. In particular, 1-benzyl-2,4,6-tribromomelatonin
(benzyl-tribromomelatonin) possessed a stronger activity than melatonin. At an in
vitro concentration of 10(-10) m, benzyl-tribromomelatonin still suppressed
osteoclastic activity after 6 hr of incubation. In reference to osteoblasts, all 
bromomelatonin derivatives had a stimulatory action, although melatonin inhibited
osteoblastic activity. In addition, estrogen receptor mRNA expression (an
osteoblastic marker) was increased in benzyl-tribromomelatonin (10(-7) m)-treated
scales. Taken together, the present results strongly suggest that these novel
melatonin derivatives have significant potential for use as beneficial drug for
bone diseases such as osteoporosis.

PMID: 18339128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2008 Mar;105(3):412-6.

[Case of pancreatic ascites successfully treated with endoscopic pancreatic
drainage].

[Article in Japanese]

Oyama K(1), Takeshita M, Sasaki S, Noto M, Yoshimoto K, Fuchisaki U, Kamata T,
Miyamori H, Kanno M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Keijyu Medical Center.

We report a 47-year-old man with abdominal distension without other distinct
signs. Massive ascites with any singular lesions was revealed on computed
tomography, and the ascites was high-amylase and high-protein. on these findings,
pancreatic ascites was suspected and he was first treated with conservative
therapy, but it failed. Computed tomography one month from the start of therapy
demonstrated a pancreatic cyst, and endoscopic retrograde pancreatography
revealed transudation of contrast medium from the cyst. A pancreatic duct stent
was placed, and the ascites was smoothly eliminated. Endoscopic pancreatic
stenting is considerable treatment for pancreatic ascites.

PMID: 18332607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Lipids. 2008 Apr;43(4):353-60. doi: 10.1007/s11745-008-3159-4. Epub 2008 Mar 5.

Delayed metabolism of postprandial triglyceride-rich lipoproteins in subjects
with echolucent carotid plaques.

Notø AT(1), Mathiesen EB, Brox J, Björkegren J, Hansen JB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Atherothrombotic Research in Tromsø, Institute of Clinical
Medicine, University of Tromsø, 9037, Tromsø, Norway. anntrude@fagmed.uit.no

Subjects with echolucent carotid plaques have an increased risk of ischemic
cerebrovascular events independent of degree of stenosis. Low plasma lipoprotein 
lipase (LPL) activity promotes a proatherogenic lipid profile, and delayed
chylomicron clearance is a risk factor for atherosclerosis. This study was
conducted to determine plasma LPL activity and postprandial metabolism of
triglycerides in relation to carotid plaque morphology. Plaque echogenicity was
assessed by B-mode ultrasound and analysis of the grey scale median (GSM).
Echolucent plaques were defined as GSM < or = 63 (the median) and echogenic
plaques as GSM > 63, and 57 subjects with carotid plaques and 38 subjects without
carotid plaques were recruited. Blood samples were collected before and at 2-h
interval for 8 h after a standard high fat meal. LPL activity and mass was
determined before and after heparin administration. Postheparin LPL activity was 
decreased in subjects with echolucent plaques compared to subjects with echogenic
plaques (P = 0.06) and to controls (P = 0.04). Plaque echogenicity increased
linearly with increasing levels of postheparin LPL activity (P = 0.02) and mass
(P = 0.03). Subjects with echolucent plaques had delayed postprandial clearance
of chylomicron triglycerides compared to controls (P = 0.04). Low postheparin LPL
activity due to attenuated mobilization of LPL from capillary endothelium may
play an important role in the formation of echolucent plaques by modulation of
postprandial lipids and subsequent fat accumulation in the arterial wall.

PMID: 18320250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Rev Sci Instrum. 2008 Feb;79(2 Pt 2):02A519. doi: 10.1063/1.2821508.

Long pulse production of high current D(-) ion beams in the JT-60 negative ion
source.

Hanada M(1), Kamada M, Akino N, Ebisawa N, Honda A, Kawai M, Kazawa M, Kikuchi K,
Komata M, Mogaki K, Noto K, Ohshima K, Takenouchi T, Tanai Y, Usui K, Yamazaki H,
Ikeda Y, Grisham LR.

Author information: 
(1)Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Ibaraki, Japan. hanada.masaya@jaea.go.jp

The first long pulse production of high power D(-) ion beams has been
demonstrated in the JT-60 U negative ion sources, each of which was designed to
produce 22 A, 500 keV D(-) ion beams. Voltage holding capability and the grid
power loading were examined for long pulse production of high power D(-) ion
beams. From the correlation between voltage holding and the light intensity of
cathodoluminescence from the Fiber Reinforced Plastic insulators, the
acceleration voltage for stable voltage holding capability was found to be less
than 320-340 kV where the light was sufficiently suppressed. By tuning the
extraction voltage, the grid power loadings in the ion sources were decreased to 
the allowable levels for long pulse injection without a significant reduction of 
the beam power. After tuning the acceleration and extraction voltages, D(-) ion
beams of 12.5 and 9.8 A were produced at 340 keV with cesium seeding at a rate of
approximately 14 microg/s into the ion sources. The pulse duration of these D(-) 
ion beams was extended step by step, and then was successfully extended up to 18 
s without degradation of the negative ion production. The D(-) ion beams were
neutralized to yield 3.6 MW D(0) beams by a gas cell, and then injected into the 
JT-60 U plasma. Further, a slight reduction of D(-) ion beam power allowed the
longer injection duration of 21 s at a D(0) beam power of 3.2 MW. The success in 
the long pulse production of a high power D(-) ion beam shows that negative ion
beams can be produced during a few tens of seconds without degradations of
negative ion production and the voltage holding in a large Cs-seeded negative ion
source.

PMID: 18315140  [PubMed]


289. Crit Care. 2008;12(1):R26. doi: 10.1186/cc6802. Epub 2008 Feb 26.

Determinants of tracheostomy decannulation: an international survey.

Stelfox HT(1), Crimi C, Berra L, Noto A, Schmidt U, Bigatello LM, Hess D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Calgary, Foothills Medical
Centre, EG23A, 1403-29 Street NW, Calgary, AB, Canada, T2N 2T9.
tom.stelfox@calgaryhealthregion.ca

Comment in
    Crit Care. 2008;12(2):128.

BACKGROUND: Although tracheostomy is probably the most common surgical procedure 
performed on critically ill patients, it is unknown when a tracheostomy tube can 
be safely removed.
METHODS: We performed a cross-sectional survey of physicians and respiratory
therapists with expertise in the management of tracheostomized patients at 118
medical centers to characterize contemporary opinions about tracheostomy
decannulation practice and to define factors that influence these practices.
RESULTS: We surveyed 309 clinicians, of whom 225 responded (73%). Clinicians
rated patient level of consciousness, ability to tolerate tracheostomy tube
capping, cough effectiveness, and secretions as the most important factors in the
decision to decannulate a patient. Decannulation failure was defined as the need 
to reinsert an artificial airway within 48 hours (45% of respondents) to 96 hours
(20% of respondents) of tracheostomy removal, and 2% to 5% was the most frequent 
recommendation for an acceptable recannulation rate (44% of respondents). In
clinical scenarios, clinicians who worked in chronic care facilities (30%) were
less likely to recommend decannulation than clinicians who worked in weaning
(47%), rehabilitation (53%), or acute care (55%) facilities (p = 0.015). Patients
were most likely to be recommended for decannulation if they were alert and
interactive (odds ratio [OR] 4.76, 95% confidence interval [CI] 3.27 to 6.90; p <
0.001), had a strong cough (OR 3.84, 95% CI 2.66 to 5.54; p < 0.001), had scant
thin secretions (OR 2.23, 95% CI 1.56 to 3.19; p < 0.001), and required minimal
supplemental oxygen (OR 2.04, 95% CI 1.45 to 2.86; p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Patient level of consciousness, cough effectiveness, secretions, and 
oxygenation are important determinants of clinicians' tracheostomy decannulation 
opinions. Most surveyed clinicians defined decannulation failure as the need to
reinsert an artificial airway within 48 to 96 hours of planned tracheostomy
removal.

PMCID: PMC2374629
PMID: 18302759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Int J STD AIDS. 2008 Jan;19(1):65-6. doi: 10.1258/ijsa.2007.007037.

Early syphilitic hepatitis in an immunocompetent patient: really so uncommon?

Noto P(1), Del Nonno F, Licci S, Chinello P, Petrosillo N.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Department, 2nd Infectious Diseases Division, National Institute for 
Infectious Diseases L Spallanzani, Via Portuense, 292 - 00149 Rome, Italy.

The incidence of syphilis has increased substantially over the past years,
particularly in men who have sex with men. The clinical manifestations of
syphilis are variable and liver involvement is uncommon, but may occur at any
stage of the disease. We report a case of early syphilitic hepatitis (ESH) in an 
immunocompetent patient referring multiple bisexual exposures, who presented at
admission with jaundice, tiredness, an ulcerated genital lesion and an increase
of liver aminotransferases. During his hospital stay, he developed a skin rash,
and serology for syphilis was found positive. Our case report strengthens the
need to take into consideration the diagnosis of ESH in all patients with
unexplained liver enzyme increase and epidemiological data of unsafe sexual
exposures. Indeed, an early recognition of the clinical manifestations of
syphilis can lead to a prompt treatment, and allows the prevention of the
transmission of this disease to other individuals.

PMID: 18275654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Leuk Res. 2008 Aug;32(8):1196-9. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2007.12.016. Epub 2008
Feb 11.

Critical role of multidimensional flow cytometry in detecting occult
leptomeningeal disease in newly diagnosed aggressive B-cell lymphomas.

Di Noto R(1), Scalia G, Abate G, Gorrese M, Pascariello C, Raia M, Morabito P,
Capone F, Pardo CL, Mirabelli P, Mariotti E, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università Federico II and
CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy. dinoto@dbbm.unina.it

Among histological aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL), the overall risk of
central nervous system (CNS) relapse is approximately 5%, a figure which is too
low to offer prophylaxis to all patients. The aim of this work is to demonstrate 
the utility of flow cytometry (FCM) in detecting occult leptomeningeal disease in
this subtype of NHL. We studied cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) involvement in 42 newly
diagnosed aggressive NHL patients at risk for CNS involvement. We used
multicolour FCM to detect CSF infiltrating neoplastic cells. Among the 42
patients studied, 11 had CSF involvement as detected by FCM. Of these, only four 
were also positive for conventional morphology (p=0.046). These results designate
that FCM as the first choice technique in NHL CSF clinical cell analysis.

PMID: 18262645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Gynecol Oncol. 2008 Apr;109(1):65-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2007.12.027. Epub 2008
Feb 5.

Isolated sentinel lymph node dissection with conservative management in patients 
with squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva: a prospective trial.

Moore RG(1), Robison K, Brown AK, DiSilvestro P, Steinhoff M, Noto R, Brard L,
Granai CO.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Women's Oncology, Women and Infants' Hospital, Brown University,
Providence, RI 02905, USA. rmoore@wihri.org

Comment in
    Gynecol Oncol. 2008 Oct;111(1):158; author reply 159.

OBJECTIVES: Sentinel lymph node (SLN) dissections have a high sensitivity and
negative predictive value for the detection of metastatic disease. The objective 
of this study was to examine the inguinal recurrence rate along with complication
rates for patients undergoing inguinal SLN dissection alone for vulvar carcinoma.
METHODS: An IRB approved prospective study enrolled patients with biopsy proven
squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva. Peritumoral injection of Tc-99 sulfur
colloid and methylene blue dye was used to identify SLNs intraoperatively.
Patients with SLNs negative for metastatic disease were followed clinically.
Patients with metastasis detected in a SLN subsequently underwent a full groin
node dissection followed by standard treatment protocols.
RESULTS: Thirty-six patients were enrolled onto study with 35 undergoing a SLN
dissection. All SNL dissections were successful with a mean of 2 SLN obtained per
groin. There were 24 patients with stage I disease, 8 stage II, 3 stage III and 1
stage IV. A total of 56 SLN dissections were performed with 4 patients found to
have inguinal metastasis by SLN dissection. There were 31 patients with a total
of 46 SLN dissections found to be negative for metastatic disease. The median
follow-up has been 29 months (range 8 to 51) with 2 groin recurrences for a groin
recurrence rate of 4.3% and a recurrence rate per patient of 6.4%. There have
been no reports of groin breakdown, extremity cellulitis or lymphedema.
CONCLUSIONS: The recurrence rate for patients undergoing inguinal sentinel node
dissection alone is low. These patients did not experience any complications as
seen with complete groin node dissections. Sentinel lymph node dissection should 
be considered as an option for evaluation of inguinal nodes for metastatic
disease.

PMID: 18255128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2008 Feb;56(2):361-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2007.01534.x.

Outbreak of norovirus gastroenteritis in elderly evacuees after the 2007 Noto
Peninsula earthquake in Japan.

Nomura K, Murai H, Nakahashi T, Mashiba S, Watoh Y, Takahashi T, Morimoto S.

PMID: 18251819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Biol Pharm Bull. 2008 Feb;31(2):305-8.

Novel method for selecting immunosuppressive histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors with minimal thrombocytopenia.

Matsuoka H(1), Fujimura T, Unami A, Yamada T, Noto T, Takata Y, Yoshizawa K, Mori
H, Aramori I, Mutoh S.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Research Laboratories, Astellas Pharma Inc., Yodogawa-ku, Osaka, 
Japan. hideaki.mtsuoka@us.astellas.com

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors repress interleukin-2 (IL-2) gene
expression in T cells and possess immunosuppressive activity in vivo. In addition
to its immunosuppressive activity, HDAC inhibitors block GATA binding protein-1
(GATA-1) gene expression in megakaryocytes and elicit thrombocytopenia. In this
report we state that for a given immunosuppressive dose of HDAC inhibitor, the
ratio of GATA-1 reporter gene activity relative to IL-2 reporter gene assay (G/I 
ratio of measured IC(50)) can be predictive of a HDAC inhibitor's
thrombocytopenic effect. This study utilized nine HDAC inhibitors at a minimal
effective dose in a rat heterotopic cardiac transplantation model and the
resultant G/I ratios and platelet depletion rates were highly correlated
(r=0.933). These results indicate that calculation of G/I ratio can be a novel
method for selecting immunosuppressive HDAC inhibitor having minimal
thrombocytopenic effect which will benefit the search for new immunosuppressants 
of greater safety and efficacy.

PMID: 18239292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Infection. 2008 Feb;36(1):46-53. doi: 10.1007/s15010-007-6300-z. Epub 2008 Jan
29.

Recent acquired STD and the use of HAART in the Italian Cohort of Naive for
Antiretrovirals (I.Co.N.A): analysis of the incidence of newly acquired hepatitis
B infection and syphilis.

Cicconi P(1), Cozzi-lepri A, Orlando G, Matteelli A, Girardi E, Degli Esposti A, 
Moioli C, Rizzardini G, Chiodera A, Ballardini G, Tincati C, d'Arminio Monforte
A; I.Co.N.A. Study Group.

Collaborators: Montroni M, Scalise G, Braschi MC, Riva A, Grima P, Tirelli U, Di 
Gennaro G, Pastore G, Ladisa N, Minafra G, Suter F, Arici C, Chiodo F, Colangeli 
V, Fiorini C, Coronado O, Carosi G, Cadeo GP, Torti C, Minardi C, Bertelli D,
Rizzardini G, Melzi S, Manconi PE, Piano P, Cosco L, Scerbo A, Vecchiet J,
D'Alessandro M, Santoro D, Pusterla L, Carnevale G, Citterio P, Viganò P, Mena M,
Ghinelli F, Sighinolfi L, Leoncini F, Mazzotta F, Pozzi M, Lo Caputo S, Angarano 
G, Grisorio B, Saracino A, Ferrara S, Tundo P, Pagano G, Cassola G, Alessandrini 
A, Piscopo R, Toti M, Chigiotti S, Soscia F, Tacconi L, Orani A, Perini P, Scasso
A, Vincenti A, Chiodera A, Castelli P, Scalzini A, Palvarini L, Moroni M,
Lazzarin A, Cargnel A, Vigevani GM, Caggese L, d'Arminio Monforte A, Repetto D,
Galli A, Merli S, Pastecchia C, Moioli MC, Esposito R, Mussini C, Abrescia N,
Chirianni A, Izzo CM, Piazza M, De Marco M, Viglietti R, Manzillo E, Nappa S,
Colomba A, Abbadessa V, Prestileo T, Mancuso S, Ferrari C, Pizzaferri P, Filice
G, Minoli L, Bruno R, Novati S, Baldelli F, Tinca M, Petrelli E, Cioppi A,
Alberici F, Ruggieri A, Menichetti F, Martinelli C, De Stefano C, La Gala A,
Ballardini G, Rizzo E, Magnani G, Ursitti MA, Arlotti M, Ortolani P, Cauda R,
Dianzani F, Ippolito G, Antinori A, Antonucci G, D'Elia S, Narciso P, Petrosillo 
N, Vullo V, De Luca A, Bacarelli A, Zaccarelli M, Acinapura R, De Longis P,
Brandi A, Trotta MP, Noto P, Lichtner M, Capobianchi MR, Carletti F, Girardi E,
Pezzotti P, Rezza G, Mura MS, Mannazzu M, Caramello P, Di Perri G, Soranzo ML,
Orofino GC, Arnaudo I, Bonasso M, Grossi PA, Basilico C, Poggio A, Bottari G,
Raise E, Ebo F, De Lalla F, Tositti G, Resta F, Loso K, Cozzi-Lepri A.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate the incidence of newly acquired syphilis (n-syphilis) and 
hepatitis B infection (n-hepatitis B) in I.Co.N.A. and to evaluate the impact of 
HAART, calendar date and risk group.
METHODS: Cohort study: Incidence was calculated by person-years analyses. Poisson
regression was used for the multivariate model.
RESULTS: The rate of n-syphilis was 23.4/1,000 PYFU and it increased over time;
HIV transmission risk was the most important predictor: men who have sex with men
(MSM) had a considerable higher risk (RR 5.92, 95% CI 2.95-12.13 vs IDU/exIDU,
p<0.0001). The rate of n-hepatitis B was 12.2/1,000 PYFU; it declined in recent
years and halved per 10 years age. Patients with HIV-RNA<500 copies/ml had a 60% 
reduced risk of n-hepatitis B if they were treated with HAART compared with not
treated individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: In our population, the use of HAART was not associated with a higher
risk of newly acquired sexually transmitted diseases (STD). Suppressive HAART was
associated with a lower risk of HbsAg seroconversion. Incidence of n-hepatitis B 
has recently been declining possibly due to herd immunity provided by vaccination
policies. The risk of acquiring n-syphilis has increased over time and it is
higher in the population of MSM compared with other categories of HIV exposure.

PMID: 18231722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Inflamm Res. 2007 Nov;56(11):439-46. doi: 10.1007/s00011-007-6078-6.

Expression profiles of cytokines and chemokines in murine MDR1a-/- colitis.

Masunaga Y(1), Noto T, Suzuki K, Takahashi K, Shimizu Y, Morokata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Pharmacology Research Laboratories, Institute for
Drug Discovery Research, Astellas Pharma Inc., 1-6, Kashima 2-Chome, Yodogawa-ku,
Osaka, 532-8514, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: MDR1a-/- mice spontaneously develop colitis as the result of imperfect
epithelial barrier derived from MDR1a deficiency in the large intestine; however,
the pathogenesis is not well understood. This study investigated the expression
profiles of cytokines and chemokines in murine MDR1a-/- colitis.
METHODS: MDR1a-/- and wild-type FVB mice were monitored from the 6th to the 16th 
week of age. Production of various cytokines and chemokines in the large
intestine and mesenteric lymph node (MLN) cells was examined.
RESULTS: Inflammatory cell infiltration, IL-1beta production, and MPO activity
were aberrantly enhanced in the tissue of MDR1a-/- mice. Under various stimuli,
MLN cells produced higher levels of Th1-type (IFN-gamma, IL-2, and IL-12) and
proinflammatory (IL-1beta and TNF-alpha) cytokines. Inflammatory chemokines
MIP-2/CXCL2, KC/CXCL1, MIP-1alpha/CCL3, MCP-1/CCL2, and RANTES/CCL5 were also
markedly upregulated in the tissue.
CONCLUSION: Since the expression profiles of cytokines and chemokines correspond 
well with those in human IBD, MDR1a-/- mouse is a useful model for the analysis
of IBD pathophysiology.

PMID: 18224285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008 Apr;52(4):1221-9. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01164-07.
Epub 2008 Jan 22.

Spontaneous deletion of the methicillin resistance determinant, mecA, partially
compensates for the fitness cost associated with high-level vancomycin resistance
in Staphylococcus aureus.

Noto MJ(1), Fox PM, Archer GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University
School of Medicine, McGuire Hall Room 103, 1112 East Clay Street, Richmond,
Virginia.

Treatment of infections caused by Staphylococcus aureus is often confounded by
the bacterium's ability to develop resistance to chemotherapeutic agents.
Methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) arises through the acquisition of
staphylococcal chromosomal cassette mec (SCCmec), a genomic island containing the
methicillin resistance determinant, mecA. In contrast, resistance to vancomycin
can result from exposure to the drug, a mechanism that is not dependent upon a
gene acquisition event. Here we describe three MRSA strains that became resistant
to vancomycin during passage in the presence of increasing concentrations of the 
drug. In each case two derivative strains were isolated, one that had lost mecA
and one that retained mecA during passage. Strain 5836VR lost mecA by the
site-specific chromosomal excision of SCCmec, while the other two strains
(strains 3130VR and VP32) deleted portions of their SCCmec elements in a manner
that appeared to involve IS431. Conversion to vancomycin resistance caused a
decrease in the growth rate that was partially compensated for by the deletion of
mecA. In mixed-culture competition experiments, vancomycin-resistant strains that
lacked mecA readily outcompeted their mecA-containing counterparts, suggesting
that the loss of mecA during conversion to vancomycin resistance was advantageous
to the organism.

PMCID: PMC2292509
PMID: 18212094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Adolesc Health. 2008 Feb;42(2):111-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2007.09.024.

Clinical efficacy and safety of parenteral nutrition in adolescent girls with
anorexia nervosa.

Diamanti A(1), Basso MS, Castro M, Bianco G, Ciacco E, Calce A, Caramadre AM,
Noto C, Gambarara M.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology and Nutrition Unit, Children's Hospital Bambino Gesù, Rome,
Italy. diamanti@opbg.net

Comment in
    J Adolesc Health. 2009 Apr;44(4):410-1; author reply 411-2.
    J Adolesc Health. 2008 Feb;42(2):109-10.

PURPOSE: Anorexia nervosa (AN) is a common chronic disorder characterized by
severe malnutrition and psychological disturbances. Parenteral nutrition (PN) is 
not usually used in nutritional rehabilitation of AN. The aim of our study was to
retrospectively evaluate the indications, clinical efficacy, and safety of PN as 
assessed by short- and long-term outcomes in AN inpatient girls.
METHODS: During the last 10 years a total of 198 inpatients were included in our 
study: 104 (53%) received oral and parenteral refeeding (group A) and 94 (47%)
oral refeeding alone (group B). For each nutritional treatment, clinical efficacy
was evaluated by short- and long-term outcomes, and safety was assessed by
complication rate.
RESULTS: Short-term outcome assessment indicated weekly weight gain and maximum
caloric intake to be higher in PN-treated patients. Long-term outcome evaluation 
showed rehospitalization and recovery rate to be similar in the two groups, but
failure of first nutritional rehabilitation requiring PN significantly greater in
group B (17.5%) than in group A (3%) (p = .01). The number of complications was
significantly higher in group A than in group B (p = .004), although all
complications resolved.
CONCLUSION: Among all nutritional rehabilitation strategies, PN offers an
alternative and safe way to successfully treat AN patients. Presence of clinical 
complications and reduced compliance with individual, group, and family therapy
seem to be the main indications for PN, as it promptly improves nutritional
status. At pediatric and adolescent ages, psychological disturbances can also
contraindicate the use of enteral nutrition, and therefore represent an
additional indication for PN.

PMID: 18207088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Acta Neurochir Suppl. 2008;102:311-6.

Cerebral blood flow thresholds predicting new hypoattenuation areas due to
macrovascular ischemia during the acute phase of severe and complicated
aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. A preliminary study.

Chieregato A(1), Tanfani A, Noto A, Fronza S, Cocciolo F, Fainardi E.

Author information: 
(1)UO Anestesia e Rianimazione, Dipartimento di Emergenza, AUSL-Cesena, Ospedale 
M. Bufalini, Viale Ghirotti, 286, 47023 Cesena, Italy. achiere@ausl-cesena.emr.it

BACKGROUND: Focal ischemia may affect patients with aneurysmal subarachnoid
hemorrhage (SAH), and the potential evolution of cerebral infarction may greatly 
influence the patients' outcome. The aim of the study was to assess the values of
regional cortical cerebral blood flow (rCBF) thresholds predictive for ischemia
during the acute phase of SAH.
METHODS: In 34 patients affected by poor grade or complicated SAH, 52 pairs of
Xenon-CT (Xe-CT) studies of regional CBF were analyzed, in which the follow-up
Xe-CT study was obtained no later than 72 hours after the baseline study.
Corresponding cortical ROIs were placed in the perimeter of the cortex on both
the Xe-CT studies. A blinded, experienced neuroradiologist classified for each
ROI, the development of a new hypoattenuation at the unenhanced CT images
included in the follow-up Xe-CT, while another independent investigator collected
rCBF levels of the ROI in the baseline Xe-CT study.
FINDINGS: New hypoattenuation developed in 3.94% of the ROIs in the paired
follow-up Xe-CT studies, and these evolving ROIs were associated with a lower
rCBF in baseline Xe-CT. However, the positive predictive value of rCBF levels for
the development of new hypoattenuation was only moderately predictive (28.3%) for
very low physiological values (5 ml/100gr/min).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that there is no absolute rCBF threshold
ofischemia in severe and complicated SAH patients and that the rCBF values are
only moderately predictive at levels lower than previously described.

PMID: 19388336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Psychoactive Drugs. 2007 Sep;39(3):301-6.

Death by drug overdose: impact on families.

da Silva EA(1), Noto AR, Formigoni ML.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Dependência de Drogas, Departamento de Psicobiologia, Universidade 
Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. eroy@psicbio.epm.br

Death by overdose is loaded with social/moral stigmas, in addition to strong
feelings of anger, helplessness, guilt and shame in the families. The objective
of this study was to analyze the impact of these feelings on families facing
death by overdose. Qualitative methodology was used to study six families with a 
history of death by overdose of one of their members. The interview was open, and
guided by the question "What did you feel with the death of your family member by
overdose and what was the impact of this death on your family as a whole?" The
families were grouped into two categories: families who knew about the drug use
of their family member, and families who were not aware of it. The reports show
that secrecy regarding drug use followed by death by overdose arouses feelings of
anger, guilt, helplessness, and deprives the family members of information that
could allow them to take action. As regards families that were aware of the drug 
use, there seems to be a "veiled preparation" for a possible death by overdose,
bringing about ambivalent situations of grief and relief. The report stresses how
disturbing it is to lose a family member by overdose, and points to the need for 
psychological support for those families.

PMID: 18159785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Bacteriol. 2008 Feb;190(4):1276-83. Epub 2007 Dec 14.

Gene acquisition at the insertion site for SCCmec, the genomic island conferring 
methicillin resistance in Staphylococcus aureus.

Noto MJ(1), Kreiswirth BN, Monk AB, Archer GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth School of Medicine, Richmond, VA
23298, USA.

Staphylococcus aureus becomes resistant to methicillin by acquiring a genomic
island, known as staphylococcal chromosome cassette mec (SCCmec), which contains 
the methicillin resistance determinant, mecA. SCCmec is site-specifically
integrated into the staphylococcal chromosome at a locus known as the SCCmec
attachment site (attB). In an effort to gain a better understanding of the
potential that methicillin-sensitive S. aureus (MSSA) isolates have for acquiring
SCCmec, the nucleotide sequences of attB and surrounding DNA regions were
examined in a diverse collection of 42 MSSA isolates. The chromosomal region
surrounding attB varied among the isolates studied and appears to be a common
insertion point for acquired foreign DNA. Insertions of up to 15.1 kb were found 
containing open reading frames with homology to enterotoxin genes,
restriction-modification systems, transposases, and several sequences that have
not been previously described in staphylococci. Two groups, containing eight and 
four isolates, had sequences found in known SCCmec elements, suggesting SCCmec
elements may have evolved through repeated DNA insertions at this locus. In
addition, the attB sequences of the majority of MSSA isolates in this collection 
differ from the attB sequences of strains for which integrase-mediated SCCmec
insertion or excision has been demonstrated, suggesting that some S. aureus
isolates may lack the ability to site-specifically integrate SCCmec into their
chromosomes.

PMCID: PMC2238224
PMID: 18083809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Thromb Haemost. 2007 Dec;98(6):1362-7.

Interleukin 6 plasma levels predict with high sensitivity and specificity
coronary stenosis detected by coronary angiography.

Noto D(1), Cottone S, Baldassare Cefalù A, Vadalà A, Barbagallo CM, Rizzo M,
Pernice V, Minà M, Fayer F, Cerasola G, Notarbartolo A, Rocco Averna M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Emerging Disease, Via del Vespro 141,
I-90127 Palermo, Italy.

In recent years new biomarkers able to measure the coronary atherosclerotic
burden have been investigated. The aim of the present study was: i) to measure
plasma levels of four biomarkers: C reactive protein (CRP), soluble intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1), interleukin 6 (IL-6), 8-isosprostane (8-ISO), in a
series of patients undergoing coronary angiography; ii) to assess the power of
the biomarkers to predict critical coronary stenosis detected by angiography. The
study population consisted of a group of 438 subjects undergoing coronary
angiography; 160 patients with 0, 1, 2, or 3 critical vessels were selected, and 
biomarkers plasma levels were measured in plasma samples obtained before the
procedure. The most predictive biomarker was then assayed in 120 patients with
critical stenosis and 120 unmatched patients without stenosis. CRP, sICAM-1, IL-6
and 8-ISO plasma levels increased with the number of diseased vessels. All
biomarkers were good predictors of critical stenosis (receiver-operator-curve
[ROC] areas; CRP = 0.880, IL-6 = 0.936, sICAM-1 = 0.907, 8-ISO = 0.873). IL-6 was
confirmed in an expanded sample of 240 subjects to be the best predictor with a
ROC area = 0.959. With a threshold of 3.6 ng/l, a 100% sensitivity (120/120) and 
a 90% specificity (108/120) was observed. In conclusion, IL-6, sICAM-1, CRP and
8-ISO are predictive of CAD. IL-6 predicts critical coronary stenosis with the
highest sensitivity and specificity.

PMID: 18064337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Dev Cell. 2007 Dec;13(6):884-96.

Live imaging and genetic analysis of mouse notochord formation reveals regional
morphogenetic mechanisms.

Yamanaka Y(1), Tamplin OJ, Beckers A, Gossler A, Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental & Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

The node and notochord have been extensively studied as signaling centers in the 
vertebrate embryo. The morphogenesis of these tissues, particularly in mouse, is 
not well understood. Using time-lapse live imaging and cell lineage tracking, we 
show the notochord has distinct morphogenetic origins along the
anterior-posterior axis. The anterior head process notochord arises independently
of the node by condensation of dispersed cells. The trunk notochord is derived
from the node and forms by convergent extension. The tail notochord forms by
node-derived progenitors that actively migrate toward the posterior. We also
reveal distinct genetic regulation within these different regions. We show that
Foxa2 compensates for and genetically interacts with Noto in the trunk notochord,
and that Noto has an evolutionarily conserved role in regulating axial versus
paraxial cell fate. Therefore, we propose three distinct regions within the mouse
notochord, each with unique morphogenetic origins.

PMID: 18061569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Mol Cell Probes. 2008 Apr;22(2):110-4. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

PCR-based identification of short deletion/insertions and single nucleotide
substitutions in genotyping of splotch (Pax3sp) and truncate (Nototc) mouse
mutants.

Mitrecic D(1), Mavric S, Gajovic S.

Author information: 
(1)Croatian Institute for Brain Research, School of Medicine, Salata 12, HR-10000
Zagreb, Croatia. dominic@mef.hr

Splotch (Pax3(sp)) and truncate (Noto(tc)) are spontaneously arisen mouse mutants
with disturbed embryo development. Splotch carries a Pax3 mutation and it is
characterized by the neural tube defect. Corresponding mutation in human causes
Waardenburg syndrome. Truncate is Noto mutant with disturbed development of the
caudal notochord. In order to establish easy genotyping procedure of these
mutations, it was tested whether simple PCRs with single primer pairs could be
used for this purpose. As it was necessary to differentiate sequence variants on 
the scale of one to several nucleotides, the approach referred to as "3' variable
primer ends" was applied. The method was based on the presence of discriminating 
nucleotides at the 3' end of the primer sequence. This approach was successfully 
applied in genotyping adult mice and embryos of splotch with a 6 bp
deletion/insertion and truncate with a single nucleotide substitution. Described 
genotyping approach facilitates recognizing of these mutations and it could be in
general used for detection of sequence differences in one to several nucleotides.

PMID: 18042345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Chir Ital. 2007 Sep-Oct;59(5):693-9.

Is sentinel lymph node biopsy more accurate than axillary dissection for staging 
nodal involvement in breast cancer patients?

Marrazzo A(1), Taormina P, Gebbiab V, David M, Riili I, Lo Gerfo D, Casà L, Noto 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology and Clinical Application, University of
Palermo, Palermo.

Today evaluation of axillary involvement can be routinely performed with the
technique of sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB). One of the greatest advantages of
SLNB is the nearly total absence of local postoperative complications. It is
important to understand whether SLNB is better than axillary lymph-node
dissection (ALND) for staging axillary nodal involvement. The aim of the study
was to evaluate the axillary staging accuracy comparing three different methods: 
axillary dissection, sentinel node biopsy with the traditional 4-6 sections and
sentinel node biopsy with complete analysis of the lymph node. 527 consecutive
patients (525 females and 2 males) with invasive breast cancer < or = 3 cm and
clinically negative axillary nodes were divided into 3 different groups: group A 
treated with axillary dissection, group B treated with sentinel nodal biopsy
analysed with 4-6 sections, and group C treated with sentinel node biopsy with
analysis of the entire node. All patients underwent a quadrantectomy to treat the
tumor. Group differences and statistical significance were assessed by ANOVA. The
percentages of N+ in group A and group B were 25.80% and 28% respectively, while 
in the third group it rose to 45%, or almost half the patients. The differences
among the three groups were statistically significant (p = 0.02). From our
analysis of the data it emerges that axillary dissection and sentinel node biopsy
with analysis of 4-6 sections have the same accuracy in staging the nodal status 
of the axilla; analysis of the entire sentinel lymph node revealed an increased
number of patients with axillary nodal involvement, proving more powerful in
predicting nodal stage. SLNB with complete examination of the SLN removed can be 
considered the best method for axillary staging in breast cancer patients with
clinical negative nodes. In our study, the percentage of metastases encountered
after complete examination of SLN was 45% compared to the accuracy of axillary
dissection that was only 25.8%. Moreover, this approach avoids the useless
axillary cleaning in about 55-60% of cases, decreasing postoperative morbidity
and mortality.

PMID: 18019642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Chir Ital. 2007 Sep-Oct;59(5):687-91.

Surgical treatment of early breast cancer in day surgery.

Marrazzo A(1), Taormina P, David M, Riili I, Lo Gerfo D, Casà L, Noto A,
Mercadante S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology and Clinical Application, University of
Palermo, Palermo.

Quadrantectomy and associated sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) is currently
employed in most breast surgery centres as the gold standard in the treatment of 
early breast cancer. This approach has a modest morbidity and can usually be
performed in a day-surgery regimen, leading to best acceptance by the patients.
This reports outlines the experience of our Breast Unit with quadrantectomy and
SLNB in day surgery for early breast cancer. One hundred patients presenting to
our institution with primary invasive breast cancer measuring less than 3 cm and 
clinically negative axillary nodes underwent quadrantectomy and SLNB in day
surgery. For 60 women with breast cancer the sentinel node was negative, so the
only definitive surgical treatment was performed in the day-surgery regimen; 40
patients with positive sentinel nodes were hospitalised a second time for
axillary dissection. In these patients that needed clearance of the axilla, SLNB 
was performed on the only positive node in 22 cases (55%). None of the patients
admitted for quadrantectomy and SLNB in day surgery required re-hospitalisation
after discharge. All patients proved to be fully satisfied with early discharge
from hospital when questioned on the occasion of subsequent monitoring.
Short-stay surgical programs in early invasive breast cancer treatment are
feasible today owing to the availability of less invasive approaches such as
quadrantectomy and SLNB. There are two main pointers to a distinct advantage for 
this kind of approach, i.e. recovery and psychological adjustment. Recovery from 
surgery is faster and the patient tends to play down the seriousness of the
operation and to have a better mental attitude to neoplastic disease. Moreover,
when performing quadrantectomy with SLNB in day surgery fewer than 50% of breast 
cancer patients (40% in our experience) require another surgical treatment,
concluding the surgery in a single session.

PMID: 18019641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Chir Ital. 2007 Sep-Oct;59(5):671-7.

[Laparoscopic incisional hernia repair: our experience and review of the
literature].

[Article in Italian]

Martorana G(1), Carlucci M, Alia C, Barrianco G, Iacopinelli SM, Labruzzo C, Noto
N, Restivo FP, Viola M, Mastrandrea G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto S. Raffaele, Fondazione G., - 90015 Cefalù, Palermo.

Incisional hernia after laparotomy closure continues to be an important
postoperative complication. Historically, the best results have been obtained
with the open Rives-Stoppa technique. This approach is done by fixing a
prosthetic mesh behind the posterior fascia of the rectus muscle. The
laparoscopic approach allows similar mesh placement with minimal dissection. In
this study, we review the scientific literature and report our experience,
describing the clinical outcome of patients who have undergone laparoscopic
repair of ventral hernias. After describing the standard technique of
laparoscopic insertion of a prosthesis, we reviewed the records of all our
patients who underwent such a procedure from March 2004 to January 2006. A
laparoscopic approach was attempted in all patients. The patients' demographic
characteristics, operative details and outcomes were recorded. Of 55 patients
scheduled to undergo laparoscopic incisional herniorrhaphy, conversion to an open
procedure was necessary in 2/55 (3.6%). All the remaining 53 patients (31 men and
22 women; mean age 51.8 years) underwent laparoscopic repair of ventral hernias. 
The mean fascial defect size was 98.3 cm (range: 5-200 cm). In 52/53 patients
(98%) a dual mesh was used. 40% of patients (22/53) had multiple wall defects.
The mean operative time was 90 minutes (range: 32-190 minutes). The average
hospital stay was 2.6 days (range: 1-16 days). 50/53 patients (94.3%) tolerated
an oral diet 24 hours after the operation. 49/53 (92.4%) returned to normal
working activity within two weeks. The percentage of complications amounted to
13% (7/55), with 5.6% (5/53) minor and 3.7% (2/55) major complications. In one
patient it was necessary to remove the mesh 6 months after surgery because of
pain. The recurrence rate of 5.6% confirms the permanence of the repair. The
follow-up was 12 months for 44/53 patients and 6 months for 9/53 patients. The
procedure for incisional hernia repair used in our study may be performed safely 
with low complication and recurrence rates and should be considered for the
majority of incisional hernia repairs requiring a mesh prosthesis.

PMID: 18019639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Molecules. 2005 Feb 28;10(2):383-93.

Diastereoselective synthesis of 2-phenylselenenyl-1,3-anti-diols and
2-phenylselenenyl-1,3-anti-azido-alcohols via hydroxy and azido-selenenylation
reactions.

Riela S(1), Aprile C, Gruttadauria M, Meo PL, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica E. Paternò, Università di Palermo, Viale
delle Scienze, Parcod'Orleans II, Pad. 17, 90128, Palermo, Italy.

A method to synthesize 2-phenylselenenyl-1,3-anti-diols and 2-phenyl-
selenenyl-1,3-anti-azidoalcohols via hydroxy- or azido-selenenylation of
trans-allylic alcohols is reported. Moreover, the first example of
hydroxyl-selenenylation of an allylic azide is presented. Yields ranging from
moderate to good and diastereomeric ratios up to 95:5 are achieved.

PMID: 18007309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Metabolism. 2007 Dec;56(12):1601-11.

Dietary conjugated linoleic acid decreases adipocyte size and favorably modifies 
adipokine status and insulin sensitivity in obese, insulin-resistant rats.

Noto A(1), Zahradka P, Yurkova N, Xie X, Truong H, Nitschmann E, Ogborn MR,
Taylor CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutritional Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
MB, Canada.

Conjugated linoleic acids (CLA) have been shown to alter adiposity in some
species with varying effects on insulin resistance. The objective of this 8-week 
study was to investigate the effects of feeding a CLA mixture (1.5%, wt/wt) on
adipocyte size, insulin sensitivity, adipokine status, and adipose lipid
composition in fa/fa vs lean Zucker rats. The fa/fa CLA-fed rats had smaller
adipocytes and improved insulin sensitivity compared with fa/fa rats fed the
control diet. Conjugated linoleic acids did not affect select markers of adipose 
differentiation, lipid filling, lipid uptake, or oxidation. Dietary CLA, compared
with the control diet, reduced circulating leptin and elevated fasting serum
adiponectin concentrations in fa/fa rats. Adipose resistin messenger RNA levels
were greater in fa/fa CLA-fed rats compared with fa/fa control rats. CLA did not 
markedly alter adipose phospholipid fatty acid composition, and the changes in
the triacylglycerol fatty acid composition reflected a lower delta-9 desaturase
index of CLA-fed vs control-fed rats. In conclusion, CLA reduced adipocyte size
and favorably modified adipokine status and insulin sensitivity in fa/fa Zucker
rats.

PMID: 17998009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2007 Nov;104(11):1625-31.

[A case of alveolar hydatid disease of the liver for which progression was seen
on CT images].

[Article in Japanese]

Akutsu N(1), Sakamoto H, Nakagaki T, Sato H, Matsui T, Kobayashi T, Takamura T,
Noto H, Katsuramaki T, Hirata K, Imai K, Shinomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hakodate Goryoukaku Hospital.

A 59-year-old woman with autoimmune hepatitis was referred to our hospital for
examination of a liver tumor detected in 2001. A CT scan showed a hypovascular
mass, and a liver biopsy revealed the presence of an inflammatory pseudotumor. A 
June 2003 CT scan showed enlargement of the tumor and polycystic pathological
changes. Echinococcus antibody was positive, and a diagnosis of liver hydatid
disease was made. A liver left lobe resection was performed. CT was useful in
this case for detecting change in the lesion and for making the diagnosis of
liver hydatid disease.

PMID: 17984611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Neurophysiol. 2008 Jan;99(1):220-30. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

Premotor inhibitory neurons carry signals related to saccade adaptation in the
monkey.

Kojima Y(1), Iwamoto Y, Robinson FR, Noto CT, Yoshida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurophysiology, Doctoral Program in Kansei Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Cerebellar output changes during motor learning. How these changes cause
alterations of motoneuron activity and movement remains an unresolved question
for voluntary movements. To answer this question, we examined premotor neurons
for saccadic eye movement. Previous studies indicate that cells in the fastigial 
oculomotor region (FOR) within the cerebellar nuclei on one side exhibit a
gradual increase in their saccade-related discharge as the amplitude of
ipsiversive saccades adaptively decreases. This change in FOR activity could
cause the adaptive change in saccade amplitude because neurons in the FOR project
directly to the brain stem region containing premotor burst neurons (BNs). To
test this possibility, we recorded the activity of saccade-related burst neurons 
in the area that houses premotor inhibitory burst neurons (IBNs) and examined
their discharge during amplitude-reducing adaptation elicited by intrasaccadic
target steps. We specifically analyzed their activity for off-direction
(contraversive) saccades, in which the IBN activity would increase to reduce
saccade size. Before adaptation, 29 of 42 BNs examined discharged, at least
occasionally, for contraversive saccades. As the amplitude of contraversive
saccades decreased adaptively, half of BNs with off-direction spike activity
showed an increase in the number of spikes (14/29) or an earlier occurrence of
spikes (7/14). BNs that were silent during off-direction saccades before
adaptation remained silent after adaptation. These results indicate that the
changes in the off-direction activity of BNs are closely related to adaptive
changes in saccade size and are appropriate to cause these changes.

PMID: 17977929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Biol Chem. 2007 Dec 14;282(50):36403-11. Epub 2007 Oct 2.

Metal-catalyzed oxidation of the Werner syndrome protein causes loss of catalytic
activities and impaired protein-protein interactions.

Harrigan JA(1), Piotrowski J, Di Noto L, Levine RL, Bohr VA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, NIA, National Institutes of Health,
Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

Metal-catalyzed oxidation reactions target amino acids in the metal binding
pocket of proteins. Such oxidation reactions generally result in either
preferential degradation of the protein or accumulation of a catalytically
inactive pool of protein with age. Consistently, levels of oxidized proteins have
been shown to increase with age. The segmental, progeroid disorder Werner
syndrome results from loss of the Werner syndrome protein (WRN). WRN is a member 
of the RecQ family of DNA helicases and possesses exonuclease and ATP-dependent
helicase activities. Furthermore, each of the helicase and exonuclease domains of
WRN contains a metal binding pocket. In this report we examined for
metal-catalyzed oxidation of WRN in the presence of iron or copper. We found that
WRN was oxidized in vitro by iron but not by copper. Iron-mediated oxidation
resulted in the inhibition of both WRN helicase and exonuclease activities.
Oxidation of WRN also inhibited binding to several known protein partners. In
addition, we did not observe degradation of oxidized WRN by the 20 S proteasome
in vitro. Finally, exposure of cells to hydrogen peroxide resulted in oxidation
of WRN in vivo. Therefore, our results demonstrate that WRN undergoes
metal-catalyzed oxidation in the presence of iron, and iron-mediated oxidation of
WRN likely results in the accumulation of a catalytically inactive form of the
protein, which may contribute to age-related phenotypes.

PMID: 17911100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Free Radic Biol Med. 2007 Nov 1;43(9):1255-62. Epub 2007 Jul 4.

Decreased plasma soluble RAGE in patients with hypercholesterolemia: effects of
statins.

Santilli F(1), Bucciarelli L, Noto D, Cefalù AB, Davì V, Ferrante E, Pettinella
C, Averna MR, Ciabattoni G, Davì G.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence on Aging, Department of Medicine, and Department of Drug 
Sciences, University of Chieti G. d'Annunzio Schools of Medicine and Pharmacy,
66013 Chieti, Italy.

Comment in
    Free Radic Biol Med. 2007 Nov 1;43(9):1231-2.

The receptor for advanced glycation endproducts (RAGE) is overexpressed at sites 
of vascular pathology. A soluble RAGE isoform (sRAGE) neutralizes the
ligand-mediated damage by acting as a decoy. We hypothesized that in
hypercholesterolemia up-regulation of the ligand-RAGE axis may bridge impairment 
of nitric oxide biosynthesis with oxidative stress. We measured in 60
hypercholesterolemic patients and 20 controls plasma total sRAGE levels, urinary 
8-iso-prostaglandin (PG) F(2alpha) excretion, and plasma levels of asymmetric
dimethylarginine (ADMA). The effects of two structurally different statins
(pravastatin and atorvastatin) on these parameters were analyzed in 20
hypercholesterolemic subjects free of vascular disease. Plasma sRAGE was
significantly lower, ADMA and urinary 8-iso-PGF(2alpha) were higher, in
hypercholesterolemic versus normocholesterolemic patients. Patients on statin
treatment with previous myocardial infarction had lower 8-iso-PGF(2alpha), higher
sRAGE, and unchanged ADMA levels compared to subjects free of vascular disease.
On multivariate regression analysis only 8-iso-PGF(2alpha) and ADMA predicted
sRAGE levels. An 8-week treatment with either statin was associated with a
significant reduction in urinary 8-iso-PGF(2alpha), whereas only atorvastatin
raised sRAGE levels near to normal values, with no change in ADMA levels. sRAGE
might serve as an endogenous protecting factor for accelerated atherosclerosis
mediated by oxidative stress and endothelial dysfunction in hypercholesterolemia.

PMID: 17893038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Oct 2;104(40):15765-70. Epub 2007 Sep 20.

The mouse homeobox gene Noto regulates node morphogenesis, notochordal
ciliogenesis, and left right patterning.

Beckers A(1), Alten L, Viebahn C, Andre P, Gossler A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Oct 30;104(44):17554.

The mouse homeobox gene Noto represents the homologue of zebrafish floating head 
(flh) and is expressed in the organizer node and in the nascent notochord.
Previous analyses suggested that Noto is required exclusively for the formation
of the caudal part of the notochord. Here, we show that Noto is also essential
for node morphogenesis, controlling ciliogenesis in the posterior notochord, and 
the establishment of laterality, whereas organizer functions in
anterior-posterior patterning are apparently not compromised. In mutant embryos, 
left-right asymmetry of internal organs and expression of laterality markers was 
randomized. Mutant posterior notochord regions were variable in size and shape,
cilia were shortened with highly irregular axonemal microtubuli, and basal bodies
were, in part, located abnormally deep in the cytoplasm. The transcription factor
Foxj1, which regulates the dynein gene Dnahc11 and is required for the correct
anchoring of basal bodies in lung epithelial cells, was down-regulated in mutant 
nodes. Likewise, the transcription factor Rfx3, which regulates cilia growth, was
not expressed in Noto mutants, and various other genes important for cilia
function or assembly such as Dnahc5 and Nphp3 were down-regulated. Our results
establish Noto as an essential regulator of node morphogenesis and ciliogenesis
in the posterior notochord, and suggest Noto acts upstream of Foxj1 and Rfx3.

PMCID: PMC2000419
PMID: 17884984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Hosp Infect. 2007 Sep;67(1):102-4. Epub 2007 Aug 27.

Outbreak of multi-resistant Corynebacterium striatum infection in an Italian
general intensive care unit.

Iaria C, Stassi G, Costa GB, Biondo C, Gerace E, Noto A, Spinella SG, David A,
Cascio A.

PMID: 17719684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Transplantation. 2007 Aug 27;84(4):527-31.

Alloimmunization to red cell antigens in liver and multivisceral transplant
patients.

Shariatmadar S(1), Pyrsopoulos NT, Vincek V, Noto TA, Tzakis AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine/Jackson
Memorial Hospital, Miami, FL, USA. sshariat@med.miami.edu

BACKGROUND: Alloimmunization to red blood cell (RBC) antigens can significantly
impact transfusion support of patients undergoing solid-organ transplantation.
This study evaluated the incidence of clinically significant RBC alloantibodies
(abs) in 2000 consecutive adults receiving liver (OLTX), intestinal (ITX) or
multivisceral (MVT) transplants.
METHODS: From January 1991 to May 2006, 2000 patients underwent OLTX (n=1892),
MVT (n=74), or ITX (n=34). Blood sample for serologic investigation was submitted
to the transfusion service no later than 4 hr before surgery. The presence of
clinically significant RBC abs before transplant with subsequent transfusion
requirements, the incidence of delayed transfusion reactions, and de novo abs
after transplant were evaluated.
RESULTS: One hundred fifteen patients (5.75%) had clinically significant RBC abs 
before transplant, with 56.7% directed against Rh system antigens. Forty-six
(40%) had multiple abs. A mean of 18 packed RBC units (U) were transfused per
patient. Patients requiring >20 U (n=34) or those with multiple abs received
antigen-negative units for the first 5-10 U when antibody was still present,
switched to antigen-unscreened units during massive blood loss and returned to
antigen-negative units for the last 5-10 U transfused. Twelve patients (0.6%)
developed de novo abs posttransplant. Twenty-two (1.1%) had delayed serologic
transfusion reaction. All patients were successfully managed without delay in
initiation of surgery or hemolytic complications.
CONCLUSION: RBC alloimmunization can present a special challenge to solid-organ
transplantation. Early serologic testing of the recipient pretransplant and
prompt communication between the transfusion service and transplant team
facilitates successful transfusion management of these patients.

PMID: 17713438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Lipids. 2006 Feb;41(2):179-88.

Conjugated linoleic acid reduces hepatic steatosis, improves liver function, and 
favorably modifies lipid metabolism in obese insulin-resistant rats.

Noto A(1), Zahradka P, Yurkova N, Xie X, Nitschmann E, Ogborn M, Taylor CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutritional Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada R3T 2N2.

CLA has been shown to induce or suppress excess liver lipid accumulation in
various animal models. Interestingly, the state of insulin resistance may be an
important modulator of this effect. The objective of the current study was to
determine how feeding a dietary CLA mixture would affect liver lipid accumulation
in insulin-resistant/obese and lean rats in relation to liver function,
lipidemia, liver TAG and phospholipid FA composition, and expression of hepatic
markers of FA transport, oxidation, and synthesis. Six-week-old fa/fa and lean
Zucker rats (n = 20/genotype) were fed either a 1.5% CLA mixture or a control
diet for 8 wk. CLA supplementation reduced liver lipid concentration of fa/fa
rats by 62% in concurrence with improved liver function (lower serum alanine
aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase) and favorable modification of the
serum lipoprotein profile (reduced VLDL and LDL and elevated HDL) compared with
controlfed fa/fa rats. The fa/fa genotype had two-thirds the amount of CLA (as % 
total FA) incorporated into liver TAG and phospholipids compared with the lean
genotype. In both genotypes, CLA altered the hepatic FA profile (TAG greater than
phospholipids) and these changes were explained by a desaturase enzyme index.
Liver-FA-binding protein and acyl CoA oxidase, markers of FA transport and
oxidation, respectively, were expressed at higher levels in CLA-fed fa/fa rats.
In summary, these results illustrate a strong relationship between the state of
insulin resistance and liver lipid metabolism and suggest that CLA acts to
favorably modify lipid metabolism in fa/fa Zucker rats.

PMID: 17707984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Cancer Res. 2007 Aug 15;67(16):7731-7.

Epigenetic modulation of estrogen receptor-alpha by pRb family proteins: a novel 
mechanism in breast cancer.

Macaluso M(1), Montanari M, Noto PB, Gregorio V, Bronner C, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center of
Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA. macaluso@temple.edu

Estrogen receptor-alpha (ER-alpha) plays a crucial role in normal breast
development and has also been linked to mammary carcinogenesis and clinical
outcome in breast cancer patients. However, ER-alpha gene expression can change
during the course of disease and, consequently, therapy resistance can occur. The
molecular mechanism governing ER-alpha transcriptional activity and/or silencing 
is still unclear. Here, we showed that the presence of a specific pRb2/p130
multimolecular complex on the ER-alpha promoter strongly correlates with the
methylation status of this gene. Furthermore, we suggested that pRb2/p130 could
cooperate with ICBP90 (inverted CCAAT box binding protein of 90 kDa) and DNA
methyltransferases in maintaining a specific methylation pattern of ER-alpha
gene. The sequence of epigenetic events for establishing and maintaining the
silenced state of ER-alpha gene can be locus- or pathway- specific, and the local
remodeling of ER-alpha chromatin structure by pRb2/p130 multimolecular complexes 
may influence its susceptibility to specific DNA methylation. Our novel
hypothesis could provide a basis for understanding how the complex pattern of
ER-alpha methylation and transcriptional silencing is generated and for
understanding the relationship between this pattern and its function during the
neoplastic process.

PMID: 17699777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Chir Ital. 2007 May-Jun;59(3):361-5.

[Thyroidectomy with LigaSure versus traditional thyroidectomy: our experience].

[Article in Italian]

Marrazzo A(1), Casà L, David M, Lo Gerfo D, Noto A, Riili I, Taormina P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Oncologia Sperimentale e Applicazioni Cliniche, Università
degli Studi di Palermo.

Over the past few decades the surgical strategy for both benign and malignant
thyroid diseases has undergone several changes. In particular, total
thyroidectomy today has become the routine operation for most thyroid diseases.
The complications of this surgical procedure, though of multifactorial
aetiopathogenesis, are often related to the efficacy of the haemostasis. Our aim 
in this study was to verify whether the use of the new LigaSure haemostatic
system is capable of reducing the incidence of these complications as well as
operative times and length of hospital stay as compared to the conventional
haemostatic procedures. Twenty-five patients were randomly assigned to
thyroidectomy with LigaSureTM (group A), and 25 to total thyroidectomy using the 
conventional haemostasis procedures (group B). Of these, 39 were women and 11
men, with a mean age +/- standard deviation of 52.26 +/- 13.57 years. In both
groups the thyroidectomy was performed according to the standard total
thyroidectomy surgical technique entailing the placement of two aspiration
drainages at the end of the operation. As regards the assessment of operative
times, these were significantly lower in thyroidectomy with LigaSureTM compared
to traditional thyroidectomy (duration: 60 +/- 14.8 min [range: 60-105) in group 
A versus 92.4 +/- 27.5 min [range: 70-150] in group B, p = 0.02). The total
amount of fluid drained postoperatively was substantially similar in the two
groups (145 +/- 80 cc in group A versus 140 +/- 64.1 cc in group B). The
incidence of postoperative complications was also similar in the two groups. We
had only one case of haemorrhage in a patient submitted to thyroidectomy with
LigaSureTM, 8 cases of transitory hypocalcaemia, 3 of which in patients with
LigaSure thyroidectomy and 5 in patients treated with traditional thyroidectomy
(p = 0.42), 2 cases of stupor of the recurrent nerve (1 in group A and 1 in group
B) and a single definitive recurrent lesion in a group B patient with carcinoma, 
in which the tumour infiltrated the recurrent nerve. We observed no cases of
definitive hypocalcaemia. The mean postoperative hospital stay of the patients in
group A was 1.88 +/- 0.44 days as against 2.2 +/- 0.41 days in group B. The
statistical analysis revealed a significant difference between the two groups (p 
= 0.01).

PMID: 17663377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Chir Ital. 2007 May-Jun;59(3):313-8.

Survival of breast cancer patients. Our experience.

Marrazzoa A(1), Taormina P, David M, Riili I, Casà L, Catalano F, Lo Gerfo D,
Noto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology and Clinical Application, University of
Palermo.

Life expectancy for patients with breast carcinoma has changed in Europe over the
last two decades. In Italy, the overall survival rate is about 77% at 5 years.
When considering the situation in Sicily, the EUROCARE 2 study examined survival 
data from the Ragusa Cancer Registry, showing that the curves are worse than in
other regions of Italy. Starting from these considerations we decide to evaluate 
whether these data from the Ragusa Cancer Registry corresponded to Palermo data. 
So we analysed data from 575 consecutive patients with breast cancer, treated in 
our Breast Unit from 1990 to 2003 according to the St. Gallen Recommendations and
followed for a median period of 5 years. The prognostic role of age, tumour size,
nodal status, TNM, stage, grading and hormonal receptors (OR, PR) were analysed
and survival curves at 5 and 10 years were produced using the actuarial survival 
methods. All causes of death were considered. The median follow-up was 33 months.
The Log rank test and univariate cox proportional model were used to demonstrate 
the association between prognostic factors and outcome. When considering T and N 
status, the curves showed an inverse correlation between survival and increases
in these parameters. Overall survival was 92.9% at 5 years and 81.4% at 10 years 
for T1, 78.4% at 5 years and 61.4% at 10 years for T2 and 40.8% for T3-T4 at 5
and 10 years. Overall survival for NO was 92.1% and 78.2%, respectively, at 5 and
10 years, but decreased to 72.0% and 59.9% at 5 and 10 years for N1. In N2
patients we found that only about 50% of patients were still alive at 5 and 10
years, while for N3 patients the figures were 57.2% and 40%, respectively.

PMID: 17663369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Vasc Access. 2002 Jul-Sep;3(3):114-9.

Diagnosis of intra vascular catheter-related infection.

Cicalini S(1), Palmieri F, Noto P, Boumis E, Petrosillo N.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Infectious Diseases Division, National Institute for Infectious Diseases
'L. Spallanzani', IRCCS, Rome - Italy.

The use of central vascular catheters (CVC) is associated with a substantial
number of complications, amongst which infections predominate. A diagnosis of
CVC-related infection usually requires catheter removal for culture.
Semiquantitative (roll-plate method) and quantitative methods (flush, vortex,
centrifugation or sonication methods) are the most reliable diagnostic
methodologies requiring catheter removal, because of their greater specificity.
The roll-plate method is the simplest and most commonly used technique. This
method only samples the external surface of the catheter, and is particularly
indicated for recently inserted catheters in which extraluminal colonisation is
the primary mechanism of infection. Luminal culture techniques, such as the
quantitative methods, may be more relevant for catheters that have been in place 
for a long period of time. However, in up to 85% of removed CVC the culture is
negative, and other diagnostic techniques that do not require catheter removal
have been proposed, including paired quantitative blood cultures, endoluminal
brushing, and differential time to positivity (DTP) of paired blood cultures.
DTP, that compares the time to positivity for qualitative cultures of blood
samples simultaneously drawn from the CVC and a peripheral vein, appears to be
the most reliable in the routine clinical practice since many hospitals use
automatic devices for qualitative blood culture positivity detection. More
recently catheter-sparing direct diagnostic methods, which include Gram stain and
acridin-orange leucocyte cytospin (AOLC) test, appeared to be especially useful
because of the rapidity of results and the ability to distinguish different
microorganisms, allowing early targeted antimicrobial therapy.

PMID: 17639472  [PubMed]


322. Inorg Chem. 2007 Aug 6;46(16):6529-34. Epub 2007 Jul 13.

Substituent effects on the structures of silver complexes with
monoazatrithia-12-crown-4 ethers bearing substituted aromatic rings.

Habata Y(1), Noto K, Osaka F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Toho University, Funabashi,
Chiba, Japan. habata@chem.sci.toho-u.ac.jp

New 4'-methoxybenzyl-, 4'-methylbenzyl-, benzyl-, 3',5'-difluorobenzyl-,
3',5'-dichlorobenzyl-, and 4'-nitrobenzyl-armed monoazatrithia-12-crown-4 ethers 
were prepared by the reductive amination of monoazatrithia-12-crown-4 with the
appropriate benzenecarbaldehyde in the presence of NaBH(OAc)3. Cold electrospray 
ionization mass spectrometry and X-ray crystallography show that silver complexes
with armed monoazatrithia-12-crown-4 ethers bearing aromatic side arms with
electron-donating groups or electron-withdrawing groups are coordination polymers
and trimers, respectively. The structures of the silver complexes were strongly
dependent on the strength of the CH...pi interactions, which are controlled by
substituent effects on the aromatic side arms.

PMID: 17630683  [PubMed]


323. Eur J Pharmacol. 2007 Oct 1;571(2-3):88-96. Epub 2007 Jun 26.

Mechanisms of HDAC inhibitor-induced thrombocytopenia.

Matsuoka H(1), Unami A, Fujimura T, Noto T, Takata Y, Yoshizawa K, Mori H,
Aramori I, Mutoh S.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Research Laboratories, Astellas Pharma Inc., 2 1-6 Kashima,
Yodogawa-ku, Osaka 532-8514, Japan. hideaki.matsuoka@us.astellas.com

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDAC inhibitors) are an emerging class of
anticancer agents. To elucidate the mechanism of HDAC inhibitor-induced
thrombocytopenia, we focused on the effects of HDAC inhibitors on megakaryocyte
differentiation and performed Affymetrix GeneChip analysis of human
megakaryocytic HEL cells treated with or without HDAC inhibitors. Here, we report
that GATA-1 and 10 haematopoietic factors (SCL, NF-E2, EKLF, Pleckstrin,
Thrombin-R, LMO2, PU.1, Fli-1, AML1, and TCF11) are transcriptionally repressed
by HDAC inhibitors in a similar pattern (R>0.98), and putative GATA-1-binding
sites are found in almost all promoters of these genes. In addition, luciferase
reporter assays reveal that mutations of GATA-1-binding sites in the GATA-1
promoter abolish its sensitivity to HDAC inhibitor-mediated down-regulation in
HEL cells. Further, this report also asserts that HDAC inhibitor increases
megakaryocyte counts and inhibits GATA-1 gene expression in rat spleen. Together,
these results suggest that HDAC inhibitors inhibit GATA-1 gene expression by
decreasing the transactivation function of GATA-1 itself, and that this may in
turn lead to a delay in megakaryocyte maturation and finally cause
thrombocytopenia. Our findings may help our understanding of the molecular
mechanism of HDAC inhibitor-mediated GATA-1 transcriptional repression and to
reduce the risk of HDAC inhibitor-induced thrombocytopenia.

PMID: 17628529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2007;30(5):283-8. Epub 2007 Jul 6.

Pulse pressure is an independent predictor of aortic stiffness in patients with
mild to moderate chronic kidney disease.

Stancanelli B(1), Malatino LS, Malaponte G, Noto P, Giuffrè E, Caruso A, Gagliano
C, Zoccolo AM, Puccia G, Castellino P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Systemic Diseases, University of Catania, Catania, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND: In patients with end-stage renal disease pulse wave velocity (PWV)
has been widely assessed, but its behavior in mild to moderate chronic kidney
disease (CKD) has been less investigated. We evaluated PWV in mild to moderate
CKD.
METHODS: We studied 31 patients with grade II-IV CKD. Aortic PWV (aPWV), aortic
and upper limb augmentation index, creatinine clearance, C-reactive protein,
serum fibrinogen, interleukin-1, interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor, albumin,
total and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and blood pressure were evaluated.
RESULTS: aPWV (7.95 +/- 0.64 m/s), but not augmentation index was significantly
higher (p = 0.03) in CKD patients than age-matched healthy subjects (aPWV: 6.24
+/- 0.43 m/s; upper limb: 32.8 +/- 1.9; aortic: 27.7 +/- 1.9). At univariate
regression analysis, aPWV was significantly correlated with age (r = 0.44; p =
0.013), interleukin-6 (r = 0.43; p = 0.027), pulse (r = 0.39; p = 0.029),
systolic blood pressure (r = 0.37; p = 0.038) and tumor necrosis factor (r =
0.39; p = 0.029). At multivariate analysis, pulse pressure was the only
significant independent determinant (beta = 0.37; p = 0.05) of aPWV.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study confirm an aPWV increase in mild to
moderate CKD and emphasize association between pulse pressure and PWV,
independently of renal failure.

2007 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 17622773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. New Microbiol. 2007 Apr;30(2):127-30.

Prospective study of BKV nephropathy in 117 renal transplant recipients.

Giraldi C(1), Noto A, Tenuta R, Greco F, Perugini D, Dodaro S, Spadafora M, Lo
Bianco AM, Savino O, Papalia T, Greco R, Bonofiglio R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Microbiologia e Virologia, PO "Annunziata" AO, Cosenza, Italy. 
gircri@virgilio.it

Nephropathy caused by poliomavirus (BKVAN) in transplant recipients is
responsible for the loss of the transplanted organ. In this study we suggest a
non-invasive diagnostic protocol for the early identification of BKVAN during
follow-up treatments. In 117 kidney transplant recipients follow-up was performed
every three months during a two year period after transplantation and a positive 
screening result was confirmed and assessed by quantitative assays (BKV DNA load 
in plasma and urine). The definitive diagnosis of BKV requires allograft biopsy. 
Of the 117 patients 4 had BKVAN (3.4%), and the consequential reduction of
immunosuppression improved kidney function and plasma clearance of the virus was 
achieved.

PMID: 17619256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Intern Med. 2007 Jul;262(1):104-12.

Effect of the -420C/G variant of the resistin gene promoter on metabolic
syndrome, obesity, myocardial infarction and kidney dysfunction.

Norata GD(1), Ongari M, Garlaschelli K, Tibolla G, Grigore L, Raselli S,
Vettoretti S, Baragetti I, Noto D, Cefalù AB, Buccianti G, Averna M, Catapano AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
Danilo.Norata@unimi.it

OBJECTIVE: Resistin is an adipokine that has been suggested to be correlated with
markers of inflammation and to be predictive of coronary atherosclerosis and type
II diabetes in humans. A common single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) (-420C/G) in
the promoter of resistin is associated with increased resistin plasma levels and 
susceptibility to type II diabetes. The aim of this study was to investigate the 
association of the -420C/G polymorphism with metabolic syndrome, obesity,
myocardial infarction and kidney disease.
DESIGN AND RESULTS: First we studied 1542 subjects from the PLIC study (a
population based cohort). GG carriers showed an higher prevalence of obesity and 
metabolic syndrome as well as increased plasma triglycerides levels, BMI,
systolic and diastolic blood pressure and cardiovascular risk according to
Framingham algorithm (P < 0.05 for all). Next we investigated the presence of the
-420C/G resistin polymorphism in a case-control study that included 300 subject
with myocardial infarction and 300 age and sex matched controls and then we
studied the role of the -420C/G SNP in 88 patients with mild to moderate renal
dysfunction. No statistically significant differences in allele frequencies
between the PLIC study, the myocardial infarction (MI) cases and the subjects
with renal dysfunction were observed. Pro-inflammatory gene expression profiling 
of peripheral blood mononuclear cells failed to detect any difference between
wild type subjects and carriers of the rare allele.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that the presence of the -420C/G SNP of the resistin
gene is associated with increased obesity and metabolic syndrome, although it is 
not different in subjects at high cardiovascular risk such as patients with
myocardial infarction or patients with renal dysfunction compared with controls.

PMID: 17598818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Leuk Res. 2008 Feb;32(2):323-6. Epub 2007 Jun 21.

Rapid detection of mycoplasma in continuous cell lines using a selective
biochemical test.

Mariotti E(1), Mirabelli P, Di Noto R, Fortunato G, Salvatore F.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate and Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biotecnologie
Mediche, Università Federico II, Via Comunale Margherita 482, 80145 Naples,
Italy.

Mycoplasma contamination is a deleterious event for a cell culture laboratory due
to the ability of this microorganism to contaminate cell culture leading up to
the production of false data or, in the worst cases, to the loss of cell culture 
itself. Fortunately, mycoplasma can be eradicated by the use of antibiotics, but 
early detection of contamination is peremptory. Here, we propose the use of a
sensitive and specific biochemical test named MycoAlert. In particular, as
regards cell cultures not yet treated with antibiotics, sensitivity, specificity,
positive and negative predictive values of MycoAlert assay gave excellent scores 
of 100%, 97%, 89% and 100%, respectively.

PMID: 17586045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Atherosclerosis. 2007 Dec;195(2):e19-27. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Molecular diagnosis of hypobetalipoproteinemia: an ENID review.

Tarugi P(1), Averna M, Di Leo E, Cefalù AB, Noto D, Magnolo L, Cattin L,
Bertolini S, Calandra S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Modena e Reggio Emilia, Via
Campi 287, I-41100 Modena, Italy. tarugi@unimore.it

Primary hypobetalipoproteinemia (HBL) includes a group of genetic disorders:
abetalipoproteinemia (ABL) and chylomicron retention disease (CRD), with a
recessive transmission, and familial hypobetalipoproteinemia (FHBL) with a
co-dominant transmission. ABL and CRD are rare disorders due to mutations in the 
MTP and SARA2 genes, respectively. Heterozygous FHBL is much more frequent. FHBL 
subjects often have fatty liver and, less frequently, intestinal fat
malabsorption. FHBL may be linked or not to the APOB gene. Most mutations in APOB
gene cause the formation of truncated forms of apoB which may or may be not
secreted into the plasma. Truncated apoBs with a size below that of apoB-30 are
not detectable in plasma; they are more frequent in patients with the most severe
phenotype. Only a single amino acid substitution (R463W) has been reported as the
cause of FHBL. Approximately 50% of FHBL subjects are carriers of pathogenic
mutations in APOB gene; therefore, a large proportion of FHBL subjects have no
apoB gene mutations or are carriers of rare amino acid substitutions in apoB with
unknown effect. In some kindred FHBL is linked to a locus on chromosome 3 (3p21) 
but the candidate gene is unknown. Recently a FHBL plasma lipid phenotype was
observed in carriers of mutations of the PCSK9 gene causing loss of function of
the encoded protein, a proprotein convertase which regulates LDL-receptor number 
in the liver. Inactivation of this enzyme is associated with an increased LDL
uptake and hypobetalipoproteinemia. HBL carriers of PCSK9 mutations do not
develop fatty liver disease.

PMID: 17570373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Acta Derm Venereol. 2007;87(3):275-6.

Multifocal cutaneous leishmaniasis: a new clinical presentation of the disease.

Maniscalco M, Noto G, Zichichi L, Veraldi S.

PMID: 17533501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2007 Jun-Aug;45(5):557-62.

Laboratory diagnosis of toluene-based inhalants abuse.

Thiesen FV(1), Noto AR, Barros HM.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacy Faculty and Toxicology Institute, Pontifícia Universidade Católica do
Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil. fvthiesen@pucrs.br

Toluene is the main substance contained in products used as inhalants. The
frequent abuse of toluene-based inhalants requires the definition of a simple
laboratory parameter that allows acute exposure assessment. This study aimed at
defining urinary hippuric acid (UHA) levels related to intentional exposure to
toluene, and to correlate them to blood toluene concentration (BT).METHODS: BT
and UHA levels were measured in 65 homeless adolescents of Porto Alegre, Brazil.
RESULTS: Toluene was detected in 91.9% of the investigated population, who
presented BT levels from 0.5 to 83.7 microg/mL. There was good correlation
between UHA and BT concentrations (r = 0.78), and in homeless adolescents, UHA
levels higher than 3.0 g/g creatinine indicate intentional exposure to toluene.
CONCLUSIONS: The determination of UHA concentrations can be used as a screening
method for the detection of intentional exposure to toluene, but its diagnosis
must include BT toluene dosage, as well as circumstantial and clinical evidence.

PMID: 17503266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Behav Healthc. 2007 Mar;27(3):32-3.

Benchmarking blossoms in the Garden State.

Noto J(1).

Author information: 
(1)jnoto@njamha.org

PMID: 17500329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Atherosclerosis. 2008 Mar;197(1):147-53. Epub 2007 Apr 26.

The metabolic syndrome predicts cardiovascular events in subjects with normal
fasting glucose: results of a 15 years follow-up in a Mediterranean population.

Noto D(1), Barbagallo CM, Cefalù AB, Falletta A, Sapienza M, Cavera G, Amato S,
Pagano M, Maggiore M, Carroccio A, Notarbartolo A, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Emerging Diseases, University of Palermo, 
Palermo, Italy.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the cardiovascular (CV) risk due to the
metabolic syndrome in a 15-year prospective study of a Sicilian population. In
the Mediterranean area obesity is highly prevalent, but epidemiological data on
the metabolic syndrome are limited.METHODS AND RESULTS: Among the 1351 subjects
enrolled in the "Ventimiglia di Sicilia" epidemiological project, we selected 687
subjects between 35 and 75 years of age; baseline parameters were assessed and
subjects have been followed for 15 years recording CV events, total and
cardiovascular mortality. The metabolic syndrome was defined according to both
the Adult Treatment Panel III and the International Diabetes Federation criteria.
Metabolic syndrome (ATPIII criteria) was significantly (p<0.00001) more prevalent
in women (31.5%) than in men (12.4%). The metabolic syndrome increased the risk
of CV events with a hazard ratio of 1.9 (confidence interval CI; 1.46-2.46).
Using a Cox proportional hazards estimation model, the survival curve of subjects
with metabolic syndrome and normal fasting glucose did not significantly differ
from the curve of subjects with metabolic syndrome and impaired fasting glucose
(IFG).
CONCLUSIONS: In a 15-year follow-up the metabolic syndrome is predictive of CV
events regardless of the presence of IFG or diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 17466306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Inflammopharmacology. 2007 Apr;15(2):90-4.

Ecabet sodium prevents esophageal lesions induced by the reflux of gastric juice 
in rats.

Okuyama K(1), Saito N, Kume E, Noto T, Nagasaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Research Laboratories, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., 2-2-50
Kawagishi, Toda Saitama, Japan. kay@tanabe.co.jp

We investigated the effect of ecabet sodium (ecabet) on rat acute esophageal
lesions induced by reflux of gastric juice. Ligation of both pylorus and
fore-stomach induced the reflux of gastric juice, decreased the amount of mucus
and formed hemorrhagic lesions in the esophageal mucosa. Intragastric injection
of ecabet reduced the pepsin activity and prevented both the decrease of mucus
amount and formation of lesions. Ecabet enhanced the reduction in lesion
formation induced by omeprazole and ranitidine without a change in decreased acid
concentration and pepsin activity. Digestion of mucosa and the reduction in mucus
were prevented by ecabet in the everted HCl and pepsin treated esophageal sac.
These results indicate that ecabet prevents esophageal lesions by inhibiting
pepsin activity as well as by protecting mucus from degradation. These further
implicate the therapeutic potential of ecabet for prevention/treatment of GERD,
especially in combination with a proton pump inhibitor or H(2)-antagonist.

PMID: 17450449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Zoolog Sci. 2007 Feb;24(2):131-6.

Relationship between the lifestyle of a Siboglinid (Pogonophoran) polychaete,
Oligobrachia mashikoi, and the total sulfide and nitrogen levels in its habitat.

Sasayama Y(1), Higashide Y, Sakai M, Matada M, Fukumori Y.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University, Japan. sasayama@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

A gutless polychaete of the family Siboglinidae, Oligobrachia mashikoi, known in 
the past as a beard worm of the group Pogonophora, inhabits Tsukumo Bay of the
Noto Peninsula in the Sea of Japan. Photographs were taken of this polychaete
projecting about one third of the length of its tentacles outside of its tube.
The tube protruded several mm from the sea bottom. These are the first field
photographs of beard worms. The trophosome of this beard worm harbors
sulfur-oxidizing bacteria. In fact, the muddy sediment where this worm inhabits
smells slightly of hydrogen sulfide. Total sulfide levels, which can be an
indicator of the generation of hydrogen sulfide gas, were measured at 10
locations in the bay. Furthermore, at the location which this species inhabits,
the total sulfide levels in the vertical direction were determined. In addition, 
the total nitrogen levels, which can indicate the quantity of organic substances,
were measured. The sediment inhabited by this worm was determined to have total
sulfide levels of 0.24-0.39 mg/g dry mud, measured in the form of acid-volatile
sulfide-sulfur. The total nitrogen levels were 1.0-1.5 microg/mg dry mud. These
values suggest that the bottom of Tsukumo Bay has not been deteriorated by
eutrophication. The levels were, however, highest in the surface layer of the
sediment. These results suggest that hydrogen sulfide is generated in the surface
of the sediment by sulfate-reducing bacteria, and that O. mashikoi appears to
able to live in an environment that contains a slight amount of sulfide.

PMID: 17409726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Am J Gastroenterol. 2007 Jul;102(7):1383-91. Epub 2007 Mar 31.

The effect of age on response to therapy with peginterferon alpha plus ribavirin 
in a cohort of patients with chronic HCV hepatitis including subjects older than 
65 yr.

Antonucci G(1), Longo MA, Angeletti C, Vairo F, Oliva A, Comandini UV, Tocci G,
Boumis E, Noto P, Solmone MC, Capobianchi MR, Girardi E.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Department of Infectious Disease, National Institute for Infectious
Disease, L. Spallanzani, Rome, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: In many industrialized countries HCV infection is characterized by an
increasing prevalence during ageing; however, data on the efficacy of treatment
among older patients are scarce. This study was set up to evaluate the effect of 
age on the treatment of chronic HCV hepatitis with peginterferon alpha plus
ribavirin.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed medical records of 153 adult patients with
chronic HCV hepatitis treated with combination therapy; 30 of them (19.6%) were
65 years of age or older.
RESULTS: In multivariable analysis, age groups >/=40 years had similar odds of
achieving sustained virologic response (P= 0.71) and significantly lower odds of 
sustained response compared with younger patients (odds ratio [OR] 0.16, 95%
confidence interval [CI] 0.05-0.59, P= 0.006; OR 0.13, 95% CI 0.03-0.49, P=
0.002; OR 0.21, 95% CI 0.05-0.91, P= 0.037 for patients aged 40-49 years, 50-64
years, and older than 64 years, respectively). The effect of age was present in
the 74 patients infected with genotype 1 or 4 (P= 0.04), while among the 79
patients with genotype 2 or 3 sustained virologic response rates were relatively 
uniform, with no statistically significant differences.
CONCLUSIONS: The probability of good response to combination treatment with
peginterferon alpha plus ribavirin is decreased for patients aged more than 40
years infected with genotype 1 or 4, but patients aged more than 65 had a similar
rate of response to those aged 40-64 years. Combination treatment may be safely
extended to elderly patients with no major contraindications.

PMID: 17403072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Biophys J. 2007 Jun 15;92(12):4466-72. Epub 2007 Mar 30.

Detection of protein orientation on the silica microsphere surface using
transverse electric/transverse magnetic whispering gallery modes.

Noto M(1), Keng D, Teraoka I, Arnold S.

Author information: 
(1)Microparticle Photophysics Laboratory, Polytechnic University, Brooklyn, New
York 11201, USA.

The state of adsorbed protein molecules can be examined by comparing the shifts
in a narrow line resonance wavelength of transverse electric (TE) and transverse 
magnetic (TM) whispering gallery modes (WGM) when the molecules adsorb onto a
transparent microsphere that houses WGM. In adsorption of bovine serum albumin
(BSA) onto an aminopropyl-modified silica microsphere, the TM/TE shift ratio
indicated highly anisotropic polarizability of BSA in the direction normal to the
surface, most likely ascribed to anchoring the heart-shaped protein molecule by
one of its tips. The polarization-dependent resonance shift was confirmed when
the surrounding refractive index was uniformly changed by adding salt, which
would simulate adsorption of large objects.

PMCID: PMC1877779
PMID: 17400701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2007 Mar-Apr;32(2):120-3.

Correlation between salivary alpha-amylase activity and pain scale in patients
with chronic pain.

Shirasaki S(1), Fujii H, Takahashi M, Sato T, Ebina M, Noto Y, Hirota K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Caress Alliance Tenshi Hospital, Sapporo, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The visual analog scale (VAS) is commonly used to
assess pain intensity. However, the VAS is of limited value if patients fail to
reliably report. Objective assessments are therefore clearly preferable. Previous
reports suggest that elevated salivary alpha-amylase may reflect increased
physical stress. There is a close association between salivary alpha-amylase and 
plasma norepinephrine under stressful physical conditions. In this study, we have
determined the usefulness of a portable salivary alpha-amylase analyzer as an
objective biomarker of stress.
METHODS: Thirty patients (male/female = 15/15, age: 60.5 +/- 15.3 years) with
chronic low back or leg pain (pain (+) group) and 20 pain-free control patients
undergoing elective surgery under general anesthesia with epidural analgesia
(pain (-) group) were recruited. Patients received epidural block with 5 to 10 mL
1% lidocaine. VAS, blood pressure, and heart rates were assessed before and 30
and 45 minutes after the epidural block. Salivary alpha-amylase was
simultaneously measured using a portable analyzer. The relationship between the
VAS and salivary alpha-amylase in chronic pain patients was assessed.
RESULTS: After the epidural block both heart rate and systolic blood pressure
decreased by approximately 8%. In the pain (+) group, the epidural block markedly
decreased the VAS pain scale and salivary alpha-amylase from 56 +/- 22 to 19 +/- 
16 mm (P < .01) and from 82 +/- 48 to 45 +/- 28 U/mL (P < .01), respectively,
with a significant correlation between the 2 measures (r = 0.561, P < .01). In
contrast, salivary alpha-amylase did not change significantly in the pain (-)
group.
CONCLUSIONS: Because there was a significant correlation between VAS pain scale
and salivary alpha-amylase, we suggest that this biomarker may be a good index
for the objective assessment of pain intensity. In addition, a simple to use
portable analyzer may be useful for such assessment.

PMID: 17350522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Saline Systems. 2007 Mar 9;3:2.

A traditional Japanese-style salt field is a niche for haloarchaeal strains that 
can survive in 0.5% salt solution.

Fukushima T(1), Usami R, Kamekura M.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-Nano Electronics Research Centre, Toyo University, 2100 Kujirai, Kawagoe, 
Saitama 350-8585, Japan. bioeng@mail.cc.eng.toyo.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Most of the haloarchaeal strains have been isolated from hypersaline 
environments such as solar evaporation ponds, salt lakes, or salt deposits, and
they, with some exceptions, lyse or lose viability in very low-salt
concentrations. There are no salty environments suitable for the growth of
haloarchaea in Japan. Although Natrialba asiatica and Haloarcula japonica were
isolated many years ago, the question, "Are haloarchaea really thriving in
natural environments of Japan?" has remained unanswered.
RESULTS: Ten strains were isolated from a traditional Japanese-style salt field
at Nie, Noto Peninsula, Japan by plating out the soil samples directly on agar
plates containing 30% (w/v) salts and 0.5% yeast extract. They were most closely 
related to strains of three genera, Haladaptatus, Halococcus, and
Halogeometricum. Survival rates in 3% and 0.5% SW (Salt Water, solutions
containing salts in approximately the same proportions as found in seawater)
solutions at 37 degrees C differed considerably depending on the strains. Two
strains belonging to Halogeometricum as well as the type strain Hgm. borinquense 
died and lysed immediately after suspension. Five strains that belonged to
Halococcus and a strain that may be a member of Halogeometricum survived for 1-2 
days in 0.5% SW solution. Two strains most closely related to Haladaptatus
possessed extraordinary strong tolerance to low salt conditions. About 20 to 34% 
of the cells remained viable in 0.5% SW after 9 days incubation.
CONCLUSION: In this study we have demonstrated that haloarchaea are really
thriving in the soil of Japanese-style salt field. The haloarchaeal cells,
particularly the fragile strains are suggested to survive in the micropores of
smaller size silt fraction, one of the components of soil. The inside of the silt
particles is filled with concentrated salt solution and kept intact even upon
suspension in rainwater. Possible origins of the haloarchaea isolated in this
study are discussed.

PMCID: PMC1828056
PMID: 17346353  [PubMed]


339. J Comp Neurol. 2007 Apr 1;501(4):543-67.

Differential hypertrophy and atrophy among all types of cutaneous innervation in 
the glabrous skin of the monkey hand during aging and naturally occurring type 2 
diabetes.

Paré M(1), Albrecht PJ, Noto CJ, Bodkin NL, Pittenger GL, Schreyer DJ, Tigno XT, 
Hansen BC, Rice FL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuropharmacology and Neuroscience, Albany Medical College, Albany,
New York 12208, USA.

Diabetic neuropathy (DN) is a common severe complication of type 2 diabetes. The 
symptoms of chronic pain, tingling, and numbness are generally attributed to
small fiber dysfunction. However, little is known about the pathology among
innervation to distal extremities, where symptoms start earliest and are most
severe, and where the innervation density is the highest and includes a wide
variety of large fiber sensory endings. Our study assessed the immunochemistry,
morphology, and density of the nonvascular innervation in glabrous skin from the 
hands of aged nondiabetic rhesus monkeys and from age-matched monkeys that had
different durations of spontaneously occurring type 2 diabetes. Age-related
reductions occurred among all types of innervation, with epidermal C-fiber
endings preferentially diminishing earlier than presumptive Adelta-fiber endings.
In diabetic monkeys epidermal innervation density diminished faster, became more 
unevenly distributed, and lost immunodetectable expression of calcitonin
gene-related peptide and capsaicin receptors, TrpV1. Pacinian corpuscles also
deteriorated. However, during the first few years of hyperglycemia, a surprising 
hypertrophy occurred among terminal arbors of remaining epidermal endings.
Hypertrophy also occurred among Meissner corpuscles and Merkel endings supplied
by Abeta fibers. After longer-term hyperglycemia, Meissner corpuscle hypertrophy 
declined but the number of corpuscles remained higher than in age-matched
nondiabetics. However, the diabetic Meissner corpuscles had an abnormal structure
and immunochemistry. In contrast, the expanded Merkel innervation was reduced to 
age-matched nondiabetic levels. These results indicate that transient phases of
substantial innervation remodeling occur during the progression of diabetes, with
differential increases and decreases occurring among the varieties of
innervation.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17278131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Appl Opt. 2007 Jan 10;46(2):161-6.

Switchable circular-to-point converter based on holographic polymer-dispersed
liquid-crystal technology.

Zhang H(1), Xianyu H, Liang J, Bétrémieux Y, Crawford GP, Noto J, Kerr R.

Author information: 
(1)Scientific Solutions Inc., North Chelmsford, Massachusetts 01863-1561, USA.
zhang@sci-sol.com

We demonstrate the use of a switchable circular-to-point converter (SCPC) device 
based on holographic polymer-dispersed liquid-crystal technology for application 
in lidar detection and optical telecommunication. A SCPC device converts the
Fabry-Perot ring pattern into a single point or an array of points, while an
external electrical field on the SCPC deactivates the conversion. Stacking
different SCPC elements gives a random optical switch for applications in lidar
detection and optical telecommunication. Two types of SCPC designs are analyzed
and one is chosen and built for testing.

PMID: 17268558  [PubMed]


341. Biol Pharm Bull. 2007 Feb;30(2):313-7.

Tacrolimus (FK506) limits accumulation of granulocytes and platelets and protects
against brain damage after transient focal cerebral ischemia in rat.

Noto T(1), Furuichi Y, Ishiye M, Matsuoka N, Aramori I, Mutoh S, Yanagihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Biology Research Laboratories, Astellas Pharmaceutical Inc., Osaka, 
Japan. takahisa.noto@jp.astellas.com

We investigated the neuroprotective effect of tacrolimus (FK506) on the
ischemia-reperfusion injury caused by transient focal brain ischemia induced by
middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion for 60 min in rats. Neuronal damage
visualized as a decrease of MAP2 immunoreactivity was observed in the cerebral
cortex at 9 h after MCA occlusion and further expanded at 24 h. Hypoxic areas
visualized with an immunohistochemical reaction for 2-nitroimidazole, a hypoxia
marker (hypoxyprobe-1), and accumulation of granulocytes and platelets were also 
observed at 9 h and 24 h after MCA occlusion. Tacrolimus (1 mg/kg, i.v.),
administered immediately after MCA occlusion, attenuated cortical damage and
decreased the hypoxyprobe-1 positive area, as well as the number of granulocytes 
and platelets at 24 h after MCA occlusion. Immunohistochemical analysis showed
that tacrolimus reduced the number of blood vessels positively stained for
ICAM-1, E-selectin and P-selection. These results suggested that tacrolimus
limited attachment of granulocytes and platelets to blood vessels by inhibiting
the expression of adhesion molecules and protected neuronal tissue from hypoxic
insults.

PMID: 17268072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Nov;1089:104-9.

Cytokine gene polymorphisms and breast cancer susceptibility.

Scola L(1), Vaglica M, Crivello A, Palmeri L, Forte GI, Macaluso MC, Giacalone A,
Di Noto L, Bongiovanni A, Raimondi C, Accardo A, Verna R, Candore G, Caruso C,
Lio D, Palmeri S.

Author information: 
(1)Patologia Clinica, Dipartimento di Biopatologia e Metodologie Biomediche,
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

Human breast cancer (BC) is characterized by a considerable clinical
heterogeneity. Steroid hormone receptor expression and growth factor receptor
expression have been considered suitable diagnostic and prognostic markers,
whereas mutations of oncosuppressor and gatekeeper genes have been found
associated with an increased risk for this malignancy. To evaluate the role that 
polymorphisms of genes involved in the regulation of inflammatory response might 
play in BC susceptibility, we investigated associations between cytokine
functionally relevant polymorphisms in 84 BC patients compared to 110 age- and
sex-matched controls. TNF-alpha (-308G/A), TGF-beta1 (+869C/T), IL-10 (-1117G/A; 
-854C/T; -627C/A), and IFN-gamma (874T/A) single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
were identified by sequence-specific primers (SSP)-PCR or restriction fragment
length polymorphism (RFLP)-PCR. Genotype or haplotype distributions for each
polymorphisms were consistent with the HWE in these populations. We were unable
to demonstrate differences in genotype or allele frequencies between patient and 
control groups. Data obtained in this study indicate that none of the cytokine
SNPs studied is likely to have predisposing or protective effects on BC
susceptibility. On the other hand, both positive and negative association with BC
have been reported for some of the studied genotypes by different research
groups. In conclusion, further studies involving larger numbers of subjects are
required.

PMID: 17261759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Nov;1089:98-103.

Regulatory cytokine gene polymorphisms and risk of colorectal carcinoma.

Crivello A(1), Giacalone A, Vaglica M, Scola L, Forte GI, Macaluso MC, Raimondi
C, Di Noto L, Bongiovanni A, Accardo A, Candore G, Palmeri L, Verna R, Caruso C, 
Lio D, Palmeri S.

Author information: 
(1)Patologia Clinica, Dipartimento di Biopatologia e Metodologie Biomediche,
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

It is well established that cancer arises in chronically inflamed tissue, and
this is particularly notable in the gastrointestinal tract. Classic examples
include Helicobacter pylori-associated gastric cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, 
and inflammatory bowel disease-associated colorectal cancer. Growing evidence
suggests that these associations might be not casual findings. Focusing on
individual cytokines has generated evidence that anti-inflammatory cytokine
interleukin (IL)-10 and transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) may have a
complex role in gastrointestinal carcinogenesis. As an example, IL-10-deficient
mice develop severe atrophic gastritis and a chronic enterocolitis, developing
colorectal cancer similar to human inflammatory bowel disease-associated
neoplasia. TGF-beta1 is a multifunctional signaling molecule with a wide array of
roles. Animal experiments suggest that TGF-beta1 plays a biphasic role in
carcinogenesis by protecting against the early formation of benign epithelial
growths, but promoting a significant stimulation of tumor growth invasion and
metastasis during tumor progression. We assessed association of functional
polymorphisms (-1082G/A; -592C/A) and TGF-beta1 (-509C/T; +869C/T) influencing
the IL-10 production to colorectal cancer risk in a case-control study of 62
patients and 124 matched controls. No significant differences were observed among
cancer patients and controls for IL-10 -1082G/A; -592C/A genotype frequencies.
Evaluation of odds ratios (OR) for the TGF-beta1 +869C/T genotypes showed a
significant increased risk for individuals bearing +869CC genotype compared to
+869CT- and +869TT-positive individuals. These results suggest that the +869C
allele, responsible for a Leu-->Pro substitution in the signal peptide sequence
of the TGF-beta1 protein, may have a predisposing role in the development of
colorectal cancer.

PMID: 17261758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Pediatr Int. 2007 Feb;49(1):109-11.

Sequential measurement of fecal parameters in a case of non-immunoglobulin
E-mediated milk allergy.

Wada H(1), Horisawa T, Inoue M, Yoshida T, Toma T, Yachie A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Noto General Hospital, Nanao, Japan.
wada@noto-hospital.jp

PMID: 17250518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Bioinformatics. 2007 Jan 15;23(2):e156-62.

Learning probabilistic models of cis-regulatory modules that represent logical
and spatial aspects.

Noto K(1), Craven M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Sciences and Department of Biostatistics and Medical
Informatics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA. noto@cs.wisc.edu

MOTIVATION: The process of transcription is controlled by systems of factors
which bind in specific arrangements, called cis-regulatory modules (CRMs), in
promoter regions. We present a discriminative learning algorithm which
simultaneously learns the DNA binding site motifs as well as the logical
structure and spatial aspects of CRMs.
RESULTS: Our results on yeast datasets show better predictive accuracy than a
current state-of-the-art approach on the same datasets. Our results on yeast, fly
and human datasets show that the inclusion of logical and spatial aspects
improves the predictive accuracy of our learned models.
AVAILABILITY: Source code is available at http://www.cs.wisc.edu/~noto/crm

PMID: 17237085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Minerva Endocrinol. 2006 Dec;31(4):251-61.

Tadalafil and modifications in peak systolic velocity (Doppler spectrum dynamic
analysis) in the cavernosal arteries of patients with type 2 diabetes after
continuous tadalafil treatment.

[Article in English, Italian]

La Vignera S(1), Calogero AE, Cannizzaro MA, Condorelli R, Noto Z, Vicari E.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Endocrinology, Andrology and Internal Medicine, Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Garibaldi Hospital, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
sandrolavignera@email.it

AIM: In this study peak systolic velocity (PSV) was measured by penile duplex
Doppler spectrum dynamic analysis in diabetic patients with erectile dysfunction 
(ED) administered continuous treatment with tadalafil for 3 months in a weekly
regimen (Monday-Wednesday-Friday). Responses to the Structured Interview on
Erectile Dysfunction (SIEDY) questionnaire and hormonal blood levels (LH,
testosterone, prolactin) were studied before and after treatment.
METHODS: The study sample was 20 diabetic patients (mean age 60 years; range
55-65) with organic vascular arterial ED at enrollment into the study. All
patients were eligible for receiving tadalafil. Patients were randomly assigned
to 2 different treatment groups according to a computer-generated list. The first
random set of numbers was assigned to group A, the second to group B. Group A
(n=10) received tadalafil 20 mg per os on demand for 3 months (Cialis, Lilly
ICOS; London, UK). Group B (n=10) received tadalafil 20 mg per os on weekly fixed
days (Monday-Wednesday-Friday) for 3 months. All patients underwent duplex penile
sonographic dynamic evaluation after intracavernosal injection of alprostadil 20 
microg (Caverject, Pharmacia SpA; Milan, Italy); SIEDY questionnaire responses
and changes in blood hormonal levels (LH, testosterone, prolactin) before and
after treatment were compared.
RESULTS: Increased PSV at 10 min and 20 min after alprostadil administration was 
found in 30% of Group A patients and in 60% of Group B patients. In 40% of Group 
B patients, the increase in PSV was so significant as to justify reclassification
to a less severe diagnostic category (Benson classification) in vascular profile.
No changes in hormonal levels after treatment were found in either group.
Analysis of the questionnaires showed a more marked reduction in the global total
scores in Group B, with a greater frequency and a clearer improvement in global
scores.
CONCLUSIONS: This study on a group of 20 patients with organic vascular arterial 
ED disclosed at least 2 basic aspects: 1) a higher percentage of Group B patients
(fixed-day treatment regimen) showed a greater improvement in PSV than the
controls; 40% of these patients were reclassified according to the Benson
classification; 2) within the context of a clinical study, monitoring and
supportive care to increase the frequency and quality of sexual intercourse led
to a resumption of and a greater interest in sexual activity. This finding cannot
be explained by changes in hormonal levels; instead, there appeared a sort of
effect placebo that the continuous therapy, like conventional treatment for other
health reasons, had on the patient.

PMID: 17213792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2007 Jan 1;32(1):72-5.

Assessment of forearm pronation strength in C6 and C7 radiculopathies.

Rainville J(1), Noto DJ, Jouve C, Jenis L.

Author information: 
(1)New England Baptist Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. jrainvil@caregroup.harvard.edu

STUDY DESIGN: Consecutive case series of patients with C6 and C7 radiculopathies.
OBJECTIVES: To explore the clinical utility and reliability of manual muscle
testing of forearm pronation strength in C6 and C7 radiculopathies.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: EMG evidence of denervation of the pronator teres was
the most common finding in C6 radiculopathies, and frequently present in C7
radiculopathies. Clinical evaluation of the pronator teres through manual muscle 
testing of forearm pronation has never been explored; therefore, its clinical
utility is unknown as compared with the muscle groups that are traditionally
evaluated.
METHODS: Fifty-five subjects with diagnostic imaging evidence of either C6 (n =
25) or C7 (n = 30) cervical root compression and clinical symptoms consistent
with cervical radiculopathy were recruited for this study. These subjects
underwent manual muscle testing of forearm pronation, wrist extension, elbow
flexion, and elbow extension. The frequency of impaired strength was recorded and
compared for C6 and C7 radiculopathies. A second examiner evaluated each subject,
with his or her findings compared with the first examiner only for the
determination of interrater reliability.
RESULTS: In C6 radiculopathy subjects, forearm pronation weakness was present in 
72%, was twice as common as wrist extension weakness, was present in all cases
where elbow flexion or wrist extension weakness was noted, and was found in all
but 2 subjects where elbow extension weakness was present. In C7 radiculopathy
subjects, forearm pronation weakness accompanies elbow extension weakness in 23% 
of subjects and was the only weakness in 10% of subjects. Manual muscle testing
demonstrated adequate interrater reliability.
CONCLUSIONS: Forearm pronation weakness is the most frequent motor finding in C6 
radiculopathies and may be noted is some cases of C7 nerve root compression.

PMID: 17202895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. New Microbiol. 2006 Oct;29(4):243-50.

A comparative evaluation between real time Roche COBas TAQMAN 48 HCV and bDNA
Bayer Versant HCV 3.0.

Giraldi C(1), Noto A, Tenuta R, Greco F, Perugini D, Spadafora M, Bianco AM,
Savino O, Natale A.

Author information: 
(1)UOC Microbiologia e Virologia, PO Annunziata AO Cosenza. gircri@virgilio.it

The HCV virus is a common human pathogen made of a single stranded RNA genome
with 9600nt. This work compared two different commercial methods used for HCV
viral load, the bDNA Bayer Versant HCV 3.0 and the RealTime Roche COBAS TaqMan 48
HCV. We compared the reproducibility and linearity of the two methods.
Seventy-five plasma samples with genotypes 1 to 4, which represent the population
(45% genotype 1; 24% genotype 2; 13% genotype 3; 18% genotype 4) were directly
processed with the Versanto method based upon signal amplification; the same
samples were first extracted (COBAS Ampliprep - TNAI) and then amplified using
RealTime PCR (COBAS TaqMan 48). The results obtained indicate the same
performance for both methods if they have genotype 1, but in samples with
genotypes 2, 3 and 4 the RealTime PCR Roche method gave an underestimation in
respect to the Bayer bDNA assay.

PMID: 17201090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Blood Transfus. 2007 Jan;5(1):33-40. doi: 10.2450/2007.0022-06.

A comparison of two automated methods for the detection and identification of red
blood cell alloantibodies.

Garozzo G(1), Licitra V, Criscione R, Comitini N, Noto C, Lomagno R, Ruta D,
Spadola G, Zago V, Bonomo P.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Medicina Trasfusionale ed Immunoematologia, Azienda Ospedaliera
Civile Maria Paternò Arezzo, Ragusa, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to compare the routine use of two automated
systems (OrthoAutoVue Innova, microcolumn, and Immucor Galileo, solid phase) for 
the screening and identification of irregular red blood cell alloantibodies in
samples, analysed in our Transfusion Service during 6 months of normal activity. 
The study focused particularly on an evaluation of the repeatability of the
screening tests, the identification of antibody specificities and the
identification of antibodies in samples showing discordant results.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Overall 2,229 samples from potential blood donors (A),
multiply transfused patients with blood disorders (DH), potential transfusion
recipients (TS), and external cases (E) were studied. The protocols were carried 
out according to the manufacturers recommendations.
RESULTS: The screening tests detected 78 samples that were positive with both
systems, while 18 were positive only with Immucor and 11 only with Ortho (thus,
overall, Immucor detected 96 positive samples and Ortho 89 positive samples). The
use of the respective identification panels enabled us to identify the antibodies
in 65 samples with Immucor and in 61 samples with the Ortho system; 74 antibodies
were identified with Immucor (55 with a single specificity and 19 with mixed
specificities) and 68 antibodies with Ortho (51 and 17, respectively). In the
remaining cases (31 samples for Immucor and 28 for Ortho), the antibody
specificity was not identified. The two systems were found to be essentially
similar. The Immucor system revealed a greater number of antibodies, mainly
because of its greater sensitivity at detecting anti-D antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: Both systems showed a repeatability of over 85%, demonstrating that 
automation of immunohaematological tests is advantageous. The specificity of the 
antibody was identified in 68% of the samples. Furthermore, using the two systems
led to the identification of ten new antibodies (6 anti-D, 2 anti-E, 1 anti
Le(a), and 1 anti-Vel), which would not have been detected had only one of the
two methods been used.

PMCID: PMC2535873
PMID: 19204749  [PubMed]


350. Int J Cardiol. 2007 May 2;117(3):388-94. Epub 2006 Dec 19.

No detectable Chlamydia pneumoniae and cytomegalovirus DNA in leukocytes in
subjects with echolucent and echogenic carotid artery plaques.

Halvorsen DS(1), Karlsen J, Notø AT, Mathiesen EB, Njølstad I, Gutteberg TJ,
Vorland LH, Hansen JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University Hospital of North Norway, N-9038
Tromsø, Norway. dag.seeger.halvorsen@unn.no

BACKGROUND: Controversy exists whether persistent Chlamydia pneumoniae or
cytomegalovirus infections cause initiation or progression of atherosclerosis. C.
pneumoniae DNA in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) has been proposed to 
be a more reliable marker of cardiovascular risk than are C. pneumoniae
antibodies. Reported prevalences of C. pneumoniae DNA among cardiovascular
patients vary greatly, indicating methodological limitations. There is an
increasing concern that published results may have been biased by extensive use
of less specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology.
METHODS: C. pneumoniae DNA and cytomegalovirus DNA were determined by probe-based
real-time PCR technology in PBMCs among subjects with echolucent (n=29) or
echogenic (n=28) carotid artery plaques, and in controls without carotid plaques 
(n=38), all recruited from a population-based study. Samples were examined in
multiple repeats with PCR assays targeting two different sequences of the genome 
for both microorganisms.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: IgG seropositivity was frequent in all three groups,
confirming previous exposure, but C. pneumoniae DNA or cytomegalovirus DNA was
not detected in a single PBMC sample by means of probe-based, highly sensitive,
and specific real-time PCR assays. Our results indicate that persistent C.
pneumoniae or CMV infection is not a common phenomenon in subjects with carotid
atherosclerosis.

PMID: 17182139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2006 Nov;32(8):831-7.

The value of four-detector row spiral computed tomography for the diagnosis of
pulmonary embolism.

Vigo M(1), Pesavento R, Bova C, Porro F, Ghirarduzzi A, Bazzan M, Polverosi R,
Frulla M, Noto A, Castelli R, Giovanardi F, Angelini F, Pagnan A, Prandoni P;
SCENIC Investigators Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Hospital of Bassano del Grappa, Italy.

Although spiral computed tomography (CT) is being used increasingly as the
first-line imaging procedure in the diagnostic workup of patients with clinically
suspected pulmonary embolism (PE), the diagnostic value of negative findings, at 
least when using the four-detector row scanners, is still controversial. A total 
of 702 consecutive patients with clinical symptoms suggestive of PE underwent
four-slice CT. Patients with negative findings received the determination of
D-dimer. Those with positive D-dimer underwent further diagnostic workup to
confirm or rule out the diagnosis of PE. Those with negative D-dimer were
followed-up to 6 months to detect the development of symptomatic venous
thromboembolism (VTE). The CT test was interpreted as negative in 536 patients
(76.3%). These patients had the D-dimer determination, which was positive in 279 
and negative in the remaining 257 patients. Of the former, PE subsequently was
documented in 55 patients (19.7%). Of the latter, symptomatic VTE in the
follow-up period developed in three patients (1.17%; 95% confidence interval,
0.24 to 3.38%). In conclusion, when using the four-detector row, the negative
predictive value of CT findings in patients with clinically suspected PE and
positive D-dimer is low. In contrast, it is safe to withhold anticoagulation from
patients with negative findings and negative D-dimer.

PMID: 17171597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007 Mar;27(3):677-81. Epub 2006 Dec 14.

A novel loss of function mutation of PCSK9 gene in white subjects with low-plasma
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol.

Fasano T(1), Cefalù AB, Di Leo E, Noto D, Pollaccia D, Bocchi L, Valenti V,
Bonardi R, Guardamagna O, Averna M, Tarugi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via
Campi 287, I-41100 Modena, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: The PCSK9 gene, encoding a pro-protein convertase involved in
posttranslational degradation of low-density lipoprotein receptor, has emerged as
a key regulator of plasma low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. In
African-Americans two nonsense mutations resulting in loss of function of PCSK9
are associated with a 30% to 40% reduction of plasma low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol. The aim of this study was to assess whether loss of function
mutations of PCSK9 were a cause of familial hypobetalipoproteinemia and a
determinant of low-plasma low-density lipoprotein cholesterol in whites.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We sequenced PCSK9 gene in 18 familial
hypobetalipoproteinemia subjects and in 102 hypocholesterolemic blood donors who 
were negative for APOB gene mutations known to cause familial
hypobetalipoproteinemia. The PCSK9 gene variants found in these 2 groups were
screened in 42 subjects in the lowest (<5th) percentile, 44 in the highest
(>95th) percentile, and 100 with the average plasma cholesterol derived from
general population. In one familial hypobetalipoproteinemia kindred and in 2
hypocholesterolemic blood donors we found a novel PCSK9 mutation in exon 1
(c.202delG) resulting in a truncated peptide (Ala68fsLeu82X). Two familial
hypobetalipoproteinemia subjects and 4 hypocholesterolemic blood donors were
carriers of the R46L substitution previously reported to be associated with
reduced low-density lipoprotein cholesterol as well as other rare amino acid
changes (T77I, V114A, A522T and P616L) not found in the other groups examined.
CONCLUSIONS: We discovered a novel inactivating mutation as well as some rare
nonconservative amino acid substitutions of PCSK9 in white hypocholesterolemic
individuals.

PMID: 17170371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Org Chem. 2006 Dec 22;71(26):9637-42.

Room temperature ionic liquids structure and its effect on the mononuclear
rearrangement of heterocycles: an approach using thermodynamic parameters.

D'Anna F(1), Frenna V, Noto R, Pace V, Spinelli D.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica E. Paterno, Università degli Studi di
Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans 2, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
fdanna@unipa.it

The kinetics of the rearrangement of the Z-phenylhydrazone of
3-benzoyl-5-phenyl-1,2,4-oxadiazole (1) into the relevant
4-benzoylamino-2,5-diphenyl-1,2,3-triazole (2) induced by amines have been
studied in five room-temperature ionic liquids (RTILs) at different temperatures.
The kinetic data collected show that both cationic and anionic parts of RTILs
significantly influence the reactivity of the title reaction. The calculated
activation parameters allow us to advance hypotheses about the weak interactions 
operating in RTIL solutions.

PMID: 17168580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Leukemia. 2007 Jan;21(1):4-8.

Flow cytometry analysis of acute promyelocytic leukemia: the power of 'surface
hematology'.

Di Noto R, Mirabelli P, Del Vecchio L.

PMID: 17167527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Metabolism. 2007 Jan;56(1):142-51.

Dietary conjugated linoleic acid preserves pancreatic function and reduces
inflammatory markers in obese, insulin-resistant rats.

Noto A(1), Zahradka P, Ryz NR, Yurkova N, Xie X, Taylor CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutritional Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
MB, Canada R3T 2N2.

Pancreatic preservation is an important part of diabetes management that may
occur with improved peripheral insulin sensitivity and attenuated low-grade
adipose tissue inflammation. The objective of the current study was to determine 
the response of obese, insulin-resistant fa/fa Zucker rats vs lean controls to
dietary conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) supplementation with respect to pancreatic
islet size, insulin resistance, and markers of inflammation and adipose glucose
uptake. Six-week-old fa/fa and lean Zucker rats (n = 20 per genotype) were fed
either a 1.5% CLA mixture or control diet for 8 weeks. Oral glucose tolerance
testing was conducted at 7.5 weeks. Fasting serum haptoglobin, insulin, and
C-peptide were assayed, and select messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein markers of
inflammation and glucose metabolism were measured in adipose and liver tissues.
CLA-fed fa/fa Zucker rats had smaller islet cell size, improved oral glucose
tolerance and insulinemia, and attenuated serum haptoglobin levels compared with 
control-fed fa/fa Zucker rats, despite no differences in body weight and a
slightly higher visceral adipose mass. CLA did not alter insulin sensitivity or
islet size in lean Zucker rats. The CLA-fed fa/fa rats also had greater adipose
glucose transporter-4 mRNA and less adipose tumor necrosis factor alpha mRNA and 
protein compared with control-fed fa/fa rats. In contrast, other markers of
inflammation and glucose metabolism including adipose macrophage inflammatory
factor, macrophage inflammatory protein-2, and liver pyruvate carboxylase and
pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 were not significantly changed. These results
suggest that CLA supplementation preserved pancreatic function in conjunction
with improved peripheral glucose use and reduced inflammation in fa/fa Zucker
rats.

PMID: 17161237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Phys Chem B. 2006 Dec 14;110(49):24972-86.

Effect of SiO2 on relaxation phenomena and mechanism of ion conductivity of
[Nafion/(SiO2)x] composite membranes.

Di Noto V(1), Gliubizzi R, Negro E, Pace G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Università di Padova, Via Marzolo 1, 35131
Padova (Pd), Italy. vito.dinoto@unipd.it

This report describes a study of the effect of SiO2 nanopowders on the mechanism 
of ionic motion and interactions taking place in hybrid inorganic-organic
membranes based on Nafion. Five nanocomposite membranes of the formula
[Nafion/(SiO2)x] with SiO2 ranging from 0 to 15 wt % were prepared by a solvent
casting procedure. TG measurements demonstrated that the membranes are thermally 
stable up to 170 degrees C but with the loss water it changes the cluster
environments and changes the conductivity properties. MDSC investigations in the 
90-300 degrees C temperature range revealed the presence of three intense
overlapping endothermal peaks indicated as I, II, and III. Peak I measures the
order-disorder molecular rearrangement in hydrophilic polar clusters, II
corresponds to the endothermic decomposition of -SO3 groups, and III describes
the melting process in microcrystalline regions of hydrophobic fluorocarbon
domains of the Nafion moiety. ESEM with EDAX measurements revealed that the
membranes are homogeneous materials with smooth surfaces. DMA studies allowed us 
to measure two relaxation modes. The mechanical relaxation detected at ca. 100
degrees C is attributed to the motion of cluster aggregates of side chains and is
diagnostic for R-SO3H...SiO2 nanocluster interactions. DMA disclosed that at
SiO2/-SO3H (psi) molar ratios lower than 1.9, the oxoclusters act to restrict
chain mobility of hydrophobic domains of Nafion and the dynamics inside polar
cages of [Nafion/(SiO2)x] systems; at psi higher than 1.9, the oxoclusters reduce
the cohesiveness of hydrophilic polar domains owing to a reduction in the density
of cross-links. FT-IR and FT-Raman studies of the [Nafion/(SiO2)x] membranes
indicated that the fluorocarbon chains of Nafion hydrophobic domains assume the
typical helical conformation structure with a D(14pi/15) symmetry. These analyses
revealed four different species of water domains embedded inside polar cages and 
their interconnecting channels: (a) bulk water [(H2O)n]; (b) water solvating the 
oxonium ions directly interacting with sulfonic acid groups
[H3O+...SO3(-)-].(H2O)n; (c) water aggregates associated with H3O+ ions
[H3O+.(H2O)n]; and (d) low associated water species in dimer form [(H2O)2]. The
conductivity mechanism and relaxation events were investigated by broadband
dielectric spectroscopy (BDS). [Nafion/(SiO2)x] nanocomposite membranes were
found to possess two different molecular relaxation phenomena which are
associated with the alpha-relaxation mode of PTFE-like fluorocarbon domains and
the beta-relaxation mode of acid side groups of the Nafion component. Owing to
their strong coupling, both these relaxation modes are diagnostic for the
interactions between the polar groups of the Nafion host polymer and the (SiO2)x 
oxoclusters and play a determining role in the conductivity mechanism of the
membranes. The studies support the proposal that long-range proton charge
transfer in [Nafion/(SiO2)x] composites takes place due to a mechanism involving 
exchange of the proton between the four water domains. This latter proton
transfer occurs owing to a subsequent combination of domain intersections
resulting from the water domain fluctuations induced by the molecular relaxation 
events of host Nafion polymer.

PMID: 17149919  [PubMed]


357. BMC Bioinformatics. 2006 Dec 5;7:528.

A specialized learner for inferring structured cis-regulatory modules.

Noto K(1), Craven M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706,
USA. noto@cs.wisc.edu

BACKGROUND: The process of transcription is controlled by systems of
transcription factors, which bind to specific patterns of binding sites in the
transcriptional control regions of genes, called cis-regulatory modules (CRMs).
We present an expressive and easily comprehensible CRM representation which is
capable of capturing several aspects of a CRM's structure and distinguishing
between DNA sequences which do or do not contain it. We also present a learning
algorithm tailored for this domain, and a novel method to avoid overfitting by
controlling the expressivity of the model.
RESULTS: We are able to find statistically significant CRMs more often then a
current state-of-the-art approach on the same data sets. We also show
experimentally that each aspect of our expressive CRM model space makes a
positive contribution to the learned models on yeast and fly data.
CONCLUSION: Structural aspects are an important part of CRMs, both in terms of
interpreting them biologically and learning them accurately. Source code for our 
algorithm is available at: http://www.cs.wisc.edu/~noto/crm.

PMCID: PMC1762027
PMID: 17147812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Chromosome Res. 2006;14(8):817-30. Epub 2007 Jan 19.

Peculiar behavior of distinct chromosomal DNA elements during and after
development in the dicyemid mesozoan Dicyema japonicum.

Awata H(1), Noto T, Endoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology,
Kanazawa University, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan.

The dicyemid mesozoans are obligate parasites that inhabit the cephalopod renal
appendage. Dicyemids have a simple body, consisting of approximately 30 cells:
one long cylindrical axial cell contains intracellular stem cells (called
axoblast), from which embryos are derived, and is surrounded by some 30
peripheral somatic cells. Somatic cells divide at most eight times in their life 
span, and never divide after differentiation. During early somatic cell
development, numerous unique DNA sequences are first amplified and then
eliminated, in the form of extrachromosomal circular DNA, leading to genome
reduction. In this study we demonstrate that the remaining sequences, single-copy
genes and repetitive sequences, have very different fates. Single-copy genes,
such as beta-tubulin, are initially amplified, presumably via endoreduplication, 
but subsequently decrease in copy number through development, suggesting that the
whole genome is initially amplified and then the amplified DNAs are simply
diluted in successive cell divisions, with little DNA replication. In contrast,
repetitive sequences are maintained even in terminally differentiated somatic
cell nuclei. Considering the increasing intensity of in-situ hybridization,
incorporation of BrdU, and a general correlation between nuclear content and cell
size, those repetitive sequences must be selectively endoreplicated in the
peripheral cell nucleus, concomitant with the increase of cell size. The
biological significance of this mechanism is discussed as a unique dicyemid
adaptation to parasitism.

PMID: 17139531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Addict Behav. 2007 Jun;32(6):1309-13. Epub 2006 Nov 7.

Decrease in tobacco use among Brazilian students: a possible consequence of the
ban on cigarette advertising?

Galduróz JC(1), Fonseca AM, Noto AR, Carlini EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Brazil.
galduroz@psycobio.epm.br

In 2000, cigarette advertising was banned from the Brazilian media [LEI N degrees
10.167, de 27 de dezembro de dezembro. (2000).
http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/Leis/L10167.htm]. Nevertheless, not enough
surveys have been carried out to measure the impact of the prohibition. The
objective of the present survey was to compare the use of tobacco by primary and 
secondary school students in 1997 and 2004, that is, before and after the ban on 
tobacco advertising in Brazil. Two surveys were conducted (in 1997 and 2004)
using the same methodology, with a target population of primary (from the fifth
grade on) and secondary public schools in ten different Brazilian capitals. The
sampling was done by conglomerates, stratified, and obtained in two stages. In
total, 15,501 students were surveyed in 1997, and 21,712 in 2004. The
questionnaire was adapted from an instrument developed by WHO, anonymous,
self-administered, and applied collectively in the classroom. In a comparison of 
the two surveys (1997 and 2004) tobacco lifetime use (used any psychotropic drug 
at least once in their life) decreased significantly in seven out of ten capitals
surveyed. The 11-12 year old age group experienced the largest decrease in
tobacco lifetime use. There was a decrease in lifetime use for males in nine
capitals, and in eight capitals for females. A decrease was also observed in
heavy tobacco use also in eight capitals. In conclusion there was a significant
decrease in tobacco consumption among the surveyed students, suggesting that the 
decrease is related to changes in public policy in Brazil over the surveyed
period.

PMID: 17092655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Diabetes Complications. 2006 Nov-Dec;20(6):343-8.

The role of lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A(2) in the metabolic syndrome
and diabetes.

Noto H(1), Chitkara P, Raskin P.

Author information: 
(1)The University Diabetes Treatment Center, Parkland Memorial Hospital,
Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-8858, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A(2) (Lp-PLA(2)) is a novel
inflammation marker. We investigated its association with other coronary risk
factors and evaluated its role as a comprehensive marker of the metabolic
syndrome in individuals with type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: Our cross-sectional study evaluated 92 insulin-treated subjects with
type 2 diabetes. Biochemical measurements of Lp-PLA(2), glycemic control, lipid
profiles, and C-reactive protein were carried out. Seventy-seven subjects were
diagnosed as having the metabolic syndrome, which was defined according to the
American Heart Association/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Scientific
Statement.
RESULTS: Lp-PLA(2) was significantly correlated with waist-hip ratio (r=.25),
triglycerides (r=.50), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (r=-.31), and
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C; r=.27; all P<.02). In a
multiple-regression model, triglycerides and LDL-C levels were the significant
predictors of Lp-PLA(2). Lp-PLA(2) was significantly higher in subjects with the 
metabolic syndrome than in those without it (268+/-23.4 vs. 127+/-15.8 ng/ml,
P<.001). There was a linear increase in Lp-PLA(2) with an increment of the number
of the metabolic syndrome criteria (P(trend)=.041). Another multiple-regression
model showed that the hypertriglyceridemia component was the only predictor of
Lp-PLA(2).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that Lp-PLA(2) assay potentially facilitates a 
more comprehensive assessment of the metabolic syndrome in patients with type 2
diabetes on insulin.

PMID: 17070436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Leukemia. 2006 Dec;20(12):2175-7. Epub 2006 Oct 26.

CMRL-T, a novel T-cell line showing asynchronous phenotype
(CD34(+)/CD1a(-)/TCRalphabeta(+)) and dual T-cell receptor beta chain.

Di Noto R, Mirabelli P, Mariotti E, Sacchetti L, Pane F, Rotoli B, Lo Pardo C,
Del Vecchio L, Mecucci C, Salvatore F.

PMID: 17066091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Int J Urol. 2006 Oct;13(10):1280-5.

Naftopidil monotherapy vs naftopidil and an anticholinergic agent combined
therapy for storage symptoms associated with benign prostatic hyperplasia: A
prospective randomized controlled study.

Maruyama O(1), Kawachi Y, Hanazawa K, Koizumi K, Yamashita R, Sugimura S, Honda
S, Sugiyama Y, Saitoh T, Noto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Juntendo University Urayasu Hospital, Tomioka Urayasu, 
Chiba, Japan.

AIM: The aim of this study was to compare the efficacy and safety of
alpha1-adrenoceptor (alpha1-AR) antagonist monotherapy with combination therapy
using alpha1-AR antagonist and anticholinergic agent for benign prostatic
hyperplasia (BPH) with storage symptoms as the chief complaint.
METHODS: In this prospective comparative study, either 25-75 mg/day of naftopidil
monotherapy (monotherapy group) or combination therapy using 25-75 mg/day of
naftopidil and an anticholinergic agent (10-20 mg/day of propiverine
hydrochloride or 2-6 mg/day of oxybutynin hydrochloride; cotherapy group) were
administered for 12 weeks to 101 BPH patients with storage symptoms.
RESULTS: International prostate symptom score (IPSS) and quality of life (QOL)
index improved significantly in both groups, with no marked differences between
groups. Maximum flow rate (Qmax) and residual urine volume (RUV) tended to
improve in both groups, again with no marked differences between groups. However,
median post-therapeutic RUV was significantly worse for the cotherapy group (45.0
mL) than for the monotherapy group (13.5 mL; P = 0.0210). Ratio of patients with 
increased RUV was also significantly worse for cotherapy (22.9%) than for
monotherapy (5.0%; P = 0.038).
CONCLUSIONS: Although the anticholinergic dosage was low, the present results
suggest that naftopidil monotherapy was as useful as combination therapy of
naftopidil and an anticholinergic agent. Therefore, naftopidil is a useful agent 
as the first choice in BPH patients with storage symptoms.

PMID: 17010005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Metabolism. 2006 Oct;55(10):1308-16.

Low-density lipoproteins generated during an oral fat load in mild
hypertriglyceridemic and healthy subjects are smaller, denser, and have an
increased low-density lipoprotein receptor binding affinity.

Noto D(1), Rizzo M, Barbagallo CM, Cefalù AB, Verde AL, Fayer F, Notarbartolo A, 
Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Palermo, I-90127 Palermo,
Italy.

Triglyceride-rich lipoproteins generated during the postprandial phase are
atherogenic. Large very low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) or chylomicrons (CMs) are
not as atherogenic as their remnants (Rem). Small and dense LDLs are associated
with cardiovascular disease. Low-density lipoprotein size is partly under genetic
control and is considered as a relatively stable LDL feature. In this article, we
present data on retinyl palmitate kinetics correlated with the modification of
LDL features in terms of size, density, and in vitro receptor binding affinity
after an oral fat load. Six nondiabetic, hypertriglyceridemic (HTG) patients and 
6 healthy controls were examined. Low-density lipoprotein size was assessed by
gradient gel electrophoresis, and LDL density by density gradient
ultracentrifugation. Low-density lipoprotein binding affinity was tested by in
vitro competition binding assay on normal human skin fibroblasts (HSFs) and
hepatoma cells (HepG2). Kinetic parameters were estimated in CM and Rem fractions
by compartmental modeling. Hypertriglyceridemic patients showed significantly
higher triglyceride area and a slower CM fractional catabolic rate. Postprandial 
LDL density increased both in HTG patients and in the control group with a
significant difference between groups at 6 hours. Fasting LDL size was lower in
HTG patients vs controls but decreased similarly in the postprandial phase.
Low-density lipoprotein size and density postprandial modifications were not
correlated with any investigated parameter. Postprandial LDLs were internalized
more efficiently by HSF than baseline LDL only in the HTG group. In conclusion,
postprandial LDLs are smaller and denser compared with fasting LDLs after an oral
fat load. Postprandial LDLs also slightly increased their affinity to the HSF
cell receptors.

PMID: 16979400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Leuk Lymphoma. 2006 Aug;47(8):1686-7.

High efficacy of the CHOP + rituximab association in a case of primary rectal
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL).

Vassallo E, Di Noto L, Palmeri L, Vaglica M, Pancera G, Palmeri S.

PMID: 16966287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2006 Aug 20;62(8):1119-26.

[Estimation of the effective dose of patient in interventional radiology: study
of coronary angiography].

[Article in Japanese]

Kawabata C(1), Koshida K, Hayakawa M, Chadani A, Nakagawa H, Noto K, Fukuda A,
Matsubara K, Iida H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa University.

The applications of interventional radiology (IVR) increasingly are being used in
clinical examinations, where they tend to extend examination time. In addition,
the risk of occupational exposure necessarily is increasing with this technology.
In this study, the dose distributions in a sliced acrylic-acid phantom involving 
the bore for each irradiation condition were measured using a thermoluminescence 
dosimeter (TLD). Four patterns of set-up for the fluoroscopy unit were chosen as 
references for the conditions generally used clinically. Exposure also was
measured with dose area product (DAP), and we then calculated the entrance skin
dose and effective dose for the patient. The results showed that the effective
dose was 7.0 mSv to 8.0 mSv at LAO45 degrees and RAO30 degrees; 100 kV, 2.3 mSv
to 3.3 mSv at LAO45 degrees and RAO30 degrees; 80 kV. The effective dose is
greatly influenced by the setup of fluoroscopy in IVR. The change in DAP is
especially influenced. We found that the relation between DAP and effective dose 
was corrected with the exponential function. The effective doses were not
necessarily less than those of other radiation examinations, and increase. When
PCI and TAE are repeated many times in IVR, we propose that the effective dose
should be taken into consideration together with the skin dose for dose control
management.

PMID: 16957667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2006 Sep;103(9):1039-43.

[A case of Turner syndrome complicated with Crohn's disease, erythema nodosum and
Hashimoto disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto H(1), Iimura M, Karibe T, Tanishima M, Hamura K, Takasaki T, Mochizuki N,
Torii N, Iizuka BE, Shiratori K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gastroenterology, Tokyo Womens Medical University.

A 26-year-old woman, who had had Turner syndrome from age 10 years old, had
diarrhea, fever, joint pain, and erythema in the lower left leg. She was given a 
diagnosis of Crohn's disease, erythema nodosum, and Hashimoto disease. Systemic
steroid therapy was very effective for both intestinal and skin lesions. It has
been reported that half of inflammatory bowel disease patients with Turner
syndrome have 46XiX (q) type chromosome abnormality, and this case also has this 
type of abnormality.

PMID: 16953100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Vet Med Sci. 2006 Aug;68(8):803-7.

Temporal and topographic profiles of tissue hypoxia following transient focal
cerebral ischemia in rats.

Noto T(1), Furuichi Y, Ishiye M, Matsuoka N, Aramori I, Mutoh S, Yanagihara T,
Manabe N.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Biology Research Laboratories, Astellas Pharmaceutical Inc, Osaka,
Japan.

Intravascular accumulation of blood cells after brain ischemia-reperfusion can
cause obstruction of cerebral blood flow and tissue hypoxia/ischemia as a
consequence. In the present study, we examined temporal and topographic changes
of tissue hypoxia/ischemia after occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (MCA)
for 60 min in rats with immunohistochemical staining for hypoxia
(2-nitroimidazole hypoxia marker: hypoxyprobe-1 adducts). Our results showed that
tissue hypoxia expressed as positive staining for hypoxyprobe-1 adducts preceded 
neuronal degeneration. Platelets and granulocytes were detected close to the
hypoxyprobe-1 adducts positive area. These results suggested that the hypoxic
environment could persist even after reperfusion of MCA, because of vascular
obstruction with accumulation of platelets and granulocytes.

PMID: 16953079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Alzheimers Dis. 2006 Aug;9(3):273-8.

Association of estrogen receptor alpha gene with Alzheimer's disease: a
case-control study.

Monastero R(1), Cefalù AB, Camarda C, Noto D, Camarda LK, Caldarella R, Imbornone
E, Averna MR, Camarda R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Epidemiology and Psychology of Aging and Dementia, Section of
Neurology and Psychiatry, DiNOOP, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

Recent experimental data have offered the biological background to study the
estrogen receptor (ER) alpha gene as a candidate gene for AD. Genetic association
studies proposed ERalpha PvuII and XbaI gene polymorphisms as susceptibility
factors for AD, although subsequent studies did not replicate this finding. To
verify this association in a Caucasian Italian sample, we conducted a
case-control study in a dataset of 172 clinic-based probable AD cases and 172
age- and sex-matched controls. Possible interaction between ERalpha polymorphisms
and sex, age at onset of AD or apolipoprotein E (APOE) was examined. The
xx-genotype of the XbaI polymorphism was associated with the risk of developing
AD in the total sample (OR 1.9, 95% CI [1.2-3.1]). The risk increased in women
(OR 2.3, 95% CI [1.3-4.2]), and in subjects with late-onset AD (OR 2.1, 95% CI
[1.2-3.5]). PvuII polymorphism did not contribute to the risk of AD. There was no
evidence for a statistical interaction between the APOE and either the PvuII and 
XbaI polymorphisms. This result shows that ERalpha XbaI polymorphism is an
additional risk factor for women with late-onset AD.

PMID: 16914837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Radiol Med. 2006 Sep;111(6):818-27. Epub 2006 Aug 11.

Role of videofluorography swallow study in management of dysphagia in
neurologically compromised patients.

[Article in English, Italian]

Barbiera F(1), Condello S, De Palo A, Todaro D, Mandracchia C, De Cicco D.

Author information: 
(1)Unità Operativa di Radiologia "Domenico Noto", Azienda Ospedali Civili Riuniti
"Giovanni Paolo II", Sciacca, Italy.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to demonstrate the key role of the
videofluorography swallow study (VFSS) in the management of patients with
dysphagia and varying degrees of neurological deficit.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In 1 year (March 2004-March 2005) 47 patients with
oropharyngeal dysphagia due to different types of neurological deficit and who
required rehabilitation were studied. All patients underwent: (1) clinical
history assessment, (2) speech therapy assessment and (3) VFSS using digital
fluoroscopy (25 frames per second). Patients were divided according to the Waxman
classification into seven levels of dysphagia, and the most suitable type of
feeding was selected (normal diet, restricted diet, artificial nutrition). At
discharge, the possibility of changing the dietary regimen followed in hospital
was evaluated based on clinical progress, radiological follow-up and the degree
of improvement obtained.
RESULTS: VFSS confirmed aspiration in 21/47 (44%) patients, of whom four (8%) had
not been suspected at clinical-speech therapy assessment. In 13/47 (28%)
patients, VFSS identified changes at the oral (three patients) or pharyngeal
stage (three patients) or both (seven patients) but with no signs of silent
aspiration. In the remaining 13 (28%) patients, VFSS did not show any changes in 
swallow dynamics. On the basis of these data, together with the follow-up at the 
end of rehabilitation treatment, different nutritional strategies were adopted:
artificial nutrition [percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) or nasogastric
tube], a restricted-consistency diet or normal diet.
CONCLUSIONS: Our experience shows that VFSS precisely classifies the degree of
dysphagia that conditions the dietary management of each neurologically
compromised patient.

PMID: 16896559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Thromb Haemost. 2006 Aug;96(2):132-6.

Incidence of arterial cardiovascular events in patients with idiopathic venous
thromboembolism. A retrospective cohort study.

Bova C(1), Marchiori A, Noto A, Rossi V, Daniele F, Santoro C, Ricchio R, De
Lorenzo R, Umbaca R, Prandoni P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Azienda Ospedaliera, Cosenza, Italy. carbova@libero.it

Comment in
    Thromb Haemost. 2006 Aug;96(2):111-2.

Recent data have shown a higher incidence of arterial events in patients with
venous thromboembolism (VTE) of unknown origin than in those with the secondary
form of disease. Whether patients with idiopathic VTE have a higher risk of
subsequent arterial events than the general population is unknown. The aim was to
evaluate the rates of subsequent arterial events in patients with idiopathic VTE 
and control subjects. In a retrospective cohort study we compared the rates of
subsequent arterial events (i.e. acute myocardial infarction, ischemic stroke and
peripheral arterial disease) in 151 consecutive patients with objectively
confirmed spontaneous VTE and 151 control subjects randomly selected from the
database of two family physicians. We collected information about cardiovascular 
risk-factors (hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes, obesity and smoke) at
the time of VTE episode, or corresponding date for the controls, and considered
the follow-up from this time. Patients and controls who had suffered from
arterial events before the index date were excluded. During a mean follow-up of
43.1 (+/- 21.7) months there were 16 arterial events in the VTE patients and six 
in the control group (HR, 2.84;95% CI,1.11 to 7.27; p = 0.03). The difference
remained significant after adjusting for age and other cardiovascular risk
factors (HR 2.86;95% CI,1.07 to 7.62). Overall mortality was also higher in the
VTE patients (12 vs.4 deaths). In conclusion, arterial events are more common in 
patients with previous idiopathic VTE than in the general population. These
findings may have practical implications.

PMID: 16894454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2006 Aug;50(8):2782-8.

A subset of Staphylococcus aureus strains harboring staphylococcal cassette
chromosome mec (SCCmec) type IV is deficient in CcrAB-mediated SCCmec excision.

Noto MJ(1), Archer GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Virginia Commonwealth University School of
Medicine, Richmond, VA 23298-0565, USA.

The gene encoding resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics in the staphylococci is
found on the chromosome in a genomic island designated staphylococcal cassette
chromosome mec, or SCCmec. In addition to the resistance gene mecA, SCCmec also
contains site-specific recombinase genes that are capable of catalyzing the
chromosomal excision and reintegration of SCCmec. SCCmec is found in five major
isotypes partially defined by the recombinase genes present, either ccrAB or
ccrC. Of these, SCCmec type IV is presumed to be mobile in the environment, and
this mobility may be partially responsible for the rise in community-associated
methicillin-resistant staphylococcal infections. In this study, we investigate
the presumptive first step in type IV SCCmec mobility: chromosomal excision of
the element. CcrAB from a panel of six Staphylococcus aureus and four
Staphylococcus epidermidis strains were able to catalyze chromosomal excision of 
SCCmec types I and II, indicating that these proteins maintain recombinase
activity despite varying by up to 3.7% at the amino acid level. Excision of type 
IV SCCmec was not universally seen, as a subset of S. aureus strains with type IV
SCCmec did not excise their element. These strains are all highly related and
represent a lineage of successful community-associated pathogens. In addition,
the inability to excise SCCmec in these strains is associated with the insertion 
of a presumptive mobile element containing the gene for staphylococcal
enterotoxin H (seh) immediately downstream of SCCmec on the chromosome.
Acquisition of this mobile element, containing a known virulence gene, appears to
have stabilized the chromosomal integration of the methicillin resistance gene in
these strains.

PMCID: PMC1538682
PMID: 16870772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Sep;18(3):449-55.

RT-PCR and in situ hybridization analysis of apolipoprotein H expression in rat
normal tissues.

Ragusa MA(1), Costa S, Cefalù AB, Noto D, Fayer F, Travali S, Averna MR,
Gianguzza F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Developmental Biology 'A. Monroy', University of
Palermo, 90128 Palermo, Italy.

In this study, by using different techniques (i.e. Northern blot hybridization,
RT-PCR and Southern blot hybridization) on various normal rat tissues, we were
able to identify liver, kidney, heart, small intestine, brain, spleen, stomach
and prostate as tissues in which the ApoH gene is transcribed. Moreover, for some
of these tissues, by in situ hybridization, we found a specific localization of
apoH transcripts. For instance epithelial cells of the bile ducts in liver and of
the proximal tubules in kidney are the major sites of apoH synthesis. Our data
suggest that some of the different physiological roles proposed for apoH could
correlate with its direct expression, while others could correlate with its
absorption from bloodstream or adjacent cells.

PMID: 16865229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Subst Use Misuse. 2006;41(9):1263-76.

Drugs in the Brazilian print media: an exploratory survey of newspaper and
magazine stories in the year 2000.

Noto AR(1), Pinsky I, Mastroianni Fde C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Psicobiologia da Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), 
Centro Brasileiro de Informações sobre Drogas (CEBRID), Brasil.
ananoto@psicobio.epm.br

Print media is one of the key factors for defining public opinion and setting
public policies regarding drugs. Therefore, surveying its content should provide 
us with a better understanding of the situation. The few existing surveys on this
issue in Brazil point out discrepancies between print media and public health.
The objective of the present survey is to enhance the analysis of drug-related
stories in the Brazilian print media, based on a new time frame, in the year
2000. Major newspapers and magazines of all Brazilian state capitals have been
surveyed throughout year 2000, with 4,669 stories presenting drugs as their main 
topic. A random sample of 964 stories underwent content analysis. Approximately
half the stories (49.6%) dealt with smuggling- and repression-related issues. The
remainder of the stories (50.4%) approached health, legislation, and public
policy issues. Tobacco was the most widely discussed drug, with stories focusing 
mainly on damage caused by use and on measures for reducing consumption rates
among the population. Articles about cocaine, also featured frequently in the
print media, dealt mainly with the issues of drug dealing and of damage caused by
cocaine use. Regarding marijuana, in addition to the law enforcement repressive
approach, some articles dealt with decriminalization and therapeutic use.
Articles about alcoholic beverages, featured less frequently in the print media, 
approached the subject matter from various angles. The number of stories on
solvents and psychotropic medication was negligible. The results confirm
discrepancies between print media coverage and epidemiology. They also indicate
that each drug is approached differently, allowing for a better understanding of 
the "social climate" in Brazil regarding each drug. Of all possible social
interventions for dealing with the issue repression stands out, whereas stories
about treatment and damage reduction are relatively scarce. These findings
suggest the need for improved communication between journalists and health
professionals.

PMID: 16861177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Chir Ital. 2006 May-Jun;58(3):299-304.

The role of sentinel lymph-node biopsy (SLNB) in the treatment of breast cancer.

Marrazzo A(1), Taormina P, David M, Casà L, Lo Gerfo D, Noto A, Riili I, Ficola
U, Russo L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology and Clinical Application, University of
Palermo.

Sentinel lymph-node biopsy is an innovative method for axillary staging in breast
cancer patients, based on the concept that information about the status of the
entire lymphatic drainage from a tumour site could be obtained by identification 
and sampling of a "sentinel node". The aim of the study was to evaluate the
impact of sentinel lymph-node biopsy in the management of patients with early
invasive breast carcinoma. Three hundred and forty-one patients with primary
invasive breast carcinoma measuring less than 2 cm (less than 3 cm from January
2001) and clinically negative axillary nodes were recruited into the study.
Sentinel lymph-nodes were positive for metastases in 108/341 cases (31.7%).
Micrometastases were found in 22 patients and isolated tumour cells in 1 case.
The mean number of sentinel lymph-nodes removed was 1.8 per patient. The sentinel
lymph-node was the only positive node in 57 of 108 patients (52.8%). The
percentage of axillary recurrence in sentinel lymph-node-negative patients was
0%. The accuracy of sentinel lymph-node biopsy for axillary staging has been
confirmed in many studies. Axillary recurrences after sentinel lymph-node biopsy 
range from 0 to 1.6% in many series, while axillary recurrence after axillary
lymph-node dissection is about 0-3%. In our experience we observed no axillary
recurrences in 233 patients with sentinel lymph-node biopsy alone, with a median 
follow-up of 33 months, confirming the accuracy of the procedure, and sentinel
lymph-node-negative patients with sentinel lymph-node biopsy alone are no more at
risk for axillary recurrences than those undergoing axillary lymph-node
dissection.

PMID: 16845865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom. 2006;20(16):2433-40.

Analysis of sterols by high-performance liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry
combined with chemometrics.

Nagy K(1), Jakab A, Pollreisz F, Bongiorno D, Ceraulo L, Averna MR, Noto D, Vékey
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mass Spectrometry, Institute of Structural Chemistry, Chemical
Research Center, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Pusztaszeri ut 59-67, H-1025
Budapest, Hungary.

A newly developed high-performance liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry
(HPLC/MS) method has been successfully used to analyze plasma concentrations of
various phytosterols (cholestanol and beta-sitosterol) and cholesterol
metabolites (desmosterol and lathosterol). This was based on an unusual solvent
combination of water/methanol vs. methanol/acetone/n-hexane applied on a
Purospher Star RP-18e (125 x 2 mm, 3 microm) column, which proved excellent for
the separation, identification and quantification of plasma sterols. Simple
solid-phase extraction preparation of plasma samples was performed, followed by
the developed fast and robust HPLC separation. Results on four groups of people
were compared, those with low, normal and high plasma cholesterol levels and
those with high cholesterol levels on statin therapy, and the results were
evaluated using linear discriminant analysis (LDA). Variable selection for LDA
was achieved using backward removal selection. Highly discriminatory variables
were the ratios of desmosterol to sitosterol and of lathosterol to total plasma
cholesterol. The latter ratio was also excellent for distinguishing subjects on
statin therapy. The success rate of classification was 100%. The present pilot
study shows the potential of HPLC/MS analysis and chemometrics for studying
cholesterol-related disorders and warrants future full-scale medical study.

PMID: 16841361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Metabolism. 2006 Aug;55(8):1129-34.

Differential effects of apolipoprotein E isoforms on lipolysis of very
low-density lipoprotein triglycerides.

Hara M(1), Iso-O N, Satoh H, Noto H, Togo M, Ishibashi S, Kimura S, Kadowaki T,
Hashimoto Y, Tsukamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Apolipoprotein (apo) E plays a key role in lipoprotein metabolism and has been
proposed to modulate triglyceride (TG) lipolysis. However, no systematic
investigation on lipolysis using all 3 isoforms of apoE has been performed. To
clarify the role of common human apoE isoforms in the lipolysis of very
low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) TGs, we overexpressed human apoE isoforms in apoE 
and low-density lipoprotein receptor-deficient mice using adenoviral-mediated
gene transfer and used VLDL particles obtained from these mice for in vitro
lipolysis assay. Overexpression of apoE, regardless of its isoforms, increased
the TG content of VLDL in mice in vivo. In vitro analysis of the effect of apoE
on lipolysis revealed that irrespective of its isoforms, apoE did inhibit TG
lipolysis at every concentration of apoE examined, and this inhibitory effect
became more pronounced as the apoE content of VLDL increased. No difference was
observed in TG lipolysis activity among isoforms at low apoE/TG ratio; however,
intermediate ratios of apoE/TG, which reflect physiologic VLDL apoE/TG ratios,
demonstrated a significantly greater level of lipolysis inhibition in apoE2, but 
less so in apoE4 compared with other isoforms. This differential effect by apoE
isoforms on lipolysis was attenuated at higher apoE/TG ratios; nevertheless,
apoE2 still inhibited lipolysis significantly more than did apoE4. Enrichment of 
VLDL with apoE decreased both the apoC contents and apoC-II/C-III ratios of VLDL,
contributing, at least in part, to the inhibitory function of apoE on lipolysis. 
The present study clarifies the differential lipolysis-modulating effect of apoE 
isoforms, which would help explain the difference in pre- and postprandial TG
levels among humans carrying different apoE isoforms.

PMID: 16839851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Theor Popul Biol. 2006 Nov;70(3):289-99. Epub 2006 May 26.

The coalescence time of sampled genes in the structured coalescent model.

Notohara M(1), Umeda T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Natural Sciences, Nagoya City University, Mizuho, Nagoya
467-8501, Japan. noto@nsc.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

The aim of this article is to investigate the distribution of the coalescence
time (T) for sampled genes in the structured coalescent. We obtain some exact
solutions for small samples and approximate distributions for n sampled genes in 
strong and weak migration. We also conduct computer simulation to evaluate
efficiencies of these approximations and show the dependency of the distribution 
of the coalescence time on the geographical structure and the intensity of
migration. In a panmictic population, we prove that the conditional distribution 
of the coalescence time given the number of segregating sites (S) among sampled
genes is given by the weighted mean of the convolution of gamma distributions. We
also study the joint distribution of T and S in the structured coalescent model
and show some exact solutions.

PMID: 16828136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Org Chem. 2006 Jul 7;71(14):5144-50.

Study of aromatic nucleophilic substitution with amines on nitrothiophenes in
room-temperature ionic liquids: are the different effects on the behavior of
para-like and ortho-like isomers on going from conventional solvents to
room-temperature ionic liquids related to solvation effects?

D'Anna F(1), Frenna V, Noto R, Pace V, Spinelli D.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica E. Paterno, Università degli Studi di
Palermo, Viale delle Scienze-Parco d'Orleans II, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
fdanna@unipa.it

The kinetics of the nucleophilic aromatic substitution of some
2-L-5-nitrothiophenes (para-like isomers) with three different amines
(pyrrolidine, piperidine, and morpholine) were studied in three room-temperature 
ionic liquids ([bmim][BF4], [bmim][PF6], and [bm(2)im][BF4], where bmim =
1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium and bm(2)im = 1-butyl-2,3-dimethylimidazolium). To
calculate thermodynamic parameters, a useful instrument to gain information
concerning reagent-solvent interactions, the reaction was carried out over the
temperature range 293-313 K. The reaction occurs faster in ionic liquids than in 
conventional solvents (methanol, benzene), a dependence of rate constants on
amine concentration similar to that observed in methanol, suggesting a parallel
behavior. The above reaction also was studied with 2-bromo-3-nitrothiophene, an
ortho-like derivative able to give peculiar intramolecular interactions in the
transition state, which are strongly affected by the reaction medium.

PMID: 16808500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Minerva Cardioangiol. 2006 Apr;54(2):277-84.

Submassive acute pulmonary thromboembolism with normal D-dimer. A case report.

[Article in English, Italian]

Di Grande A(1), Tomaselli V, Massarelli L, Narbone G, Sabbia CM, Noto P, Amico S,
Nigro F, Di Mauro A.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Emergency Medicine and Surgery, S. Elia Hospital, Caltanisetta, Italy.
adigrande@yahoo.it

Pulmonary thromboembolism is a relatively common disease in an Emergency
Department. Diagnosis, often difficult, is based on careful evaluation of risk
factors, clinical examination, radiological and laboratory investigations. Plasma
D-dimer, a degradation product of cross-linked fibrin with low specificity and
very high sensibility, is considered extremely useful as screening to rule out a 
pulmonary thromboembolism. We report the case of a 74 year old woman who
presented in the Emergency Department suffering from the sudden onset of dyspnea 
4 hours before. Plasma D-dimer (automated latex-enhanced turbidimetric test) was 
normal (253 ng/mL; normal value: 278 ng/mL), but spiral CT angiography showed a
sub-massive thromboembolism of the principal branch of the right pulmonary
artery, also involving the middle and the inferior lobar branches. A cardiac
echo-color-Doppler demonstrated an enlargement of the right cardiac section with 
telediastolic pressure in the pulmonary artery of 74 mmHg (normal value 4-12
mmHg). A second measurement of plasma D-dimer, 12 hours later, remained in the
normal range (274 ng/mL) and only after four days was there a significant
increase (1017 ng/mL). The authors, taking the case as a starting point,
stigmatize the difficulties that such diagnosis involves, despite indications of 
guidelines.

PMID: 16778760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2003 Dec;22(4 Suppl):167-9.

Resection and transplantation: evaluation of surgical perspectives in HIV
positive patients affected by end-stage liver disease.

Ettorre GM(1), Vennarecci G, Boschetto A, Giovannelli L, Antonini M, Carboni F,
Santoro R, Lepiane P, Cosimelli M, Lonardo MT, Del Nonno F, Perracchio L, Maritti
M, Moricca P, D'Offizi G, Narciso P, Noto P, Boumis E, Petrosillo N, Visco G,
Santoro E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Digestive Surgery and Liver Transplantation, IRCCS Regina Elena 
Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the opportunity of surgical
treatment in terms of liver resection or liver transplantation in HIV positive
patients affected by an end stage liver disease that referred to our liver unit.
METHODS: Among 1350 outpatients who referred to our liver unit from January 2002 
to September 2003, thirty-two (2,4%) were HIV positive. The routes of
transmission of the viral infection, the related co-infections and the underlying
liver disease were recorded. The therapeutic pathway was analysed. The kind and
the duration of the surgical procedures were assessed.
RESULTS: Fourteen (44%) of these thirty-two patients were not suitable for
surgical treatment. Surgery was planned in 9 of 32 HIV positive patients (28%).
Four patients (12%) were submitted to liver resection and OLT was performed in
five patients (15%). Hepatocellular Carcinoma was present in 4 (44%) of the HIV
positive patients considered for surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion in our centre the 28% of HIV positive out patients had
the opportunity to receive a surgical treatment. The candidate to this surgery is
mostly young, HCV and/or HBV coinfected and affected by HCC in 44% of cases.

PMID: 16767925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Environ Radioact. 2006;89(2):138-49. Epub 2006 Jun 8.

Seasonal variations in 228Ra/226Ra ratio within coastal waters of the Sea of
Japan: implications for water circulation patterns in coastal areas.

Inoue M(1), Tanaka K, Watanabe S, Kofuji H, Yamamoto M, Komura K.

Author information: 
(1)Low Level Radioactivity Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental
Technology, Kanazawa University, Nomi, Ishikawa 923-1224, Japan.
mutsuo@llrl.ku-unet.ocn.ne.jp

In this study, low-background gamma-spectrometry was used to determine the
(228)Ra/(226)Ra ratio of 131 coastal water samples from various environments
around Honshu Island, Japan (mainly around Noto Peninsula) at 1-3 month intervals
from April 2003 until September 2005. Spatial variation in (228)Ra/(226)Ra ratios
was also assessed by analyzing 34 coastal water samples from five areas within
the Sea of Japan during May and June 2004. The (228)Ra/(226)Ra ratio of coastal
water from all sites around Noto Peninsula shows seasonal variation, with minimum
values during summer ((228)Ra/(226)Ra=0.7) and maximum values during
autumn-winter ((228)Ra/(226)Ra=1.7-2). This seasonal variation is similar to that
recorded for coastal water between Tsushima Strait and Noto Peninsula. The
measured lateral variation in (228)Ra/(226)Ra ratios within coastal water between
Tsushima Strait and Noto Peninsula is only minor (0.5-0.7; May-June 2004).
Coastal waters from two other sites (Pacific shore and Tsugaru Strait, north
Honshu) show no clear seasonal variation in (228)Ra/(226)Ra ratio. These measured
variations in (228)Ra/(226)Ra ratio, especially the temporal variations, have
important implications for seasonal changes in patterns of coastal water
circulation within the Sea of Japan.

PMID: 16762463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Ann Oncol. 2006 Jun;17 Suppl 7:vii27-9.

Nuclear and cytoplasmic interaction of pRb2/p130 and ER-beta in MCF-7 breast
cancer cells.

Macaluso M(1), Montanari M, Noto PB, Gregorio V, Surmacz E, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center of
Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Estrogens exhibit important biological functions and influence several
pathological processes of hormone-dependent diseases. The biological actions of
estrogens require their interaction with two estrogen receptors (ER-alpha and
ER-beta), which are ligand-dependent transcription factors. ER-alpha and ER-beta 
exhibit distinct tissue expression patterns as well as show different patterns of
gene regulation. In addition, it has been suggested that ER-beta works as a
counter partner of ER-alpha through inhibition of the transactivating functions
of ER-alpha. For instance, ER-beta seems to play a different role in breast
tumorigenesis than ER-alpha, as ER-beta decreased expression in breast cancer has
been correlated with bad prognosis. Biological activities of ER-alpha and ER-beta
could be controlled by a number of interacting proteins such as
activators/inhibitors, ligand binding and kinases. We have previously reported
that pRb2/p130, retinoblastoma related protein, could be involved in the
silencing of ER-alpha gene during breast tumorigenesis. Here, we report that
ER-beta and pRb2/p130 proteins co-immunoprecipitate in both nucleus and cytoplasm
of MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Our hypothesis is that the interaction of pRb2/130 
with ER-beta may have a functional significance in regulating ER-beta activity.

PMID: 16760287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Minerva Anestesiol. 2006 Jun;72(6):533-41.

Metabolic treatment of critically ill patients: energy balance and substrate
disposal.

Iapichino G(1), Radrizzani D, Armani S, Noto A, Spanu P, Mistraletti G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, San Paolo Hospital,
University of Milan, Milan, Italy. g.iapichino@unimi.it

Oxidation of substrates is the main biochemical process used by the human body to
produce energy. Different substrates (carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins) have
different effects on oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production: during the
critical phase of pathologies it could be relevant pay attention to the use of
various nutrients, that have some altered effect respect to the normal subjects
metabolism, and during the length of metabolic treatment, too. Generally,
nutrition lead to replenish body stores, while endogenous substrates are used to 
be oxidized. Critically ill patients show a preference for prompt energy
availability (i.e. glucose) to avoid endogenous protein catabolism; lipids are
shown to have a more pronounced storage effect. Adequate amount of energy intake 
in carbohydrates determine an increase of RQ, that means a shift from a more
lipid-based to a more glucose-based oxidation. Composition of dietary intake can 
be usefully different for each pathology, and also for different periods of the
same pathology, because critically ill patients have a variety of metabolic needs
during their stay in ICU.

PMID: 16682927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Psychoactive Drugs. 2006 Mar;38(1):13-8.

A profile of Ecstasy (MDMA) use in São Paulo, Brazil: an ethnographic study.

Battisti MC(1), Noto AR, Nappo S, Carlini Ede A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology, Federal University of Sao Paulo (UNIFESP),
Brazil. murilobattisti@uol.com.br

The use of Ecstasy in Brazil has gained visibility in recent years. Nevertheless,
scientific data on this issue remain scarce. The present study focused on
clarifying this phenomenon by means of qualitative and ethnographic research.
Observational studies (N = 8), information obtained from key informants (N = 14) 
and interviews with Ecstasy users (N = 32) from the city of São Paulo were part
of this study. The results pointed to night clubs and rave parties where
electronic music is played as the main context of use. Interviews with users
revealed a sample of young adult members of the highest layers of society, with a
good educational background and access to the labor market. Furthermore, polydrug
use was manifested. Users' typology was established regarding the pattern of drug
use, showing two profiles of users: the "Rave Generation," consisting of more
recent users who initiated this use with the arrival of the large-sized rave
parties at the end of the 1990s. The second profile, the "Sons of the Hell's
Club," consisted of more experienced users (beginning in the early 1990s) and
showed a richer history of use. Neither profile group had sought help regarding
their Ecstasy use, and both showed positive beliefs related to the safety of use.

PMID: 16681171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Emerg Infect Dis. 2005 Sep;11(9):1491-2.

VanB-VanC1 Enterococcus gallinarum, Italy.

Mammina C, Di Noto AM, Costa A, Nastasi A.

PMCID: PMC3310630
PMID: 16673519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Dalton Trans. 2006 May 14;(18):2202-6. Epub 2006 Jan 20.

Synthesis of diazahexathia-24-crown-8 derivatives and structures of Ag+
complexes.

Habata Y(1), Seo J, Otawa S, Osaka F, Noto K, Sung Lee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Toho University, 2-2-1 Miyama,
Funabashi, Chiba 274-8510, Japan. habata@chem.sci.toho-u.ac.jp

Diazahexathia-24-crown-8 (2) has been isolated from the reaction mixture during
the preparation of monoazatrithia-12-crown-4 (1). When N-Boc protected
bis(2-chloroethyl)amine was employed as a starting material, N-Boc protected
monoazatrithia-12-crown-4 (3) and N-Boc protected diazahexathia-24-crown-4 (4)
were separated easily. Double-armed diazahexathia-24-crown-8 having two
3',5'-dichlorobenzyl groups (5a) or two 2-phenylethyl groups (5b) were also
prepared using reductive amination. The stoichiometry and detailed structures of 
the Ag+ complexes with and were investigated by 1H NMR titration experiments and 
X-ray crystallography.

PMID: 16673034  [PubMed]


387. J Neurophysiol. 2006 Sep;96(3):1030-41. Epub 2006 May 3.

Distinct short-term and long-term adaptation to reduce saccade size in monkey.

Robinson FR(1), Soetedjo R, Noto C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195-7420, USA. robinsn@u.washington.edu

In monkeys, saccades that repeatedly overshoot their targets adapt to become
smaller by the time the monkey has made 1,000-2,000 saccades. In life, adaptation
must keep movements accurate for long periods of time. Previous work describes
only saccade adaptation that occurs within a few hours. Here we describe
long-term saccade adaptation elicited in three monkeys by 19 days of training.
Each day a monkey made saccades to track 16 degrees leftward and rightward target
movements. During saccades, the target stepped back toward its starting position 
6.4 degrees (40%) in two monkeys or 8 degrees (50%) in the third. After each
day's adaptation, we blindfolded the monkey with goggles and returned it to its
cage overnight. We found that adapting saccades for 19 days elicited
significantly larger, long-lasting reduction in saccade size than did adapting
for only 1 day. Further, after 19 days of adaptation we could elicit additional, 
apparently normal, short-term reduction in saccade size by increasing the size of
the intra-saccade target movement. In contrast, we could elicit only small
additional size reduction after only 1 day of adaptation. A simple model using
separate short- and long-term adaptation mechanisms can reproduce many of the
features of saccade gain exhibited by monkeys during a 19-day adaptation. We
conclude that there is a long-term saccade-adaptation mechanism that is distinct 
from the well-characterized short-term system and that this newly recognized
system is responsible for long-term maintenance of saccade accuracy.

PMID: 16672299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Recenti Prog Med. 2006 Feb;97(2):108-12; quiz 122.

[Anti-TNF (infliximab) treatment in Crohn disease: safety profile].

[Article in Italian]

Carroccio A(1), Di Prima L, Pirrone G, Ambrosiano G, Noto D, Cefalù AB.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Medicina Interna, Università, Palermo. acarroccio@hotmail.com

Anti-tumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF) therapy is an important therapeutic
addition in the treatment of active Crohn's disease. Although controlled trials
have confirmed the efficacy of anti-TNF (infliximab) treatment, serious
toxicities related to the therapies have emerged. The purpose of this article was
to review the safety profile of infliximab, and in particular analyse the
infectious complications, the autoimmune disorders and the theoretical risk of
cancer and lymphoma.

PMID: 16671277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2006 Oct;291(4):H1529-35. Epub 2006 Apr 28.

Lack of activation of molecular forms of the BNP system in human grade 1
hypertension and relationship to cardiac hypertrophy.

Belluardo P(1), Cataliotti A, Bonaiuto L, Giuffrè E, Maugeri E, Noto P, Orlando
G, Raspa G, Piazza B, Babuin L, Chen HH, Martin FL, McKie PM, Heublein DM,
Burnett JC Jr, Malatino LS.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiorenal Research Laboratory, 200 First St., SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. 
cataliotti.alessandro@mayo.edu

We evaluated relationships among two circulating molecular forms of brain
natriuretic peptide (BNP32 and NT-proBNP), severity of hypertension (HTN), and
cardiac hypertrophy in subjects with mild, moderate, and severe HTN. We
prospectively studied 78 patients (43 males; mean age 51.4 +/- 11 yr) with
essential HTN and 28 age- and sex-matched controls. BNP32 and NT-proBNP were
measured by radioimmunoassay. In grade 1 HTN, BNP32 was not elevated and
NT-proBNP was reduced (P = 0.030) compared with controls. However,
log-transformed values of BNP32 and NT-proBNP were both increased with severity
of HTN from grade 1 to 3 (P <0.0001 and P = 0.003, respectively). By multivariate
analysis, log BNP32 was independently predicted by age (beta = 0.210, P = 0.026) 
and HTN grade (beta = 0.274, P = 0.004), whereas log NT-proBNP was independently 
predicted by sex (beta = 0.235, P = 0.012) and HTN grade (beta = 0.218, P =
0.0023). Two forms of BNP were measured in normal subjects and patients with
essential HTN. In grade 1 HTN, BNP32 was unchanged and NT-proBNP was
significantly reduced compared with controls. As severity increased in humans
with grade 1 to 3 HTN, both BNP32 and NT-proBNP levels were increased while not
being affected by the presence of left ventricular hypertrophy. The lack of
activation of BNP32 together with the reduction of NT-proBNP in grade 1 HTN may
represent an impaired response of the BNP system in the early phase of HTN. The
later activation of both forms of BNP may be a late compensatory effect, because 
it correlates with severity of HTN rather than cardiac hypertrophy/remodeling.

PMID: 16648193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2006 Apr;41(4):498-504.

Multiple food hypersensitivity as a cause of refractory chronic constipation in
adults.

Carroccio A(1), Di Prima L, Iacono G, Florena AM, D'Arpa F, Sciumè C, Cefalù AB, 
Noto D, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, University Hospital of Palermo, Italy.

Chronic constipation that is unresponsive to laxative treatment is a severe
illness, but children unresponsive to laxatives have been successfully treated
with an elimination diet. We report the first cases of refractory chronic
constipation caused by food hypersensitivity in adults. Four patients with
refractory constipation who were unresponsive to high doses of laxatives were put
on an oligo-antigenic diet and underwent successive double-blind,
placebo-controlled, food challenges (DBPFC). Routine laboratory tests,
immunological assays, colonoscopy, esophago-gastroduodenoscopy and rectal and
duodenal histology were performed. While on an elimination diet, bowel habits
normalized in all patients and a DBPFC challenge triggered the reappearance of
constipation. In comparison with another 13 patients with refractory constipation
unresponsive to the elimination diet, observed over the same period, the patients
with food-hypersensitivity-related constipation had the following
characteristics: longer duration of illness (p < 0.03), lower body mass index (p 
< 0.03), higher frequency of self-reported food intolerance (p < 0.01), higher
frequency of nocturnal abdominal pain and anal itching (p < 0.01). In patients
with food hypersensitivity, hemoglobin concentrations and peripheral leukocytes
were lower than those in controls (p < 0.03). The duodenal and rectal mucosa
histology showed lymphocyte and eosinophil infiltration, and the duodenal villi
were flattened in two cases. In adult patients, refractory chronic constipation
may be caused by food hypersensitivity and an elimination diet is effective in
these subjects.

PMID: 16635922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Metabolism. 2006 May;55(5):662-8.

Accumulation of apoE-enriched triglyceride-rich lipoproteins in patients with
coronary artery disease.

Barbagallo CM(1), Rizzo M, Noto D, Frasheri A, Pernice V, Rubino A, Pieri D,
Pinto V, Cefalù AB, Giordano C, Notarbartolo A, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Palermo,
and Intensive Care Unit, Villa Maria Eleonora Hospital, Palermo, Italy.
carlob@unipa.it

Triglycerides (TGs) are vehicled by multiple particles with different abilities
to promote atherosclerosis. Among plasma TG-rich lipoproteins (TRLs), subspecies 
may or may not contain apolipoprotein E (apoE) molecules: in this study, we
evaluated the relative contribution of apoE-rich and apoE-poor TRLs to coronary
atherosclerosis. We selected a group of males with premature coronary artery
disease (CAD) without any of the classical nonlipid risk factors and/or high
plasma lipid levels and evaluated the plasma concentration of TRL subspecies in
comparison with healthy controls. Patients with CAD and controls had total
cholesterol and TG levels within the normal range (despite slightly, even if
significantly, higher TG levels in patients with CAD) and low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol levels near optimal values. Nevertheless, patients with CAD had
significantly lower high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, smaller low-density
lipoprotein peak particle size, and a reduced HDL2b subfraction than controls. In
addition, we observed higher concentrations of total TRL in patients with CAD
together with a selective increase in apoE-rich particles. All these data were
confirmed after correction for TG levels. We also investigated which parameters
were associated with the spread of coronary atherosclerosis. Subjects with a
single-vessel disease had selectively lower levels of apoE-rich fractions than
patients with a multivessel disease. This was confirmed by multivariate analysis.
Patients with a premature CAD free of nonlipid conventional risk factors, despite
not having elevated lipid levels, show several lipoprotein abnormalities. Besides
known atherogenic alterations, the accumulation of apoE-rich TRL subfractions may
represent an additive factor that can potentially promote and initiate the
atherosclerotic process.

PMID: 16631444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Atherosclerosis. 2007 Mar;191(1):128-34. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

Serum osteoprotegerin is inversely associated with carotid plaque echogenicity in
humans.

Vik A(1), Mathiesen EB, Notø AT, Sveinbjørnsson B, Brox J, Hansen JB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Atherothrombotic Research in Tromsø (CART), Department of Medicine,
Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tromsø, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway.
anders.vik@fagmed.uit.no

Osteoprotegerin (OPG) is a member of the tumour necrosis factor superfamily
involved in the regulation of bone metabolism and vascular calcification. High
serum values of OPG are associated with cardiovascular disease in humans. The
purpose was to investigate serum OPG levels in subclinical carotid
atherosclerosis and the relation between OPG levels and plaque morphology. OPG
levels were compared in 29 persons with echogenic carotid plaques, 30 persons
with echolucent plaques and 41 persons without carotid plaques, all recruited
from a population health study. Computerized assessment of plaque echogenicity
was done by use of the gray scale median (GSM). Participants with echogenic
carotid plaques had lower serum OPG level (1.23 ng/ml; 1.02-1.48) (geometric
mean; 95% CI) than persons with echolucent plaques (1.76 ng/ml; 1.46-2.14) and
those without plaques (1.89 ng/ml; 1.60-2.21). OPG and PTH were independently
related to GSM. A significant trend for decrease in GSM across quartiles of OPG
was found (p=0.003) which remained significant even after adjustment for PTH and 
smoking. The present study demonstrates lower serum OPG levels in persons with
subclinical echogenic carotid plaques and identified an inverse relation between 
serum OPG and plaque echogenicity. The findings support the concept that OPG may 
play an important role in arterial calcification.

PMID: 16620835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2006 Apr;4(4):455-9.

Unexplained elevated serum pancreatic enzymes: a reason to suspect celiac
disease.

Carroccio A(1), Di Prima L, Scalici C, Soresi M, Cefalù AB, Noto D, Averna MR,
Montalto G, Iacono G.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, University Hospital of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
acarroccio@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The frequency of elevated serum pancreatic enzymes in patients
with celiac disease (CD) is unknown. The aim of this study was to evaluate the
serum levels of pancreatic enzymes in CD patients.
METHODS: Serum pancreatic isoamylase and lipase levels were assayed in 90 adult
and 112 pediatric consecutive CD patients at diagnosis and after 12 months of
gluten-free diet (GFD). Serum elastase and trypsin levels were assayed in a
subgroup of adult CD patients. Pancreatic ultrasonography was also performed.
RESULTS: Twenty-six adult (29%) and 29 pediatric (26%) CD patients exhibited
elevated values of serum pancreatic amylase and/or lipase; trypsin was elevated
in 69% and elastase in 19%. The frequency of elevated serum pancreatic enzymes
observed was identical in the patients with "typical" and "atypical" CD symptoms 
and in the asymptomatic patients. Most of the elevated values were lower than
2-fold the threshold limits. Elevated pancreatic enzymes were not associated with
alcohol consumption, drug use, presence of abdominal pain, or diabetes mellitus. 
Abdominal ultrasound scan showed no abnormal findings in the pancreatic region in
any of the CD patients. After 12 months of GFD, pancreatic amylase was elevated
in 3 cases and lipase in 2 cases; these patients had not strictly adhered to the 
GFD.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated a frequency of about 25% of elevated pancreatic
enzymes values in CD patients, including subjects without gastrointestinal
manifestations and apparently asymptomatic subjects. The finding of elevated
serum amylase or lipase level, in the absence of signs of pancreatic disease,
would appear to suggest a need to screen for celiac disease.

PMID: 16616350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Phys Chem B. 2006 Apr 13;110(14):7357-66.

Adsorption of unsaturated hydrocarbon moieties on H:Si(111) by Grignard reaction.

Yamada T(1), Shirasaka K, Noto M, Kato HS, Kawai AM.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN (The Institute for Chemical and Physical Research), 2-1 Hirosawa,
Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Grafting of unsaturated hydrocarbon moieties (-CH(2)-CH=CH(2), -CH=CH(2),
-CH(2)-CH=CH-CH(3), and -CCH) by a C-Si covalent bond was attempted by the
Grignard reaction on hydrogen-terminated Si(111) in tetrahydrofuran solutions.
The product adsorbates were monitored by vibrational methods of high-resolution
electron energy loss spectroscopy and multiple internal infrared reflection
absorption spectroscopy, as well as Auger electron spectroscopy. The temperature 
and the period of reaction were adjusted so as to preserve the unsaturated
carbon-carbon bonds. The -CH(2)-CH=CH(2) group was introduced by a mild reaction 
condition, with the reservation of the C=C double bond confirmed. The unsaturated
bonds in -CH(2)-CH=CH-CH(3) and -CCH were also reserved. Only in the case of
-CH=CH(2) was the reservation of the C=C double bond not realized. Unsaturated
hydrocarbon moieties are applicable for further organic modification to introduce
functional groups, and are prospective materials in nanofabrication and
biological application on silicon wafer surfaces.

PMID: 16599510  [PubMed]


395. J Phys Chem B. 2006 Apr 6;110(13):6740-9.

Photoassisted adsorption of allylamine and 1-butene on H:Si(111) studied by
surface vibrational spectroscopies.

Yamada T(1), Noto M, Shirasaka K, Kato HS, Kawai M.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN (The Institute for Chemical and Physical Research), 2-1 Hirosawa,
Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Ultraviolet photoassisted adsorption of terminally double-bonded molecules,
allylamine (CH2=CH-CH2-NH2) and 1-butene (CH2=CH-CH2-CH3), on hydrogen-terminated
silicon (111) surface was attempted to obtain adsorbates covalently terminating
the surface Si atoms. The adsorption process was monitored by high-resolution
electron energy loss spectroscopy, multiple internal infrared
reflection-absorption spectroscopy, and Auger electron spectroscopy. Allylamine
adsorbates emerged upon delivery of allylamine gas under ultraviolet irradiation.
The N-H bonds in allylamine were evidenced to survive over the photoadsorption
process by vibrational analysis and by the reaction with ketene. CH3- groups were
detected at low coverage, indicating anchoring of the organic moieties by the
secondary (sec-) type carbon atoms, which were taken over by the primary (n-)
type with increasing coverage. C-D bonds were detected after deposition on
deuterium-terminated Si(111) upon incorporation of Si-terminating H into the
hydrocarbon part of adsorbates. In the case of 1-butene, not only the C=C end but
also the CH3- end of a molecule might attach on Si, resulting in emergence of
adsorbates composed of CH2 groups. The newly obtained adsorbates are prospective 
as a material applied for nanolithography, fine electrochemistry, and
nano-biotechnology.

PMID: 16570980  [PubMed]


396. Minerva Med. 2006 Feb;97(1):65-77.

Sperm output in patients with primary infertility and hepatitis B or C virus;
negative influence of HBV infection during concomitant varicocele.

[Article in English, Italian]

Vicari E(1), Arcoria D, Di Mauro C, Noto R, Noto Z, La Vignera S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Garibaldi Hospital, University of Catania, 
Catania, Italy. enzodante@email.it

AIM: The aim of this study was to evaluate the sperm abnormalities in young
infertile patients with hepatitis B (HBV) or C (HCV) virus infection and to
evaluate the additional negative influence of varicocele on sperm parameters in
these patients.
METHODS: Part I. Forty-two infertile patients in Child-Pugh classification A with
HBV (n=23) or HCV (n=19) infection, underwent sperm analysis and quantitative
detection of HBV-DNA or HCV-RNA in blood serum. Sperm parameters were compared to
those of a group of 30 patients with primary infertility due to causes different 
from liver diseases and/or varicocele). Part II. Twenty-one infertile patients
with varicocele associated to HBV (n=11) or HCV (n=10) infection were also
enrolled and underwent semen analysis: a group of 39 patients without liver
disease, but with varicocele alone served as matched-control group.
RESULTS: Part I. HBV patients (with a median HBV-DNA load of 6x10(5) copies/mL,
range 1x10(5)-10x10(6)) showed median sperm parameters (sperm density, total
number, forward motility and morphology, viability) significantly worse than
those found in patients with HCV (with a median HCV-RNA load of 2.3x10(6)
copies/mL, range (2x10(5)-12x10(6)). Sperm parameters showed no significant
correlation with the duration of infertility neither with the duration of viral
infection. Sperm morphology only, exhibited a trend (P=0.06) of negative
correlationship (r=-0.59) with the viral HBV-DNA load, whereas the other sperm
parameters studied showed no correlation with the viral load. Part II. The group 
of infertile patients with HBV and varicocele showed median values of all sperm
parameter evaluated significantly worse than those found in infertile patients
with varicocele alone, or with HCV infection plus varicocele.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with HBV infection show worse sperm parameters compared
with HCV patients. The additional presence of varicocele further impairs sperm
output in HBV patients.

PMID: 16565700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Clin Ultrasound. 2006 Feb;34(2):43-9.

B-flow sonographic demonstration for assessing carotid atherosclerosis in young
patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia.

Noto N(1), Okada T, Yoshino Y, Harada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nihon University School of Medicine, 30-1 Oyaguchi, 
Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8610, Japan.

PURPOSE: To determine whether bloodstream swirls detected with B-mode flow
(B-flow) sonography at the region of the carotid bifurcation can predict the
early progression of atherosclerosis, we prospectively examined the relationships
between the size of bloodstream swirls as identified with B-flow sonography, the 
local mechanical behavior of the common carotid artery (CCA), and some
cardiovascular risk factors in young patients with heterozygous familial
hypercholesterolemia (FH).
METHODS: Thirty-eight young patients (mean age 25.8 +/- 14.1 years) with FH were 
evaluated for the following parameters: age, sex, body mass index, degree of
dyslipidemia, presence of a plaque, intima-media thickness (IMT), elastic modulus
(Ep) and internal diameter of the CCA via duplex scan, wall shear stress, maximal
diameter of the bloodstream swirl (Sm) at bifurcation, maximal diameter of the
CCA (Cm) at the level of the swirl's center, and diameter ratio (Sm/Cm) via
B-flow sonography.
RESULTS: Bloodstream swirls of varying size at the site of bifurcation were
observed in all patients. Six (15.7%) out of 38 patients exhibited plaques at
bifurcation. All plaques were located at the far wall and were in contact with
the distal portion of the bloodstream swirl as observed with B-flow sonography.
Univariate analysis revealed that Sm/Cm and Sm were positively correlated with
age, presence of a plaque, IMT, and Ep and were negatively correlated with shear 
stress. Multivariate analysis revealed that Sm was significantly correlated with 
age (P < 0.01) and Ep (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that a bloodstream swirl visualized at the
carotid bifurcation with B-flow sonography may be an indicator of a local
mechanism for the age-related progression of atherosclerosis in young patients
with FH.

2006 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 16547980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2006 Feb 20;62(2):305-14.

[Measurement of patient skin dose in interventional radiology using passive
integrating dosimeter].

[Article in Japanese]

Iida H(1), Noto K, Nakagawa H, Horii J, Chabatake M, Yamamoto T, Kobayashi I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Kanazawa University Hospital.

To avoid radiation injury from interventional radiology (IVR), quality assurance 
(QA) of IVR equipment based on dosimetry is important. In this study, we
investigated the usefulness of measuring patient skin dose with a passive
integrating dosimeter and water phantom. The optically stimulated luminescence
dosimeter (OSLD) was chosen from among various passive integrating dosimeters.
The characteristics of the OSLD were compared with a reference ionization
dosimeter. The effective energy obtained from the OSLD was compared with that
found by the aluminum attenuation method for using the reference ionization
dosimeter. Doses and effective energies measured by OSLD correlated well with
those of the reference ionization dosimeter. (dose: y=0.971x, r=0.999, effective 
energy: y=0.990x, r=0.994). It was suggested that OSLD could simultaneously and
correctly measure both patient skin dose and effective energy. Patient skin dose 
rate and effective energy for 15 IVR units of 10 hospitals were investigated
using OSLD and a water phantom for automatic brightness control fluoroscopy. The 
measurement was performed at the surface of a water phantom that was located on
the interventional reference point, and source image intensifier distance was
fixed to 100 cm. When the 9-inch field size was selected, the average patient
skin dose rate was 16.3+/-8.1 mGy/min (3.6-32.0 mGy/min), the average effective
energy was 34.6+/-4.1 keV (30.5-42.5 keV). As a result, it was suggested that QA 
should be performed not only for patient dose but also for effective energy. QA
of equipment is integral to maintaining consistently appropriate doses.
Consequently, the dosimetry of each IVR unit should be regularly executed to
estimate the outline of patient skin dose. It was useful to investigate patient
skin dose/effective energy with the passive integrating dosimeter for IVR
equipment.

PMID: 16520715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Diabetes Complications. 2006 Mar-Apr;20(2):113-20.

Hepatitis C infection and diabetes.

Noto H(1), Raskin P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, The
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, TX 75390-8858, USA.

Since the discovery of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) in 1989, attention has been
paid to the association of chronic HCV infection and the development of diabetes.
The risk factors for diabetes include older age, HCV genotype 3, severe liver
fibrosis, family history of diabetes, and liver/kidney transplantation. Emerging 
evidence in animals and humans has shown that HCV infection induces hepatic
steatosis and increases tumor necrosis factor-alpha level, both resulting in the 
development of insulin resistance and subsequent type 2 diabetes. It is suggested
that the presence of diabetes and hepatic steatosis may enhance fibrosis
progression, hepatocellular carcinoma, and atherosclerosis. Interferon is
reportedly associated with improved glucose tolerance. However, interferon might 
enhance underlying autoimmunity against beta cells, leading to overt type 1
diabetes that is genetically predisposed or give rise to hyperglycemia, resulting
in the development of type 2 diabetes. In light of the national epidemic of type 
2 diabetes, the link between HCV and diabetes would be a major public health
problem. Further clinical researches are awaited in order to effectively detect, 
prevent, and treat HCV-associated type 2 diabetes, which would also slow the
progression of hepatitis C itself.

PMID: 16504840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Chromatogr A. 2006 Apr 21;1112(1-2):171-80. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Chromatographic fingerprint analysis--a rational approach for quality assessment 
of traditional Chinese herbal medicine.

Xie P(1), Chen S, Liang YZ, Wang X, Tian R, Upton R.

Author information: 
(1)Zhuhai Chromap Institute of Herbal Medicine Research, Zhuhai 519085, PR China.
psxie163@163.com

Traditional Chinese Herbal Medicine (TCHM) contain multiple botanicals, each of
which contains many compounds that may be relevant to the medicine's putative
activity. Therefore, analytical techniques that look at a suite of compounds,
including their respective ratios, provide a more rational approach to the
authentication and quality assessment of TCHM. In this paper we present several
examples of applying chromatographic fingerprint analysis for determining the
identity, stability, and consistency of TCHM as well as the identification of
adulterants as follows: (1) species authentication of various species of ginseng 
(Panax ginseng, Panax quinquefolium, Panax noto-ginseng) and stability of ginseng
preparations using high performance thin-layer chromatography (HPTLC) fingerprint
analysis; (2) batch-to-batch consistency of extracts of Total Glycosides of Peony
(TGP), to be used as a raw material and in finished products (TGP powdered
extract products), using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
fingerprint analysis with a pattern recognition software interface (CASE); (3)
documenting the representative HPLC fingerprints of Immature Fruits of Terminalia
chebula (IFTC) through the assessment of raw material, in-process assay of the
extracts, and the analysis of the finished product (tablets); (4) HPLC
fingerprint study demonstrating the consistent quality of total flavonoids of
commercial extracts of ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) leaves (EGb) along with detection
of adulterations. The experimental conditions as well as general comments on the 
application of chromatographic fingerprint analysis are discussed.

PMID: 16472540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Mar;17(3):539-46.

Six novel mutations of the LDL receptor gene in FH kindred of Sicilian and
Paraguayan descent.

Cefalù AB(1), Barraco G, Noto D, Valenti V, Barbagallo CM, Elisir GD, Cuniberti
LA, Werba JP, Libra M, Costa S, Gianguzza F, Notarbartolo A, Travali S, Averna
MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, University of Palermo, Italy.

Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant inherited disease
caused by mutations in the gene coding for the low density lipoprotein receptor
(LDL-R). It is characterized by a high concentration of low density lipoprotein
(LDL), which frequently gives rise to premature coronary artery disease. We
studied the probands of five FH Sicilian families with 'definite' FH and one
proband of Paraguayan descent with homozygous FH who has been treated with an
effective living-donor liver transplantation. In order to seek the molecular
defect in these six families, we used direct sequencing to define the molecular
defects of the LDL-R gene responsible for the disease. We described three novel
missense mutations (C100Y, C183Y and G440C), two frameshift mutations (g.1162delC
in exon 8 and g.2051delC in exon 14) and one mutation (g.2390-1Gright curved
arrow A) at splicing acceptor consensus sequences located in intron 16 of the
LDL-R gene; the analysis of cDNA of this splicing mutation showed the activation 
of a cryptic splice site in intron 16 and the binding studies showed a reduction 
in internalisation of LDL-DIL in the proband's cultured fibroblasts. Moreover, a 
g.2051delC in exon 14 was identified in the proband of Paraguayan ancestry with
clinical features of homozygous FH. The mutation identified in the South American
patient represents the first description of a variant in South American patients 
other than Brazilian FH patients. The 5 mutations identified in the Sicilian
patients confirm the heterogeneity of LDL-R gene mutations in Sicily.

PMID: 16465405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2005 Sep-Oct;13 Spec No:896-902. Epub 2006 Jan 4.

[Misuse of benzodiazepines: a study among key informants in São Paulo city].

[Article in Portuguese]

Orlandi P(1), Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal de São Paulo.

The aim of this study was to understand the practice of prescription,
dispensation and prolonged use of benzodiazepines, from the point of view of
health care professionals and of chronic users of these substances. The sample
group was formed using the snowball technique, totaling 19 key-informants. The
semi-structured interviews were recorded and transcribed for analysis. Most of
the interviewees reported frequent benzodiazepine prescriptions through requests 
made to doctors, without the need for a formal appointment. The users reported a 
history of prolonged use (between 2 and 8 years) for purposes other than the
simple therapeutic purpose. They also emphasized the ease in acquiring the
medication and the lack of medical counseling about the necessary precautions
during treatment. The study suggests that the occurrence of misuse involves not
only the dispensation control system, but also a series of other factors,
including the attitudes of health care professionals.

PMID: 16400457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2005 Sep-Oct;13 Spec No:888-95. Epub 2006 Jan 4.

[Use of psychotropic drugs in Brazil: household survey in the 107 biggest
Brazilian cities--2001].

[Article in Portuguese]

Galduróz JC(1), Noto AR, Nappo SA, Carlini EA.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Brasileiro de Informações sobre Drogas Psicotrópicas, Departamento de
Psicobiologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo. galduroz@psicobio.epm.br

The objective was to estimate the prevalence of the use of drugs, alcohol,
tobacco and the use of non-medical psychotropics. This study enclosed the 107
biggest cities in Brazil; sample: ages between 12 and 65 years. Sampling in three
periods: tax sectors; household and the respondent. Were interviewed 8,589
people. The lifetime use of the alcohol was 68.7%, closer to 70.8% in Chile. The 
lifetime use of the tobacco was of 41.1%, lower than USA (70.5%). The lifetime
use of the marijuana was of 6.9% closer to Colombia (5.4%) and lower than USA
(34.2%). The lifetime use of the cocaine was 2.3%, lower than USA (11.2%). The
lifetime use of solvent was of 5.8%, much lower than the United Kingdom (20.0%). 
The stimulants have had 1.5% of lifetime use and the anxiolytics with 3.3%. These
findings will allow the implantation of adjusted public politics to our reality
in the field of the psychotropics drugs.

PMID: 16400456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2006 Feb;18(2):143-50.

Food intolerance and chronic constipation: manometry and histology study.

Iacono G(1), Bonventre S, Scalici C, Maresi E, Di Prima L, Soresi M, Di Gesù G,
Noto D, Carroccio A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Di Cristina Hospital, Palermo,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Chronic constipation in children can be caused by cows' milk
intolerance (CMI), but its pathogenesis is unknown.
AIMS: To evaluate the histology and manometry pattern in patients with food
intolerance-related constipation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Thirty-six consecutive children with chronic constipation
were enrolled. All underwent an elimination diet and successive double-blind food
challenge. All underwent rectal biopsy and anorectal manometry.
RESULTS: A total of 14 patients were found to be suffering from CMI and three
from multiple food intolerance. They had a normal stool frequency on elimination 
diet, whereas constipation recurred on food challenge. The patients with food
intolerance showed a significantly higher frequency of erosions of the mucosa,
and the number of intra-epithelial lymphocytes and eosinophils. The rectal mucous
gel layer showed that the food-intolerant patients had a significantly lower
thickness of mucus than the other subjects studied. Manometry showed a higher
anal sphincter resting pressure and a lower critical volume in food intolerance
patients than in the others suffering from constipation unrelated to food
intolerance. Both histology and manometry abnormalities disappeared on the
elimination diet.
CONCLUSIONS: Food intolerance-related constipation is characterized by proctitis.
Increased anal resting pressure and a reduced mucous gel layer can be considered 
to be contributory factors in the pathogenesis of constipation.

PMID: 16394795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mol Diagn. 2005;9(4):201-4.

A novel mutation of the DHCR7 gene in a sicilian compound heterozygote with
Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome.

Romano F(1), Fiore B, Pezzino FM, Longombardo MT, Cefalù AB, Noto D, Puglisi A,
Brogna A, Mattina T, Averna M, Travali S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Section of Clinical Pathology and Molecular
Oncology, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is an autosomal recessive
disorder of cholesterol biosynthesis, resulting from deficient
7-dehydrocholesterol reductase (3beta-hydroxysterol Delta7-reductase) activity,
the enzyme responsible for conversion of 7-dehydrocholesterol to cholesterol.
SLOS is most common among people of European descent, with a reported incidence
of 1 per 20,000-60,000 newborns, depending on the diagnostic criteria and the
reference population. More than 80 different mutations have been identified in
several hundred patients. In Italy, SLOS appears to be a rare condition, probably
because of underdiagnosis.
METHOD: We analyzed by direct sequencing the 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase gene 
(DHCR7) in a Sicilian patient with Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome and his parents in 
order to characterize the molecular defect.
RESULTS: The molecular analysis of the coding exons and the intron-exon
boundaries of the DHCR7 gene demonstrated the presence of two missense mutations:
a novel mutation (I251N) and a known mutation (E288K) responsible in a compound
heterozygous state for a severe form of SLOS.
CONCLUSION: The present study describes a Sicilian patient, a carrier of a novel 
mutation of the DHCR7 gene (I251N), which is responsible in a compound
heterozygous state for a severe form of SLOS.

PMID: 16392899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Surg Today. 2006;36(1):89-93.

Successful cystic fenestration for a macrocystic serous cystadenoma of the
pancreas causing obstructive jaundice: report of a case.

Watanabe H(1), Ohtsubo K, Yamaguchi Y, Mouri H, Motoo Y, Noto M, Kitagawa H,
Kayahara M, Ohta T, Gabata T, Sakamoto S, Sawabu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Oncology, Cancer Research
Institute, Kanazawa University, Graduate School of Medical Science, Takaramachi
13-1, Kanazawa 920-8641, Japan.

A 72-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for investigation of jaundice. We 
made a preoperative diagnosis of macrocystic serous cystadenoma (SCA) of the
pancreas, but did not perform palliative choledochojejunostomy because aspiration
of the pancreatic cystic fluid caused the cysts to shrink and relieved the
compressive stenosis of the common bile duct (CBD) during the operation. Frozen
sections of the cyst wall taken by incision biopsy showed no signs of malignancy.
Therefore, we performed fenestration of the cystic wall after fixing the inner
epithelium of the cyst with 100% ethanol and aspirating the cystic fluid.
Cholangiography after the cystic fenestration showed resolution of the CBD
stenosis and abdominal computed tomography (CT) confirmed the disappearance of
the pancreatic cysts. No recurrence of cystic swelling or obstructive jaundice
has been detected by abdominal CT or laboratory data for more than 2 years since 
the cystic fenestration. Thus, cystic fenestration may be a better palliative
option for treating benign compressive tumors such as macrocystic SCA of the
pancreas causing obstructive jaundice.

PMID: 16378203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Intern Med. 2005 Nov;44(11):1182-4.

Adult Kawasaki disease unrelated to epstein-barr virus and group A Streptococcus.

Hattori T(1), Matsukawa Y, Takei M, Yamaguchi K, Yamazaki T, Sawada U, Sawada S, 
Horie T, Ayusawa M, Noto N, Harada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Respirology, Nihon University School of
Medicine, Tokyo.

A 23-year-old Japanese woman with a fever and generalized skin eruptions was
referred to our hospital in July 1999. At admission, her temperature was 38.9
degrees C, and she had fluctuating symptoms including erythema of the
extremities, conjunctival hyperemia, strawberry tongue, and generalized skin
eruptions, but lymphadenopathy was not verified. An initially elevated urine
leukocyte count (more than 100 per high power field) later returned to normal
range without antibiotic therapy. Adult Kawasaki disease was diagnosed on the
basis of the above symptomology. Echocardiograph showed transient effusion in the
pericardium. Using the Harada scoring system for treatment of Kawasaki disease,
we gave the patient aspirin and did not administer intravenous immunoglobulin.
The clinical course was uneventful, and on the day of discharge (day 22 after
onset), the laboratory test results were nearly normal. Laboratory test results
were negative for both Epstein-Barr virus and group A Streptococcus.

PMID: 16357458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. AIDS. 2006 Jan 2;20(1):136-8.

Rhino-orbital zygomycosis secondary to diabetic ketoacidosis in an HIV-positive
patient: case report and literature review.

Boumis E, Chinello P, Conte A, Noto P, Cicalini S, Grillo LR, Petrosillo N.

PMID: 16327338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Life Sci. 2006 Apr 18;78(21):2533-41. Epub 2005 Nov 28.

Tributyltin inhibits osteoblastic activity and disrupts calcium metabolism
through an increase in plasma calcium and calcitonin levels in teleosts.

Suzuki N(1), Tabata MJ, Kambegawa A, Srivastav AK, Shimada A, Takeda H, Kobayashi
M, Wada S, Katsumata T, Hattori A.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University, Ishikawa 927-0553, Japan. nobuo@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

To examine the direct effects of tributyltin acetate (TBTA) on osteoclasts and
osteoblasts, teleost scale, which has both osteoclasts and osteoblasts and is
similar to mammalian membrane bone, was used in the present study. The activities
of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase and alkaline-phosphatase, as respective
indicators of activity in both cells, were used. In freshwater teleost (goldfish)
and marine teleosts (nibbler and wrasse), the osteoclastic activity in the scales
did not change as a result of TBTA treatment (10(-9) to 10(-5) M). However, the
osteoblastic activity decreased in the goldfish, nibbler, and wrasse after 6 h of
incubation. In goldfish, even 10(-10) M of TBTA significantly inhibited the
osteoblastic activity. The inhibitory activity in goldfish was stronger than that
in nibbler and wrasse. Therefore, details of the mechanism were examined using
goldfish. The mRNA expressions of the estrogen receptor and insulin-like growth
factor-I, which participate in osteoblastic growth and differentiation, decreased
in the TBTA-treated scales. However, the mRNA expression of metallothionein (MT),
a metal-binding protein that protects the organism from heavy metal, increased
much less than those of cadmium and methyl-mercury. Furthermore, we showed that
the plasma calcium and hypocalcemic hormone (calcitonin) level increased in
goldfish kept in water containing TBTA (10(-10) and 10(-8) M). The current data
are the first to demonstrate that, in teleosts, TBTA inhibits osteoblastic
activity without affecting osteoclastic activity and disrupts the calcium
metabolism, including the calcemic hormone, in goldfish.

PMID: 16318860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Biol Psychol. 2006 May;72(2):173-9. Epub 2005 Nov 21.

Background noise decreases both prepulse elicitation and inhibition of acoustic
startle blink responding.

Blumenthal TD(1), Noto JV, Fox MA, Franklin JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC 27109,
USA. blumen@wfu.edu

Prepulse inhibition of startle (PPI) has proved to be useful in distinguishing
between schizophrenia patients and normal controls, although not all studies in
this area find such group differences. One reason for this inconsistency may be
the fact that some research labs present the startle eliciting and inhibiting
stimuli over a steady background noise (70 dB), whereas others present stimuli in
ambient noise conditions (30-56 dB). The present study tested the impact of
background noise (30, 50, and 70 dB) on PPI in normal college adults, with
prepulses at intensities of 75, 80, and 85 dB, and with prepulse rise times of 1 
or 10 ms. Background noise decreased the amount of PPI caused by the prepulses,
and also decreased the ability of the prepulses to themselves elicit blink
responses. We conclude that background noise interferes with the processing of
the prepulse, attenuating its effect as both an elicitor and inhibitor of the
startle reflex. By elevating the difficulty of prepulse processing, this
attenuation may be a necessary condition for observing differences in PPI between
patient and control groups.

PMID: 16303226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Anesth Analg. 2005 Dec;101(6):1873-6.

The relationship between salivary biomarkers and state-trait anxiety inventory
score under mental arithmetic stress: a pilot study.

Noto Y(1), Sato T, Kudo M, Kurata K, Hirota K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Hirosaki
036-8563, Japan. masuika@cc.hirosaki-u.ac.jp

Measurement of stress hormones is a common objective method for assessment of
mental stress. However, the stress of blood sampling alone may also increase
stress hormone levels. In the present study, we sampled salivary biomarkers from 
healthy volunteers under noninvasive conditions and determined their efficacy to 
assess mental stress. Specifically, we examined the relationship between State
Anxiety Inventory score (STAI-s) in subjects exposed to arithmetic stress and
salivary chromogranin-A, alpha-amylase, or cortisol. The STAI-s was significantly
correlated to salivary alpha-amylase (r = 0.589; P < 0.01) but not to salivary
chromogranin-A or cortisol. Therefore, salivary alpha-amylase is a useful
indicator of psychosocial stress.

PMID: 16301277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Surg Neurol. 2005 Dec;64(6):495-8, discussion 498-9.

Management of patients with cavernous angiomas presenting epileptic seizures.

Noto S(1), Fujii M, Akimura T, Imoto H, Nomura S, Kajiwara K, Kato S, Fujisawa H,
Suzuki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Yamaguchi University School of Medicine, Ube,
Yamaguchi 755-8505, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to establish a treatment strategy for
patients with cavernous angiomas and have seizures.
METHODS: We analyzed retrospectively 31 patients with cavernous angiomas
presenting with seizures. Of the 31 patients, 15 (11 men, 4 women) had been
treated medically (the medical group) and 16 (11 men, 5 women) had been treated
surgically (the surgical group). The percentage of patients who became
seizure-free and the number of anticonvulsants used were compared between these 2
groups. The mean follow-up period was 5.3 years (range, 7 months-10 years). There
was no statistically significant difference between the 2 groups with regard to
the number of patients, sex, age, and follow-up period.
RESULTS: The percentage of patients who became seizure-free was higher in the
surgical group than in the medical group (80% vs 19%, P < .01). The number of
anticonvulsants required was reduced in the surgical group after surgery (from
1.5 +/- 0.7 to 1.1 +/- 0.8, P < .01) and was not reduced after in the medical
group.
CONCLUSIONS: Surgical intervention may have greater benefits than medical
intervention for patients with cavernous angiomas presenting with epileptic
seizures.

PMID: 16293460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Cardiology. 2006;105(2):75-9. Epub 2005 Nov 8.

Swallow syncope, a case report and review of the literature.

Omi W(1), Murata Y, Yaegashi T, Inomata J, Fujioka M, Muramoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Internal Medicine, Noto General Hospital, Nanao, 
Japan. omiomi@medf.m.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Swallow syncope is a relatively rare syndrome that is treatable when diagnosed. A
66-year-old woman was referred to the department of cardiology because she had
been suffering from recurrent syncopal attacks associated with swallowing. An
ambulatory electrocardiogram revealed atrial and ventricular asystoles
immediately after swallowing soup or tea that were reproducible (max. RR 3.5 s). 
An electrophysiological study did not detect sinus nodal or atrioventricular
nodal dysfunction. The patient had no underlying esophageal disease or cardiac
disorder. The patient's symptoms resolved after permanent pacemaker implantation.
This report reviews the diagnosis, mechanism and management of swallow syncope.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16286732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Nihon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi. 2005 Oct;43(10):605-8.

[A case of cystic bronchial typical carcinoid].

[Article in Japanese]

Taniguchi H(1), Fujisaka S, Abo H, Noto H, Izumi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Central Prefectural Hospital.

A 53-year-old man was admitted with a nodular lesion on chest radiograph. Chest
CT scan showed a cystic nodule in right S4 which gradually enlarged during
follow-up without therapy. Two years after the first examination, we performed
middle lobectomy using video assisted thoracoscopy. Histologically, the tumor was
found to be typical carcinoid by immunostaining.

PMID: 16285593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Abdom Imaging. 2006 Jan-Feb;31(1):39-42. Epub 2005 Oct 26.

Intraluminal duodenal diverticulum: MR findings.

Takamatsu S(1), Gabata T, Matsui O, Noto M, Ninomiya I, Nonomura A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Kanazawa University, School of Medicine, 13-1
Takara-machi, Kanazawa City, Ishikawa, 920-8641, Japan.
shiget@rad.m.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

We report a case of intraluminal duodenal diverticulum with special reference to 
its magnetic resonance imaging findings. An intraluminal duodenal fluid
collection surrounded by a hypointense rim on T2-weighted or magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatographic images, the shape of which is changed by peristalsis,
is considered to be almost diagnostic for intraluminal duodenal diverticulum.

PMID: 16252140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Ann Ist Super Sanita. 2005;41(2):239-45.

[Prevalence of the use of old and new drugs among new entrants in Italian
prisons].

[Article in Italian]

Rezza G(1), Scalia Tomba G, Martucci P, Massella M, Noto R, De Risio A, Brunetti 
B, Ardita S, Starnini G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Malattie Infettive, Parassitarie e Immunomediate, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, Roma. g.rezza@iss.it

An epidemiological survey was conducted to evaluate the prevalence of drug use
among new entrants in Italian prisons. Overall, 1267 inmates were recruited by 9 
prisons. Drug use before imprisonment was reported by 55.8% of the participants. 
Cocaine was the most commonly used drug (42%), followed by heroin (34%),
marijuana/cannabis (33%), ecstasy (7%), hallucinogens (6%), amphetamines (5%);
more than one drug was reported by 68% of abusers. Recent use (1 month before
imprisonment) was admitted by up to 27% of inmates. Alcohol or tobacco use was
reported by 38 and 77% of the inmates, respectively. Our findings indicate that a
high proportion of inmates has ever used drugs; adequate intervention is needed
to reduce the risk of addictive behaviour in this population group.

PMID: 16244399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Electrocardiol. 2005 Oct;38(4 Suppl):175-9.

Clinical utility of the Food and Drug Administration Electrocardiogram Warehouse:
a paradigm for the critical pathway initiative.

Cabell CH(1), Noto TC, Krucoff MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA;
Duke Clinical Research Institute, Durham, NC 27715, USA. chris.cabell@duke.edu

Although there are rising public expectations about the prospects for new
therapies based on advances in biomedical discoveries, the rate of new product
submissions to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not been increasing.
Alarmingly, over the past 6 years, there has been a 30% decline in submissions.
The reasons for this are multifactorial and include new science not at its full
potential, mergers/business arrangements have decreased candidates, chronic
disease is harder to study, the failure rate has not improved, and rapidly
escalating costs and complexity. Notably, societal investment in research and
development to improve the drug approval process has been lacking in contrast to 
the large investments, both private and public, in basic research and specific
product advances. The Critical Path Initiative has been developed by the FDA to
combat many of these issues. This initiative is designed to be collaborative
between government, academic, industry, and patient groups. The partnership is
designed to expand product opportunities by sharing existing knowledge and data, 
allowing the development of enabling standards, to improve drug development and
approval. A central tenant of Critical Path is a focus on the evaluative science 
of the drug approval process, including both efficacy and safety measures. The
FDA Electrocardiogram Warehouse is 1 example where a government resource could be
used by a confluence of groups to improve the science surrounding important
components of the drug approval process such as cardiac safety evaluation.

PMID: 16226096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Br J Dermatol. 2005 Nov;153(5):1019-22.

A novel mutation of the extracellular matrix protein 1 gene (ECM1) in a patient
with lipoid proteinosis (Urbach-Wiethe disease) from Sicily.

Lupo I(1), Cefalu AB, Bongiorno MR, Daniele O, Valenti V, Noto D, Camarda R,
Savettieri G, Aricò M, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Institute of Neurology, University of Palermo,
Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Lipoid proteinosis (LP), also known as Urbach-Wiethe disease, is a
rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by a hoarse voice, warty skin
infiltration and scarring. Mutations within the extracellular matrix protein 1
(ECM1) gene cause LP.
OBJECTIVES: We report the molecular analysis of the ECM1 gene in a Sicilian
patient with LP in order to extend the mutation spectrum of this genodermatosis.
METHODS: We studied a 32-year-old female born from consanguineous parents who was
diagnosed at the age of 11 years as having LP. She has a clinical phenotype
corresponding to Urbach-Wiethe disease characterized by papules/nodules,
indurated plaques and sometimes ulcerated lesions primarily involving the skin
and mucous membranes, and extracutaneous features such as epilepsy, hoarseness of
the voice and neuropsychiatric abnormalities. Samples of clinically affected skin
obtained by biopsies were analysed after staining with haematoxylin and eosin,
periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), and PAS-diastase. The whole ECM1 gene was analysed by
direct sequencing.
RESULTS: We identified a homozygous nonsense mutation in exon 6 of the ECM1 gene,
C589T (Q197Ter).
CONCLUSIONS: Over 60% of mutations occur in exons 6 and 7. Exon 7 is
alternatively spliced and frameshift mutations in exon 7 lead to ablation of the 
ECM1a transcript, but not the shorter ECM1b transcript that normally lacks this
exon. Homozygous nonsense or frameshift mutations in exon 6 are predicted to
affect both full-length ECM1a and ECM1b transcripts, whereas ECM1b should be
unaffected for similar types of mutation in exon 7. It has been suggested that
individuals with mutations in exon 7 have a slightly milder phenotype than those 
with exon 6 mutations. This is the first report with respect to a novel mutation 
of the ECM1 gene responsible for recessive LP in Sicily.

PMID: 16225617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Nihon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi. 2005 Sep;43(9):547-51.

[A case of Wegener's granulomatosis without PR3-ANCA at relapse].

[Article in Japanese]

Taniguchi H(1), Honda R, Adachi Y, Abo H, Noto H, Izumi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Prefectural Central Hospital.

A 49-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with fever. His chest radiograph
showed some nodules in the right upper and lower lung fields. The
cytoplasmic-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody test was positive, and
histopathologic biopsy of a small nasal polyps yielded a diagnosis of Wegener's
granulomatosis. He was started on prednisolone and cyclophosphamide. The findings
on his chest radiograph and his symptoms improved rapidly, and we stopped these
drugs after one year. Two years after cessation of treatment, his chest
radiograph showed two nodules with cavities. Relapse of Wegener's granulomatosis 
was diagnosed. The proteinase 3-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody test was
negative. He was started on prednisolone and cyclophosphamide, and the findings
on his chest radiograph improved rapidly. Chest radiographs are useful for
follow-up observation of patients with Wegener's granulomatosis after treatment.

PMID: 16218425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2005 Oct;15(5):361-7. Epub 2005 Jul 1.

Family history, diabetes and extension of coronary atherosclerosis are strong
predictors of adverse events after PTCA: A one-year follow-up study.

Rizzo M(1), Barbagallo CM, Noto D, Pace A, Cefalú AB, Pernice V, Pinto V, Rubino 
A, Pieri D, Traina M, Frasheri A, Notarbartolo A, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Emerging Diseases, University of Palermo, 
Via del Vespro 141, 90127 Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: In this study we addressed some open questions in patients
with coronary artery disease (CAD). First, we analysed which of the traditional
risk factors was associated with the spreading of coronary stenosis and second,
we aimed to identify if any variable was predictive of post-percutaneous
transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) clinical events.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We collected a consecutive series of patients with CAD
(n=301) and in the subgroup of patients undergoing PTCA (n=135) we performed a
prospective one-year follow-up study recording cardiovascular morbidity and total
mortality. According to the extension of coronary atherosclerosis, we found a
significant relationship with the prevalence of diabetes in men and with plasma
HDL-cholesterol concentrations in women. The follow-up was completed in 95% of
patients; we did not document any death whereas clinical events were registered
in 16% of patients. At univariate analysis, we found that patients with clinical 
events had a higher prevalence of family history of CAD (43% vs 14%, p<0.005),
diabetes (52% vs 21%, p<0.005) and multivessel disease (52% vs 35%, p<0.05).
Multivariate analysis (logistic regression) confirmed that family history of CAD 
(OR 4.6, 95% CI 1.7-12.8, p<0.005), diabetes (OR 4.0, 95% CI 1.5-10.6, p<0.01)
and multivessel disease (OR 2.8, 95% CI 1.1-7.4, p<0.05) were the only variables 
predictive of clinical events.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, factors associated with the spreading of coronary
stenosis were different according to the gender. Moreover, the presence of
diabetes and multivessel disease had a negative impact on the long-term prognosis
of patients undergoing PTCA. In addition, the family history of CAD represented
in our study a strong predictor of clinical events. We suggest that in the
management of post-PTCA patients, the role of individual baseline clinical
characteristics must be taken into account and that subjects with a family
history of premature CAD, diabetes and a wide extension of coronary disease
represent those with the highest risk.

PMID: 16216722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Mol Ther. 2006 Jan;13(1):118-26. Epub 2005 Oct 5.

Adenovirus-mediated gene transfer and lipoprotein-mediated protein delivery of
plasma PAF-AH ameliorates proteinuria in rat model of glomerulosclerosis.

Iso-O N(1), Noto H, Hara M, Togo M, Karasawa K, Ohashi N, Noiri E, Hashimoto Y,
Kadowaki T, Kimura S, Watanabe T, Tsukamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Oxidative stress has been proposed to play a crucial role in glomerulosclerosis, 
although its in vivo demonstration has proved taxing given the difficulty of
inducing gene expression in specific renal cells. In this study, we examined
whether the liver-directed expression of plasma platelet-activating factor
acetylhydrolase (PAF-AH) would affect the glomerular pathophysiology in Imai
rats, an animal model for glomerulosclerosis. Adenovirus-mediated liver-directed 
gene delivery of human PAF-AH resulted in a significant increase in plasma PAF-AH
activity, which was detected almost exclusively on HDL. Histological examination 
of rats overexpressing PAF-AH showed not only the deposition of PAF-AH in
mesangial cells, but also a reduction in hydroxynonenal and matrix protein
content in the glomeruli. In situ hybridization analysis was negative for human
PAF-AH mRNA in the kidney, while injection of HDL abundant in PAF-AH resulted in 
the deposition of PAF-AH in mesangial cells. Urine protein levels did not
increase in rats overexpressing PAF-AH, while those of control rats increased
significantly with age. This study provides direct evidence of the in vivo role
of an enzyme that degrades lipid peroxides during the progression of
glomerulosclerosis. Adenovirus-mediated extrarenal gene expression and
lipoprotein-mediated glomeruli-targeted protein delivery promise to be a novel
therapeutic approach to glomerulosclerosis.

PMID: 16213192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 2;280(48):39907-13. Epub 2005 Sep 29.

Proteasomal degradation of mutant superoxide dismutases linked to amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis.

Di Noto L(1), Whitson LJ, Cao X, Hart PJ, Levine RL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-0812, USA.

Mutations in copper-zinc superoxide dismutase cause the neurodegenerative disease
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Many of the mutant proteins have increased
turnover in vivo and decreased thermal stability. Here we show that purified,
metal-free superoxide dismutases are degraded in vitro by purified 20 S
proteasome in the absence of ATP and without ubiquitinylation, whereas their
metal-bound counterparts are not. The rate of degradation by the proteasome
varied among the mutants studied, and the rate correlated with the in vivo
half-life. The monomeric forms of both mutant and wild-type superoxide dismutase 
are particularly susceptible to degradation by the proteasome. Exposure of
hydrophobic regions as a consequence of decreased thermal stability may allow the
proteasome to recognize these molecules as non-native.

PMID: 16195234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Atherosclerosis. 2006 Jun;186(2):433-40. Epub 2005 Sep 23.

Additive effect of mutations in LDLR and PCSK9 genes on the phenotype of familial
hypercholesterolemia.

Pisciotta L(1), Priore Oliva C, Cefalù AB, Noto D, Bellocchio A, Fresa R,
Cantafora A, Patel D, Averna M, Tarugi P, Calandra S, Bertolini S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genoa, Viale Benedetto XV 6,
I-16132 Genoa, Italy.

Patients homozygous or compound heterozygous for LDLR mutations or double
heterozygous for LDLR and apo B R3500Q mutation have higher LDL-C levels, more
extensive xanthomatosis and more severe premature coronary disease (pCAD) than
simple heterozygotes for mutations in either these genes or for missense
mutations in PCSK9 gene. It is not known whether combined mutations in LDLR and
PKCS9 are associated with such a severe phenotype. We sequenced Apo B and PCSK9
genes in two patients with the clinical diagnosis of homozygous FH who were
heterozygous for LDLR gene mutations. Proband Z.P. (LDL-C 13.39 mmol/L and pCAD) 
was heterozygous for an LDLR mutation (p.E228K) inherited from her father (LDL-C 
8.07 mmol/L) and a PCSK9 mutation (p.R496W) from her mother (LDL-C 5.58 mmol/L). 
Proband L.R. and her sister (LDL-C 11.51 and 10.47 mmol/L, xanthomatosis and
carotid atherosclerosis) were heterozygous for an LDLR mutation (p.Y419X)
inherited from their mother (LDL-C 6.54 mmol/L) and a PCSK9 mutation (p.N425S)
probably from their deceased father. The LDL-C levels in double heterozygotes of 
these two families were 56 and 44% higher than those found in simple
heterozygotes for the two LDLR mutations, respectively. The two PCSK9 mutations
are novel and were not found in 110 controls and 80 patients with co-dominant
hypercholesterolemia. These observations indicate that rare missense mutations of
PCSK9 may worsen the clinical phenotype of patients carrying LDLR mutations.

PMID: 16183066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Biomacromolecules. 2005 Sep-Oct;6(5):2555-62.

Role of charges and solvent on the conformational properties of poly(galacturonic
acid) chains: a molecular dynamics study.

Noto R(1), Martorana V, Bulone D, San Biagio PL.

Author information: 
(1)CNR, Instituto di BioFisica, Section of Palermo, Via Ugo La Malfa 153, I-90147
Palermo, Italy.

Pectin shares with many other polysaccharides an intrinsic chemical and physical 
complexity. The widespread industrial applications have made it one of the most
studied polysaccharides. This work presents a theoretical model of
poly(galacturonic acid), the major constituent of pectin, suitable to study its
structural and dynamical properties. In particular, the effects of solvent and
charge status are studied. The dynamics is shown to be severely affected by the
presence of charged groups on each residue, making the charged chain much more
rigid than the uncharged one. A key structural property for a semirigid polymer, 
the asymptotic persistence length, is calculated for relatively short charged and
uncharged chains in molecular water solvent using a new method. The influence of 
charge on structural properties of poly(galacturonic acid) is shown to be strong 
and solvent-dependent. In fact, a large difference is found between continuum
solvent adiabatic map calculations and molecular dynamics with explicit solvent, 
with the latter showing a much larger persistence length.

PMID: 16153092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Int J Oncol. 2005 Oct;27(4):1071-7.

Bovine seminal ribonuclease is cytotoxic for both malignant and normal
telomerase-positive cells.

Viola M(1), Libra M, Callari D, Sinatra F, Spada D, Noto D, Emmanuele G, Romano
F, Averna M, Pezzino FM, Stivala F, Travali S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Biologica, Chimica Medica e Biologia Molecolare,
Università degli Studi di Catania, Catania, Italy.

Bovine seminal-ribonuclease (BS-RNase) is a member of the 'ribonucleases with
special biological actions' family since it possesses specific anti-tumour,
anti-spermatogenic and embryotoxic activities and exerts an immunosuppressive
effect on T lymphocytes. In previous studies it was demonstrated that BS-RNase
induced apoptosis in proliferating, malignant and normal cells and that
telomerase activity loss also caused apoptotic death in neoplastic cells. Since
an obvious relationship between cell proliferation and telomerase activity
exists, the aim of this work was to study if the pro-apoptotic cytotoxic action
exerted by BS-RNase on proliferating malignant cells (HT29) and proliferating
normal cells (PHA-stimulated lymphocytes) could be linked to a possible BS-RNase 
effect on telomerase activity. In BS-RNase-treated HT29 cells
(Na-butyrate-differentiated or not) and human lymphocytes (proliferating or not),
we investigated cell vitality (MTT method) and morphology (SEM), BS-RNase
localization (immunofluorescence), telomerase activity (TRAP-ELISA method), hTR
mRNA expression (RT-PCR), and hTERT levels (western blot). While no BS-RNase
effect was detectable on not proliferating cells, a clear relationship was
noticed between the diminished number of vital elements of both proliferating
cell populations after treatment (48 h and 72 h for HT29 and PHA-stimulated
lymphocytes, respectively) with 50 microg/ml BS-RNase and the decrease of their
telomerase activity. At the same time, we found that hTR levels, the RNA subunit 
of telomerase, in proliferation-inhibited BS-RNase-treated cells were diminished.
Moreover, by immunofluorescence technique, we detected BS-RNase in the HT29 cell 
nucleolus after 3-h treatment. Therefore, as hTR has been recently proven to
co-fractionate with nucleoli, we hypothesize that a BS-RNase direct action on the
telomerase hTR subunit could be a possible mechanism of action by which BS-RNase 
exerts its pro-apoptotic effects only on proliferating cells.

PMID: 16142325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Alzheimers Dis. 2005 Aug;7(4):291-5.

No association between the cystatin C gene polymorphism and Alzheimer's disease: 
a case-control study in an Italian population.

Monastero R(1), Camarda C, Cefalù AB, Caldarella R, Camarda LK, Noto D, Averna
MR, Camarda R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Epidemiology and Psychology of Aging and Dementia, Section of
Neurology and Psychiatry, DiNOOP, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

Cystatin C is an amyloidogenic protein found together with beta-amyloid in
cerebral arteriolar walls of both patients with Alzheimer's Disease (AD) and
conghopilic amyloid angiopathy. Several findings implicate cystatin C in the
pathogenesis of vascular diseases. Recent genetic association studies proposed
cystatin C gene (CST3) as a susceptibility factor for AD, although other reports 
did not replicate this finding. We conducted a case-control study including 192
probable AD cases and 192 age- and sex-matched controls to test the association
between CST3 and AD. Possible interaction between CST3 and age at onset of AD or 
apolipoprotein E (APOE) was also examined. No significant differences in CST3
genotype or allele frequencies between cases and controls was observed, while the
risk of AD increased in subjects carrying the APOE epsilon4 allele (OR 3.5, 95%
CI [2.1-5.9]). There was no interaction between CST3 with age or APOE. Our
findings do not support a role of CST3 gene in Italian sporadic AD.

PMID: 16131730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2005 Aug;21(8):706-13.

Neurocognitive impairment and survival in a cohort of HIV-infected patients
treated with HAART.

Tozzi V(1), Balestra P, Serraino D, Bellagamba R, Corpolongo A, Piselli P,
Lorenzini P, Visco-Comandini U, Vlassi C, Quartuccio ME, Giulianelli M, Noto P,
Galgani S, Ippolito G, Antinori A, Narciso P.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Infectious Diseases Lazzaro Spallanzani, 00149 Rome,
Italy. tozzi@inmi.it

Before the introduction of HAART, HIV-associated neurocognitive impairment (NCI) 
was recognized as an independent risk factor for death. Since 1996, we conducted 
a prospective study to assess whether NCI still represents a negative prognostic 
factor for mortality. Patients were administered measures of neurocognitive
function (a battery of 17 neuropsychological tests), clinical and neurological
evaluation, laboratory testing, and brain imaging studies. Among the 412 enrolled
patients, 224 (54.4%) were neurocognitively impaired and 188 (45.6%) were
neurocognitively unimpaired. A durable virological suppression under highly
active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) was achieved by 63.3% of unimpaired
patients and by 49.6% of impaired patients (p = 0.007). Overall, 47 deaths were
recorded, 38 among impaired and 9 among unimpaired patients. At 84 months, the
estimated survival proportions in impaired and unimpaired patients were 68.5% and
84.9%, respectively (p < 0.001). At univariate analysis the virological response 
to HAART was the variable most strongly associated with survival, since patients 
with virological failure had a nearly 10-fold increased risk of death than those 
with durable virological suppression (HR = 9.9, 95% CI: 3.9-25.0). After
stratification for virological response to HAART, an increased risk of death for 
neurocognitively impaired patients was seen only among the 182 patients with
virological failure (HR: 2.9, 95% CI: 1.2-7.1), while the survival probability of
the 230 patients with durable virological suppression was not affected by
neurocognitive impairment (p = 0.89). Our results highlight the clinical
relevance of HIV-related central nervous system (CNS) involvement in the HAART
era, and raise concerns regarding the clinical relevance of CNS involvement as
potent antiretroviral therapies become less effective.

PMID: 16131310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2005 Nov;20(11):2358-67. Epub 2005 Aug 9.

Monoclonal antibody 1-22-3-induced glomerulonephritis in uninephrectomized rats
as a model of progressive renal failure.

Tomita M(1), Sogabe H, Nakazato S, Nakatsuji S, Noto T, Hamada K, Kawachi H,
Shimizu F, Matsuo M, Mutoh S.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Biology Research Laboratories, Fujisawa Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd,
Osaka, Japan. masayuki.tomita@jp.astellas.com

BACKGROUND: At present, there are few available animal models of progressive
renal failure originating from mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis (GN).
In the current study, we examined the usefulness of anti-Thy-1 monoclonal
antibody (mAb) 1-22-3-induced GN in uninephrectomized rats as a model of
progressive renal failure by analysing the similarities to human disease.
METHODS: GN was induced by intravenous injection of mAb 1-22-3 into
uninephrectomized male Wistar rats. The natural course of the disease was
analysed in this model for 47 weeks. The effect of treatment with the
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, captopril, on renal functional outcome
was also examined in this model for 23 weeks, beginning from 1 week after
antibody injection.
RESULTS: Injection of mAb 1-22-3 induced a persistent proteinuria during the
entire study period. Animals showed a progressive decline in renal function and
63% died by week 47. Severe glomerular and tubulointerstitial lesions were
consistently observed. Treatment with captopril significantly inhibited increases
in proteinuria and blood pressure, and attenuated renal injury. Captopril also
retarded the progression of renal failure, and decreased mortality. Finally, the 
level of proteinuria was significantly correlated with the rate of decline in
renal function, and the reduction in proteinuria by captopril was accompanied by 
a slower progression of renal failure.
CONCLUSIONS: The mAb 1-22-3-induced GN in a uninephrectomized rat model simulates
the clinical manifestations of human disease, indicating that this model may be
useful for studying progressive renal failure and for investigating new
therapeutic strategies against renal failure.

PMID: 16091375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2005 Jul 20;61(7):989-96.

[Estimation of X-radiation protective coats in abdominal angiography].

[Article in Japanese]

Koshida K(1), Sota T, Noto K, Fukuda A, Matsubara K, Nakagawa H, Kawabata C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiological Technology, School of Health Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, Kanazawa University.

Medical personnel involved in abdominal angiography are exposed not only to
direct radiation but also scattered radiation from inspection tables, patients,
image intensifiers, and the beam-limiting system (collimator), among others.
Japanese standard JISZ4831 prescribes protective coats of at least 0.25 mm lead
equivalent, which is the uniform thickness of lead equivalent. The most commonly 
used protective coats are 0.25 mm Pb, 0.35 mm Pb, or 0.5 mm Pb in thickness. The 
weight of a typical protective coat is about 3 kg. While some coats weigh up to 6
kg, wearing such heavy coats becomes physically burdensome as inspection time
increases. The trade-off between physical burden and protection was considered by
analyzing the X-ray intensity distribution and attenuation rate of scattered
radiation in each position assumed by the medical staff. In the case of
inspections performed at an x-ray tube voltage of 80 kV, it may be possible to
reduce the weight of the lead rubber apron by about 33%. Namely, the lead
thickness can be reduced uniformly by 0.20 mm Pb at 70 cm and 0.05 mm Pb at 100
cm, when the shielding capability of a 0.25 mm thick Pb layer is accepted as the 
standard at 40 cm above the gonad position. The same range of permeated X-ray
dose for the gonad position may be reduced as well. In the case of 110 kV, when
the lead thicknesses are 0.30 mm Pb at 40 cm and 70 cm, and 0.10 mm Pb at 100 cm,
it is possible to reduce the weight of the lead rubber apron by about 28%.

PMID: 16049412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2005 Jul;32(7):997-1005.

[Multicenter comparative study of the recurrence-inhibitory effect of oral
fluoropyrimidine drugs in patients with colorectal cancer following curative
resection].

[Article in Japanese]

Sadahiro S(1), Mitomi T, Noto T, Kumada K, Hiki Y, Yamakawa T, Amano T, Oki S,
Otani Y, Oka H, Takahashi T, Takemiya S, Nishiyama K, Yamamura T, Tsuchiya S,
Ogawa N; Study Group on Postoperative Adjuvant Chemotherapy in Kanagawa
Prefecture.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery, Tokai University School of Medicine.

HCFU and UFT were reported effective in adjuvant chemotherapy for colorectal
cancer. This investigation was planned as a randomized study to compare the
usefulness of combination therapies with mitomycin C (MMC)+HCFU and MMC+UFT as
postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with colorectal cancer following 
curative resection, in terms of survival rate, recurrence rate, and adverse drug 
reactions. A total of 501 patients consisting of 252 patients with stage III/IV
colon cancer (Colorectal Cancer Handling Rules, 4th Ed.) for which macroscopic
curative resection was possible and 249 patients with stage II/III/IV rectal
cancer (ibid, 4th Ed.) were registered from 40 participating institutions. The
patients were randomly allocated to two groups with colon cancer and rectal
cancer employed as stratification factors. Beginning on Day 14 after surgery,
HCFU at 300 mg/day was administered to one group and UFT at 300 mg/day or 400
mg/day to another group, both orally and daily for one year. MMC 6 mg/m2 was
administered intravenously to both groups on the day of surgery and the day
following. Among the 501 patients, 496 patients (99%) were eligible. The 5-year
survival rates were 77.1% for the MMC+ HCFU group and 79.2% for the MMC+UFT
group, with the 5-year recurrence-free survival rates were 76.1% and 72.9%,
respectively, neither showing a significant difference between the groups.
Adverse drug reactions appeared in 23% of patients in the MMC+HCFU group and in
19% in the MMC+UFT group, with no serious reactions. One year after surgery the
administration completion rates were good, at 82% for the MMC+HCFU group and 83% 
for the MMC+UFT group. No clear difference in effectiveness was noted between
MMC+HCFU therapy and MMC+UFT therapy as postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy for
colorectal cancer. The administration completion rates were good, and no serious 
adverse drug reactions were observed for either therapy. It was thus considered
that both therapies could be administered safely, and both were useful as
postoperative adjuvant chemotherapies for colorectal cancer. It is considered
necessary to compare them with standard therapies in Western countries in the
future.

PMID: 16044962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Mol Genet Genomics. 2005 Jul;273(6):441-9. Epub 2005 Jun 14.

Differentiation of somatic mitochondria and the structural changes in mtDNA
during development of the dicyemid Dicyema japonicum (Mesozoa).

Awata H(1), Noto T, Endoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology,
Kanazawa University, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan, awata@sgkit.ge.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Dicyemids (Mesozoa) are extremely simple multicellular parasites found in the
kidneys of cephalopods. Their mitochondria are known to contain single-gene
minicircle DNAs. However, it is not known if the minicircles represent the sole
form of mitochondrial genome in these organisms. Here we demonstrate that
high-molecular-weight (HMW) mtDNA is present in dicyemids. This form of mtDNA is 
probably limited to germ cells, and has been analyzed by PCR and Southern
hybridization. In situ hybridization revealed that mtDNA is initially amplified
during early embryogenesis, and then gradually decreases in copy number as larval
development proceeds. Furthermore, we demonstrated using BrdU as a tracer that
many of the mitochondria in terminally differentiated somatic cells no longer
support DNA synthesis. Taking these observations into account, we propose an
"amplification-dilution" model for mesozoan mtDNA. "Stem" mitochondria in the
germ cells (1) amplify the HMW form of mtDNA in early embryos, followed by
minicircle formation via DNA rearrangement, or (2) selectively replicate
minicircles from the HMW DNA, concomitantly with the differentiation of the soma.
Minicircle formation may itself lead to the loss of replication origins.
Thereafter, the minicircles are simply distributed to daughter mitochondria
without replication, resulting in the "somatic" mitochondria, which have lost the
replicative form of the HMW mtDNA. The change in mtDNA configuration is discussed
in relation to mitochondrial differentiation.

PMID: 16044354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2005 Jul;30(1):75-9.

Video-thoracoscopic surgical pleurodesis in the management of malignant pleural
effusion: the importance of an early intervention.

Marrazzo A(1), Noto A, Casà L, Taormina P, Lo Gerfo D, David M, Mercadante S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology and Clinical Application, University of
Palermo, Italy.

Thoracentesis plays an important role in cancer patients with symptomatic
effusions, although its effect is short-lived and symptoms recur in almost all
patients. Early video-thoracoscopic surgical pleurodesis may provide added
benefit to a group of patients with advanced cancer presenting with symptomatic
malignant pleural effusion. Seventy-six patients with advanced cancer and pleural
effusion due to pulmonary-pleural metastases were recruited. In 51 cases (67.1%),
at least one thoracentesis was performed before admission for surgery.
Preoperative staging consisted of chest radiograph, CT scan, and blood gas
analysis. The mean Karnofsky performance status was about 50. Pleurodesis with
talc poudrage was completely successful in all patients, with a morbidity rate of
2.6%. There was no post-operative mortality. Three patients (3.9%) underwent
further thoracenteses for recurrence of pleural effusion within two months after 
the procedure. Early use of talc insufflated by video-thoracoscopic surgery is an
effective and relatively safe method for treating pleural effusion, and
preventing recurrence, in advanced cancer patients.

PMID: 16043010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Neurovirol. 2005 Jul;11(3):265-73.

Prevalence and risk factors for human immunodeficiency virus-associated
neurocognitive impairment, 1996 to 2002: results from an urban observational
cohort.

Tozzi V(1), Balestra P, Lorenzini P, Bellagamba R, Galgani S, Corpolongo A,
Vlassi C, Larussa D, Zaccarelli M, Noto P, Visco-Comandini U, Giulianelli M,
Ippolito G, Antinori A, Narciso P.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Infectious Diseases Lazzaro Spallanzani, Rome, Italy.
tozzi@inmi.it

To assess prevalence and risk factors for human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)-related neurocognitive impairment (NCI), the authors performed a 7-year
survey in the period 1996 to 2002. A total of 432 patients were examined.
HIV-related NCI was diagnosed in 238 patients (55.1%), meeting the HIV dementia
(HIV-D) criteria in 45 (10.4%). The prevalence of both NCI and HIV-D did not
change significantly during the study period. Compared with patients without NCI,
patients with NCI were older (40.4 versus 38.2 years; P = .003), had a higher
prevalence of positive HCV serology (61.1% versus 38.9%; P = .003), and a lower
nadir CD4 cell count (156 versus 222 cells/microl; P < .001). Compared with
patients seen during 1996 to 1999, patients with NCI seen during 2000 to 2002
were older (40.7 versus 38.8 years; P = .004), had a less advanced disease stage 
(previous acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS] 28.8% versus 65.7%; P < .001)
and a higher nadir CD4 count (174 versus 132 cells/microl; P = .026). This study 
showed an unchanged prevalence of both HIV-related NCI and HIV-D in the period
1996 to 2002. The authors found evidences for new additional potential risk
factors for HIV-related NCI (older age, lower nadir CD4 count, positive hepatitis
C virus [HCV] serology), and for a change of risk factors for NCI in the late
highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) era (older age, less advanced
disease, higher nadir CD4 count).

PMID: 16036806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Am J Surg Pathol. 2005 Aug;29(8):1056-61.

Pancreas head carcinoma: frequency of invasion to soft tissue adherent to the
superior mesenteric artery.

Noto M(1), Miwa K, Kitagawa H, Kayahara M, Takamura H, Shimizu K, Ohta T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterologic Surgery, Division of Cancer Medicine, Graduate
School of Medical Science, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan.

Despite radical extension of surgical procedures, the cure rate of pancreatic
head carcinoma patients still remains low. A cause of this concerns unsuccessful 
locoregional control, which may originate from a positive surgical margin near
the superior mesenteric artery (SMA). However, no studies have examined invasion 
of pancreatic carcinoma around the SMA. En bloc resection of the head of the
pancreas and the superior mesenteric vessels was performed on 6 patients who had 
pancreatic head carcinoma invading the superior mesenteric vein. The specimens
were cut perpendicular to the SMA and consecutive serial sections were made. The 
slices were stained with hematoxylin and eosin or immunohistochemistry for
cytokeratin 19 to easily detect carcinoma tissue under a microscope. Nodal
metastasis around the SMAs was found in all of the cases. There were no
characteristics of the arrangement of the metastatic nodes along the SMA.
Lymphatic emboli were often observed close to the metastatic nodes. Neural
invasions were detected around the tumors in every case and were continuously
connected with the extrapancreatic nerve plexus. The nerve plexus covering the
SMA were involved in 4 cases. Involvement was observed mainly behind the SMA,
reaching as far as the left side of the SMA in 3 cases. The invasion extended
further upwards along the right side of SMA for the celiac nerve plexus. The
lymphatics and the nerve plexus in the area around the SMA were frequently
involved by pancreatic head carcinoma. This involvement would have been left
behind unless the SMA was resected.

PMID: 16006800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Water Sci Technol. 2005;51(6-7):441-6.

Evaluation of MBR effluent characteristics for reuse purposes.

Oota S(1), Murakami T, Takemura K, Noto K.

Author information: 
(1)R&D Dept., Japan Sewage Works Agency, 5141 Shimo-sasame, Toda 335-0037, Japan.

One of the advantages of MBR is its excellent effluent quality, which is suitable
for a wide range of reuse purposes. We investigated the characteristics of MBR
effluent and evaluated them based on the Japanese guideline for the reuse of
treated wastewater. As the result, MBR effluent showed qualitative
coaracteristics that satisfy the requirement except chromaticity for recreational
purpose. Further treatment, such as by oxone or activated carbon, will be
required to remove the remaining color. MBR shows high removal efficiency of
bacteria and other hazardous microorganisms such as Cryptosporidium. We
investigated the removal efficiency of virus by MBR using coliphage as an
alternative index. The results showed that high removal efficiency for coliphage 
could be obtained by MBR. The removal mechanism appears to be that coliphage are 
attached to the activated sludge and thus rejected by the membrane together with 
activated sludge particles. With regard to the endocrine disrupters, no
significant differences were observed between MBR and CAS in the removal of main 
endocrine disrupters.

PMID: 16004006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Dermatol Surg. 2005 Jun;31(6):699-702.

Congenital melanocytic nevus: a possible clinical and dermoscopic pitfall.

Noto G(1), Argenziano G, Ferrara G, Zalaudek I.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Dermatology, Department of Oncology, La Maddalena, Palermo, Italy.

PMID: 15996424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2004 Fall;1(3):195-9.

Pheno-genotyping of Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis isolates identified 
in Sicily during a reemergence period.

Mammina C(1), Noto AM, Ricci A, Nastasi A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Enteric Pathogens of Southern Italy (CEPIM), Dipartimento di Igiene
e Microbiologia G. D'Alessandro, Università degli Studi di Palermo, Palermo,
Italy. diptigmi@unipa.it

After an upward trend paralleling that occurring in most European countries,
including Italy, since October 2002 Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis (S. 
Enteritidis) has again gained the first position among outbreak and sporadic
human isolates of Salmonella in Sicily. Because phage typing of S. Enteritidis
has many technical and epidemiological limitations and molecular methods have
proved to be poorly discriminative for this organism, multiple typing, using
phage typing together with pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and plasmid
profiling on a sample of fifty human and poultry isolates identified during the
period October 2002 to May 2003 in Sicily, was chosen as the most valuable
strategy to explore key features of this new epidemic wave. Although the limited 
number of strains imposes a cautious interpretation of the results, an apparently
increasing phage type heterogeneity has emerged with rise in PT6 as the more
striking event. While PFGE has confirmed the findings by other authors about the 
close genetic homogeneity between PT4 and PT6, plasmid profiling has provided
discriminative patterns for PT6 strains. Combined phenotypic and genotypic
profiles are necessary for epidemiological studies and public health
investigations on S. enteritidis.

PMID: 15992280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Infect. 2006 Jan;52(1):e27-30. Epub 2005 Jun 2.

Streptococcus salivarius meningitis and sphenoid sinus mucocele. Case report and 
literature review.

Conte A(1), Chinello P, Civljak R, Bellussi A, Noto P, Petrosillo N.

Author information: 
(1)Second Infectious Diseases, Lazzaro Spallanzani National Institute for
Infectious Diseases, Rome, Italy.

We report a case of meningitis caused by Streptococcus salivarius in a
49-year-old woman with a previously undiagnosed cerebrospinal fluid fistula due
to a sphenoid mucocele. We reviewed the literature concerning meningitis caused
by this uncommon organism and to the best of our knowledge this is the first case
of S. salivarius meningitis associated with sphenoid mucocele.

PMID: 15936084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Zoolog Sci. 2005 May;22(5):579-85.

A histological investigation of the maturation of the acorn worm, an inhabitant
of the Sea of Japan, and a suggestion about the relationship between synchronized
spawning/spermiation and the tidal level.

Ogiso S(1), Sakai K, Matada M, Sasayama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University, Japan.

One species of Hemichordata, Balanoglossus misakiensis, is then acorn worm
originally reported from the intertidal zone of the Miura Peninsula on the
Pacific Ocean side of Japan. We histologically examined the reproductive cycle of
the population of this species, which inhabits only the sublittoral zone in the
Sea of Japan. Testes and ovaries began to develop at the beginning of May 2003
and were almost mature in the latter half of June in males and in the first half 
of July in females in the same year. Subsequently, spermiation and spawning
followed in the latter half of July in males and in the first half of August in
females. Progress in maturation appeared to be related to increases in the water 
temperature. Although some experiments were conducted in aquariums to identify
the conditions responsible for the synchronization of the occurrence of
spontaneous spawning/spermiation, no clues were obtained. During the experiments,
however, 11, 2, and 4 individuals out of the 67 used achieved
spawning/spermiation on separate days. The occurrence of spawning/spermiation in 
the laboratory corresponded to the latter half of the switch from high tide to
low tide on those days. Also in the field, it was known that they released the
gametes according to this specific schedule. Therefore, it was suggested that, in
the Japan Sea population of this species, the tide level may be a condition for
synchronized spawning/spermiation.

PMID: 15930831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Hinyokika Kiyo. 2005 Apr;51(4):277-81.

[A case of fibroepithelial polyp of the ureter resected ureteroscopically].

[Article in Japanese]

Numakura K(1), Tsuchiya N, Inoue T, Horikawa Y, Kakinuma H, Togashi H, Matsuura
S, Ohyama C, Satoh S, Sato K, Habuchi T, Noto H.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine.

A case of a giant fibroepithelial polyp of the ureter is presented. A 76-year-old
woman was pointed out to have a tumorus lesion in the urinary bladder by
ultrasonography. Intravenous pyelography showed a filling defect in the lower
portion of the left ureter and bladder. Cystoscopy revealed a tumor with a smooth
surface sticking out of the left ureteral orifice. After demonstration of benign 
ureteral polyp without malignancy by biopsy, ureteroscopic resection was
performed. The stalk of the polyp was coagulated and removed with biopsy forceps 
under ureteroscopy. Pathological diagnosis was a fibroepithelial polyp. There
were no findings of polyp recurrence or ureteral stenosis at 9 months after the
operation. The diagnosis and management of fibroepithelial polyp are discussed.

PMID: 15912790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Dig Dis Sci. 2005 May;50(5):922-7.

Therapeutic effects of ecabet sodium, an antiulcer drug, on dextran sodium
sulfate-induced ulcerative colitis in rats.

Noto T(1), Yamada H, Inui T, Okuyama K, Watanable A, Kimura I, Nagasaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery & Pharmacology Research Laboratories, Toda, Saitama, Japan.
t-noto@tanabe.co.jp

Ecabet, an antiulcer drug, is reported to be effective in patients with
ulcerative colitis. We investigated the effect of ecabet enema on ulcerative
colitis in rats and some mechanisms underlying this effect. In vivo ecabet enema 
showed a therapeutic effect in the rat ulcerative colitis model induced by
dextran sodium sulfate in the drinking water. The amount of ecabet bound to
damaged mucosa was higher than that bound to normal mucosa 30 min after
intrarectal administration. In vitro ecabet accelerated the restitution of
epithelial cells, which was not affected by a TGF-beta antibody. Ecabet inhibited
the leukotriene B4 production and 5-lipoxygenase activity in human neutrophils.
In conclusion, ecabet enema showed a therapeutic effect in rats with ulcerative
colitis. This effect may be attributable to the high binding affinity for damaged
mucosa, the acceleration of restitution, and the inhibition of leukotriene B4
production.

PMID: 15906769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Am J Transplant. 2005 Jun;5(6):1559-61.

Extended survival by urgent liver retransplantation after using a first graft
with metastasis from initially unrecognized donor sarcoma.

Ortiz JA(1), Manzarbeitia C, Noto KA, Rothstein KD, Araya VA, Munoz SJ, Reich DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Transplantation Program, Department of Surgery, Albert Einstein Medical 
Center, Phiadelphia, PA, USA.

A 58-year-old man underwent orthotopic liver transplantation for polycystic liver
disease. Shortly after the procedure, it was discovered that the donor harbored a
sarcoma of the aortic arch that had metastasized to the spleen, and bilateral
renal cell carcinomas. The two sole organ recipients, our liver recipient and a
lung recipient at another institution, were both listed for urgent
retransplantation, which they received from the same second donor. The liver
explant contained metastatic sarcoma. Twenty-four months survival following lung 
retransplantation has been previously reported. We report the 76-month
disease-free survival in the liver recipient.

PMID: 15888069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Int J Cardiol. 2005 May 25;101(2):213-7.

Cystatin C levels are decreased in acute myocardial infarction: effect of
cystatin C G73A gene polymorphism on plasma levels.

Noto D(1), Cefalu' AB, Barbagallo CM, Pace A, Rizzo M, Marino G, Caldarella R,
Castello A, Pernice V, Notarbartolo A, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, University of Palermo, Via del
Vespro 141, Palermo I-90127, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Cystatin C is the most abundant protease inhibitor in the plasma. Low
plasma levels have been found in patients with aortic aneurysms and they seem
correlated with the extension of the aortic lesions in early aneurysms detected
by ultrasonography.
METHODS: In this study, plasma levels of cystatin C have been investigated in
patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI), unstable angina and controls.
The effect on plasma levels of the G73A polymorphism of the CST3 gene has been
also evaluated.
RESULTS: Patients with acute myocardial infarction showed significantly lower
levels of cystatin C compared to unstable angina and controls, but levels were
nearly normal in a week after the acute event. The genotype distribution of the
G73A polymorphism was not different among the groups. Nevertheless, cystatin C
levels decreased proportionally with the number of A alleles. Cystatin C levels
were positively correlated with age, triglyceride/HDL cholesterol ratio and
creatinine, and negatively with HDL cholesterol and the number of A alleles. All 
variables, but not HDL cholesterol, were independently correlated in a
multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Cystatin C is decreased in acute myocardial infarction. It is still 
not clear whether lower cystatin C levels are causally linked to the acute event 
or just represent a negative acute phase response. The CST3 gene G73A
polymorphism functionally affects cystatin C plasma levels.

PMID: 15882666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2005 Jan;40(1):33-42.

Chronic constipation and food intolerance: a model of proctitis causing
constipation.

Carroccio A(1), Scalici C, Maresi E, Di Prima L, Cavataio F, Noto D, Porcasi R,
Averna MR, Iacono G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital of Palermo, Palermo,
Italy. acarroccio@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Chronic constipation in children can be linked to cow's milk
intolerance (CMI) but the existence of a food intolerance-dependent proctitis is 
still debated. The aim of this study was to evaluate the histologic data in
patients with food intolerance-related constipation.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Fifty-two consecutive patients (22 M, median age 4 years)
with chronic constipation unresponsive to common treatment were enrolled. All
patients were put on a cow's milk-free diet for 4 weeks and those uncured on this
diet underwent a subsequent 4-week period of oligoantigenic diet. In the patients
cured on elimination diet, a subsequent double-blind food challenge was performed
to confirm the diagnosis of food intolerance. At entry to the study, routine
hemato-chemical and immunologic assays, rectoscopy, and histologic study of the
rectal mucosa were performed. In the patients cured on elimination diet, rectal
histology was repeated when they were cured.
RESULTS: Twenty-four patients were found to be suffering from CMI and 6 from
multiple food intolerance. These patients had a normal stool frequency on
elimination diet, while constipation reappeared on food challenge. The condition 
of the remaining 22 patients did not improve on elimination diet. The patients
with food intolerance showed a significantly higher frequency of erosions of the 
mucosa, number of intraepithelial lymphocytes and eosinophils, and number of
eosinophils in the lamina propria. Study of the rectal mucus gel layer showed
that the food-intolerant patients had a significantly lower thickness than the
other subjects studied. In the food intolerant patients, histologic abnormalities
disappeared on elimination diet, when the patients were well.
CONCLUSIONS: Food intolerance-related constipation is characterized by proctitis 
with eosinophil infiltrate of the rectal mucosa. A reduced mucus gel layer can be
considered a contributory factor in the pathogenesis of the constipation.

PMID: 15841712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Chir Ital. 2005 Jan-Feb;57(1):65-70.

[The role of fine-needle aspiration in the diagnosis of thyroid nodules].

[Article in Italian]

Marrazzo A(1), Casà L, David M, Lo Gerfo D, Noto A, Taormina P.

Author information: 
(1)Casa di Cura di Alta Specialità, Dipartimento Oncologico di III I ivello, La
Maddalena, Palermo.

The aim of this study was to prospectively evaluate the sensitivity, specificity 
and accuracy of fine-needle aspiration of thyroid nodules. From January 1978 to
December 2003, 497 patients underwent fine-needle aspiration of thyroid nodules
and then thyroidectomy. Fine-needle aspiration was performed with a fine 23-25
gauge and the aspirate was fixed and dyed with May-Grounwald-Giemsa method. The
results of cytology were divided into four groups: positive for malignancy (77
patients), negative for malignancy (370 patients), suspect for malignancy (34
patients) and not diagnostic (16 patients). Suspect specimens also included
follicular neoplasm and Hürthle cell neoplasm. Fine-needle aspiration results
were compared with histopathologic analysis after thyroidectomy. There were 2
false-positive (0.5%) and 5 false-negative patients (1%). Sensitivity,
specificity and accuracy were respectively 94.7%, 99% and 98.4%. This study
confirms that fine-needle aspiration of thyroid nodules can be performed easily
with high sensitivity, specificity and accuracy.

PMID: 15832740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2005 May;179(3):700-4. Epub 2005 Apr 2.

Randomized clinical trial to compare the effects of methadone and buprenorphine
on the immune system in drug abusers.

Neri S(1), Bruno CM, Pulvirenti D, Malaguarnera M, Italiano C, Mauceri B, Abate
G, Cilio D, Calvagno S, Tsami A, Ignaccolo L, Interlandi D, Prestianni L,
Ricchena M, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
sergio.neri4@tin.it

RATIONALE: Buprenorphine may be a useful alternative option to methadone in
addicts. Opioids can produce severe changes in the immune system.
OBJECTIVES: The objectives of this study are to compare the effect of sublingual 
buprenorphine and methadone on the immune system and to compare the two
substances on the drying-out program compliance.
METHODS: We studied 62 randomized outpatients for a period of 12 months. Subjects
(55 males and 7 females; mean age 25+/-4 years; average history of heroin abuse
being 2 years) on maintenance treatment were assigned in two groups (A and B).
Methadone chloride (medium dose 100 mg/day) was administered to group A, whereas 
group B received sublingual buprenorphine (32.40+/-2.8 mg/day). Urine
toxicological screening, plasma levels of TNF-alpha interleukin-1,
interleukin-beta, lymphocyte CD14 and a self-rating depression questionnaire were
measured.
RESULTS: Urine screening was negative for opiates in 17.6% of group A and in
10.7% of group B (p<0.001; r = 0.62). Depression score was 62+/-2 in group A and 
55+/-3 in group B (p < 0.01). Cytokine and CD14 revealed higher concentrations
both in groups A and B without significant differences (p > 0.05) between the two
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The effects of buprenorphine and methadone tested on the immune
system were overlapping in our patients. The elevated cytokine levels observed
may suggest that the two drugs stimulate immunologic hyperactivation of an immune
system that was formerly inhibited by heroin. Furthermore, our data suggest that 
buprenorphine can be a valid alternative to methadone in maintenance treatment of
chronic heroin abuse and referred a marked decline in depression.

PMID: 15806416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Ann Surg. 2005 Apr;241(4):622-8.

A multicenter evaluation of utility of chest computed tomography and bone scans
in liver transplant candidates with stages I and II hepatoma.

Koneru B(1), Teperman LW, Manzarbeitia C, Facciuto M, Cho K, Reich D, Sheiner P, 
Fisher A, Noto K, Goldenberg A, Korogodsky M, Campbell D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, New Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey, USA.
koneruba@umdnj.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine utility of practice of chest computed tomography (CCT)
and bone scan (BS) in patients with early-stage hepatoma evaluated for
transplantation (LT).
SUMMARY BACKGROUND DATA: Consensus-based policy mandates routine CCT and BS in LT
candidates with hepatoma. No data exist either to support or refute this policy.
METHODS: From January 1999 to December 2002, stages I and II hepatoma patients
evaluated at 4 centers were included. Scan interpretation was positive,
indeterminate, or negative. Outcomes of evaluation and transplantation were
compared between groups based on scans. Total charges incurred were derived from 
mean of charges at the centers.
RESULTS: One hundred seventeen stages I and II patients were evaluated. None had 
positive scans, 78 had negative, 29 had at least 1 indeterminate, and 10 did not 
have 1 or both scans. Twelve patients were declined listing, 6 from progression
of hepatoma but none from CCT or BS findings. Two listed patients were delisted
for progression of the hepatoma. Proportion of patients listed, transplanted,
clinical and pathologic stage of hepatoma, and recurrence after LT were similar
in groups with negative and indeterminate scans. Indeterminate scans led to 6
invasive procedures, 1 patient died of complications of a mediastinal biopsy, and
none of the 6 showed metastases. Charges of $2933 were generated per patient
evaluated.
CONCLUSIONS: Positive yield of routine CCT and BS in patients with hepatoma is
very low despite substantial charges and potential complications. CCT and BS
performed only when clinically indicated will be a more cost-effective and safer 
approach.

PMCID: PMC1357066
PMID: 15798464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Photochem Photobiol B. 2005 Apr 4;79(1):59-65. Epub 2005 Jan 19.

Photoaddition of thienocoumarin derivatives to DNA: stoichiometry and kinetics of
binding.

Dalla Via L(1), Di Noto V, Gia O, Marciani Magno S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Padova, Via Marzolo 5,
35131 Padova, Italy. lisa.dallavia@unipd.it

Photoreaction of the
6,9-dimethyl-4-methoxymethyl-2H-thieno[3,2-g]-1-benzopyran-2-one (compound I) and
4-acetoxymethyl-6,9-dimethyl-2H-thieno[3,2-g]-1-benzopyran-2-one (compound II) to
DNA was studied. The quantitative evaluation of the photobound molecules was
performed by means of inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry
(ICP-AES), exploiting the presence of the sulphur atom inside the tricyclic
chromophore. The concurrent estimation of the phosphorus atom, present
exclusively in the macromolecule, allowed possible intercalation sites to be
identified and their involvement in the photoaddition reaction to be determined. 
The development of a kinetic model made it possible to discriminate and evaluate 
the single kinetic events that constitute the overall photoaddition process of I 
and II to DNA.

PMID: 15792880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Nihon Koshu Eisei Zasshi. 2005 Feb;52(2):158-68.

[How has medical inspection by Public Health Center been accepted for medical
care institutions?].

[Article in Japanese]

Sato M, Moriizumi S, Sakurayama T, Koyanagi H, Ikeda K, Kawashima H, Okada N,
Takenouchi N, Tagusari Y, Sasaki J, Ahiko T, Ogami T, Fujieda T, Noto T, Koinuma 
N.

PMID: 15791902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Opt Lett. 2005 Mar 1;30(5):510-2.

Nanolayer characterization through wavelength multiplexing of a microsphere
resonator.

Noto M(1), Vollmer F, Keng D, Teraoka I, Arnold S.

Author information: 
(1)Microparticle Photophysics Laboratory, Polytechnic University, 6 Metrotech
Center, Brooklyn, New York 11201, USA.

We optically characterize nanolayer (<150 nm) formation in situ on a silica
microsphere in an aqueous environment by simultaneously following the shifts of
whispering-gallery modes at two wavelengths. This approach was inspired by layer 
perturbation theory, which indicates that these two measurements can be used to
determine independently both the thickness and the optical dielectric constant.
The theory is verified for extreme cases and used to characterize a biophysically
relevant hydrogel nanolayer with an extremely small excess refractive index of
0.0012.

PMID: 15789719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Org Chem. 2005 Apr 1;70(7):2828-31.

Can the absence of solvation of neutral reagents by ionic liquids be responsible 
for the high reactivity in base-assisted intramolecular nucleophilic
substitutions in these solvents?

D'Anna F(1), Frenna V, Noto R, Pace V, Spinelli D.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica E. Paterno, Università degli Studi di
Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Parco d'Orleans 2, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
fdanna@unipa.it

Erratum in
    J Org Chem. 2006 Feb 17;71(4):1754.

[reaction: see text] The kinetics of the rearrangement of the Z-phenylhydrazone
of 3-benzoyl-5-phenyl-1,2,4-oxadiazole (1a) into the relevant
4-benzoylamino-2,5-diphenyl-1,2,3-triazole (2a) induced by amines have been
studied in two room-temperature ionic liquids (IL-1, [BMIM][BF4] and IL-2,
[BMIM][PF6]). The data collected show that the reaction occurs faster in ionic
liquids than in other conventional solvents previously studied (both polar or
apolar, protic or aprotic). Presumably, this could depend on their peculiar
ability to minimize the strong substrate-solvent, amine-solvent and amine-amine
interactions occurring in conventional solvents.

PMID: 15787580  [PubMed]


452. Nihon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi. 2005 Feb;43(2):108-11.

[Case of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis triggered by relocation of
residence].

[Article in Japanese]

Taniguchi H(1), Abo H, Miyazawa H, Noto H, Izumi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Prefectural Central Hospital.

A 22-year-old woman has been treated with inhaled corticosteroid for bronchial
asthma. Her family moved house to Toyama prefecture in March 2003, and she was
enrolled in our hospital. Her chest radiograph on first medical examination
showed the right upper lobe infiltration. Bronchoscopy revealed a mucoid
impaction at right B2, and Aspergillus fumigatus was cultured from suctioning of 
pulmonary secretions. Histopathologic findings from transbronchial biopsy
revealed eosinophilic pneumonitis but not Aspergillus fumigatus. She was
diagnosed allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, and she was started on
prednisolone 40 mg/day. The finding of her chest radiograph improved in two
weeks. This case suggested that allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis was
triggered by moving house with exposure of Aspergillus fumigatus. We should give 
guidance to asthmatics to wear a dust respirator at work in dust-laden
environment.

PMID: 15770943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Haematologica. 2005 Mar;90(3):423-4.

Importance of troponin T for the risk stratification of normotensive patients
with pulmonary embolism. A prospective, cohort study with a three-month
follow-up.

Bova C, Crocco F, Ricchio R, Serafini O, Greco F, Noto A.

To determine the prognostic importance of troponin T in normotensive patients
with pulmonary embolism, we investigated the rate of adverse events in patients
with normal and elevated troponin values, during the hospital period and at three
months of follow-up. We also calculated the proportion of patients with abnormal 
troponin values and adverse outcomes who could have been treated with more
aggressive therapy according to published criteria.

PMID: 15749686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Clin Calcium. 2005 Mar;15(3):139-46.

[Physiological significance of calcitonin in fish].

[Article in Japanese]

Suzuki N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University.

The physiological role of calcitonin (CT) in fish has been partially elucidated. 
In teleosts, CT did not affect the calcium (Ca) and phosphate contents in bone
and scales. In an experiment using Ca(45), CT did not show any change in the Ca
flux of the scales. To examine the effect of CT on osteoclasts in teleosts,
therefore, we developed a new culture system using goldfish scales. This system
can detect osteoclastic and osteoblastic activities very sensitively using
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase and alkaline phosphatase as respective
markers. We are the first to demonstrate that CT suppresses osteoclastic
activities in teleosts as well as mammals. Using the sandwich type of an ELISA
system with two polyclonal antibodies, we demonstrated that a considerable
increase (more than twice) of plasma Ca triggered the secretion of CT from
ultimobranchial glands in the feeding period but a slight increase of plasma Ca
did not promote CT secretion. From the analyses of the plasma CT level and the
expression of a CT receptor, we found that in teleosts, CT has the most important
role in the reproductive period compared to other periods. In cartilaginous fish 
and cyclostomes as well as teleosts, CT has some roles in the reproductive
period. These results suggest that CT in fish has a more important role in the
reproductive physiology than in the Ca metabolism.

PMID: 15741693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Environ Radioact. 2005;80(3):341-55.

Seasonal variation of 228Ra/226Ra ratio in seaweed: implications for water
circulation patterns in coastal areas of the Noto Peninsula, Japan.

Inoue M(1), Kofuji H, Yamamoto M, Komura K.

Author information: 
(1)Low Level Radioactivity Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental
Technology, Kanazawa University, Tatsunokuchi, Ishikawa 923-1224, Japan.
mutsuo@llrl.ku-unet.ocn.ne.jp

To examine water circulation patterns of coastal water, 72 seaweed (Sargasso)
samples and 27 coastal water samples were collected from coastal areas of the
Noto Peninsula, Japan, during the period from December 1998 to June 2002. The
(228)Ra and (226)Ra activities of those samples were measured by low-background
gamma-ray spectrometry. There was a wide range of activities of (228)Ra
(0.5-2Bq/kg-fresh) and (226)Ra (0.5-1.2Bq/kg-fresh) in the Sargasso samples. The 
(228)Ra/(226)Ra activity ratio of Sargasso samples exhibited seasonal variation
with minimum values in June ((228)Ra/(226)Ra= approximately 1) and maximum values
in December (1.5-2.5), which was mainly governed by changes in (228)Ra activity. 
It is also notable that the seasonal variation of the (228)Ra/(226)Ra ratio of
Sargasso is in approximate agreement with that of the ambient coastal water.
Sargasso samples appear to have retained the (228)Ra/(226)Ra ratio of the ambient
coastal waters, and the temporal variations in that ratio provide insight into
seasonal changes in water circulation in the Noto Peninsula coastal area.

PMID: 15725507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Addict Behav. 2005 Mar;30(3):545-56.

Household survey on drug abuse in Brazil: study involving the 107 major cities of
the country--2001.

Galduróz JC(1), Noto AR, Nappo SA, Carlini EA.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal De São Paulo, Departamento De Psicobiologia, Brazil.
galduroz@psicobio.epm.br

The prevalence of the use in Brazil of illicit drugs, as well as of alcohol and
tobacco, was determined. Further, illicit use of psychotropic medicines, and
anabolic steroids were also surveyed. This study was carried out in 107 Brazilian
cities with more than 200,000 inhabitants aged 12-65 years. The sampling design
adopted was that of sampling per aggregates in three stages: first, the census
sectors were selected; second, homes were selected among the sectors; finally, in
each home, a respondent was selected in a manner independent of the interviewer. 
There were 8589 persons interviewed. The questionnaire utilized was that of the
SAMHSA (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration) which was
translated and adapted for Brazilian conditions. The lifetime use of alcohol in
the 107 major cities of the country was 68.7%, which was close to numbers
observed for Chile at 70.8% and the USA at 81.0%. Yet, tobacco lifetime use was
41.1% of the total, which is lower than the prevalence observed in the USA
(70.5%). The data on the lifetime use of marijuana in Brazil (6.9%) approximated 
the findings for Colombia (5.4%), however, being much lower than that observed in
the USA (34.2%) and the United Kingdom (25.0%). The prevalence of lifetime use of
cocaine was 2.3%, well below the levels for the USA with 11.2% of the total
population. The abuse of inhalants was 5.8% of the total, greater than that found
in Colombia (1.4%) and about four times less than that in the United Kingdom with
20.0%. Among the medicaments, stimulants had a 1.5% prevalence of lifetime use,
and that of benzodiazepines had similar percentages in Brazil (3.3%) and in the
USA (5.8%). In this survey, only four individuals reported lifetime use of
heroin, which was equivalent to about 0.04% of the sample and much lower than
that in the USA with 1.2% and in Colombia reaching 1.5%. These findings will
allow the implementation of public policies fitted to the situation with
psychotropic drugs in Brazil.

PMID: 15718070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Intensive Care Med. 2005 Mar;31(3):482-6. Epub 2005 Feb 16.

Sedation in the critically ill ventilated patient: possible role of enteral
drugs.

Cigada M(1), Pezzi A, Di Mauro P, Marzorati S, Noto A, Valdambrini F, Zaniboni M,
Astori M, Iapichino G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Anestesiologia e Rianimazione dell'Università degli Studi di
Milano, Azienda Ospedaliera-Polo Universitario San Paolo, Italy.
marcocigada@yahoo.it

OBJECTIVE: Sedation by the enteral route is unusual in intensive medicine. We
analysed the feasibility/efficacy of long-term enteral sedation in ventilated
critically ill patients.
DESIGN: Prospective interventional cohort study.
SETTING: General ICU.
PATIENTS AND PARTICIPANTS: Forty-two patients needing ventilation and sedation
for at least 4 days.
INTERVENTIONS: At admission, sedation was induced with propofol or midazolam.
Enteral hydroxyzine (+/- enteral lorazepam) was added in all patients within the 
second day. Intravenous drugs were gradually withdrawn, trying to maintain only
enteral sedation after the initial 48 h. Analgesia was provided with continuous
IV fentanyl.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Sedation level was assessed evaluating, on a daily
basis, patients' compliance to the invasive care and comparing observed vs
planned Ramsay scores three times a day. Excluding the first 2 days of
patient-stabilisation and fast titration of sedation level, 577 days with
ventilatory support were analysed. In 460 days (79.7%) total enteral sedation was
given. This percentage rose to 94.2% when the requested Ramsay was 2 (347 days). 
Daily sedation was judged as adequate in 82.8% of days of total enteral sedation.
Thirty-one patients had total enteral as the exclusive route of sedation.
CONCLUSIONS: After 24-48 h, enteral sedation may replace, totally/in part, IV
sedation in ventilated patients. Total enteral sedation easily fits the target
when a Ramsay score 2 is planned. When a deeper sedation is needed, a mixed
regimen is effective and lowers IV drug dosages. No side effects were reported.

PMID: 15714324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Transplant Proc. 2004 Dec;36(10):3200-2.

Monitoring of T-cell repertoire was useful for predicting graft-versus-host
disease prognosis in a patient with chronic myelogeneous leukemia after
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.

Tsutsumi Y(1), Tanaka J, Minami H, Musashi M, Fukushima A, Kawamura T, Kanamori
H, Obara S, Noto S, Ogura N, Asaka M, Imamura M, Masauzi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hakodate Municipal Hospital, Hakodate, Japan.
rtsutsu@nyc.odn.ne.jp

We analyzed 24 T-cell receptor (TCR)beta chain subfamilies (Vbeta) and the
chimerism of a patient with chronic myelogeneous leukemia who underwent
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (allo-BMT). The patient developed liver
dysfunction at day 19 leading to worsening of his condition. He died on day 91 of
hepatic failure. Complete donor chimerism was observed after day 19. The average 
complexity score of TCR-Vbeta, which was low on day 19 (5.50), because much lower
on day 82 (3.77). The average value of normal volunteers is 7.69. Neither
immunosuppressive therapy nor antiviral therapy was effective to treat his
hepatic dysfunction. A liver specimen at autopsy showed necrotic tissue with
invasion of lymphocytes under the endothelial cells of the bile ducts. These
findings suggest that the liver dysfunction was due to graft-versus-host disease 
(GVHD). Careful monitoring of chimerism and TCR-Vbeta complexity may help to
predict the prognosis of GVHD after allogeneic BMT.

PMID: 15686728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Nihon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi. 2004 Dec;42(12):1030-3.

[Hypopituitarism caused by hypothalamic metastasis of lung cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Taniguchi H(1), Inomata M, Abo H, Miyazawa H, Noto H, Izumi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Central Prefectural Hospital.

A 40-year-old man was admitted due to thirst, general malaise, and swollen
cervical lymph nodes. Cervical lymph node biopsy revealed moderately
differentiated adenocarcinoma, and he was diagnosed lung cancer with hypothalamic
metastasis. We gave him chemotherapy and hypothalamic irradiation. He had mild
hydrodipsia at the first examination, which progressively worsened. He was given 
a diagnosis of diabetes insipidus caused by hypothalamic metastasis. We gave him 
desmopressin acetate, and his symptom improved. Predonisolone was prescribed,
because of low levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone in the blood. After
chemotherapy and irradiation of hypothalamus, metastatic focus diminished and
desmopressin acetate was tapered. Hypopituitarism caused by hypothalamic
metastasis is rare.

PMID: 15678911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Nihon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi. 2004 Dec;42(12):1009-13.

[Central diabetes insipidus caused by pituitary metastasis of lung cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Taniguchi H(1), Inomata M, Abo H, Miyazawa H, Noto H, Izumi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Central Prefectural Hospital.

A 53-year-old man admitted for thirst, polyposia, and polyuria. Large cell lung
cancer T3N2M1 (Stage IV), and central diabetes insipidus caused by pituitary
metastasis of lung cancer, were diagnosed. We gave him desmopressin acetate, and 
chemotherapy with paclitaxel and carboplatin. But pituitary metastasis increased 
and invaded the hypothalamus. After irradiation of the pituitary and
hypothalamus, metastatic focus diminished and desmopressin acetate was tapered.

PMID: 15678907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 11;280(10):9678-90. Epub 2004 Dec 21.

Metal-catalyzed oxidation of alpha-synuclein: helping to define the relationship 
between oligomers, protofibrils, and filaments.

Cole NB(1), Murphy DD, Lebowitz J, Di Noto L, Levine RL, Nussbaum RL.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Diseases Research Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. ncole@mail.nih.gov

Oxidative stress is implicated in a number of neuro-degenerative diseases and is 
associated with the selective loss of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia
nigra in Parkinson's disease. The role of alpha-synuclein as a potential target
of intracellular oxidants has been demonstrated by the identification of
posttranslational modifications of synuclein within intracellular aggregates that
accumulate in Parkinson's disease brains, as well as the ability of a number of
oxidative insults to induce synuclein oligomerization. The relationship between
these relatively small soluble oligomers, potentially neurotoxic synuclein
protofibrils, and synuclein filaments remains unclear. We have found that
metal-catalyzed oxidation of alpha-synuclein inhibited formation of synuclein
filaments with a concomitant accumulation of beta sheet-rich oligomers that may
represent synuclein protofibrils. Similar results with a number of oxidative and 
enzymatic treatments suggest that the covalent association of synuclein into
higher molecular mass oligomers/protofibrils represents an alternate pathway from
filament formation and renders synuclein less prone to proteasomal degradation.

PMID: 15615715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2004 Dec;60(12):1723-9.

[Shielding effect of clinical X-ray protector and lead glass against annihilation
radiation and gamma rays of 99mTc].

[Article in Japanese]

Fukuda A(1), Koshida K, Yamaguchi I, Takahashi M, Kitabayashi K, Matsubara K,
Noto K, Kawabata C, Nakagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Shiga Medical Center for Adults.

Various pharmaceutical companies in Japan are making radioactive drugs available 
for positron emission tomography (PET) in hospitals without a cyclotron. With the
distribution of these drugs to hospitals, medical check-ups and examinations
using PET are expected to increase. However, the safety guidelines for radiation 
in the new deployment of PET have not been adequately improved. Therefore, we
measured the shielding effect of a clinical X-ray protector and lead glass
against annihilation radiation and gamma rays of (99m)Tc. We then calculated the 
shielding effect of a 0.25 mm lead protector, 1 mm lead, and lead glass using the
EGS4 (Electron Gamma Shower Version 4) code. The shielding effects of 22-mm lead 
glass against annihilation radiation and gamma rays of (99m)Tc were approximately
31.5% and 93.3%, respectively. The clinical X-ray protector against annihilation 
radiation approximately doubled the skin-absorbed dose.

PMID: 15614224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Immunol. 2004 Dec 15;173(12):7471-80.

Demonstration of the involvement of outer surface protein E coiled coil
structural domains and higher order structural elements in the binding of
infection-induced antibody and the complement-regulatory protein, factor H.

McDowell JV(1), Wolfgang J, Senty L, Sundy CM, Noto MJ, Marconi RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical College of Virginia at
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

Factor H (fH) is an important regulator of the alternative complement cascade.
Several human pathogens have been shown to bind fH to their surface, a process
that facilitates immune evasion or cell to cell interaction. Among the pathogens 
that bind fH are some Borrelia species associated with Lyme disease and relapsing
fever. The fH-binding proteins of the Lyme spirochetes form two classes (I and
II). In Borrelia burgdorferi B31MI, class I includes the outer surface protein E 
(OspE) paralogs, L39, N38, and P38, whereas the class II group includes A68 and
additional proteins that have not yet been identified. To identify the OspE
determinants involved in fH and OspE-targeting infection-induced Ab (iAb)
binding, deletion, random, and site-directed mutagenesis of L39 were performed.
Mutations in several different regions of L39 abolished fH and or iAb binding,
indicating that separable domains and residues of OspE are required for ligand
binding. Some of the mutants that lost the ability to bind fH, iAb, or both had
only a single amino acid change. Site-directed mutagenesis of three putative
coiled coil motifs of OspE revealed that these higher order structures are
required for fH binding but not for iAb binding. The data presented within
demonstrate that the binding of fH and iAb to the OspE protein is mediated by
higher order structures and protein conformation. These studies advance our
understanding of fH binding as a virulence mechanism and facilitate ongoing
efforts to use fH-binding proteins in the development of microbial vaccines.

PMID: 15585873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Intensive Care Med. 2005 Jan;31(1):164-5. Epub 2004 Dec 3.

Levosimendan in septic cardiac failure.

Noto A, Giacomini M, Palandi A, Stabile L, Reali-Forster C, Iapichino G.

PMID: 15580334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Gen Intern Med. 2004 Nov;19(11):1104-10.

Patient-reported and physician-estimated adherence to HAART: social and clinic
center-related factors are associated with discordance.

Murri R(1), Ammassari A, Trotta MP, De Luca A, Melzi S, Minardi C, Zaccarelli M, 
Rellecati P, Santopadre P, Soscia F, Scasso A, Tozzi V, Ciardi M, Orofino GC,
Noto P, Monforte Ad, Antinori A, Wu AW; AdICoNa Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Clinica delle Malattie Infettive, Università Cattolica del S. Cuore, 00168
Rome, Italy. ritamurri@libero.it

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the rate of discordance between patients and physicians
on adherence to highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) and identify factors
related to discordance in these two assessments.
DESIGN: Prospective, multicenter, cohort study (AdICONA) nested within the
Italian Cohort Naive Antiretrovirals (ICONA) study.
SETTING: Tertiary clinical centers.
PARTICIPANTS: The patients filled out a 16-item self-administered questionnaire
on adherence to HAART. At the same time, physicians estimated the current HAART
adherence of their patient.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Discordance between patient and physician on adherence to
antiretroviral therapy.
RESULTS: From May 1999 to March 2000, 320 paired patient-physician assessments
were obtained. Patients had a mean plasma HIV RNA of 315 copies/ml (64% had
undetectable HIV RNA) and a mean CD4+ cell count of 577 cells x 10(6)/L.
Nonadherence was reported by 30.9% of patients and estimated by physicians in
45.0% cases. In 111 cases (34.7%), patients and physicians were discordant on
adherence to HAART. Kappa statistics was 0.27. Using patient-assessed adherence
as reference, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative
predictive value of physician-estimated adherence were 64.7%, 66.6%, 81.2%, and
45.8%, respectively. On multivariable analysis, low education level,
unemployment, absence of a social worker in the clinical center, and
unavailability of afternoon visits were significantly correlated with
patient-physician discordance on adherence to antiretrovirals.
CONCLUSIONS: Physicians did not correctly estimate patient-reported adherence to 
HAART in more than one third of patients. Both social variables and factors
related to the clinical center were important predictors of discordance between
patients and physicians. Interventions to enhance adherence should include
strategies addressed to improve patient-physician relationship.

PMCID: PMC1494787
PMID: 15566439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Chir Ital. 2004 Sep-Oct;56(5):621-7.

Localization of the sentinel lymph node in breast cancer: prospective comparison 
of vital staining and radioactive tracing methods.

Marrazzo A(1), Taormina P, Noto A, Cardinale G, Casà L, Mercadante S, Lo Gerfo D,
David M.

Author information: 
(1)Casa di Cura ad Alta Specialità Oncologica La Maddalena, Palermo.

The aim of the study was to evaluate possible differences in accuracy between the
radioactive tracing and vital staining method in the search for sentinel nodes in
patients with breast cancer. From January 1999 to December 2000, 102 patients
with T1 N0 breast carcinoma were recruited into the study for localization of
sentinel nodes with vital blue dye staining and radioactive tracing and were then
submitted to lumpectomy and axillary dissection. For the two methods, we
estimated the percentage of sentinel nodes localized, the false-negative rate,
the predictive negative and positive value and the accuracy. The vital blue dye
staining method permitted localization of the sentinel node in 73% of patients
with a false-negative rate of 8%, a predictive negative value of 92% and 92%
accuracy. The radioactive tracing method permitted localization of the sentinel
node in 97% cases with a false-negative rate of 0%, a predictive negative value
of 100% and 100% accuracy (P<0.0005). The method that offers the better results
is radioactive tracing. Currently, many authors use both techniques, since, in
common practice, staining helps to identify the sentinel node with the probe.

PMID: 15553432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Thromb Haemost. 2004 Nov;92(5):993-6.

Incidence of post-thrombotic syndrome in patients with previous pulmonary
embolism. A retrospective cohort study.

Bova C(1), Rossi V, Ricchio R, Greco A, Bloise A, Daniele F, Greco F, Noto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Annunziata General Hospital, Cosenza, Italy. 
carbova@libero.it

There is little information available about the true incidence of post-thrombotic
syndrome (PTS) after pulmonary embolism (PE). The aim of this study was to
investigate the incidence of PTS in patients with previous pulmonary embolism
without concomitant ultrasonographically-detectable deep vein thrombosis (DVT). A
retrospective cohort study was conducted at a single tertiary care centre,
Cosenza, Italy. Forty-seven consecutive patients with proved PE without DVT
within the previous 2 to 6 years, 45 patients with previous DVT in the same
years, and 45 patients with diseases unrelated to venous thromboembolism (VTE)
underwent a blind assessment for PTS using a clinical score. Two of 47 (4.2%,
95%CI: 0.01-9.9) patients with PE, 2 of 45 (4.4%, 95%CI: 0.01-10.4) patients with
diseases unrelated to VTE, and 23 of 45 (53.3%, 95%CI: 38.7-67.9) patients with
DVT showed signs and symptoms of PTS. The difference between the first two groups
was not statistically significant (p = 0.7). In conclusion, the incidence of PTS 
after pulmonary embolism without DVT is low, and no different from that of
patients without previous VTE.

PMID: 15543325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2004 Jun;26(2):137. Epub 2004 Oct 27.

[A comment on the editorial Cannabis use in adolescence and risk of
schizophrenia].

[Article in Portuguese]

Carlini EA, Galduróz JC, Noto AR, Nappo SA.

PMID: 15517070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Arerugi. 2004 Jul;53(7):696-9.

[A case of hypersensitivity pneumonitis caused by Lyophyllum karst].

[Article in Japanese]

Taniguchi H(1), Miwa T, Abo H, Miyazawa H, Noto H, Uchiyama A, Miwa A, Izumi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Prefectural Central Hospital.
tan@tch.pref.toyama.jp

A 52-year-old woman who has worked at factory to check pack Lyophyllum karst for 
six years consulted another doctor for dry cough as common cold. After a month,
low grade fever, dyspnea on effort, and productive cough brought her to our
hospital. Her chest radiographs showed multiple small nodular shadows and ground 
glass opacities in entire lung fields. Histopathological examination of
transbronchial lung biopsy specimen revealed granuloma and thickening of alveolar
septa with lymphocytes infiltration. She was admitted to our hospital for
hypersensitivity pneumonitis and prescribed predonisorone 30 mg/day. Her symptoms
and the finding of chest radiograph improved in two weeks. The precipitation
antibodies to Lyophyllum karst were positive and the symptoms exacerbated by
going to work. Those finding suggests that hypersensitivity pneumonitis in this
case. After quitting her job, she has had no relapse by tapering steroids.

PMID: 15492495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2004 Jul;45(7):539-45.

[Current status of treatment for patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenic
purpura in the Hokkaido area (evaluation of Helicobacter pylori eradication)].

[Article in Japanese]

Hashino S(1), Ota S, Kobayashi S, Tanaka J, Musashi M, Fukuhara T, Miyake T,
Kurosawa M, Iwasaki H, Shiroshita N, Hirano T, Irie T, Morioka M, Noto S,
Kobayashi H, Suzuki S, Kawamura T, Yamamoto Y, Kakinoki Y, Kobayashi N, Kasai M, 
Oya T, Hirano M, Tanaka M, Fujimoto N, Imamura M; Clinical Hematology Forum.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hematology, Hokkaido University Graduate
School of Medicine.

Treatment guidelines for patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) 
have been changed recently due to the clinical application of Helicobacter pylori
(H. pylori) eradication but there has been no detailed multi-center analysis of
the hematological effects of H. pylori eradication. The Clinical Hematology Forum
consists of 11 large hematological departments and divisions in the Hokkaido
area. We sent questionnaires to these 11 hematological departments and divisions 
in March 2003 to obtain information on current treatment strategies for patients 
with ITP and hematological results after the eradication of H. pylori.
Questionnaires were returned by 9 (81.8%) of the 11 departments. Doctors in all
hospitals had experience in diagnosis and treatment of H. pylori infection.
Diagnostic examinations for H. pylori infection were performed in 54.3% of the
registered cases. H. pylori infection was detected in 68.1% of the examined
cases, and eradication treatment was performed in 87.7% of H. pylori-positive
patients. H. pylori was eradicated in 52 (83.9%) of the 62 patients in whom the
results of treatment could be evaluated. Among the patients whose platelet counts
were less than 10.0 x 10(4)/microl, platelet recovery was observed in 48.8% of
cases with successful eradication, a percentage similar to previously reported
percentages in Japan. There was no prognostic factor to predict good responders
before eradication treatment. Since the side effects of eradication treatment,
including gastrointestinal symptoms and skin eruptions, were not serious, this
method might become a front-line treatment for patients with ITP. Patient
selection for eradication as an up-front treatment, analysis of the
pathophysiology of platelet recovery after eradication and long-term effects
should be investigated to make new treatment guidelines for newly diagnosed
patients with ITP.

PMID: 15359913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Clin Ter. 2004 May;155(5):205-8.

[Erdheim-Chester disease: a non-Langerhans cell histiocytosis. A clinical-case
and review of the literature].

[Article in Italian]

Valentini D(1), Cappelli C, Mizzoni F, Noto C, Toscano D, Foco M, Trasimeni G.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Oncologia Clinica Pediatrica, Università degli Studi di Roma La
Sapienza, Roma, Italia. tvjfel@tin.it

We make a retrospective evaluation of clinical and radiologic features,
treatment, and outcome of Erdheim-Chester disease, a rare non-Langerhans cell
histiocytosis. We report a case of Erdheim-Chester disease and review 60 cases
from the literature. These cases are consider to have Erdheim-Chester disease
when they have either typical bone radiographs (symmetrical long bones
osteosclerosis) and/or histologic criteria disclosing histiocytic infiltration
with distinctive immunohistochemical phenotype of the non-Langerhans cell
histiocytes with positive staining for CD68 and negative staining for S-100
protein and CD1a. Our patient undergoes chemiotherapy according to the LCH-II
stratification and therapy plan (Vinblastine, Etoposide and Prednisone) and
thereafter receives Carboplatin and Etoposide, and Somatostatin. She is alive and
clinically well 33 months after onset of symptoms and the lesions don't appear to
progress at imaging examinations. In conclusion, Erdheim-Chester disease may be
confused with Langerhans cell histiocytosis as it sometimes shares the same
clinical (exophthalmos, diabetes insipidus) or radiologic (osteolytic lesions)
findings. However, the characteristics radiological pattern of Erdheim-Chester
disease together the immunohistochemical phenotype of hystiocytic infiltration
supports the theory that Erdheim-Chester disease is a unique disease entity
distinct.

PMID: 15344569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2004 Sep 10;128(1):30-8.

Neuroprotective effect of tacrolimus (FK506) on ischemic brain damage following
permanent focal cerebral ischemia in the rat.

Noto T(1), Ishiye M, Furuich Y, Keida Y, Katsuta K, Moriguchi A, Matsuoka N,
Aramori I, Goto T, Yanagihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Biology Research Laboratories, Fujisawa Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.,
2-1-6, Kashima, Yodogawa, Osaka, 532-8514, Japan.

We investigated the neuroprotective effect of tacrolimus (FK506) on the ischemic 
cell death with respect to cytochrome c translocation and DNA fragmentation,
which are pivotal events in the necrotic and apoptotic signaling pathway, using
permanent focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Immunohistochemically, cytochrome c
was observed in the cytoplasm as early as 1 h after middle cerebral artery (MCA) 
occlusion in the infarcted hemisphere. Cytosolic release of cytochrome c after
MCA occlusion was also confirmed by Western blot analysis and enzyme immunoassay.
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL)
showed DNA fragmentation evolving in the ipsilateral cortex and the caudate
putamen after 3 and 6 h, respectively, following MCA occlusion. Tacrolimus (1
mg/kg, i.v.), administered immediately after MCA occlusion, significantly
attenuated the release of cytochrome c in the ischemic region, the number of
TUNEL-positive cells in the ischemic penumbra zone, and the size of cortical
ischemic lesions. This study demonstrated that tacrolimus ameliorated the
accumulation of cytochrome c in the cytosol and the increase of TUNEL-positive
cells induced by cerebral ischemia, indicating that the neuroprotective action of
tacrolimus on ischemic brain injury caused by permanent focal cerebral ischemia
could partially be attributed to the attenuation of the activation of the
apoptotic execution machinery.

PMID: 15337315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Infez Med. 2004 Mar;12(1):7-18.

[Guidelines for the management of HCV infection in HIV-infected patients.
Istituto Nazionale per le Malattie Infettive Lazzaro Spallanzani].

[Article in Italian]

Antonucci G(1), Antinori A, Boumis E, De Longis P, Gentile M, Girardi E, Lauria
FN, Narciso P, Noto P, Palmieri F, Oliva A, Petrosillo N, Rosati S, Urso R, Tocci
G, Tozzi V, Visco Comandini U, Ippolito G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale per le Malattie Infettive Lazzaro Spallanzani, Istituto di 
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Roma, Italy.

It is crucial to ensure an optimal clinical management of HCV infection in
HIV-co-infected persons. The reasons for the development of guidelines on
HCV-infection treatment in HIV-infected persons arise from the need for a
standardised management of HIV/HCV coinfection in our Institute. The aim of these
guidelines are: to clarify principles of clinical management of HCV infection in 
HIV-infected patients to care-providers; to improve the awareness of HIV-infected
patients cared for our Institute on current management of HCV infection; to
improve the quality of care on this topic. These guidelines, based on Evidence
based Medicine principles, have been developed by a panel of experts, who
conducted a systematic review of the literature, mainly taking into account
current international recommendations. In the present document, the most frequent
clinical presentation occurring in the management of HIV/HCV co-infected patients
at our Institution are discussed. The adherence to present guidelines and their
effectiveness at our Institution, outcome indicators will be evaluated. The
present guidelines cannot entirely substitute the judgement of an expert
clinician. However, adherence to these guidelines will contribute to the
improvement of the standard of care of HIV/HCV-co-infected persons.

PMID: 15329524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Bone Miner Metab. 2004;22(5):439-46.

Both mercury and cadmium directly influence calcium homeostasis resulting from
the suppression of scale bone cells: the scale is a good model for the evaluation
of heavy metals in bone metabolism.

Suzuki N(1), Yamamoto M, Watanabe K, Kambegawa A, Hattori A.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University, 927-0553, Ishikawa, Uchiura, Japan.
nobuo@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

To examine the effects of heavy metals such as cadmium and mercury on calcium
homeostasis, plasma calcium and calcitonin were measured in goldfish. Cadmium
induced hypocalcemia both at 4 and at 8 days. In methylmercury-treated goldfish, 
the plasma calcium level increased at 2 days and then decreased at 8 days. The
plasma calcitonin level increased in correspondence with the increased plasma
calcium by methylmercury treatment, although cadmium did not cause a significant 
change. To elucidate the mechanism in detail, fish scales, which have both
osteoclasts and osteoblasts and are similar to mammalian membrane bone, were used
in the present study. We measured tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) and 
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity as respective indicators of activity in both 
types of cells. TRAP activity in the scales decreased by treatment of cadmium and
methylmercury at 6 h incubation. Particularly, cadmium (even at 10(-13) M)
significantly suppressed TRAP activity, suggesting that this system is utilized
as an acute biosensor for cadmium. ALP activity decreased after exposures of 64
and 96 h, although the activity did not change after 6, 18, and 36 h. In
addition, mRNA expression of the estrogen receptor and insulin-like growth factor
1, which participate in osteoblastic growth and differentiation, was less than
the control values by treatment with both metals. This study demonstrates that
mercury directly acts on the bone cells and influences calcium homeostasis and
indicates that, in a short-term exposure, mercury has a different action from
that of cadmium and induces hypercalcemia.

PMID: 15316864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2004 Sep 1;138(2):121-7.

Possible direct induction by estrogen of calcitonin secretion from
ultimobranchial cells in the goldfish.

Suzuki N(1), Yamamoto K, Sasayama Y, Suzuki T, Kurokawa T, Kambegawa A, Srivastav
AK, Hayashi S, Kikuyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University, Uchiura, Ishikawa 927-0553, Japan.
nobuo@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

The plasma level of calcitonin (CT), a calcium (Ca)-regulating hormone, is known 
to increase in female teleosts during the reproductive period. In the present
study, a correlation between plasma CT and Ca and one between plasma CT and the
gonad somatic index were demonstrated in the female goldfish but not in the male.
To clarify the relationship between CT and Ca, we examined the plasma CT and Ca
levels after injecting immature goldfish with estrogen. At day 1, the plasma CT
level significantly increased, whereas the plasma Ca level was not changed from
its initial level. This result suggests that the trigger of CT secretion is
estrogen and that estrogen directly acts on the ultimobranchial gland (UBG), a
CT-secreting organ. To determine whether the UBG is equipped with estrogen
receptor (ER), an ER binding assay and immunohistochemical staining of UBG cells 
with an antibody against ER were conducted. As a result, estrogen-specific
binding (Kd, 18.52 nM; Bmax, 1.35 pmol/mg protein) and ER-immunoreactivity in the
UBG were demonstrated. Furthermore, the expression of alpha, beta, and gamma
types of ER in the UBG was also detected by use of the reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction. Thus, we concluded that estrogen acts on the UBG to
induce the release of CT, which in turn plays an important role in reproduction
directly and/or indirectly through Ca. This is the first report on the existence 
of ERs in a teleost UBG and the occurrence of CT secretion caused by estrogen.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 15302261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. G Chir. 2004 Apr;25(4):132-3.

Nipple leiomyoma in man: a case report.

Marrazzo A(1), Taormina P, Noto A, Cardinale G, Casa L, Lo Gerfo D.

Author information: 
(1)Università degli Studi di Palermo, Dipartimento di Discipline Chirurgiche,
Anatomiche ed Oncologiche.

We describe a rare case of a man, 38 year old, with a nipple leiomyoma, and
report the presentation as a small nodule of the areola spreading the nipple, the
symptoms, the clinical signs, the treatment that includes a complete excision;
free margins should be histologically established to prevent recurrence.

PMID: 15283404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2004 Jul;56(7):855-9.

Effect of acyl chains of phosphatidylcholines on the pharmacokinetics of
menatetrenone incorporated in O/W lipid emulsions prepared with
phosphatidylcholines and soybean oil in rats.

Ueda K(1), Fujimoto M, Noto H, Sakaeda T, Iwakawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Kobe Pharmaceutical University, 4-19-1
Motoyamakita-machi, Higashinada-ku, Kobe 658-8558, Japan. ueda@kobepharma-u.ac.jp

Oil-in-water (O/W) lipid emulsions were prepared with phosphatidylcholines (PCs) 
of various acyl chains and soybean oil (SO) using a microfluidizer system, and
the pharmacokinetics of menatetrenone incorporated in these oil particles were
examined at the clinical injection volume (0.1 mL kg(-1)) in rats. The plasma
half-life of menatetrenone incorporated in the oil particles prepared with SO and
dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) (SO/DPPC) was longer than that prepared
with SO and eggyolk phosphatides (EYP) (SO/EYP) by 3 fold, while those of
menatetrenone as oil particles prepared with SO and either dilauroyl
phosphatidylcholine (DLPC), dimyristoyl phosphatidylcholine (DMPC), distearoyl
phosphatidylcholine (DSPC), dioleoyl phosphatidylcholine (DOPC) or dilinoleoyl
phosphatidylcholine (DLoPC) (SO/DLPC, SO/DMPC, SO/DSPC, SO/DOPC and SO/DLoPC,
respectively) were similar to that of menatetrenone as SO/EYP. The menatetrenone 
uptake by the liver was not significantly different from that as SO/EYP in all
SO/PCs examined, but the menatetrenone uptake by the spleen as SO/DPPC and
SO/DSPC was higher than that as SO/EYP. The menatetrenone uptake by the lungs as 
SO/DPPC was also higher than that as SO/EYP. These findings suggest that SO/DPPC 
is a good candidate drug carrier for the prolonged plasma circulation of
lipophilic drugs.

PMID: 15233863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Infect Immun. 2004 Jul;72(7):4224-32.

The galU Gene of Pseudomonas aeruginosa is required for corneal infection and
efficient systemic spread following pneumonia but not for infection confined to
the lung.

Priebe GP(1), Dean CR, Zaidi T, Meluleni GJ, Coleman FT, Coutinho YS, Noto MJ,
Urban TA, Pier GB, Goldberg JB.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory, Brigham & Women's Hospital, 181 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA
02115, USA. gpriebe@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Acute pneumonias and corneal infections due to Pseudomonas aeruginosa are
typically caused by lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-smooth strains. In cystic fibrosis
patients, however, LPS-rough strains of P. aeruginosa, which lack O antigen, can 
survive in the lung and cause chronic infection. It is not clear whether an
LPS-rough phenotype affects cytotoxicity related to the type III secretion system
(TTSS). We previously reported that interruption of the galU gene in P.
aeruginosa results in production of a rough LPS and truncated LPS core. Here we
evaluated the role of the galU gene in the pathogenesis of murine lung and eye
infections and in cytotoxicity due to the TTSS effector ExoU. We studied galU
mutants of strain PAO1, of its cytotoxic variant expressing ExoU from a plasmid, 
and of the inherently cytotoxic strain PA103. The galU mutants were more serum
sensitive than the parental strains but remained cytotoxic in vitro. In a corneal
infection model, the galU mutants were significantly attenuated. In an acute
pneumonia model, the 50% lethal doses of the galU mutants were higher than those 
of the corresponding wild-type strains, yet these mutants could cause mortality
and severe pneumonia, as judged by histology, even with minimal systemic spread. 
These findings suggest that the galU gene is required for corneal infection and
for efficient systemic spread following lung infection but is not required for
infection confined to the lung. Host defenses in the lung appear to be
insufficient to control infection with LPS-rough P. aeruginosa when local
bacterial levels are high.

PMCID: PMC427465
PMID: 15213167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Brain Res. 2004 Jul 16;1014(1-2):120-30.

Multiple modes of action of tacrolimus (FK506) for neuroprotective action on
ischemic damage after transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats.

Furuichi Y(1), Noto T, Li JY, Oku T, Ishiye M, Moriguchi A, Aramori I, Matsuoka
N, Mutoh S, Yanagihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Biology Research Laboratories, Fujisawa Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd,
2-1-6, Kashima, Osaka 532-8514, Japan. yasuhisa_furuichi@po.fujisawa.co.jp

While the immunosuppressant tacrolimus (FK506) is known to be neuroprotective
following cerebral ischemia, the mechanisms underlying its neuroprotective
properties are not fully understood. To determine the mode of action by which
tacrolimus ameliorates neurodegeneration after transient focal ischemia, we
therefore evaluated the effect of tacrolimus on DNA damage, release of cytochrome
c, activation of microglia and infiltration of neutrophils following a 60-min
occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) in rats. In this model, cortical
brain damage gradually expanded until 24 h after reperfusion, whereas brain
damage in the caudate putamen was fully developed within 5 h. Tacrolimus (1
mg/kg) administered immediately after MCA occlusion significantly reduced
ischemic damage in the cerebral cortex, but not in the caudate putamen.
Tacrolimus decreased both apoptotic and necrotic cell death at 24 h and reduced
the number of cytochrome c immunoreactive cells at 8 h after reperfusion in the
ischemic penumbra in the cerebral cortex. In contrast, tacrolimus did not show
significant neuroprotection for necrotic cell death and reduction of cytochrome c
immunoreactive cells in the caudate putamen. Tacrolimus also significantly
decreased microglial activation at 8 h and inflammatory markers (cytokine-induced
neutrophil chemoattractant and myeloperoxidase [MPO] activity) at 24 h after
reperfusion in the ischemic cortex but not in the caudate putamen. These results 
collectively suggest that tacrolimus ameliorates the gradually expanded brain
damage by inhibiting both apoptotic and necrotic cell death, as well as
suppressing inflammatory reactions.

PMID: 15212998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Panminerva Med. 2003 Dec;45(4):273-4.

Rhabdomyolysis as the epiphenomenon of unrecognised celiac sprue.

Noto R, Meli S, Noto Z, Rapisarda A, Noto P, Molino G.

PMID: 15206169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Mol Membr Biol. 2004 Mar-Apr;21(2):109-18.

Membrane binding and transport of N-aminoethyl-1,2-diamino ethane (dien) and
N-aminopropyl-1,3-diamino propane (propen) by rat liver mitochondria and their
effects on membrane permeability transition.

Dalla Via L(1), Salvi M, Di Noto V, Stefanelli C, Toninello A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmaceutiche, Università di Padova, Via Marzolo 5,
35121 Padova, Italy.

This investigation is aimed at defining the structural requirements for aliphatic
polyamines to interact with mitochondrial binding sites, which are relevant for
the regulation of the permeability transition and for mitochondrial polyamine
uptake. The triamines N-aminoethyl-1,2-diaminoethane (dien) and
N-aminopropyl-1,3-diaminopropane (propen), both symmetric polyamines, are
accumulated to differing extents by an energy-dependent mechanism in liver
mitochondria. Propen is also able completely to inhibit the permeability
transition of mitochondria, induced by Ca2+ plus phosphate, with the same
efficacy as the asymmetric ubiquitary triamine spermidine, whereas dien fails to 
exhibit this effect. The competitive inhibition of both triamines on spermidine
transport demonstrates that they bind to the same site(s) of this polyamine and
exploit its transport system. The binding of dien and propen to mitochondrial
membrane was studied by applying a thermodynamic model of ligand-receptor
interactions developed both for equilibrium and far-from-equilibrium binding
processes. Results show the presence of two mono-coordinated binding sites, S1
and S2, for propen, and one monocoordinated binding site for dien, all exhibiting
high capacity and low affinity. Comparisons of the binding parameters of these
polyamines with those of other natural polyamines reveal that, besides
flexibility and hydrophilicity, as previously suggested, protonation of the imino
group and the symmetry of the molecules for S1, and the presence of an aminobutyl
group for S2, also contribute to the polyamine interactions observed in the two
sites.

Copyright 2004 Taylor and Francis Ltd.

PMID: 15204440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Eur J Endocrinol. 2004 Jun;150(6):831-6.

Transient chylomicronemia preceding the onset of insulin-dependent diabetes in a 
young girl with no humoral markers of islet autoimmunity.

Barbagallo CM(1), Averna MR, Citarrella R, Rizzo M, Amato M, Noto D, Pugliese A, 
Cefalù AB, Galluzzo A, Giordano C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universita di Palermo,
Italy.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the possible causes of diabetes in a young child who
presented with hyperglycemia associated with severe hypertriglyceridemia (>166
mmol/l), hypercholesterolemia (>38 mmol/l) and fasting chilomicrons.
RESULTS: The patient did not have any of the HLA and autoantibody markers
typically associated with type 1 diabetes. A glucose clamp failed to demonstrate 
insulin resistance (peripheral glucose utilization rate (M)=4.3 mg/kg per min)
and there was no family history of type 2 diabetes or maturity onset diabetes in 
youth. Both fasting and stimulated C-peptide levels, including those in response 
to i.v. glucagon, were below the limit of detection. This is consistent with loss
of beta-cell function. The family history did not reveal the existence of
relatives with lipid abnormalities, coronary heart disease, and pancreatitis. We 
did not find any abnormality of plasma apoCII, lipoproteinlipase and hepatic
lipase activities. The patients had a epsilon3/epsilon3 apoE genotype and she
rapidly cleared an oral fat load after normalization of plasma lipids.
CONCLUSIONS: The mild hyperglycemia seems an unlikely explanation for both the
severe hypertriglyceridemia and chylomicronemia. A more plausible explanation is 
transient lipoproteinlipase deficiency. This rare condition, occasionally
associated with a high-fat diet, could have caused the rapid and dramatic
hypertriglyceridemia observed in this patient, which in turn might have led to
the beta-cell destruction by direct lipid toxicity.

PMID: 15191354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Rheumatol. 2004 Jun;31(6):1174-9.

Cartilage destruction in collagen induced arthritis assessed with a new
biochemical marker for collagen type II C-telopeptide fragments.

Ishikawa T(1), Nishigaki F, Christgau S, Noto T, Mo J, From N, Minoura K,
Hirayama Y, Ohkubo Y, Mutoh S.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Biology Research Laboratories, Fujisawa Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.,
Osaka, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the ability of a marker of collagen type II degradation
(CTX-II) to quantify cartilage turnover in vitro in cartilage explants and in
vivo in rats with collagen induced arthritis (CIA).
METHODS: Bovine articular cartilage explants were cultured in the presence of
interleukin 1a, oncostatin M, and plasminogen to induce cartilage degradation.
CTX-II, CTX-I (C-telopeptide fragment of collagen type I), glycosaminoglycan, and
hydroxyproline contents in culture supernatants were measured. CIA was induced in
12-week-old female Lewis rats by immunization with bovine type II collagen. The
incidence and severity of arthritis were monitored by measuring paw swelling, and
urinary levels of CTX-II and CTX-I were determined. The knee joints of rats were 
histopathologically examined after sacrifice. Results. CTX-II but not CTX-I
levels correlated well with collagen degradation in bovine articular cartilage in
vitro quantified by hydroxyproline release. Urinary CTX-II levels as well as paw 
volume of CIA rats were significantly higher than normal rats on Days 21, 28, and
42 and were apparently correlated with cartilage destruction, assessed
histopathologically. Urinary CTX-I level began to increase on Day 21, but only on
Day 42 was it significantly different between CIA and normal rats. The elevation 
in CTX-I level appeared to occur later than that of CTX-II, in accord with the
more delayed onset of bone erosion in the CIA model of rheumatoid arthritis.
CONCLUSION: Urinary CTX-II may be a useful marker for evaluation of dynamics of
cartilage destruction in CIA rats.

PMID: 15170932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2004 Apr;60(4):471-8.

[Clinical application of X-ray measurement using Monte Carlo simulation (EGS4)].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto K.

PMID: 15159664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Mol Biol. 2004 May 21;339(1):1-15.

Internal gene duplication in the evolution of prokaryotic transmembrane proteins.

Shimizu T(1), Mitsuke H, Noto K, Arai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronic and Information System Engineering, Faculty of
Science and Technology, Hirosaki University, Hirosaki 036-8561, Japan.
slsimi@si.hirosaki-u.ac.jp

We investigated the evolution of transmembrane (TM) topology by detecting partial
sequence repeats in TM protein sequences and analyzing them in detail. A total of
377 sequences that seem to have evolved by internal gene duplication events were 
found among 38,124 predicted TM protein sequences (except for single-spannings)
from 87 prokaryotic genomes. Various types of internal duplication patterns were 
identified in these sequences. The majority of them are diploid-type (including
quasi-diploid-type) duplication in which a primordial protein sequence was
duplicated internally to become an extant TM protein with twice as many TM
segments as the primordial one, and the remaining ones are partial duplications
including triploid-type. The diploid-type repeats are recognized in many 8-tms,
10-tms and 12-tms TM protein sequences, suggesting the diploid-type duplication
was a principle mechanism in the evolutionary development of these types of TM
proteins. The "positive-inside" rule is satisfied in whole sequences of both
10-tms and 8-tms TM proteins and in both halves of 10-tms proteins while not
necessarily in the second half of 8-tms proteins, providing fit examples of
"internal divergent topology evolution" likely occurred after a diploid-type
internal duplication event. From analyzing the partial duplication patterns,
several evolutionary pathways were recognized for 6-tms TM proteins, i.e. from
primordial 2-tms, 3-tms and 4-tms TM proteins to extant 6-tms proteins.
Similarly, the duplication pattern analysis revealed plausible evolution
scenarios that 7-tms TM proteins have arisen from 3-tms, 4-tms and 5-tms TM
protein precursors via partial internal gene duplications.

PMID: 15123416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2004 Jul;36(7):1297-305.

Beta-2-glycoprotein I is growth regulated and plays a role as survival factor for
hepatocytes.

Averna M(1), Paravizzini G, Marino G, Emmanuele G, Cefalù AB, Magro G, Bartoloni 
G, Ragusa M, Noto D, Barbagallo CM, Callari D, Mazzarino MC, Notarbartolo A,
Travali S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Palermo, Via del Vespro 141,
90127 Palermo, Italy.

Beta-2-glycoprotein I (beta(2)GPI) is mainly produced by the liver and is found
in plasma partially associated to lipoproteins. Although various properties have 
been attributed to this protein, its physiological role remains still unclear. We
investigated its expression in cultured liver cells and in regenerating liver.
Expression studies in HepG2 cells demonstrate that beta(2)GPI mRNA is regulated
in a cell cycle-dependent manner, with very low expression in low cycling
conditions and increasing levels in proliferating cells. p21 WAF-dependent growth
arrest, induced by butyrate treatment, down-regulate beta(2)GPI mRNA levels.
Immunolocalization in normal rat liver shows a non-homogeneous pattern, being
mainly present in the centrolobular area; post-hepatectomy regenerating rat liver
is uniformly immunostained and mitotic elements show the highest protein
expression. Albumin gene expression, studies as control liver specific product,
was not affected by sodium butyrate induced growth arrest. As previously reported
for endothelial cells, beta(2)GPI behaves as survival factor for HepG2 cells:
when increasing amounts of the protein (10-50 microg) have been added to serum
deficient cultured liver cells a progressive reduced cell loss was observed. In
conclusion, the present data demonstrate that beta(2)GPI gene expression is
strictly related to the proliferative status of hepatic cells and that this
protein could play a role in maintaining liver cells vitality when exposed to
different stress factors such as regeneration after partial hepatectomy or growth
factors depletion.

PMID: 15109573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Int J STD AIDS. 2004 Apr;15(4):254-9.

Neurocognitive impairment influences quality of life in HIV-infected patients
receiving HAART.

Tozzi V(1), Balestra P, Murri R, Galgani S, Bellagamba R, Narciso P, Antinori A, 
Giulianelli M, Tosi G, Fantoni M, Sampaolesi A, Noto P, Ippolito G, Wu AW.

Author information: 
(1)Fourth Division of Infectious Diseases, National Institute for Infectious
Diseases Lazzaro Spallanzani, Via Portuense 292, 00149 Rome, Italy. tozzi@inmi.it

The objective of the study was to determine the association of neurocognitive
impairment with health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in patients receiving
highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). Seventy subjects were
cross-sectionally analysed with a standardized neuropsychological test battery
and a questionnaire including an Italian translation of the MOS-HIV Health
Survey. The presence of neurocognitive impairment was significantly associated
with lower HRQoL scores: pain (P = 0.03), physical functioning (P = 0.01), role
functioning (P = 0.01), social functioning (P = 0.029), mental health (P =
0.001), energy (P = 0.036), health distress (P = 0.002), cognitive functioning (P
= 0.05), current health perception (P <0.001), physical health summary score
(PHS) (P = 0.005), mental health summary score (MHS) (P = 0.002). Years of
education (odds ratio [OR] 0.79; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.65-0.96), PHS (OR
0.71; 95% CI 0.54-0.95) and MHS (OR 0.67; 95% CI 0.51-0.88) were also associated 
with cognitive impairment. Neurocognitive impairment in patients receiving HAART 
was associated with reduced HRQoL. Identifying cognitive impairment may provide
motivation for additional treatment to help patients to compensate for deficits
in functioning.

PMID: 15075020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Urology. 2004 Apr;63(4):778-80.

Acute urinary retention associated with fractured osteophyte.

Minami H(1), Ueki O, Hashimoto M, Mukai H, Tada M, Kawaguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Noto General Hospital, Nanao, Japan.

A 24-year-old man presented to our hospital twice with acute urinary retention in
March 2002. Myelographic computed tomography demonstrated a posterior osteophyte.
The preoperative urodynamic study indicated detrusor overactivity and detrusor
sphincter dyssynergia 30 days after the first occurrence of urinary retention.
During osteophyte resection and laminoplasty, the osteophyte, which was found to 
be fractured and to press on the cauda equina, was removed. The postoperative
urodynamic study showed that detrusor overactivity remained and detrusor
sphincter dyssynergia had disappeared. The patient was regularly followed up as
an outpatient, and no dysuria had been noted by January 2003.

PMID: 15072908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2004 Apr;37(4):523-31. Epub 2004 Mar 23.

Trends in drug use among students in Brazil: analysis of four surveys in 1987,
1989, 1993 and 1997.

Galduróz JC(1), Noto AR, Nappo SA, Carlini EA.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Brasileiro de Informações sobre Drogas Psicotrópicas, Departamento de
Psicobiologia, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo,
Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil. galduroz@psicobio.epm.br

The consumption of psychotropic drugs among Brazilian secondary school students
was examined by comparing data from four surveys using a questionnaire adapted
from the WHO's Program on Research and Reporting on the Epidemiology of Drug
Dependence. Students filled out the form in their classrooms without the presence
of teachers. The target population consisted of 10-18-year-old students (on
average, 15,000 students responded to each survey) in Brazil's ten largest state 
capitals: Belém, Belo Horizonte, Brasília, Curitiba, Fortaleza, Porto Alegre,
Recife, Rio de Janeiro, Salvador, and São Paulo. Among the legal drugs, lifetime 
use (use at least once during life) of tobacco was increased in seven cities (the
exceptions were Brasília, Porto Alegre and Rio de Janeiro). There was also a
significant increase in frequent use of alcohol (six times or more per month) in 
6 of the cities, from an average of 9.2% in 1987 to 15.0% in 1997. With respect
to illegal drugs, there was a significant increase in lifetime use of marijuana
(a 3-fold increase from 2.8% in 1987 to 7.6% in 1997). Cocaine use increased
4-fold over the survey period (0.5% in 1987 to 2.0% in 1997). Lifetime use of
cocaine significantly increased in eight capitals (except Recife and Rio de
Janeiro). However, frequent cocaine use increased in only three capitals (Belém, 
Fortaleza and Porto Alegre), from an average of 1.0% in 1987 to 3.6% in 1997.
Lifetime use of medications such as anxiolytics and amphetamines increased 2-fold
on average over the survey period. Comparing the four studies, the main
conclusion is that there were significant increases in the frequencies for
lifetime use, frequent use and heavy use of many drugs.

PMID: 15064815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Eur J Emerg Med. 2004 Apr;11(2):119-20.

Anticholinergic toxicity associated with lupin seed ingestion: case report.

Di Grande A(1), Paradiso R, Amico S, Fulco G, Fantauzza B, Noto P.

Author information: 
(1)Unità Operativa di Medicina e Chirurgia d'Accettazione e d'Urgenza, Azienda
Ospedaliera S. Elia, Caltanissetta, Italy. adigrande@yahoo.it

We describe a case of acute poisoning in a 51-year-old female patient who
presented to the Emergency Department with weakness, anxiety, dry mouth,
bilateral mydriasis and lid drop. In differential diagnosis, botulism,
Guillain-Barré syndrome and myasthenia gravis were considered, as well as
cerebral haematoma because of a cranial injury a week before. Symptoms, which
resolved within 12 h without any therapy, were instead related to the ingestion
of lupin seeds.

PMID: 15028905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Intern Med. 2004 Feb;43(2):148-9.

Subcutaneous hematoma due to frequent insulin injections in a single site.

Kahara T(1), Kawara S, Shimizu A, Hisada A, Noto Y, Kida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kanazawa National Hospital, Kanazawa.

PMID: 15005260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Eat Behav. 2002 Summer;3(2):153-65.

Use of anorectic amphetamine-like drugs by Brazilian women.

Nappo SA(1), Tabach R, Noto AR, Galduróz JC, Carlini EA.

Author information: 
(1)CEBRID-Centro Brasileiro de Informações sobre Drogas Psicotrópicas, Department
of Psychobiology, Federal University of São Paulo, Rua Botucatu, 862, São Paulo
04023-006, Brazil. solange@psicobio.epm.br

The history of anorectic drug use was investigated in 2370 subjects in São Paulo 
and Brasília cities. Socio-demographic data and the number of previous treatments
to lose weight were obtained. When the last treatment was drug-based, the
substance(s) used, its duration, the occurrence of adverse reactions, and whether
it was adequate were studied. There was a prevalence of female patients, 92.7%,
in both cities and as many as 72.4% of them had already undergone from 1 to >10
previous treatments. Out of those patients, 75.37% had undergone pharmacological 
treatment, 79.2% of those with amphetamine-like anorectic drugs. Treatment was
longer than 3 months in half of the cases, and 60% of the subjects had a Body
Mass Index below 29.9. Over 50% of the subjects was given amphetamine-like drugs 
through compounded formulas containing four or more substances, which had been
specifically tailored by the doctor for each patient. On the other hand, 86.3% of
all the subjects reported adverse reactions to the amphetamine-like drugs, 37.4% 
of them sought medical advice, and 3.9% required hospitalization. In conclusion, 
the use of amphetamine-like drugs in Brazil is particularly prevalent among women
and this use is strongly related to the culture of slimness as a symbol of
beauty.

PMID: 15001012  [PubMed]


493. Sao Paulo Med J. 2003 Nov 6;121(6):231-7. Epub 2004 Jun 28.

First household survey on drug abuse in São Paulo, Brazil, 1999: principal
findings.

Galduróz JC(1), Noto AR, Nappo SA, Carlini EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo,
Brazil. galduroz@psicobio.epm.br

CONTEXT: In order to establish prevention programs regarding psychotropic drug
use that are adapted to specific populations it is, first of all, important to
have data on the realities of such consumption. Single data points are not enough
for drawing up a profile of society in relation to drugs.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this household survey was to determine the incidence of
illegal drug, alcohol, tobacco and psychotropic medication use, and thus the
number of persons dependent on drugs, alcohol and nicotine, and to evaluate their
perception regarding how easy it is to obtain psychotropic drugs.
TYPE OF STUDY: Epidemiological survey.
SETTING: All of the 24 cities in the State of Sao Paulo with more 200,000
inhabitants participated in the study.
METHOD: The sampling was constructed from weighted probabilistic stratified
conglomerates obtained via two-stage selection. In each municipality sampled,
census sectors (generally 200-300 households) were first selected. Then,
households and a respondent were selected to provide information from his/her
point of view. The SAMHSA questionnaire (Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration) of the U.S. Department of Public Health was used, after 
translation and adaptation to Brazilian conditions.
RESULTS: A total of 2,411 persons aged 12-65 years old were interviewed, of whom 
39.9% were men. Lifetime use of any psychotropic drug other than alcohol and
tobacco was 11.6%: much less than in the U.S. (34.8%). The alcohol dependence
rate was 6%, similar to findings from other countries. Marijuana was the illegal 
drug most cited as used daily (6.6%): a prevalence much lower than in the U.S.
(32.0%): Inhalant use was next in frequency of use (2.7%): about 10 times less
than in the United Kingdom (20%). Cocaine use (2.1%) was about 5 times less than 
in the U.S. (10.6%). There was no report of heroin use, although there was a
surprisingly high perception regarding the case of obtaining heroin: 38.3% sold
if was easy to obtain.
CONCLUSION: This study supports the implementation of better prevention programs 
regarding drug abuse in Sõ Paulo state.

PMID: 14989138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Eur J Pharmacol. 2004 Feb 6;485(1-3):283-8.

T-0156, a novel phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor, and sildenafil have different
pharmacological effects on penile tumescence and electroretinogram in dogs.

Mochida H(1), Noto T, Inoue H, Yano K, Kikkawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery and Pharmacology Research Laboratories, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd.,
2-2-50, Kawagishi, Toda, Saitama 335-8505, Japan. mochida@tanabe.co.jp

T-0156
(2-(2-methylpyridin-4-yl)methyl-4-(3,4,5-trimethoxyphenyl)-8-(pyrimidin-2-yl)meth
oxy-1,2-dihydro-1-oxo-2,7-naphthyridine-3-carboxylic acid methyl ester
hydrochloride) is a newly synthesized phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor, and its
potency and selectivity are higher than those of sildenafil in an enzyme assay.
In the present study with anesthetized dogs, we examined the effects of
intravenous T-0156 or sildenafil on the pelvic nerve stimulation-induced penile
tumescence and light-adapted flicker stimulation-induced electroretinogram,
parameters of which are reported to be indicators for inhibition of
phosphodiesterase type 5 and type 6, respectively. Both compounds potentiated the
penile tumescence in a dose-dependent manner. T-0156 at 10 microg/kg and
sildenafil at 100 microg/kg showed almost the same potentiating percentage
(181.5+/-31.1% and 190.0+/-37.9%) in spite of the plasma concentration of T-0156 
being about five times lower than that of sildenafil (16.7+/-1.6 and 78.8+/-5.3
ng/ml), indicating that the effect of T-0156 on tumescence is more potent than
that of sildenafil. While the high dose of T-0156 (1000 microg/kg) reduced the
amplitude and increased the latency of the electroretinogram positive wave, the
effects of T-0156 were conversely weaker than those of sildenafil (reduction of
amplitude; T-0156: 41.1+/-8.0%, sildenafil: 71.7+/-3.9%, increase of latency;
T-0156: 3.9+/-0.6%, sildenafil: 14.5+/-1.4%, at 1000 microg/kg). These results
clearly showed the difference in the properties of T-0156 and sildenafil in
pharmacological studies with anesthetized dogs, and the difference appeared to
correspond with their inhibitory potencies for phosphodiesterase type 5 and type 
6. It was concluded that T-0156 would be a useful pharmacological tool as a
potent and highly selective phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor.

PMID: 14757152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Biosystems. 2004 Jan;73(1):73-83.

A "chimera" theory on the origin of dicyemid mesozoans: evolution driven by
frequent lateral gene transfer from host to parasite.

Noto T(1), Endoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa
920-1192, Japan. tnoto@sgkit.ge.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

The phylogenetic status of the enigmatic dicyemid mesozoans is still uncertain.
Are they primitive multicellular organisms or degenerate triploblastic animals?
Presently, the latter view is accepted. A phylogenetic analysis of 18S rDNA
sequences placed dicyemids within the animal clade, and this was supported by the
discovery of a Hox-type gene with a lophotrochozoan signature sequence. This
molecular information suggests that dicyemid mesozoans evolved from an ancestral 
animal degenerately. Considering their extreme simplicity, which is probably due 
to parasitism, they might have come from an early embryo via a radical
transformation, i.e. neoteny. Irrespective of this molecular information,
dicyemid mesozoans retain many protistan-like or extremely primitive features,
such as tubular mitochondrial cristae, endocytic ability from the outer surface, 
and the absence of collagenous tissue, while they do not share noticeable
synapomorphy with animals. In addition, the 5S rRNA phylogeny suggests a somewhat
closer kinship with protozoan ciliates than with animals. If we accept this clear
contradiction, dicyemids should be regarded as a chimera of animals and
protistans. Here, we discuss the traditional theory of extreme degeneration via
parasitism, and then propose a new "chimera" theory in which dicyemid mesozoans
are exposed to a continual flow of genetic information via eating host tissues
from the outer surface by endocytosis. Consequently, many of their intrinsic
genes have been replaced by host-derived genes through lateral gene transfer
(LGT), implying that LGT is a key driving force in the evolution of dicyemid
mesozoans.

PMID: 14729283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Int J Urol. 2004 Feb;11(2):122-4.

Case of leiomyosarcoma of the renal pelvis.

Minami H(1), Ueki O, Tanaka T, Nishida H, Hashimoto T, Kawaguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Noto General Hospital, Nanao, Japan.
hidero_minami@mail.goo.ne.jp

A 54-year-old man presented at the Mibayashi clinic with bowel discomfort.
Ultrasonography showed a left renal mass and the patient was referred to Noto
General Hospital for urological evaluation. Results of the physical examination
were unremarkable, but computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging
demonstrated a large tumor in the middle of the left kidney. The patient
underwent left nephrectomy. On hemisection of the kidney, a firm tumor, measuring
8 x 7.5 cm, was seen occupying the renal pelvis. The histological diagnosis was
leiomyosarcoma arising from the right renal pelvis. No treatment was provided
after surgery and no recurrence was observed 6 months postoperatively.

PMID: 14706019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2003 Nov;44(11):1080-4.

[Successful T-cell-replete peripheral blood stem cell transplantation from an HLA
2 loci mismatched mother to her son with refractory anemia in myelodysplastic
syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Mochiduki Y(1), Muramoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Noto General Hospital.

A 15-year-old male with refractory anemia in myelodysplastic syndrome underwent
peripheral blood stem cell transplantation from his two-loci-mismatched
haploidentical mother. The conditioning regimen was comprised of
cyclophosphamide, busulfan, and fludarabine. Non-T-cell-depleted peripheral blood
stem cells were infused with graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis
consisting of tacrolimus and short-course methotrexate. Engraftment was confirmed
on day 18, and complete chimera on day 29. Although the patient developed grade
II acute GVHD following the transplantation, it responded rapidly to steroid
administration. The subsequent course was uneventful, and he remains well in
complete remission in 26 months after transplant. This successful experience
suggests that maternal hematopoietic stem cell transplant for children, in
specific immune tolerance based on the presence of microchimerism and
compatibility of minor histocompatibility antigens between mother and child, may 
have given rise to the favorable preventing effect against severe GVHD.

PMID: 14689871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Euro Surveill. 2003 Nov;8(11):222-5.

Clonal circulation of Salmonella enterica serotype Heidelberg in Italy?

Mammina C(1), Talini M, Pontello M, Di Noto AM, Nastasi A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Enteric Pathogens of Southern Italy (CEPIM), Dipartimento di Igiene
e Microbiologia G. D'Alessandro, University, Palermo, Italy.

Phenotypic and genetic characteristics of 21 strains of Salmonella serotype
Heidelberg isolated in the years 1999-2003 from different sources in Italy were
studied. Susceptibility patterns, plasmid analysis, and PFGE were used as
epidemiological markers. Although non-homogeneous drug resistance patterns and
plasmid profiles had been detected, PFGE patterns suggest the hypothesis of a
nationwide clonal spread of this serotype associated with poultry.

PMID: 14684884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Clin Exp Med. 2003 Nov;3(3):161-5.

The C(-260)>T gene polymorphism in the promoter of the CD14 monocyte receptor
gene is not associated with acute myocardial infarction.

Longobardo MT(1), Cefalù AB, Pezzino F, Noto D, Emmanuele G, Barbagallo CM, Fiore
B, Monastero R, Castello A, Molini V, Notarbartolo A, Travali S, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Section of Clinical Pathology and Molecular
Oncology, University of Catania, Via Androne 87, Catania, Italy.

CD surface molecules mediates cell activation and signaling. In particular, CD14 
on blood monocytes mediate monocyte/macrophage activation by lipopolysaccharide. 
Lipopolysaccharide and its receptor, CD14, have been implicated in atherogenesis.
It has been recently shown that a C(-260)T polymorphism in the promoter of the
CD14 receptor may be a risk factor for coronary artery disease. Recently this
association has been questioned because no increased risk was found with the T
allele, even in the homozygous state. In the present study we investigated a
possible association between the C(-260)T polymorphism in the CD14 promoter and
acute myocardial infarction. Two hundred and thrteen patients with and acute
myocardial infarction 213 healthy controls were included in the study. Genotype
frequencies of the C(-260)T polymorphism in the CD14 promoter were determined by 
polimerase chain reaction and the amplified product was cleaved with HaeIII. The 
frequency of the T allele was not significantly different in patients compared
with controls. In this study we were not able to detect differences of frequency 
of the allele T (-260) in the promoter of the CD14 receptor gene in survivors of 
myocardial infarction and controls.

PMID: 14648231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Atherosclerosis. 2003 Nov;171(1):131-6.

Modulation of HDL metabolism by probucol in complete cholesteryl ester transfer
protein deficiency.

Noto H(1), Kawamura M, Hashimoto Y, Satoh H, Hara M, Iso-o N, Togo M, Kimura S,
Tsukamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Probucol, an antioxidative and hypolipidemic agent, has been postulated to
increase reverse cholesterol transport by enhancing cholesteryl ester transfer
protein (CETP) activity. However, its clinical implication in CETP deficient
patients has not been fully defined. To characterize the effects of probucol in
the absence of CETP, we evaluated the changes in lipid profile, lipid
peroxidation, and paraoxonase 1 (PON1) activity in two complete CETP deficient
patients, caused by treatment with probucol. When the patients were not receiving
probucol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles were smaller and high-density
lipoprotein (HDL) particles were larger in these patients than in controls.
Treatment with probucol (500 mg/day) resulted in the decrease in the levels of
HDL-C and apolipoprotein (apo) A-I up to 22%. The size of HDL particles became
smaller. LDL cholesterol concentration did not change in one patient, while it
decreased by 47% in the other. PON1 activity/HDL-C, which was about 40% lower in 
the patients before treatment than in controls with the matching PON1 genotype,
increased by 30% during the treatment. Lag time for LDL and HDL in both cases
became prolonged more than 1.8 times after administration of probucol. This study
demonstrated for the first time that probucol reduces HDL-C even in humans with
complete CETP deficiency. Probucol treatment in these patients was also
associated with protection of lipoproteins against oxidative stress, suggesting a
clinical benefit of this drug even in such a state.

PMID: 14642415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2003 May-Jun;7(3):81-7.

Hyperhomocysteinemia in preeclampsia is associated to higher risk pressure
profiles.

Noto R(1), Neri S, Noto Z, Cilio D, Abate G, Noto P, Pepi F, Leanza A, Molino G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Systemic Diseases, University of Catania, 
School of Medicine, Catania, Italy.

Homocysteine levels have been determined with Chromatography on HPLC column,
between the 20th and the 24th week of pregnancy, in women with analogous
characteristics (a) normotensive, (b) with pregnancy-induced hypertension (PIH), 
low (LR), medium (MR), high risk (HR). The group they belonged to was confirmed
after natural or caesarean delivery. All the patients were submitted to 24 hour
blood pressure monitoring for the evaluation of further pressure risk parameters:
mean arterial pressure (MAP), non dippers, percentages of pressure peaks.
Homocysteine levels in normotensive pregnant women (5.8 +/- 1.7 microM) were low.
Significant high levels of homocysteine were present proportionally to the risk
degree of PIH. Higher levels of homocysteine statistically significant were
present in non dippers of all groups (MR p < 0.05; HR p < 0.01). A direct
correlation between plasmatic homocisteine levels and pressure profiles was found
out in non dippers (r = 0.56, r = 0.55, r = 0.50 respectively) and in dippers (r 
= 0.7, r = 0.75, r = 0.60 respectively), and also between levels of homocysteine,
MAP value, and pathological percentages of systolic and diastolic nocturnal
peaks. In pregnant women presenting preeclampsia afterwards, high levels of
homocysteine were not different from mean values present in high risk PIH
pregnant women (13.3 +/- 1.9 vs. 16.4 +/- 1.7 microM). High levels of
homocysteine early determined in the second trimester of PIH pregnancies seem to 
be associated to a pregnancy higher risk, coexisting with dangerous pressure
profiles. High levels confirm a pregnant woman to belong to a higher or lower
risk degree of vascular damage, but in the same group context high levels of
homocisteine do not allow to identify those pregnant women who will develop
eclampsia.

PMID: 14650644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Zoolog Sci. 2003 Nov;20(11):1411-6.

External morphology of the posterior end, the "opisthosoma", of the beard worm
Oligobrachia mashikoi (Pogonophora).

Sasayama Y(1), Matada M, Fukumori Y, Umebayashi M, Matsuno A, Nakagawa T, Imajima
M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biodiversity, Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and
Environmental Technology, Kanazawa University.

The entire length of the beard worm, Oligobrachia mashikoi (Pogonophora),
including the posterior end, the "opisthosoma" was collected successfully. This
species is exclusive to Tsukumo Bay in Ishikawa Prefecture, Japan. Although the
portion preceding the opisthosoma was similar to a fine filament, it abruptly
assumed a shape similar to a shovel and appeared to be composed of many segmental
structures. The number of segments exceeded 50. The dorsal side of the
opisthosoma differed from that of the ventral side in morphology. The opisthosoma
was equipped with 4 lines of setae arranged longitudinally and a sucker on the
tip. When considering the fact that the Family Oligobrachiidae is the most
primitive group of pogonophores, the external morphology of the opisthosoma is
interesting as it may be reminiscent of the ancestral condition. This is the
first report of the opisthosoma in Oligobrachiidae.

PMID: 14624042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Panminerva Med. 2003 Sep;45(3):225-6.

Gestational hypertension and pre-eclampsia in woman affected by systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Noto R, Panella M, Rapisarda A, Noto P, Garozzo V, Ciancio B, Noto Z.

PMID: 14618123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2003 Nov;47(11):3574-9.

Related clones containing SCCmec type IV predominate among clinically significant
Staphylococcus epidermidis isolates.

Wisplinghoff H(1), Rosato AE, Enright MC, Noto M, Craig W, Archer GL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23292, USA.

SCCmec is a mobile genetic element that carries the gene (mecA) mediating
methicillin resistance in staphylococci. For Staphylococcus aureus, four SCCmec
types have been described, one (type IV) of which has been associated with newly 
identified community-acquired methicillin-resistant S. aureus. However, the
distribution of SCCmec types among S. epidermidis is not known. SCCmec typing of 
a collection of 44 methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis (MRSE)
isolates recovered between 1973 and 1983 from the blood of patients with
prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) was performed by PCR amplification of key
genetic elements (mecA, mecI, IS1272, and ccrAB). Of the 44 isolates, 1 (2%)
harbored SCCmec type I, 15 (34%) harbored type II, 12 (28%) harbored type III,
and 16 (36%) harbored type IV. The complete nucleotide sequence of SCCmec type IV
was determined for 16 isolates and found to be identical in size (24 kb) and 98% 
homologous to DNA sequences published for S. aureus. Type IV SCCmec was also
common (5 of 10 isolates) among a geographically dispersed collection of 10
recent (1998 to 2001) S. epidermidis bloodstream isolates. Multilocus sequence
typing (MLST) (using the same seven genes presently employed for S. aureus MLST) 
of these MRSE isolates and of 10 additional recent geographically dispersed
methicillin-susceptible isolates demonstrated that all 16 PVE isolates and 2 of 5
recent isolates harboring type IV SCCmec were in three related clonal groups. All
three MSSE PVE isolates recovered from patients between 1976 and 1979 were in the
same clonal groups as type IV SCCmec MRSE isolates. These data support the
hypothesis of intra- and interspecies transfer of type IV SCCmec and suggest that
there are clonal associations in S. epidermidis that correlate with SCCmec type.

PMCID: PMC253785
PMID: 14576120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nihon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi. 2003 Sep;41(9):666-70.

[Pulmonary septic emboli in a patient with right-side infectious endocarditis].

[Article in Japanese]

Taniguchi H(1), Fujisaka S, Abo H, Miyazawa H, Noto H, Izumi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Central Prefectural Hospital, 2-2-78
Nishinagae, Toyama-City, Toyama, Japan.

An 18-year-old woman afflicted with ventricular septal defect was admitted for
high fever and dyspnea. She had undergone no surgical repair. Chest CT showed
numerous nodular opacities in both lungs. The majority of them were situated on
the pleura. Echocardiography revealed an area of vegetation 20 mm in diameter
just beneath the tricuspid valve. Staphylococcus aureus was cultured from venous 
blood. We diagnosed right-side bacterial infectious endocarditis caused by
Staphylococcus aureus and culminating in septic pulmonary emboli. Intravenous
panipenem/betamiprom was prescribed, and after 5 weeks, the patient recovered,
was negative for C-reactive protein and had a negative venous blood culture.
Cardiac septal defect with bacterial endocarditis is a major risk factor in the
development of septic pulmonary emboli.

PMID: 14531304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Am J Cardiol. 2003 Oct 1;92(7):865-8.

Detection of myocardial contractile reserve by low-dose dobutamine quantitative
gated single-photon emission computed tomography in patients with Kawasaki
disease and severe coronary artery lesions.

Karasawa K(1), Miyashita M, Taniguchi K, Kanamaru H, Ayusawa M, Noto N, Sumitomo 
N, Okada T, Harada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
karasawa@med.nihon-u.ac.jp

We studied 24 patients with severe coronary artery lesions to assess myocardial
perfusion and left ventricular contractile reserve simultaneously using low-dose 
dobutamine quantitative electrocardiographically gated single-photon emission
computed tomography in patients with Kawasaki disease. Low-dose dobutamine
infusion was started after an injection of technetium-99m tetrofosmin at rest.
Myocardial contractile reserve was evaluated using the post-stress and low-dose
dobutamine images, and myocardial perfusion was evaluated using the stress and
rest images. Quantitative electrocardiographically gated single-photon emission
computed tomography during low-dose dobutamine infusion is a useful and safe
method for the combined evaluation of myocardial contractile reserve and
myocardial perfusion.

PMID: 14516896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Nihon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi. 2003 Aug;41(8):541-5.

[X-ray-negative endobronchial tuberculosis with persistent irritating cough that 
resulted in unpredicted mass infection].

[Article in Japanese]

Taniguchi H(1), Suzuki K, Fujisaka S, Abo H, Miwa T, Miyazawa H, Noto H, Izumi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Central Prefectural Hospital, 2-2-78
Nishinagae, Toyama-city, Toyama, Japan.

A 24-year-old woman was referred to another hospital because of a barking cough, 
but her chest radiograph showed no abnormality. Although she had been diagnosed
as having other diseases and had been given medical treatment, the barking cough 
continued. Abnormalities of the chest radiograph appeared 11 months later, and
endobronchial tuberculosis was diagnosed from the clinical history, chest CT and 
a sputum smear positive for acid-fast bacilli. We treated her with INH, RFP, EB
for 6 months, and PZA for 2 months. However, truncus intermedius became
obstructed nine months after treatment ended, and we re-opened it with a Dumon
stent after coring it out using a rigid bronchoscope. Since the patient was a
teacher, medical checkups of many people were required, and the number of
prophylactic treatments carried out was 80. This was regarded as a mass
infection. In the early stages, endobronchial tuberculosis may not show any
abnormality on chest radiography, but may still cause mass infection. When a
barking cough continues for a long time, endobronchial tuberculosis must be
suspected, and examination of a sputum smear for acid-fast bacilli, as well as a 
sputum culture is necessary.

PMID: 14503340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2003 Aug;19(8):643-52.

Neurocognitive performance and quality of life in patients with HIV infection.

Tozzi V(1), Balestra P, Galgani S, Murri R, Bellagamba R, Narciso P, Antinori A, 
Giulianelli M, Tosi G, Costa M, Sampaolesi A, Fantoni M, Noto P, Ippolito G, Wu
AW.

Author information: 
(1)4th Division of Infectious Diseases, I.N.M.I. Lazzaro Spallanzani, Via
Portuense 292, 00149 Rome, Italy. tozzi@inmi.it

We examined the relationship of HIV-related cognitive impairment and
health-related quality of life (QoL). Subjects were administered measures of
cognitive function (a battery of 17 neuropsychological tests) and of QoL (the
MOS-HIV questionnaire). Study measures also included comprehensive clinical and
neurological evaluation, laboratory testing, and brain imaging studies in
patients with impaired neuropsychological evaluation. One-hundred and eleven
subjects were examined. Cognitively impaired patients (33.3%) reported poorer QoL
scores in all domains (p < 0.05): physical health summary score (PHS) (44.6 vs.
49.9), mental health summary score (MHS) (37.7 vs. 44.4), pain (67.6 vs. 79.4),
physical functioning (75.9 vs. 87.7), role functioning (32.4 vs. 41.5), social
functioning (70.3 vs. 83.5), mental health (48.2 vs. 61.0), energy (53.1 vs.
63.0), health distress (60.8 vs. 75.5), cognitive functioning (CF) (60.5 vs.
71.8), general health perceptions (29.2 vs. 43.4), and QoL (36.5 vs. 47.0). The
number of altered neuropsychological tests correlated significantly with MHS (p <
0.001), PHS (p < 0.03), CF (p < 0.02), and QoL (p < 0.02) scores. A correlation
between seven of seven neuropsychological measures exploring speed of mental
processing, three of four exploring mental flexibility, four of six exploring
memory, and two of two exploring fine motor functioning and MHS, PHS, CF, or QoL 
scores was also found. Poor performance on the Digit Symbol test was most
strongly associated with poor MHS (OR 1.04, 95% CI 1.01-1.08, p < 0.009) and PHS 
(OR 1.04, 95% CI 1.01-1.08, p < 0.01) scores, controlling for CD4 count, previous
AIDS diagnosis, receiving HAART, and drug abuse. Cognitive impairment is
associated with poor QoL. People with more severe cognitive impairment have the
highest probability of having a poor QoL. Cognitive impairment in any cognitive
domain explored in our battery is also associated with poor QoL. Poor performance
on the Digit Symbol Test is the strongest predictor of poor QoL.

PMID: 13678465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biochem Pharmacol. 2003 Sep 15;66(6):897-906.

Antitumor efficacy of FK228, a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor, depends on
the effect on expression of angiogenesis factors.

Sasakawa Y(1), Naoe Y, Noto T, Inoue T, Sasakawa T, Matsuo M, Manda T, Mutoh S.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Biology Research Laboratories, Fujisawa Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.,
2-1-6 Kashima, Yodogawa-ku, Osaka 532-8514, Japan.
yuka_sasakawa@po.fujisawa.co.jp

It has been recently demonstrated that histone deacetylase inhibitors inhibit
angiogenesis, but their mechanism of action has not been characterized well. In
this study, we examined the in vitro and in vivo effects of FK228
[(E)-(1S,4S,10S,21R)-7-[(Z)-ethylidene]-4,21-diisopropyl-2-oxa-12,13-dithia-5,8,2
0,23-tetraazabicyclo-[8,7,6]-tricos-16-ene-3,6,9,19,22-pentanone; FR901228,
depsipeptide], an HDAC inhibitor, on the expression of angiogenesis factors in
FK228-sensitive PC-3 prostate and FK228-resistant ACHN renal cancer cells. FK228 
suppressed the expression of VEGF mRNA in PC-3 cells, but not in ACHN cells.
FK228 also suppressed the expression of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF)
mRNA in both PC-3 and ACHN cells. Under conditions of hypoxia, FK228 suppressed
the expression of VEGF mRNA without modulating the expression of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha mRNA in PC-3 cells. FK228 induced the highest
acetylation of histone H3 and H4 in the P2 region of the VEGF promoter, which
includes the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha binding site that plays an
important role in regulating the expression of VEGF gene. Moreover, FK228 reduced
the amount of VEGF and bFGF protein, and their mRNA levels in PC-3 xenograft
implanted in nude mice, but did not reduce them in ACHN xenograft.IN CONCLUSION: 
(i) FK228 showed a suppressive effect on the expression of angiogenesis factors, 
such as VEGF and bFGF, in PC-3 xenograft but not in ACHN xenograft, which
suggests that the effect on the expression of angiogenesis factors is important
for the antitumor efficacy of FK228; (ii) FK228 caused histone acetylation of the
VEGF promoter regions, which may contribute to the suppression of VEGF gene
expression.

PMID: 12963476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2003 Aug;59(8):976-83.

[Comparison of shielding calculations for diagnostic X-ray equipment].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto K(1), Sota T, Koshida K, Suzuki S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa University.

Radiation is controlled by the recent revision of the Enforcement Regulations of 
the Medical Service Law. Law No. 188 prescribes X-ray data for estimating
effective dose in the controlled area of a medical facility. For X-ray data such 
as kerma in air, transmission data are based on NCRP. We compared various X-ray
data, and NCRP and Simpkin were compared with law No. 188. Leakage effective
doses in a general-purpose radiography room, fluoroscopy room, and X-ray CT room 
were calculated. All three calculations were below the dose limit for controlled 
areas, 1.3 mSv/3 months. In the general-purpose radiography room (including
fluoroscopy), NCRP and Simpkin underestimated from 1/3 to 1/2 in comparison with 
law No. 188. In the X-ray CT room, NCRP and Simpkin showed underestimates from
1/2 to 2/3 compared with law No. 188. There were no significant differences
between law No. 188, NCRP, and Simpkin, but significant differences were found
for individual numerical values. A need for the re-examination of basic data was 
suggested by the above findings.

PMID: 12960951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Acta Paediatr. 2003 Aug;92(8):977-9.

Improved growth with growth hormone therapy in a child with glycogen storage
disease Ib.

Noto RA(1), Vijayaraghavan V, Timoshin A, Sansobrino D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Metabolism and Nutrition, New York
Medical College, Valhalla, New York 10595, USA.

In type Ib glycogen storage disease (GSD) growth is typically affected and short 
stature is a common feature. Reported use and effect of growth hormone (GH)
therapy in children with GSD is limited. We report on the use of substitutive GH 
treatment in a poorly growing adolescent female with GSD type Ib. The patient's
growth velocity increased from a baseline level of 2.5 cm/y to an average growth 
velocity during GH therapy of 8.7 cm/y. During GH therapy this patient did not
demonstrate metabolic decompensation but increased levels of cholesterol and
triglycerides were seen (A-1).CONCLUSION: Patients with GSD may experience an
improvement in growth response with GH treatment. Prior to GH therapy, treatment 
of hyperlipidemia associated with GSD should allow the therapy to be safely
tolerated.

PMID: 12948077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Chir Ital. 2003 Jul-Aug;55(4):525-31.

[Surgical treatment of melanoma: role of the sentinel lymph node].

[Article in Italian]

Marrazzo A(1), Cardinale G, Noto A, Casà L, Taormina P, Barbera G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Chirurgiche ed Oncologiche, Università degli Studi di 
Palermo, Unità Operativa di Chirurgia Oncologica, Casa di Cura ad Alta Specialità
Oncologica La Maddalena, Palermo.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the surgical therapy of melanoma of the
head, neck, trunk or extremities, and the reliability of sentinel node biopsy.
Forty-nine patients, 23 men and 26 women, mean age 59 (range: 22-89) years, with 
melanoma of the skin--the sites affected were the head and neck (7), trunk (17), 
upper extremities (8) and lower extremities (17)--and clinically negative lymph
nodes, participated in the study from January 2000 to December 2002. The mean
Breslow thickness was 2.1 mm, and the median thickness 2 mm. Preoperative dynamic
and static lymphoscintigraphy, intraoperative blue dye and a gamma-ray detection 
probe were used. If the histological examination with haematoxylin and eosin
revealed metastases, therapeutic lymph-node dissection was performed. Sentinel
nodes were identified by lymphoscintigraphy in 47 patients (96%); 82 sentinel
nodes (mean 1.65 per patient) were removed from 56 lymph-node stations. Four
patients had tumour-positive sentinel nodes. During follow-up, nodal recurrence
in a sentinel-node-negative station was documented in 1 patient. Melanoma of the 
skin can be safely excised with 1-2 cm margins. Therapeutic lymph-node dissection
is performed only in node-positive patients. Sentinel-node biopsy allows accurate
staging and yields important prognostic information.

PMID: 12938597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Nihon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi. 2003 Jul;41(7):447-50.

[Diffuse alveolar damage after inhalation of zinc oxide fumes].

[Article in Japanese]

Taniguchi H(1), Suzuki K, Fujisaka S, Honda R, Abo H, Miyazawa H, Noto H, Izumi
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Central Prefectural Hospital, 2-2-78
Nishinagae, Toyama-city, Toyama, Japan.

A 57-year-old man with a 37-year occupational history of welding was admitted for
high fever and dyspnea after inhalation of zinc oxide fumes during a period of
welding without a protective mask. Chest radiography and CT showed bilateral
diffuse ground-glass opacities, and blood gas analysis revealed that PaO2 was
48.1 torr in room air. A transbronchial lung biopsy was done, and revealed
diffuse alveolar damage. We diagnosed the case as chemical pneumonia due to the
inhalation of zinc oxide, and prescribed prednisolone 40 mg per day. As a result,
his symptoms improved within several days. The inhalation of zinc oxide fume
usually causes metal fume fever, but chemical pneumonia is also reported on rare 
occasions. As far as our examination of the literature has disclosed, this is the
first report of diffuse alveolar damage after inhalation of zinc oxide fume.

PMID: 12931671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2003 Apr;13(2):93-9.

Two Italian kindreds carrying the Arg136-->Ser mutation of the Apo E gene:
development of premature and severe atherosclerosis in the presence of epsilon 2 
as second allele.

Rolleri M(1), Vivona N, Emmanuele G, Cefalù AB, Pisciotta L, Guido V, Noto D,
Fiore B, Barbagallo CM, Notarbartolo A, Travali S, Bertolini S, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Type III hyperlipoproteinemia, or dysbetalipoproteinemia, is
commonly associated with apolipoprotein E2 homozygosity (Cys112, Cys158). Apo
E2-Christchurch (Arg136-->Ser), a rare mutation of the Apo E gene, located in the
receptor-binding domain of the protein, has been found to be associated in the
vast majority of cases of dysbetalipoproteinemia.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This is the first report of two Italian kindreds carrying
the Arg136-->Ser mutation. One family is a four-generation kindred from Genoa
(Liguria, Italy) with a high rate of mortality due to coronary artery disease:
the proband was a 51-year-old woman with previous myocardial infarction and
residual angina, severe carotid atherosclerosis, peripheral arterial vascular
disease and arterial hypertension. The other family was identified in Palermo
(Sicily, Italy): the proband was an overweight 62-year-old man with a mixed form 
of hyperlipidemia. The mutation, which was identified by means of Apo E
genotyping followed by direct sequencing, co-segregated with the same haplotype
in the two families.
CONCLUSIONS: The family histories and clinical examinations of these subjects
clearly show that the Apo E Arg136-->Ser variant fully expresses a type III
phenotype in association with a second allele coding for Apo E2, and only
partially in association with a second allele coding for Apo E4.

PMID: 12929622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Life Sci. 2003 Sep 12;73(17):2237-47.

Bisphenol A suppresses osteoclastic and osteoblastic activities in the cultured
scales of goldfish.

Suzuki N(1), Hattori A.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University, Uchiura, Ishikawa 927-0553, Japan.
nobuo@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

The direct effect of bisphenol A on osteoclasts and osteoblasts was examined
using a culture system of goldfish scales. Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase
(TRAP) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) were used as markers of osteoclasts and
osteoblasts, respectively. Bisphenol A (10(5) M) significantly suppressed both
TRAP and ALP activities. These data were reproduced in an in vivo experiment.
From an analysis of a reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction in the in
vitro-cultured scales, it was demonstrated that the insulin-like growth factor
(IGF)-1 mRNA expression decreased by a bisphenol A treatment. On the other hand, 
17beta-estradiol (E(2)) stimulated both TRAP and ALP activities and did not
change IGF-1 mRNA expression, suggesting that bisphenol A has a different effect 
from E(2) on bone metabolism. This study is the first to demonstrate that
bisphenol A functions to suppress directly osteoblasts and osteoclasts among
vertebrates, which strongly suggests that this scale in an in vitro assay system 
can be utilized for the evaluation of the effects of endocrine disrupters on bone
cells.

PMID: 12927593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Org Biomol Chem. 2003 May 7;1(9):1584-90.

Spectrophotometric study on the thermodynamics of binding of alpha- and
beta-cyclodextrin towards some p-nitrobenzene derivatives.

Lo Meo P(1), D'Anna F, Riela S, Gruttadauria M, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Università degli Studi di Palermo, Dipartimento di Chimica Organica E.
Paternò, Viale delle Scienze-Parco d'Orleans II (pad. 17), 90128 Palermo, Italy.

Binding properties of native alpha- and beta-cyclodextrin towards some
nitrobenzene derivatives have been studied by means of UV-vis spectrophotometry. 
The former host is able to form complexes having 1:1 and 1:2 stoichiometric
ratios with these guests, while only 1:1 complexes are detected with the latter
host. A careful analysis of the thermodynamic parameters for complexation
equilibria, under the perspective of the enthalpy-entropy compensation effect,
reveals that binding abilities of the two different hosts are subject to
different features.

PMID: 12926291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2003 Sep 1;417(1):59-64.

Binding studies on aluminum(III)-albumin interaction.

Zatta P(1), Dalla Via L, Di Noto V.

Author information: 
(1)CNR-Institute for Biomedical Technologies, Metalloproteins Unit, Viale G.
Colombo, 3, 35121, Padua, Italy. zatta@mail.bio.unipd.it

The present paper reports a quantitative investigation on the binding of aluminum
to human serum albumin. Equilibrium dialysis and a general thermodynamic approach
have been used to determine the binding parameters. Two aluminum binding sites
have been identified on the albumin molecule, involving sites with single and
double occupancy modes. The binding properties of these two distinct sites appear
to undergo reciprocal influences, suggesting a possible interaction between the
corresponding protein moieties. Both coordination modes proceed from weak
interactions, as shown by the binding energies calculated.

PMID: 12921780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Ig Sanita Pubbl. 2002 Sep-Oct;58(5):302-14.

[Behavioural attitude of the young as regards road accident prevention: a survey 
carried out among high school students in two Sicilian towns].

[Article in Italian]

Vinci C(1), Coniglio MA, Di Nuovo S, Pignato S, Giammanco G.

Author information: 
(1)Facoltà di Scienze della Formazione, Università degli Studi di Catania.

This survey is aimed at assessing young peoples awareness as regards car accident
prevention and misleading behaviours. The survey concerned a sample of 829 high
school students of both genders, aged 17 to 23, from a chief town (Catania) and a
country town (Noto, Siracusa). In addition to a good level of awareness as
regards road accidents and misleading behaviours, the investigation also showed
an opposite trend to disregard basic safety rules such as the use of helmets,
safety belts and abstention from alcohol intake. Dangerous behaviours have shown 
to be higher in Noto than Catania, and more frequent among male than female of
both towns. In the light of such results, some educational actions have been
discussed for road safety.

PMID: 12874629  [PubMed]


19. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2003 Aug;18(8):943-9.

Combined passive and active immunoprophylaxis for preventing perinatal
transmission of the hepatitis B virus carrier state in Shizuoka, Japan during
1980-1994.

Noto H(1), Terao T, Ryou S, Hirose Y, Yoshida T, Ookubo H, Mito H, Yoshizawa H;
Special Committee for Preventing Hepatitis B in Shizuoka.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Hamamatsu Medical College, Shizuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Efficacy and limits in preventing perinatal infection with hepatitis 
B virus (HBV) have been examined in a model area in Japan.
METHODS: In Shizuoka (population of 3.6 million), immunoprophylaxis of perinatal 
HBV infection was started in 1980 in four institutions (Hamamatsu Medical
College, Shimada City Hospital, Shizuoka Kodomo Hospital and Numazu City
Hospital). Babies born to carrier mothers with hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) in
serum received hepatitis B immune globulins at birth and 2 months thereafter and 
vaccines at 2, 3 and 5 months after birth.
RESULTS: Overall, 980 of the 1030 babies born to HBeAg-positive carrier mothers
were protected by the immunoprophylaxis during the 15 years from 1980 to 1994
with an efficacy of 95.1%. From 1986 to 1994 while the national immunoprophylaxis
was conducted, 329,674 of the 346,637 (95.1%) expectant mothers were tested, and 
2081 (0.63%) of them were positive for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg). The
immunoprophylaxis was given only to babies born to 764 (36.7%) of the 2081
mothers who tested positive for HBeAg. Of the 494 babies receiving
immunoprophylaxis, in whom HBsAg was followed monthly after birth, 462 (93.5%)
were protected. The HBV carrier state developed in the remaining 32 (6.5%)
babies, 10 of whom (31.3% of the 32) turned positive for HBsAg within 1 month
after birth, most likely owing to infection in utero.
CONCLUSIONS: Passive-active immunoprophylasxis of high-risk babies was highly
efficacious in preventing perinatal transmission of the HBV carrier state. Most
failures (approximately 70%) occurred in the high-risk babies who were exposed to
HBV after birth, and would have been avoided by careful and extensive execution
of the immunoprophylaxis.

PMID: 12859724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Panminerva Med. 2003 Jun;45(2):123-31.

Emerging risk factors and assessment of organ damage in postmenopausal
hypertensive women.

Noto R(1), Molino G, Sciacchitano G, Noto P, Caschetto S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Systemic Pathologies, University of
Catania, Catania, Italy.

The numerous risk factors for acute cerebrocardiovascular events present in
postmenopausal women have attracted a multidisciplinary approach. In hypertensive
patients and postmenopausal intensive alike, the need for stratification of risk 
based on blood pressure, association of other risk factors and organ damage is
becoming more and more evident. This study investigated some emerging factors,
such as endothelial dysfunction, adhesion molecules and elevated homocysteine
levels that may be markers of organ damage. It also examined the current
importance of carotid US intima-media thickness assessment, cardiac US imaging
and 24 hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) in detecting organ
damage. The study results indicated that the conventional stratification of
cerebrocardiovascular risk in these patients is changing. The new approach in
postmenopausal hypertensives tends to assess the presence of other emerging
factors. Furthermore, assessment of organ damage is crucial for determining
disease development and outcome that may be positively influenced by suitable
pharmacological treatment.

PMID: 12855937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Leuk Lymphoma. 2003 Jun;44(6):1049-52.

Myelofibrosis after essential thrombocythemia complicated by alveolar
proteinosis.

Tsutsumi Y(1), Tanaka J, Saito S, Tanaka Y, Kawamura T, Obara S, Noto S,
Shimoyama N, Asaka M, Imamura M, Masauzi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hakodate Municipal Hospital 1-10-1,
Minato-Cho, Hakodate 041-8680, Japan. tsutsumi@hospital.hakodate.hokkaido.jp

Hematological diseases are often accompanied by respiratory disorders. Pulmonary 
alveolar proteinosis (PAP) is a rare disease characterized by excessive
accumulation of surfactant in the alveolar space. We describe a case of PAP
complicated by myelofibrosis following essential thrombocythemia. The patient
developed high fever, respiratory failure, and leuko-erythroblastosis during the 
progressive course of PAP. These symptoms were alleviated by prednisolone. The
level of serum IL-6 was elevated when PAP was progressing rapidly. This may
explain why the symptoms were alleviated by the steroids.

PMID: 12854908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Drug Target. 2003 Jan;11(1):37-43.

Effect of oxyethylene moieties in hydrogenated castor oil on the pharmacokinetics
of menatetrenone incorporated in O/W lipid emulsions prepared with hydrogenated
castor oil and soybean oil in rats.

Ueda K(1), Yamazaki Y, Noto H, Teshima Y, Yamashita C, Sakaeda T, Iwakawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Kobe Pharmaceutical University, 4-19-1
Motoyamakita-machi, Higashinada-ku, Kobe 658-8558, Japan. ueda@kobepharma-u.ac.jp

Lipid emulsions with particle sizes of 190-270 nm were prepared with soybean oil 
(SO) and a series of hydrogenated castor oils (HCOs) with various oxyethylene
numbers, and the effect of oxyethylene numbers of HCOs on the pharmacokinetics of
menatetrenone incorporated into the lipid emulsions was studied in rats. Plasma
half-life of menatetrenone after administration as the lipid emulsions prepared
by HCO with 10 oxyethylene units (SO/HCO10) was similar to that after the
administration as SO/egg yolk phosphatides (SO/EYP), but was shorter than that as
the lipid emulsions prepared by HCOs with > 20 oxyethylene units (SO/HCO20,
SO/HCO30, SO/HCO60, SOHC and SO/HCO100). Menatetrenone incorporated in SO/HCO10, 
SO/HCO20 and SO/HCO60 was not taken up by the blood cells in vitro, and the
plasma level of menatetrenone incorporated in SO/HCO10 was similar to that of
triglycerides, suggesting that menatetrenone was not released from the oil
particles even after entering the circulation. Menatetrenone uptake by the liver 
for SO/HCO10 was similar to that for SO/EYP, while those for SO/HCO20, SO/HCO30, 
SO/HCO60 and SO/HCO100 was less than that for SO/EYP. These findings clearly
demonstrate that 20 oxyethylene units in HCOs is the minimum requirement for the 
prolongation of the plasma circulation time of menatetrenone incorporated in
SO/HCOs.

PMID: 12852439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Zoolog Sci. 2003 Jun;20(6):759-63.

Reproductive strategy of the tiny abyssal scallop (Delectopecten vitreus
macrocheiricolus) collected on the bottom of the Japan Sea, surmised from
histological observations of the gonads.

Sasayama Y(1), Takeuchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biodiversity, Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and
Environmental Technology, Kanazawa University Uchiura, Japan.
sasayama@sweet.ocn.ne.jp

Two hundred and fifteen individuals of the tiny abyssal scallop (Delectopecten
vitreus macrocheiricolus) were collected at a depth of around 3,000 m on the
bottom of the Japan Sea during a cruise of the Yokosuka/Shinkai 6500 YK 01-06.
The scallop population included specimens of 4 sizes, i.e., very small, small,
middle, and large, with mantle sizes of 1-2mm, 3-5mm, 6-9mm, and 10-12mm,
respectively. Histological observations revealed that the large-size group was at
the stage just after oviposition or spermiation, or in the regressed stage of
gametogenesis. The small- and middle-size groups were in the growing stage of
gametogenesis. These results suggest that only the large-size individuals were
responsible for reproduction and that the small- and middle-size individuals
would participate in subsequent reproductions. This paper will discuss the
reproductive strategy of this scallop living at such great depth.

PMID: 12832828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Zoolog Sci. 2003 Jun;20(6):745-8.

Bisphenol A influences the plasma calcium level and inhibits calcitonin secretion
in goldfish.

Suzuki N(1), Kambegawa A, Hattori A.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University, Japan. nobuo@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

In teleosts, it is well known that plasma calcium levels increase as a result of 
treatment with estrogen for at least during 2 weeks and that calcitonin secretion
is induced by estrogen. The present study examined the influence of bisphenol A
on calcium homeostasis in goldfish and compared the above known estrogenic
action. In goldfish kept in water containing bisphenol A (10(-6) M), the plasma
calcium concentration increased significantly (P<0.001) at 4 days but decreased
significantly (P<0.05) at 8 days. By the treatment of bisphenol A, calcitonin
secretion was not induced until 4 days. At 8 days, however, plasma calcitonin, as
well as calcium, decreased significantly (P<0.05), although vitellogenin was
detected in the plasma. Therefore, bisphenol A influences plasma calcium levels, 
but its action is different from that of estrogen, which indicates that bisphenol
A affects the calcium homeostasis and might bring about abnormal conditions in
teleosts.

PMID: 12832826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Am J Emerg Med. 2003 May;21(3):180-3.

Diagnostic utility of echocardiography in patients with suspected pulmonary
embolism.

Bova C(1), Greco F, Misuraca G, Serafini O, Crocco F, Greco A, Noto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Annunziata General Hospital, Cosenza, Italy.

The aim of this study was to investigate the clinical utility of echocardiography
in the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism (PE). For this, we enrolled 162 patients
with suspected PE in a prospective study. We evaluated the sensitivity and
specificity of right ventricular dilatation, the Doppler evidence of pulmonary
hypertension, and their possible associations. We also calculated the number of
lung-scan angiography procedures avoided and the number of patients unnecessarily
treated when echocardiography was included in the diagnostic work-up. The
sensitivity and specificity of echocardiography ranged between 29 and 52% and
between 96% and 87%, respectively. Adding echocardiography to the diagnostic
strategy for PE would avoid about 12 to 28% of lung-scan angiography procedures, 
but would cause inappropriate treatment of 4 to 14% of all treated patients. The 
clinical utility of echocardiography in the diagnosis of PE is limited. The
reduction in the number of standard diagnostic procedures obtained through its
use would be counterbalanced by an excess of patients inappropriately treated.

PMID: 12811708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Med Health R I. 2003 May;86(5):143-6.

Future advances and applications in positron emission tomography.

Yoo D(1), Noto RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Rhode Island Hospital, 593 Eddy St.,
Providence, RI 02903, USA.

PMID: 12803035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Med Health R I. 2003 May;86(5):139-42.

Cardiac applications of positron emission tomography (PET).

Noto RB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Rhode Island Hospital, Brown Medical School,
Providence, RI, USA. Rnoto@lifespan.org

PMID: 12803034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Med Health R I. 2003 May;86(5):136-8.

Neurologic PET.

Posteraro AF(1), Noto RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Rhode Island Hospital, 593 Eddy St.,
Providence, RI 02903, USA. Aposteraro@lifespan.org

PMID: 12803033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Med Health R I. 2003 May;86(5):129-31.

Positron emission tomography (PET): the basics.

Noto RB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Rhode Island Hospital, Brown Medical School,
Providence, RI, USA. RNoto@lifespan.org

PMID: 12803031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Gynecol Oncol. 2003 Jun;89(3):475-9.

Sentinel node identification and the ability to detect metastatic tumor to
inguinal lymph nodes in squamous cell cancer of the vulva.

Moore RG(1), DePasquale SE, Steinhoff MM, Gajewski W, Steller M, Noto R,
Falkenberry S.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Women's Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Women
and Infants' Hospital, Brown University, Providence, RI 02925, USA.
rmoore@wihri.org

OBJECTIVES: The goal of this study was to identify one or more inguinal sentinel 
nodes in patients with primary squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva and to
determine the ability of the sentinel node to predict metastasis to the inguinal 
lymphatic basin.
METHODS: Techniques employing technetium-99m (Tc-99m) sulfur colloid and
isosulfan blue dye were utilized to identify sentinel nodes in the inguinal
lymphatic beds. Technetium-99m sulfur colloid was injected intradermally at the
tumor margins 90-180 min preoperatively followed by a similar injection of
isosulfan blue dye 5-10 min before the groin dissection. A handheld collimated
gamma counter was employed to identify Tc-99m-labeled sentinel nodes. Lymphatic
tracts that had taken up blue dye and their corresponding sentinel node were also
identified and retrieved. A completion inguinal dissection was then performed.
Each sentinel node was labeled as hot and blue, hot and nonblue, or cold and
blue. The sentinel nodes were subjected to pathologic examination with step
sections and nonsentinel nodes were evaluated in the standard fashion.
RESULTS: Twenty-one patients with a median age of 79 were entered onto protocol
and a total of 31 inguinal node dissections were performed. A sentinel node was
identified in 31/31 (100%) groin dissections with the use of Tc-99m. Isosulfan
blue dye identified a sentinel node in 19/31 (61%) groin dissections. Surgical
staging revealed 7 patients with stage I disease, 5 with stage II disease, 5 with
stage III disease, and 4 with stage IV disease. Lymph nodes in 9 groin
dissections were found to have metastatic disease, and in 4 of these dissections,
the sentinel node was the only positive node. Lymph nodes in 22 groin dissections
had no evidence of metastasis. No false-negative sentinel lymph nodes were
obtained (sentinel node negative and a nonsentinel node positive).
CONCLUSION: Tc-99m sulfur colloid is superior to isosulfan blue dye in the
detection of sentinel nodes in inguinal dissections of patients with vulvar
cancer. A sentinel node dissection utilizing Tc-99m alone can identify a sentinel
node in all inguinal dissections. Pathologic examination with step sections has
shown the sentinel node to be an accurate predictor of metastatic disease to the 
inguinal nodal chain.

PMID: 12798714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Chest. 2003 Jun;123(6):2057-61.

Short-term noninvasive pressure support ventilation prevents ICU admittance in
patients with acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema.

Giacomini M(1), Iapichino G, Cigada M, Minuto A, Facchini R, Noto A, Assi E.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Anestesiologia e Rianimazione dell'Università degli Studi di
Milano, Azienda Ospedaliera, Polo Universitario Ospedale San Paolo, Milan, Italy.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Noninvasive ventilation, although effective as treatment for
patients with acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema when prolonged for hours, is of
limited use in the emergency department (ED). The aim of the study was to
determine whether a short attempt at noninvasive pressure support ventilation
avoids ICU admittance and to identify lack of response prediction variables.
DESIGN: Prospective inception cohort study.
SETTING: ED of a university hospital.
PATIENTS: Fifty-eight consecutive patients with cardiogenic pulmonary edema who
had been unresponsive to medical treatment and were admitted between January 1999
and December 2000.
INTERVENTIONS: Pressure support ventilation was instituted through a full-face
mask until the resolution of respiratory failure. A 15-min "weaning test" was
performed to evaluate clinical stability. Responder patients were transferred to 
a medical ward. Nonresponding patients were intubated and were admitted to the
ICU.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The included optimal length of intervention, the avoidance
of ICU admittance, the incidence of myocardial infarction, and predictive lack of
response criteria.
RESULTS: Patients completed the trial (mean [+/- SD] duration, 96 +/- 40 min).
None of the responders (43 patients; 74%) was subsequently ventilated or was
admitted to the ICU. Two new episodes of myocardial infarction were observed.
Thirteen of 58 patients died. A mean arterial pressure of < 95 mm Hg (odds ratio 
[OR], 10.6; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.8 to 60.8; p < 0.01) and COPD (OR,
9.4; 95% CI, 1.6 to 54.0; p < 0.05) at baseline predicted the lack of response to
noninvasive ventilation.
CONCLUSIONS: A short attempt at noninvasive ventilation is effective in
preventing invasive assistance. A 15-min weaning test can identify patients who
will not need further invasive ventilatory support. COPD and hypotension at
baseline are negative predictive criteria.

PMID: 12796189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2003 Jun;69(6):3399-405.

Use of antibiotic resistance analysis for representativeness testing of
multiwatershed libraries.

Wiggins BA(1), Cash PW, Creamer WS, Dart SE, Garcia PP, Gerecke TM, Han J, Henry 
BL, Hoover KB, Johnson EL, Jones KC, McCarthy JG, McDonough JA, Mercer SA, Noto
MJ, Park H, Phillips MS, Purner SM, Smith BM, Stevens EN, Varner AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, James Madison University, Harrisonburg, Virginia 22807,
USA. wigginba@jmu.edu

The use of antibiotic resistance analysis (ARA) for microbial source tracking
requires the generation of a library of isolates collected from known sources in 
the watershed. The size and composition of the library are critical in
determining if it represents the diversity of patterns found in the watershed.
This study was performed to determine the size that an ARA library needs to be to
be representative of the watersheds for which it will be used and to determine if
libraries from different watersheds can be merged to create multiwatershed
libraries. Fecal samples from known human, domesticated, and wild animal sources 
were collected from six Virginia watersheds. From these samples, enterococci were
isolated and tested by ARA. Based on cross-validation discriminant analysis, only
the largest of the libraries (2,931 isolates) were found to be able to classify
nonlibrary isolates as well as library isolates (i.e., were representative).
Small libraries tended to have higher average rates of correct classification,
but were much less able to correctly classify nonlibrary isolates. A merged
multiwatershed library (6,587 isolates) was created and was found to be large
enough to be representative of the isolates from the contributing watersheds.
When isolates that were collected from the contributing watersheds approximately 
1 year later were analyzed with the multiwatershed library, they were classified 
as well as the isolates in the library, suggesting that the resistance patterns
are temporally stable for at least 1 year. The ability to obtain a
representative, temporally stable library demonstrates that ARA can be used to
identify sources of fecal pollution in natural waters.

PMCID: PMC161522
PMID: 12788742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2002 Jul-Aug;6(4):81-7.

Hyperhomocysteinemia in menopausal hypertension: an added risk factor and a
dangerous association for organ damage.

Noto R(1), Neri S, Molino G, Meli S, Noto P, Mauceri B, Cilio D, Rapisarda A,
Noto Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Sistemic Diseases, University of Catania, 
School of Medicine, Catania, Italy.

Hyperhomocysteinemia is widely recognised as an emerging risk factor of
endothelial dysfunction and vascular damage. In this study we wanted to verify if
it, when associated to arterial hypertension--traditional risk factor--represents
a higher added risk of organ damage during menopause, which is a condition
connected to a higher incidence of cerebrovascular diseases. A survey of 30
postmenopausal women with similar characteristics (BMI, age, absence of relevant 
pathologies such as diabetes, metabolic disorders and absence of smoking) was
selected (menopause had occurred from 12 to 16 months at the moment of
observation). At the moment of the observation they had not gone through any
continuous pharmacological therapy. They were subdivided into 3 groups:
normotensive; hypertensive (with 2nd degree hypertension: mild to moderate)
without organ damage; hypertensive with organ damage (TIA, ischaemic heart
disease, etc.). The carotid IMT, measured with ultrasound method, was considered 
as an organ damage parameter. 43% of the patients had high levels of homocysteine
(> 15 micromol/l), which are levels considered at risk in other surveys. The
highest levels of homocysteine were recorded in hypertensive women with episodes 
of acute cerebrovascular damage (micromol/l = 24.3 +/- 8.9). In this group, a
positive correlation (r = 0.7) was obtained between homocysteine levels and
carotid IMT. The possible coexistence of hyperhomocysteinemia and arterial
hypertension, even though without particularly high values for both of them, in
menopause may represent a dangerous association responsible for a significant
organ damage and, therefore, for acute cerebrovascular events.

PMID: 12729036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Antivir Ther. 2003 Feb;8(1):51-6.

Using a database of HIV patients undergoing genotypic resistance test after HAART
failure to understand the dynamics of M184V mutation.

Zaccarelli M(1), Perno CF, Forbici F, Cingolani A, Liuzzi G, Bertoli A, Trotta
MP, Bellocchi MC, Di Giambenedetto S, Tozzi V, Gori C, D'Arrigo R, De Longis P,
Noto P, Girardi E, De Luca A, Antinori A.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Infectious Diseases 'Lazzaro Spallanzani', Rome, Italy.
maurozac@inwind.it

OBJECTIVE: M184V/I mutation is associated with high-level phenotypic resistance
to lamivudine (3TC). The aim of the present analysis was to correlate the time of
appearance/disappearance of M184V/I with duration of 3TC treatment.
METHODS: Overall, 211 patients were selected from a database of HIV patients
undergoing genotypic resistance test after virological failure of HAART regimens 
in two major reference centres in Rome between 1999 and 2001. At the time of
genotyping, 120 of them (56.9%) were failing a 3TC-including HAART, while 91
(43.1%) received 3TC only in previous HAART. Duration of the current
3TC-containing regimen and the time from the end of last 3TC treatment to
genotypic resistance test (GRT) were analysed.
RESULTS: Among patients currently undergoing 3TC-containing HAART, the prevalence
of M184V/I was 82.5% (78.3/4.2%, respectively) and significantly associated to
current 3TC use at GRT. Prevalence of M184V/I was associated to longer history of
3TC (from 47.1% in patients treated with 3TC for <6 months, to 84.0% among those 
treated for 7-12 months; 100.0% of patients with >42 months of current 3TC
carried M184V. At logistic regression analysis, the rate of increase of M184V/I
in 3TC-failing patients was statistically significant (OR: 1.066 per month of
current 3TC therapy, 95% CI: 1.020-1.114, P<0.01), suggesting a 6.6% monthly
increase of probability of M184V/I. Among patients who interrupted 3TC, overall
prevalence of M184V/I was 23.1%: proportion of patients carrying the M184V/I
dropped from 83.3% among those who interrupted 3TC from < or = 3 months, to 56.3,
20, 10.5 and 0% for those interrupting 3TC from 6, 12, 24 and > or = 24 months,
respectively. At logistic regression, the rate of disappearance of M184V/I was
also statistically significant (OR: 0.883 per month, 95% CI: 0.804-0.970,
P=0.01), indicating a 11.7% monthly decrease of probability of M184V/I after 3TC 
interruption.
CONCLUSIONS: Dynamics of appearance/disappearance of M184V/I mutation is rapid
after 3TC failure/interruption, suggesting ease of development of such a
mutation, but also suggesting a remarkable growth disadvantage for HIV. From the 
clinical perspective, recycling of drugs whose antiviral activity is affected by 
M184V mutation can be successful after appropriate drug wash-out, also in heavily
pretreated patients.

PMID: 12713064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Neurophysiol. 2003 Aug;90(2):1235-44. Epub 2003 Apr 23.

Effect of visual error size on saccade adaptation in monkey.

Robinson FR(1), Noto CT, Bevans SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, and Regional Primate Research Center,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195-7420, USA.
robinsn@u.washington.edu

Saccades that consistently over- or undershoot their targets gradually become
smaller or larger, respectively. The signal that elicits adaptation of saccade
size is a difference between eye and target positions appearing repeatedly at the
ends of saccades. Here we describe how visual error size affects the size of
saccade adaptation. At the end of each saccade, we imposed a constant-sized error
by moving the target to a specified point relative to eye position. We tested a
variety of error sizes imposed after saccades to target movements of 6, 12, and
18 degrees. We found that the size of the gain change elicited in a particular
experiment depended on both the size of the imposed postsaccade error and on the 
size of the preceding target movement. For example, imposed errors of 4-5 degrees
reduce saccades tracking 6, 12, and 18 degrees target movements by an average of 
18, 35, and 45%, respectively. The most effective errors were those that were
15-45% of the size of the initial target eccentricity. Negative errors, which
reduce saccade size, were more effective in changing saccade gain than were
positive errors, which increased saccade size. For example, for 12 degrees target
movements, negative and positive errors of 2-6 degrees changed saccade gain an
average of 35 and 8%, respectively. This description of the relationship between 
error size and adaptation size improves our ability to adapt saccades in the
laboratory and characterizes the error sizes that will best drive neurons
carrying the adaptation-related visual error signal.

PMID: 12711711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cad Saude Publica. 2003 Jan-Feb;19(1):69-79. Epub 2003 Apr 1.

[Drugs and health in the Brazilian press: an analysis of articles published in
newspapers and magazines].

[Article in Portuguese]

Noto AR(1), Baptista MC, Faria ST, Nappo SA, Galduróz JC, Carlini EA.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Brasileiro de Informa es sobre Drogas Psicotrópicas, Departamento de
Psicobiologia, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo,
São Paulo, SP, 04023-062, Brasil.

This article analyzes information recently published by the Brazilian press on
the use of psychoactive drugs and its implications on health. A sample of 502
newspaper and magazine articles published in 1998 was researched using content
analysis. The drugs most frequently featured in the headlines were tobacco
(18.1%), coca-derived drugs (9.2%), marijuana (9.2%), alcoholic beverages (8.6%),
and anabolic steroids (7.4%). Solvents were featured in only one article,
although they are the most commonly used drug in Brazil, second only to alcohol
and tobacco. These data indicate an imbalance between the journalistic approach
and the epidemiological profile of psychoactive drug consumption in Brazil.
Dependence was the most frequent consequence mentioned in the articles (46%),
followed by violence (9.2%), withdrawal syndrome (8.0%), and AIDS (6.8%). The
focus of the articles varied according to the drug in question. While articles on
marijuana focused on its therapeutic use and legalization, those on
cocaine-related issues discussed both the damage caused by consumption as well as
various interventions (treatment and repression).

PMID: 12700785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Zoolog Sci. 2003 Mar;20(3):353-6.

Dynamics of plasma Ca and calcitonin levels in stonefish (Inimicus japonicus)
administered a high-Ca solution into the stomach.

Kaida N(1), Sasayama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Ishikawa Prefectural Fisheries Research Center, Ushitsu, Noto, Ishikawa
927-0435, Japan.

In stonefish, changes in plasma total Ca and calcitonin levels were examined
after administration of a high-Ca solution into the stomach. Blood was taken
successively at 0, 1, 3, 9, 33, and 81 hr from a fine tube cannulated into the
aortic bulb. Plasma Ca levels increased acutely at 1 hr and attained the peak
after 3-9 hr of the administration. Although plasma calcitonin levels did not
exhibit conspicuous changes for 1-3 hr, they began to rise significantly at 33
hr. The plasma Ca level began to decline significantly at 33 hr, although the
level was still significantly higher than the initial level. At 33 hr, however,
the plasma calcitonin level still continued to increase. At 81 hr, the plasma Ca 
level had returned to the initial level. At that time, the plasma calcitonin
level was also significantly lower than that at 33 hr. These results suggest
that, in stonefish, the ultimobranchial gland has the ability to respond
physiologically to rises in plasma Ca levels, to secrete calcitonin, and to cease
the secretion when the plasma Ca levels return to the initial level.

PMID: 12692395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2003 May 1;23(5):829-35. Epub 2003 Mar 20.

Human plasma platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase binds to all the murine
lipoproteins, conferring protection against oxidative stress.

Noto H(1), Hara M, Karasawa K, Iso-O N, Satoh H, Togo M, Hashimoto Y, Yamada Y,
Kosaka T, Kawamura M, Kimura S, Tsukamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Plasma platelet-activating factor (PAF) acetylhydrolase (AH) is an
enzyme bound with lipoproteins that degrades not only PAF but also PAF-like
oxidized phospholipids that are proposed to promote atherosclerosis. In this
study, we investigated the distribution of PAF-AH protein among lipoprotein
classes by using adenovirus-mediated gene transfer in mice, and we examined its
effects on lipoprotein oxidation and foam cell formation of macrophages.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Adenovirus-mediated overexpression of PAF-AH in mice
resulted in a 76- to 140-fold increase in plasma PAF-AH activity. Contrary to the
previous report, overexpressed human PAF-AH protein was bound to very low density
lipoprotein, intermediate density lipoprotein, low density lipoprotein, and high 
density lipoprotein (HDL). All the lipoproteins with overexpressed human PAF-AH
revealed more resistance against oxidative stress, which was associated with
lower levels in autoantibody against oxidized low density lipoprotein in the
plasma. In addition, HDL with human PAF-AH inhibited foam cell formation and
facilitated cholesterol efflux in macrophages.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that human plasma PAF-AH exerts an
antiatherogenic effect by binding to all the lipoproteins and thereby protecting 
them from oxidation, producing less proatherogenic lipoproteins and preserving
HDL functions.

PMID: 12649088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Chromosoma. 2003 Mar;111(6):359-68. Epub 2002 Nov 14.

Developmentally regulated extrachromosomal circular DNA formation in the mesozoan
Dicyema japonicum.

Noto T(1), Yazaki K, Endoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa
920-1192, Japan. tnoto@sgkit.ge.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

The dicyemid mesozoans are simple multicellular parasites with a long cylindrical
axial cell surrounded by a single outer layer of 20 to 30 ciliated peripheral
somatic cells. Their larval development proceeds within the axial cell. Here we
demonstrate the appearance of extrachromosomal circular DNAs and their fate
during early embryogenesis in Dicyema japonicum. These DNAs are highly
heterogeneous in sequence, suggesting that they consist of unique--not
repetitive--elements. Potential open reading frames were not evident in the
elements, so these DNAs are unlikely to have a protein-encoding function. In situ
hybridization revealed that the circular DNA elements were restricted to the
early embryonic larvae and gradually faded out as larvae approached maturity.
Furthermore Southern blot analysis and polymerase chain reaction analysis using a
high molecular weight DNA as a template provided evidence that the
extrachromosomal DNA circles are originally present in chromosomes. These
observations suggest DNA elimination--or selective replication--of the elements
from chromosomes during early embryogenesis in dicyemid mesozoans.

PMID: 12644951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2002 Oct;12(5):267-74.

Distribution of risk factors, plasma lipids, lipoproteins and dyslipidemias in a 
small Mediterranean island: the Ustica Project.

Barbagallo CM(1), Polizzi F, Severino M, Onorato F, Noto D, Cefalù AB, Rizzo M,
Notarbartolo A, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, University of Palermo,
Palermo, Italy. carlob@unipa.it

BACKGROUND AND AIM: The populations of the Mediterranean area have a low
incidence of cardiovascular disease (CHD). The aims of this paper are: 1) to
present demographic data of the population of Ustica, a small island in the
southern part of the Tyrrhenian sea that has reduced communications with the
mainland and a diet presumably rich in fish; and 2) to evaluate the distribution 
of risk factors, plasma lipids, lipoproteins and dyslipidemias in this
population.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We invited all of the free-living resident population aged
more than 14 years (about 800 individuals) to participate in the study; 576
responded, for a participation rate of about 73%. The distribution of
cardiovascular risk factors, plasma lipids, lipoproteins and dyslipidemias were
evaluated in all of the subjects. More than 60% of the population was out of the 
normal weight range. Total and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels were
respectively 207.4 +/- 46.7 and 141.7 +/- 42.4 mg/dL, and similar in males and
females. Lipoprotein (a) (Lp[a]) levels presented the classical "skewed"
distribution and, among the apolipoprotein(a) isoforms, there was a clear
predominance of intermediate-sized kringle IV repeats. Overall, 43% of the
subjects had a lipid disorder: the prevalence of hypercholesterolemia was 22.8%
(3.2% with severe hypercholesterolemia terolemia > or = 300 mg/dL); low
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels were found in 22.5%; the so-called
lipid triad in 2.1%; and high Lp(a) levels in 6.2%. Large familial clusters were 
found for some lipid disorders.
CONCLUSIONS: A large prevalence of body weight disturbances and high frequency of
dyslipidemias are the main characteristics of this population. Ongoing data and
future longitudinal studies will better clarify the relative influence of each
parameter on CHD risk and total mortality.

PMID: 12616806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Nihon Koshu Eisei Zasshi. 2002 Dec;49(12):1205-16.

[Measuring utilities for various functional outcomes after stroke. Comparison of 
rating scale and time trade-off methods].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto S(1), Yanagi H, Tomura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational Therapy, School of Health Sciences, Niigata
University of Health and Welfare.

OBJECTIVES: To elicit utility of various functional outcomes after stroke for
application in cost-utility analysis for stroke rehabilitation and to analyze the
effects of demographic characteristics such as age, sex, professional status,
marital status, or health status and the relationship between rating scale and
time trade-off methods.
METHODS: The respondents were 460 healthy people, students (n = 169),
rehabilitation staff (n = 134), family caregivers (n = 52) and office workers (n 
= 105). We assessed utility for 5 functional outcomes after stroke according to
the Ranking scale, employing rating scale and time trade-off methods.
RESULTS: The mean utilities for Rankin I-V were 0.89-0.18 using rating scale, and
0.83-0.09 using time trade-off. Correlations between the two were only
0.176-0.412. The effect of professional status was clear, with rehabilitation
staffs and caregivers giving higher utilities than students and office workers
using time trade-off. However, effects of other characteristics were not
apparent.
CONCLUSIONS: People's preferences for stroke outcomes differ with disability
level, and correlation between rating scale and time trade-off utility is weak.
We found that few demographic characteristics had significant influence.

PMID: 12607985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2003 Feb 1;23(2):269-74.

Isoform-dependent cholesterol efflux from macrophages by apolipoprotein E is
modulated by cell surface proteoglycans.

Hara M(1), Matsushima T, Satoh H, Iso-o N, Noto H, Togo M, Kimura S, Hashimoto Y,
Tsukamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Apolipoprotein E (apoE) mediates cellular cholesterol efflux and plays
a crucial role in the inhibition of atherogenesis. We investigated whether there 
is an isoform-specific difference in its function for cholesterol efflux from
cholesterol-loaded RAW264.7 cells, a murine macrophage cell line that lacks
endogenous apoE expression.
METHODS AND RESULTS: When human apoE was expressed in RAW264.7 cells, apoE2
reduced cellular total cholesterol (TC) and esterified cholesterol (EC) levels
significantly, whereas apoE3 and apoE4 had no effect. However, treatment of cells
with 4-methylumbelliferyl-7-beta-D-xyloside (beta-DX) resulted in all 3 isoforms'
reducing cellular TC and EC contents significantly. We also investigated the
effect of exogenously derived apoE on cholesterol efflux by utilizing the medium 
harvested from HeLa cells expressing apoE. ApoE2 and E3 reduced both cellular TC 
and EC contents significantly, whereas apoE4 did not. However, treatment of the
cells with beta-DX resulted in all 3 exogenously derived apoE isoforms' reducing 
TC and EC contents significantly. The binding ability of apoE to heparan sulfate 
proteoglycans examined by heparinase I treatment revealed less binding ability of
apoE2 compared with that of apoE3 or apoE4.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study clarified the differential cellular
cholesterol-modulating effect of apoE isoforms in macrophages, which would be due
to the difference in their binding to proteoglycans.

PMID: 12588770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Eur J Clin Invest. 2003 Feb;33(2):126-33.

Low-density-lipoprotein peak particle size in a Mediterranean population.

Rizzo M(1), Barbagallo CM, Severino M, Polizzi F, Onorato F, Noto D, Cefalù AB,
Pace A, Marino G, Notarbartolo A, Averna RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The predominance of small, dense low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
particles ('LDL phenotype B') has been associated with a three-fold increased
risk of myocardial infarction, but the feasibility of the identification of
small, dense LDL as independent predictors of coronary artery disease risk in
population studies remains questioned. Design We evaluated the LDL peak particle 
size and its relation with other established risk factors for coronary heart
disease in a group of 156 randomized subjects living on the Mediterranean island 
of Ustica (71 males and 85 women, range of age 20-69 years), representing
approximately 30% of the total population.
RESULTS: The prevalence of LDL phenotype B subjects was low (approximately 15% in
both men and women) and there was a clear trend for both genders in reducing the 
LDL peak particle size with age. Moreover, LDL phenotype B subjects had higher
BMI values, prevalence of diabetes and plasma triglyceride (TG) levels and lower 
plasma HDL-C concentrations in comparison with LDL phenotype A individuals; in a 
multivariate analysis, plasma TG levels were the only variable independently
associated with LDL peak particle size.
CONCLUSIONS: In this population, which appears to be somewhat protected by
premature coronary artery disease, a low prevalence of the LDL pattern B was
found in both men and women, and plasma TG could have a key role in regulating
the LDL peak particle size. The follow up, still ongoing, will provide useful
information on the predictive role of LDL peak particle size on cardiovascular
risk, at least in a low-risk population.

PMID: 12588286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Am Chem Soc. 2003 Feb 19;125(7):1684-5.

Activity of Candida rugosa lipase immobilized on gamma-Fe2O3 magnetic
nanoparticles.

Dyal A(1), Loos K, Noto M, Chang SW, Spagnoli C, Shafi KV, Ulman A, Cowman M,
Gross RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Chemistry and Material Science,
Polytechnic University, 6 Metrotech Center, Brooklyn, New York 11201, USA.

We report the stability and enzymatic activity of Candida rugosa Lipase
(E.C.3.1.1.3) immobilized on gamma-Fe2O3 magnetic nanoparticles. The
immobilization strategies were either reacting the enzyme amine group with a
nanoparticle surface acetyl, or amine groups. In the former, the enzyme was
attached through a C=N bond, while in the latter it was connected using
glutaraldehyde. AFM images show an average particle size of 20 +/- 10 nm after
deconvolution. The enzymatic activity of the immobilized lipase was determined by
following the ester cleavage of p-nitrophenol butyrate. The covalently
immobilized enzyme was stabile and reactive over 30 days.

PMID: 12580578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Neurology. 2003 Feb 11;60(3):514-7.

Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease with MM1-type prion protein and plaques.

Ishida C(1), Kakishima A, Okino S, Furukawa Y, Kano M, Oda Y, Nakanishi I,
Makifuchi T, Kitamoto T, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University
Graduate School of Medical Science, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan.
cishida@noto-hospital.jp

Comment in
    Neurology. 2004 Apr 13;62(7):1239; author reply 1239.

The authors report a 75-year-old woman with atypical sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease (CJD) characterized by MM1-type prion protein (PrP) (methionine
homozygosity at codon 129 in the PrP gene and type-1 protease-resistant PrP) and 
PrP plaques. This patient is the first case of sporadic CJD with plaque-forming
MM1-type PrP, suggesting either a shared prion strain with the plaque-forming
subset of dural graft-associated CJD or shared host genetic factors that are
unrelated to the PrP genotype.

PMID: 12578942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2002 Dec 15;31 Suppl 3:S145-8.

Behavioral correlates of adherence to antiretroviral therapy.

Aloisi MS(1), Arici C, Balzano R, Noto P, Piscopo R, Filice G, Menichetti F,
d'Arminio Monforte A, Ippolito G, Girardi E; Italian Cohort Naive Antiretrovirals
Behavioral Epidemiology Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Epidemiologia, Istituto Nazionale per le Malattie Infettive L.
Spallanzani-IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

The objective of this study was to analyze the relationships between adherence to
treatment and sexual and drug-taking behaviors among persons with HIV, who
started combination antiretroviral therapy as their first regimen. The authors
analyzed data from 366 patients enrolled in a multicenter observational cohort
study conducted in infectious disease hospital units in Italy. Adherence
measurement was based on responses to a self-administered questionnaire regarding
following HIV physician advice on taking medications and missed appointments.
Questions on sexual and drug-taking behaviors were also included in the
questionnaire. The median time since starting antiretroviral therapy was 11.8
months; 37.4% of patients were on a two-drug regimen and 62.6% were on a
three-drug regimen. Overall, 68 patients (18.6%) could be classified as
nonadherent. The proportion of patients with viral load < or = 500 copies/mL was 
significantly higher among adherent patients (68%) compared with nonadherent
patients (40.4%; p = .001). In multivariable analysis, age (odds ratio [OR],
0.65; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.42-0.98, per 10-year increment) and current
use of injection (OR, 3.47; 95% CI, 1.40-8.5) or noninjection drugs (OR, 4.23;
95% Cl, 1.85-9.67) were significantly associated with nonadherence. No
significant association was found between adherence and sexual behaviors. The
data do not support the hypothesis that among HIV-infected person on
antiretroviral therapy, poor adherence is associated with high-risk sexual
behaviors that may further spread the infection.

PMID: 12562039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2002 Dec 15;31 Suppl 3:S123-7.

Correlates and predictors of adherence to highly active antiretroviral therapy:
overview of published literature.

Ammassari A(1), Trotta MP, Murri R, Castelli F, Narciso P, Noto P, Vecchiet J,
D'Arminio Monforte A, Wu AW, Antinori A; AdICoNA Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Clinica delle Malattie Infettive, Università Cattolica del S. Cuore, Roma,
Italy. aammassari@libero.it

Knowledge of factors associated with medication adherence could help HIV
clinicians to target persons in need of intervention, design these interventions,
and help researchers to plan studies of adherence. This review summarizes the
results of 20 studies investigating the issue of barriers to optimal highly
active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) adherence. Only a few determinants were
consistently associated with nonadherence. Symptoms and adverse drug effects,
psychologic distress, lack of social or family support, complexity of the HAART
regimen, low patient self-efficacy, and inconvenience of treatment were the
factors most consistently associated with nonadherence. There were inconsistent
findings regarding the relationship of adherence and the following variables:
sociodemographic characteristics, substance abuse, depressive symptoms, quality
of life, CD4+ cell count, knowledge and beliefs about treatment, patients'
satisfaction with health care, and patient-provider relationship. A synthesis of 
findings relating various factors to adherence to HAART is difficult to reach
because of several limitations of the existing body of research. These
limitations concern the measurement of adherence, the assessment of correlates
and predictors of adherence, the study population, and the study design.

PMID: 12562034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2002;9(6):314-20.

Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL) in children: the significance of early
development of hyperapoB lipoproteinemia, obesity and aging.

Kuromori Y(1), Okada T, Iwata F, Hara M, Noto N, Harada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
yk-kuro@mx6.harmonix.ne.jp

It is not easy to make diagnose FCHL in children, since a clear expression of
lipoprotein abnormality is unlikely and standard criteria have not yet been
established. We investigated eight cases of childhood FCHL and their families
with respect to familial history, anthropometric parameters and serum lipoprotein
levels, to explore the characteristics of childhood FCHL. To diagnose childhood
FCHL it is necessary to clarify both the family history and lipid profiles of the
parents. In this study, two prominent features were suggested; that serum TG
level is affected by both obesity and age, and also in particular, that a
significantly elevated level of serum apoB is a predominant feature of FCHL in
childhood. It was found that hyperapoB may be revealed antecedently without other
lipid abnormalities at an early age. Regardless of other lipoprotein abnormality,
it was suggested that hyperapoB might be added to the early diagnostic criteria
for FCHL.

PMID: 12560593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Clin Chim Acta. 2003 Feb;328(1-2):91-7.

Differential apolipoprotein(a) isoform expression in heterozygosity is an
independent contributor to lipoprotein(a) levels variability.

Noto D(1), Pace A, Cefalù AB, Barbagallo CM, Rizzo M, Marino G, Emmanuele G,
Travali S, Notarbartolo A, Averna M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, University of Palermo,
Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND METHODS: Lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] levels represent an independent
risk factor for cardio- and cerebrovascular diseases. Since lipoprotein(a) levels
show a wide variability even in subjects with similar apolipoprotein(a) isoforms,
we investigated the contribution of apolipoprotein(a) heterozygosity to
lipoprotein(a) variance. Lipoprotein(a) levels, apolipoprotein(a) isoforms
identification and expression, and the correlation with other lipo-apolipoprotein
parameters have been investigated in 628 subjects >18 years of age.
RESULTS: In our study, 246 subjects were found heterozygous for apolipoprotein(a)
isoforms. Lipoprotein(a) levels were higher in females. About 40% of the subjects
expressed the larger isoform more intensely than the dominant isoform.
Lipoprotein(a) was correlated with apolipoprotein(a) dominant isoform size,
HDL-cholesterol and smaller apolipoprotein(a) isoform expression rate.
Lipoprotein(a) was independently correlated with the smaller apolipoprotein(a)
isoform, with its expression rate and with LDL-cholesterol. The inclusion of the 
smaller apolipoprotein(a) expression rate in a multiple regression model
explained at least an additional 4% of the lipoprotein(a) variance after
correction for apolipoprotein(a) size.
CONCLUSIONS: The smaller isoforms are not always effectively dominant in
heterozygosis since 40% of the subjects expressed more the larger isoform. The
individual variability of apolipoprotein(a) isoform expression in heterozygosis
could explain part of the lipoprotein(a) levels variability.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 12559603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Clin Monit Comput. 2002 Jul;17(5):271-7.

Bispectral Index in ICU: correlation with Ramsay Score on assessment of sedation 
level.

Mondello E(1), Siliotti R, Noto G, Cuzzocrea E, Scollo G, Trimarchi G, Venuti FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Psychiatric and Anaesthesiological Sciences,
Section of Anaesthesiological Sciences, University of Messina, Italy.
emondello@unime.it

OBJECTIVE: The assessment of sedation level in critically ill patient remains a
challenge for the intensivists in order to avoid over- or under-sedation
phenomena. Scoring systems commonly used still show some limitation; the
introduction of Bispectral Index (an EEG parameter) could bring potential
advantages in monitoring sedation. According to the reports, Bispectral Index
correlates with levels of sedation on the Ramsay Scale. We report our personal
experience in this topic.
METHODS: Twenty patients, diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), were involved in the study. For an optimal adaptation to respiratory
prothesis, they were sedated (with Propofol by continuous infusion at an initial 
dose of 2 mg/kg/h, which could be modulated with steps of 0.5 mg/kg/h), in order 
to maintain a Ramsay score of 4-5. BIS value was continuously recorded, and
manually calculated on a mean average of a minute during the measuring of Ramsay 
score (T0) and every 30' for 24 hours on par with Ramsay score. EEG, SpO2, non
invasive arterial pressure, ventilatory module, ETCO2, FIO2 were also recorded.
For the statistic analysis, Friedman test and Spearman coefficient were utilized.
Values of p < 0.05 were considered significant.
RESULTS: 980 observations were carried out. The variation range of Ramsay Score
was between 2 and 6. BIS range varied from 34 to 98. Statistic analysis of the
data obtained pointed out some significative correlations, particularly between
Ramsay Score and BIS (p < 0.01), and between BIS and dosage of Propofol (p <
0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the study are consistent with those found in the
literature on this topic of study. In fact, this study demonstrates the utility
of BIS to track levels of consciousness in ICU patients while still maintaining
the use of the score systems to care for ICU patients.

PMID: 12546259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Atherosclerosis. 2003 Feb;166(2):395-400.

Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia in a Sicilian kindred harboring the
432insA mutation of the ARH gene.

Barbagallo CM(1), Emmanuele G, Cefalù AB, Fiore B, Noto D, Mazzarino MC, Pace A, 
Brogna A, Rizzo M, Corsini A, Notarbartolo A, Travali S, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Istituto di Medicina Interna e Geriatria,
Policlinico Paolo Giaccone, University of Palermo, Via del Vespro 141, 90127
Palermo, Italy.

We describe a Sicilian family presenting a recessive form of hypercholesterolemia
harboring a mutation of the autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia (ARH) gene. 
In two of the three sibs, a 26-year-old male and a 22-year-old female, a severe
hypercholesterolemia was diagnosed with very high levels of plasma cholesterol
(15.9 and 12.2 mmol/l, respectively); tendon xanthomatas and xanthelasms were
present and in the male proband was documented a diffuse coronary atherosclerotic
disease with a rapid and fatal progression. Both the parents had normal or
slightly increased levels of plasma cholesterol. All causes of secondary
hypercholesterolemia were ruled out as well as an involvement of the LDL receptor
or apoB genes. Beta-Sitosterol plasma levels were in the normal range. Cultured
fibroblasts from skin biopsy from parents and the two probands displayed a normal
ability to bind and degrade 125I-LDL. Direct sequencing of ARH gene demonstrated 
the presence of a 432insA mutation in homozygosis in the two probands; parents
were heterozygotes for the same mutation. This mutation is the first report of a 
mutation of the ARH gene responsible for recessive forms of hypercholesterolemia 
in Sicily.

PMID: 12535754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Gen Appl Microbiol. 1997 Dec;43(6):373-379.

Phylogenetic relationships of activated sludge isolates of ammonia oxidizers with
different sensitivities to ammonium sulfate.

Suwa Y(1), Sumino T, Noto K.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Resources and Environment, AIST, MITI, Tsukuba
305-8569, Japan.

PMID: 12501310  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


53. J Am Coll Nutr. 2002 Dec;21(6):523-9.

Nutritional characteristics of a rural Southern Italy population: the Ventimiglia
di Sicilia Project.

Barbagallo CM(1), Cavera G, Sapienza M, Noto D, Cefalù AB, Polizzi F, Onorato F, 
Rini G, Di Fede G, Pagano M, Montalto G, Rizzo M, Descovich G, Notarbartolo A,
Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, University of Palermo, Italy. 
carlob@unipa.it

OBJECTIVE: Knowledge of alimentary habits among populations permits a better
definition of appropriate public health interventions. We designed the
epidemiological project "Ventimiglia di Sicilia" to characterize the risk profile
in a rural village with low total cholesterol levels and low early cardiovascular
mortality but with a large prevalence of overweight and obesity, which previously
have been significantly associated with total mortality.
METHODS: 488 individuals of age 20 to 69 years were included in the dietary
survey conducted by a seven-day food record.
RESULTS: Alimentary habits were characterized by high consumption of total and
complex carbohydrates (respectively 52.5 +/- 7.6% and 46.6 +/- 8.2% of daily
energy) and by a low cholesterol intake (92.5 +/- 35.0 mg/1000 kcal/day). Fat
intake was 34.7 +/- 7.7% of daily energy due to a higher consumption of
monounsaturated fats in respect to saturated fats (respectively 20.5 +/- 5.1% and
10.2 +/- 2.9% of daily energy). In particular, in this population there was a
large consumption of bread, pasta, fresh vegetables, olive oil and fruits. We
also observed an excess of total calories (about 2900 kcal/day in men and 2100
kcal/day in women) not balanced by a high degree of physical activity levels.
Furthermore we found a significant higher total and saturated fat consumption in 
the youngest individuals and in people with higher educational levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Dietary habits of Ventimiglia di Sicilia still follow the
nutritional characteristics typical of the Mediterranean diet. The high total
calorie intake indicates a quantitative more than qualitative problem, which may 
account the large prevalence of overweight and obesity and may represent a public
health issue that needs to be corrected in such a rural population.

PMID: 12480797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Neurosci Lett. 2002 Dec 25;335(2):147-9.

Lack of association between angiotensin converting enzyme polymorphism and
sporadic Alzheimer's disease.

Monastero R(1), Caldarella R, Mannino M, Cefalù AB, Lopez G, Noto D, Camarda C,
Camarda LK, Notarbartolo A, Averna MR, Camarda R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation, Centre for Aging Brain and
Dementia, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

Epidemiological and pathogenetic evidences suggest a strong association between
vascular risk factors and sporadic Alzheimer's disease (sAD). In agreement with
the vascular hypothesis of AD, the role of various candidate genes for
atherosclerosis has been investigated, leading to conflicting results. In order
to clarify the significance of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) gene insertion
(I)/deletion (D) polymorphism in a group of patients with sAD, we conducted a
case-control study including 149 cases and 149 age and sex matched controls. All 
subjects were genotyped for ACE and Apolipoprotein E (APOE). There were no
significant differences in ACE genotype or allele frequencies between cases and
controls, even after stratification for APOE4 carrier status. Our data suggest
that the ACE I/D polymorphism is not associated to genetic susceptibility in sAD 
patients.

PMID: 12459519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Eur J Pharmacol. 2002 Dec 5;456(1-3):91-8.

Enzymological and pharmacological profile of T-0156, a potent and selective
phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor.

Mochida H(1), Takagi M, Inoue H, Noto T, Yano K, Fujishige K, Sasaki T, Yuasa K, 
Kotera J, Omori K, Kikkawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Research Laboratory, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., 2-2-50, Kawagishi,
Toda, Saitama, Japan. mochida@tanabe.co.jp

The enzymological and pharmacological properties of
2-(2-Methylpyridin-4-yl)methyl-4-(3,4,5-trimethoxyphenyl)-8-(pyrimidin-2-yl)metho
xy-1,2-dihydro-1-oxo-2,7-naphthyridine-3-carboxylic acid methyl ester
hydrochloride (T-0156), a new phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor, were studied in
vitro and in vivo. The inhibitory effects of T-0156 on six phosphodiesterase
isozymes isolated from canine tissues were investigated. T-0156 specifically
inhibited the hydrolysis of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) by
phosphodiesterase type 5, at low concentration (IC(50)=0.23 nM), in a competitive
manner. T-0156 also inhibited phosphodiesterase type 6 with IC(50) value of 56
nM, which was 240-fold higher than that for inhibition of phosphodiesterase type 
5. T-0156 had low potencies against phosphodiesterase types 1, 2, 3, and 4
(IC(50)>10 microM). In the isolated rabbit corpus cavernosum, T-0156 at 10 and
100 nM increased cGMP levels (100 nM T-0156-treated: 6.0+/-1.5 pmol/mg protein,
vehicle-treated: 1.1+/-0.4 pmol/mg protein, P<0.05), causing relaxation of the
tissue. T-0156 at 1 to 100 nM potentiated the electrical field
stimulation-induced relaxation in the isolated rabbit corpus cavernosum in a
concentration-dependent manner (100 nM T-0156-treated: 76.9+/-19.8%,
vehicle-treated: 12.3+/-10.1%, P<0.05). Intraduodenal administration of T-0156 at
100 to 1000 microg/kg potentiated the pelvic nerve stimulation-induced tumescence
in anesthetized dogs (1000 microg/kg T-0156-treated: 279.0+/-38.4%,
vehicle-treated: 9.8+/-4.5%, P<0.05). These results suggested that T-0156
enhanced the nitric oxide (NO)/cGMP pathway, probably through blockade of
phosphodiesterase type 5 in vitro and in vivo experimental conditions. The
present study clearly showed that T-0156 is a potent and highly selective
phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor, which is a useful tool for pharmacological
studies in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 12450574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Brain Res. 2002 Nov 29;956(2):374-9.

Non-visual information does not drive saccade gain adaptation in monkeys.

Seeberger T(1), Noto C, Robinson F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, and Regional Primate Research Center,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-7420, USA.

Recent experiments have characterized the dependence of saccade gain adaptation
on the characteristics of the visual error following inaccurate saccades. We
currently know little about the potential role of non-visual information in
driving saccade adaptation. The brain could use non-visual signals from the
saccade burst generator or extraocular muscle (EOM) proprioceptors to determine
if the eye had rotated the appropriate distance to aim at a target. Both
saccade-related burst signals and EOM proprioceptive information reach the
posterior vermis of the cerebellum, a brain area strongly implicated in saccade
adaptation. In the experiment described here we determined if non-visual
information has a significant affect on saccade adaptation. We made monkey
saccades hypometric with intra-saccade target movements and then tested the
recovery of saccade gain toward normal under three conditions: (1) when the
target was continuously visible, (2) when the target extinguished for 1000 ms
beginning during the saccade, and (3) when the monkey remained in the dark. In
the first condition both visual and non-visual indications of hypometria were
available. In the second, only non-visual information was available. In the
third, the monkey made no visually guided saccades and very few spontaneous
saccades in the dark so neither visual nor non-visual information could drive
adaptation. We found that, though it was hypometric, saccade size during recovery
changed the same small amount when monkeys made saccades to extinguishing targets
or remained in the dark. Saccade size changed significantly (approximately 5x)
more during recovery when the monkey tracked continuously visible targets. Thus
non-visual information has no influence on adaptation and visual post-saccade
error is the only known driver of saccade adaptation.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 12445708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Ann Hematol. 2002 Aug;81(8):483-4.

Mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of CD11b on CD34-positive (CD34+) cells derived
from granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) mobilized peripheral blood
(PB) correlate conversely with the total amount of harvested CD34+ cells.

Masauzi N, Tanaka J, Miyasaka D, Miyoshi H, Noto S, Matsushima T, Kasai M,
Hashino S, Asaka M, Imamura M, Kobayashi M.

PMID: 12430562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Biol Pharm Bull. 2002 Nov;25(11):1422-6.

Acute and chronic effects of T-1032, a novel selective phosphodiesterase type 5
inhibitor, on monocrotaline-induced pulmonary hypertension in rats.

Inoue H(1), Yano K, Noto T, Takagi M, Ikeo T, Kikkawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Research Laboratory, Tanabe Seiyaku Co, Ltd, Saitama, Japan.
inoue-h@tanabe.co.jp

We examined the hemodynamic property of T-1032 (methyl
2-(4-aminophenyl)-1,2-dihydro-1-oxo-7-(2-pyridylmethoxy)-4-(3,4,5-trimethoxy-phen
yl)-3-isoquinoline carboxylate sulfate), a novel selective phosphodiesterase type
5 (PDE5) inhibitor, and evaluated the chronic effect of T-1032 on cardiac
remodeling and its related death in monocrotaline (MCT)-induced pulmonary
hypertensive rats. T-1032 (1, 10, 100 micro g/kg, i.v.) significantly reduced
mean arterial pressure (MAP) and right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP)
without a change in heart rate. The change in RVSP was more potent than that in
MAP with 1 micro g/kg T-1032 treatment (RVSP: -8.2+/-1.2%, mean arterial
pressure: -5.7+/-1.2%), and reductions in RVSP and MAP reached a peak at doses of
1 and 10 micro g/kg, respectively. In contrast, nitroglycerin (0.1, 1, 10 micro
g/kg, i.v.) and beraprost (0.1, 1 micro g/kg, i.v.) did not cause a selective
reduction in RVSP at any dose. When T-1032 (300 ppm in diet) was chronically
administered, it delayed the death, and significantly suppressed right
ventricular remodeling (T-1032-treated: 0.318+/-0.021 g, control: 0.401+/-0.013
g, p<0.05). Our present results suggest that T-1032 selectively reduces RVSP, and
resulting in the suppression of right ventricular remodeling with a delay of the 
death in MCT-induced pulmonary hypertensive rats.

PMID: 12419952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Nucl Med Commun. 2002 Nov;23(11):1115-21.

A new method for measuring dynamic change of tracer distribution using dynamic
single photon emission tomography with a slip-ring rotational gamma camera.

Miyazaki Y(1), Hashimoto M, Kinuya S, Murata Y, Inoue H, Shiozaki J, Takimoto M, 
Yoshioka K, Nakajima K, Taki J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Noto General Hospital, Nanao, Japan.
ri@noto-hospital.nanao.ishikawa.jp

The clinical applicability of dynamic single photon emission tomograpy (SPET)
using a dual-head gamma camera equipped with a slip-ring rotational mechanism,
referred to as serial SPET, was examined in the present investigation. Serial
SPET enables the production of tomographic images for any arbitrary time frame
from an arbitrary range of data to 360 degrees. In a pre-clinical evaluation, a
correlation between radioactivity concentration and serial SPET counts was
evaluated in a phantom with continuous changes in 99mTc concentration. A
differential value was obtained from each pair of SPET images; moreover, moving
average approximation processing was investigated with respect to the elimination
of noise in the data. In 11 and one patient presenting with cerebrovascular
disease and meningioma, respectively, changes in SPET counts were evaluated when 
99mTc ethyl cysteinate dimer (99mTc-ECD) was continuously administered at a
constant rate in the resting state. Furthermore, in six of 11 subjects with
cerebrovascular disease, changes occurring in SPET counts were examined by using 
acetazolamide loading while continuously administering 99mTc-ECD at a constant
rate. Consequently, serial SPET enabled the evaluation of changes in
radioactivity concentration over time in both the phantom and preliminary
clinical studies. Data analysis by differential processing utilizing moving
average approximation processing enabled the detection of minor changes in
radioactivity concentration. An increase of 15.1+/-5.4% was observed in SPET
counts of the unaffected cerebral hemisphere with acetazolamide loading. The
response of the affected hemisphere was less prominent. These findings suggest
that serial SPET would be an effective technique for the pharmacokinetic analysis
of radiopharmaceuticals.

PMID: 12411841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Recenti Prog Med. 2002 Oct;93(10):538-43.

[Measurement of carotid intima-media thickness and of pressure variability in
arterial hypertension in menopause].

[Article in Italian]

Rapisarda A(1), Meli S, Mirabella C, Leanza A, Cavaliere G, Noto P, Sciacchitano 
G, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Patologie Sistemiche, Università, Catania.

Forty women, with hypertension developed during menopause, were divided into two 
groups, depending on whether from the time of its beginning there were
occurrences of clinic episodes expressing a more or less acute "organ damage" or 
not. In all patients a 24 hrs ambulatory blood pressure monitoring and a carotid 
ultrasound were carried out to evaluate the carotid intima-media thickness (IMT).
The IMT resulted significantly superior in those patients presenting a vascular
episode and as much significantly correlated to the pressure values, especially
systolic; in particular, in "non dippers" patients there is evidence of
correlations between percentages of "at risk" systolic pressure peaks, prevalence
of plaques in carotidal vessels and higher IMT compared to those patients with
night-time blood pressure decrease. The authors think that the presence of blood 
pressure values which are persistently, or nearly, high in 24 hrs, especially
with wide variations, favours the development of plaques and, in any case, of a
higher IMT, all "at risk" elements for acute events. The IMT carotid represents a
further easily measurable index with non-invasive method, which can supply a
useful evidence of structural alterations in menopause, especially when it is
associated with hypertension, and also it represents a predictive evolutive
marker for acute cerebro-cardiovascular lesions.

PMID: 12405013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2002 Oct;54(10):1357-63.

Effect of oxyethylene moiety in polyoxyethylene sorbitan esters on the
pharmacokinetics of menatetrenone incorporated in O/W lipid emulsions prepared
with polyoxyethylene sorbitan esters and soybean oil in rats.

Ueda K(1), Fujimoto M, Noto H, Kawaguchi Y, Sakaeda T, Iwakawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Kobe Pharmaceutical University, 4-19-1
Motoyamakita-machi, Higashinada-ku, Kobe 658-8558, Japan.

Oil-in-water (O/W) lipid emulsions are suitable drug carriers for lipophilic
drugs; however, the effects of numbers or chains of oxyethylene units within a
surfactant molecule such as polyoxyethylene sorbitan esters (PSs) on the
biological fate of these lipid emulsions have not yet been clarified. In this
study, a series of PSs and soybean oil (SO) were utilized to prepare
menatetrenone-incorporated lipid emulsions (SO/PSs), and the biological fate of
menatetrenone administered as SO/PSs was studied at a clinical injection volume
(0.1 mL kg(-1)) in rats. The plasma concentration and organ uptake of
menatetrenone administered as SO/20OE-PSs (PSs with 20 oxyethylene units) was
similar to that of SO/egg-yolk phosphatides (SO/EYP). The plasma concentration of
menatetrenone was extensively lower for SO/6OE-PSs (PSs with 6 oxyethylene units)
and SO/20OE-3FA-PSs (PSs with 20 oxyethylene units and 3 fatty acid chains) than 
that for SO/EYP, and menatetrenone uptake by the liver and spleen was higher for 
SO/6OE-PSs and SO/20OE-3FA-PSs, respectively, than those for SO/EYP. Furthermore,
menatetrenone uptake by the lungs was also increased for SO/6OE-PS and
SO/20OE-3FA-PS with double bonds in the fatty acid moieties of the PSs. These
findings suggested that shortening the oxyethylene units or decreasing the
oxyethylene chain numbers of emulsifiers resulted in a rapid clearance of the
lipid emulsions from the circulation by extensive uptake via the liver, spleen or
lungs.

PMID: 12396297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Pineal Res. 2002 Nov;33(4):253-8.

Melatonin suppresses osteoclastic and osteoblastic activities in the scales of
goldfish.

Suzuki N(1), Hattori A.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Institute of Nature and Environmental Technology,
Kanazawa University, Uchiura, Ishikawa 927-0553, Japan.
nobuo@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

The effects of melatonin on osteoclastic and osteoblastic cells were examined
using a culture system of the goldfish scale. Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase
(TRACP) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) were used as markers of osteoclastic and
osteoblastic cells, respectively. In Earle's minimum essential medium containing 
melatonin (10(-9) to 10(-5) m), activities of both enzymes in scales were
significantly suppressed at 6 hr after incubation (TRACP: 10(-8), 10(-6), 10(-5) 
m; ALP: 10(-7) to 10(-5) m), but at 18 hr only ALP activity was significantly
lowered (10(-8), 10(-7) m). Estradiol-17beta (E(2)) enhanced both activities,
which were significantly inhibited and brought down to the level of the controls 
when co-incubated with E(2) and melatonin (TRACP at 6 hr: 10(-9) to 10(-5) m; ALP
at 6 hr: 10(-7) m; ALP at 18 hr: 10(-8) m). Moreover, using reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction, the mRNA expression of the estrogen receptor (ER) and 
insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1, which are related to osteoblastic growth and 
differentiation, was decreased in the melatonin-treated scales. These results
suggest that melatonin acts directly on the scale osteoclastic and osteoblastic
cells where it suppresses the ALP activity via down-regulation of ER and IGF-1
mRNAs expression. This is the first report on the function of melatonin in
osteoclasts and on the suppressive effect of melatonin in osteoblasts among
vertebrates.

PMID: 12390509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Zoolog Sci. 2002 Sep;19(9):1039-43.

Direct raises in blood Ca levels by infusing a high-Ca solution into the blood
stream accelerate the secretion of calcitonin from the ultimobranchial gland in
eels.

Sasayama Y(1), Takei Y, Hasegawa S, Suzuki D.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Faculty of Science, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa,
Japan. sasayama@suzu2.suzu.or.jp

In eels, a CaCl(2) solution was infused into the pneumatic duct vein. Plasma Ca
levels were significantly increased during 3 hr and were followed by significant 
raises in plasma calcitonin levels. These results strongly suggest that, in eels,
direct raises in blood Ca levels by infusion of a high-Ca solution via blood
vessels can accelerate the secretion of calcitonin from the ultimobranchial
gland.

PMID: 12362058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Clin Nucl Med. 2002 Oct;27(10):733-4.

Uptake of F-18 FDG by a hiatal hernia.

Ahn SH(1), Scheiner JD, Noto RB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nuclear Medicine, Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Brown Medical 
School, 593 Eddy Street, Providence, RI 02903, USA. sahn@lifespan.org

PMID: 12352120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Dermatol. 2002 Aug;29(8):512-5.

A case of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Rendu-Osler-Weber's disease)
with dystrophic calcinosis cutis and retinal lesions.

Takahama H(1), Noto S, Ito M, Nishimoto H, Tadokoro M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Sagamihara-kyodo Hospital, Sagamihara-shi, Japan.

A 65-year-old Japanese female developed a nodule on the distal
interphalangealjoint of her right thumb. She also had multiple telangiectasias on
her face, oral mucosa, tongue, nasal mucosa and upper extremities. A lip biopsy
showed irregularly dilated capillaries and venules lined by flat endothelial
cells. The nodule in the right thumb was resected. Histopathology revealed
calcium deposits in the dermis. This case was diagnosed as dystrophic calcinosis 
cutis within hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Ophthalmologic examination
showed bilateral retinal vascular lesions with dilated and tortuous retinal
venules.

PMID: 12227486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Clin Apher. 2002;17(2):78-83.

Therapeutic plasma exchange in recurrent focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
following transplantation.

Shariatmadar S(1), Noto TA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Miami/Jackson Memorial Medical Center, Florida 33136, USA.

Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) recurs in 30% of renal allograft
transplants with graft loss in half of the cases. A humoral factor may be
implicated. We report on the use of therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) in 11
patients with recurrent FSGS post transplantation. Medical records from 1989-2000
were reviewed for 11 adults transplanted for biopsy proven FSGS. Ten patients
developed proteinuria (x: 6.1 g; range: 3-40 g/24 h) within 2 months of
transplantation. In 1 patient, proteinuria (4 g) occurred 2 years post
transplantation. Biopsy in six patients revealed early recurrent FSGS, while in
five, suspected recurrence was based on clinical findings. Each patient received 
5-11 TPEs (x: 6) with the COBE Spectra, daily or on alternate days with 2.5-3.5 L
5% albumin as the replacement fluid. In four, FFP was included because of
coagulopathy. All received immunosuppression (IS) during and after TPE. A
persistent drop in 24 h urine protein (U.P.) was observed in 10/11 patients.
Seven had >70% drop in 24 h U.P. following the course of TPE, while three had a
reduction of 45-50%. No change occurred in 1 patient. Follow-up (9 months-5
years) of seven patients has shown a persistent U.P. of <1 g with successful
allograft survival. In these patients, TPE appeared effective in early recurrent 
FSGS. The decrease in U.P. may result from combined TPE and IS. Although the
disease is designated in category III by the ASFA, TPE should be considered early
when FSGS recurrence is established.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12210710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2001 Sep-Dec;5(5-6):167-72.

Dangerous thrombophilic states and internal pathologies: 3 cases of thrombosis of
the abdominal veins.

Cavaliere G(1), Leanza A, Mirabella C, Rapisarda A, Meli S, Noto P, Zingali C,
Pepi F, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Patologie Sistemiche, Università degli
Studi di Catania, Italy.

Thrombosis of the abdominal veins is a rare clinical condition which can be
assimilated with the more frequent localization of deep venous thrombosis of the 
lower limbs. In the last few years great attention has been paid to possible risk
factors for thrombosis of the abdominal veins. Two risk factors that have been
identified are the presence of internal diseases and congenital and/or acquired
abnormalities of haemostasis. The authors describe 3 clinical cases (splenic and 
portal thrombosis due to congenital thrombophilia, Budd-Chiari syndrome, portal
cavernoma consequent to ovarian neoplasia) with different etiopathogenesis to
show how this apparently rare condition is today more frequently encountered and 
easier to recognize. In the presence of thrombosis of major venous structures the
search and the identification of intrinsic internal risk factors and of
congenital and acquired thrombophilic disorders remains of great importance.
Screening for thrombophilia includes blood C and S proteins, AT III,
homocysteine, Leiden mutation of the factor V gene, G20210A mutation of the
prothrombin gene, antiphospholipid antibodies. The presence of one or more of
these risk factors allows the identification of the cases of portal thrombosis
(EHPVO) responsible for about 10% of all the cases of portal hypertension,
without cirrhosis or other hepatic lesions. The primary diagnostic procedure
however remains color-Doppler ultrasonography which represents the most simple
and the cheapest diagnostic investigation for the study of the portal and
suprahepatic vein system, but it's strictly operator dependent.

PMID: 12201667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Environ Monit. 2002 Aug;4(4):533-40.

Evolution of water chemistry in natural acidic environments in Yangmingshan,
Taiwan.

Ezoe Y(1), Lin CH, Noto M, Watanabe Y, Yoshimura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Physics of Condensed Matter, Graduate School of
Sciences, Kyushu University, Ropponmatsu, Fukuoka 810-8560, Japan.
ezoe.yuka@nies.go.jp

In Yangmingshan National Park, located in the northern part of the Taiwan Island,
there is a very rare area where fish (Channa asiatica) live in spite of acid
environments. The origin of the acid in local acid ponds and rivers and the
evolution of the water chemistry are discussed on the basis of sulfur stable
isotope ratios and chemical equilibria. One of the sources of the acid is
sulfuric acid, which is derived from the oxidation of hydrogen sulfide in
volcanic gas gushing out from fumaroles around the area and from acid deposition 
supplied from Taipei City. It is also derived from the oxidation of pyrite: the
sulfur stable isotope ratios of delta 34S of +1@1000 to +4@1000 (relative to CDT)
of sulfate in acid pond waters (pH 3-4) could be related to those of hydrogen
sulfide in volcanic gas, pyrite in local pond sediments and soils, and sulfate in
rain water. One acid source is sulfuric and hydrochloric acids arising in springs
from geothermal activity: the delta 34S values were characterised by +13@1000 to 
+17@1000 sulfate-S, which was provided by a disproportionation reaction of sulfur
dioxide in the depths. Another acid source could be the oxidation of iron(II).
Under acidic conditions, the water-rock reaction gives rise to high
concentrations of aluminium and iron. While flowing down surface streams,
iron(II) is oxidised to iron(III) and then hydrolysed to cause further
acidification under oxic conditions. The concentrations of iron and aluminium are
controlled by redox and dissolution equilibria.

PMID: 12195996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Dermatol. 2002 Jun;29(6):389-90.

A case of erythema type drug eruption due to domperidone.

Takahama H, Noto S.

PMID: 12126081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Clin Microbiol. 2002 Jul;40(7):2612-5.

Seroprevalence of antibodies that react with Anaplasma phagocytophila, the agent 
of human granulocytic ehrlichiosis, in different populations in Westchester
County, New York.

Aguero-Rosenfeld ME(1), Donnarumma L, Zentmaier L, Jacob J, Frey M, Noto R,
Carbonaro CA, Wormser GP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York Medical
College and Westchester Medical Center, Valhalla, New York 10595, USA.
m_aguero-rosenfeld@nymc.edu

We determined the frequencies of antibodies to Anaplasma phagocytophila, the
agent of human granulocytic ehrlichiosis (HGE), in different groups of adults and
children from Westchester County, New York. The groups included 159 adult blood
donors and 215 children who were seronegative for Borrelia burgdorferi
antibodies, 118 adult patients and 57 children who were seropositive for B.
burgdorferi antibodies, and 42 adult patients with culture-confirmed erythema
migrans. Eighteen (11.3%) of the blood donors and 11 (5.1%) of the B.
burgdorferi-seronegative children were found to have A. phagocytophila antibodies
by indirect immunofluorescent-antibody assay (IFA). Nine of 42 (21.4%) patients
with culture-confirmed erythema migrans tested at the baseline visit, 42 of 118
(35.6%) adults, and 3 of 57 (5.3%) children whose sera were reactive for B.
burgdorferi antibodies also tested positive for A. phagocytophila antibodies. The
geometric mean titer ranged from 219 to 315 for all groups, and the differences
in titers among the groups were not statistically significant. Only one-third of 
the healthy blood donors reactive by IFA were confirmed to be positive by
immunoblotting. We conclude that a significant proportion of adults and children 
without clinical evidence of HGE will test positive for A. phagocytophila
antibodies when the conventional cutoff titer of 80 is used in the IFA. This
information must be considered in interpretation of test results.

PMCID: PMC120546
PMID: 12089287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Eur J Epidemiol. 2001;17(8):707-13.

ApoE polymorphism in a small Mediterranean island: relationships with plasma
lipids, lipoproteins and LDL particle size.

Barbagallo CM(1), Polizzi F, Severino M, Rizzo M, Vivona N, Onorato F, Caldarella
R, Cefalù AB, Noto D, Notarbartolo A, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, University of Palermo, Italy. 
carlob@unipa.it

Polymorphisms of apoE gene are able to modulate lipoprotein metabolism at
different steps and to influence LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C) levels and also other
lipoproteins features. Population studies documented large differences in the
frequency of apoE alleles which could be even related to the prevalence of
cardiovascular disease. In this study we evaluated the apoE genotypes and allele 
frequency in 576 subjects living in a small island in the Tyrrhenian Sea and the 
relative contribution of apoE polymorphism on plasma lipid and lipoprotein
profile, including LDL particle size. We found a cumulative frequency of 0.073,
0.866 and 0.061 for epsilon2, epsilon3 and epsilon4 alleles respectively.
Moreover epsilon3 subjects had only triglyceride levels significantly lower and
LDL-C and lipoprotein (a) (Lp(a)) levels higher than epsilon2 carriers.
LDL-particle size was significant smaller in epsilon2 subjects than both epsilon3
and epsilon4 carriers, but the difference disappeared when data were adjusted for
triglycerides. In conclusion we have provided further evidence of a low
prevalence of epsilon4 allele in a Mediterranean population which may represent a
genetic protective factor of these populations. Environmental factors, such as
diet, occurring in this area may have attenuated the influence of this gene on
plasma lipoproteins.

PMID: 12086087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Dev Ophthalmol. 2002;35:60-9.

High prevalence of nuclear cataract in the population of tropical and subtropical
areas.

Sasaki H(1), Jonasson F, Shui YB, Kojima M, Ono M, Katoh N, Cheng HM, Takahashi
N, Sasaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Kanazawa Medical University, Uchinada.
sasakimy@aioros.ocn.ne.jp

The authors have conducted cataract epidemiological studies in four climatically 
and racially different places and compared the data. The survey places were Noto 
and Amami in Japan, Reykjavik in Iceland, and Singapore. The evaluation and
grading of lens opacities were done using graphic analysis of Scheimpflug and
retro-illumination images. The prevalence of nuclear opacity was extremely high
in the Singapore group, followed by Amami. The main type of lens opacity was
nuclear in the Singapore group and cortical in the Noto and Icelandic groups. The
characteristic lens opacity in Amami was in between the above two groups. No
significant difference was seen in the prevalence of nuclear opacity between
males and females in any of the groups. Although the common factors of the living
conditions in the subjects with a high prevalence of nuclear opacity appear to be
high UV exposure and high ambient temperature, future investigations should be
made to disclose the possible cause.

PMID: 12061279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2001 Dec;11(6):394-400.

Effectiveness of screening for known mutations in Sicilian patients with
"probable" familial hypercholesterolemia.

Cefalù AB(1), Emmanuele G, Marino G, Fiore B, Caldarella R, Vivona N, Noto D,
Barbagallo CM, Costa S, Gueli MC, Bertolini S, Notarbartolo A, Travali S, Averna 
MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: More than 750 mutations in the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) 
receptor gene are currently known to cause familial hypercholesterolemia (FH),
but the array of mutations varies considerably in different populations. The
definition of essentially all the LDL receptor gene mutations in a population is 
therefore a prerequisite for the implementation of nation-wide genetic testing
for FH.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In this study, a screening strategy based on PCR-enzymatic
digestion and PCR-allele specific hybridisation procedures was used to evaluate
the frequency distributions of 11 known mutations in a cohort of 214 unrelated
subjects meeting the diagnostic criteria of "probable" FH. We identified 20
mutation carriers (9.3%). One mutation (FH Palermo-1) occurred with a relatively 
high frequency, accounting for 7% of the entire study cohort. We also report the 
first observation of the receptor-negative mutation V408M (Afrikaner-2) in Italy.
CONCLUSIONS: Our screening approach is not effective and, at least in our area,
it is not a suitable alternative to the more expensive and time-consuming
sequencing approach. However, our data suggest that it is possible to identify
the molecular defect in about 10% of Sicilian patients with a clinical diagnosis 
of "probable FH" using a rapid laboratory diagnostic mutation panel. Four
mutations were responsible for all of the diagnosed cases, and it could be
reasonable to use this 4-mutation panel as a preliminary step before adopting a
more complex laboratory approach.

PMID: 12055704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Eur J Pharmacol. 2002 May 17;443(1-3):179-84.

T-1032, a novel phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor, increases the survival of
cardiomyopathic hamsters.

Inoue H(1), Yano K, Noto T, Takagi M, Ikeo T, Kikkawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Research Laboratory, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., 2-2-50, Kawagishi,
Toda, Saitama 335-8505, Japan. inoue-h@tanabe.co.jp

To evaluate the influence of T-1032
(methyl2-(4-aminophenyl)-1,2-dihydro-1-oxo-7-(2-pyridylmethoxy)-4-(3,4,5-trimetho
xyphenyl)-3-isoquinoline carboxylate sulfate), a potent and relatively selective 
phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitor, on chronic heart failure, we examined the acute
hemodynamic profile of T-1032 and its chronic effect on the survival of Bio 14.6 
cardiomyopathic hamsters. In the acute study, T-1032 (1, 10, 100 microg/kg) was
administered intravenously by means of a dose-escalating procedure in 55-week-old
hamsters. T-1032 significantly reduced both the right and left ventricular
end-diastolic pressure in a dose-dependent manner. T-1032 modestly reduced the
systemic arterial pressure at the highest dose (100 microg/kg i.v.). T-1032 did
not change the heart rate or left ventricular dp/dt(max). In the survival study, 
chronic administration of T-1032 (50 and 500 ppm in a diet) increased survival,
and the survival rate was 24.2%, 45.4% and 48.5% in the control, 50 and 500
ppm-treated groups, respectively. The median survival was 55, 58 and 58 weeks in 
control, 50 and 500 ppm-treated groups, respectively. Analysis of the survival
curves revealed that T-1032 (500 ppm) significantly increased the survival of
these hamsters (P<0.05 vs. control). It was concluded that T-1032 had beneficial 
hemodynamic effects on heart failure in Bio 14.6 cardiomyopathic hamsters, and
the favorable hemodynamic changes induced by T-1032 were partly related to the
increase in the survival of these hamsters. Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors
may have therapeutic potential for the treatment of chronic heart failure.

PMID: 12044807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 20;277(38):34755-9. Epub 2002 May 21.

In vitro assembly of Alzheimer-like filaments. How a small cluster of charged
residues in Tau and MAP2 controls filament morphology.

DeTure MA(1), Di Noto L, Purich DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, and the McKnight Brain
Institute, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida
32610-0245, USA.

Although the microtubule-binding regions (MTBRs) of both Tau and MAP2 can undergo
self-assembly into straight filaments (SFs) in vitro, only the Tau MTBR forms
paired helical filaments (PHFs). Moreover, Tau appears to be the exclusive
building block of the neuropathic filaments observed in Alzheimer's disease and
certain frontotemporal dementias (FTDs). Despite significant conservation in the 
MTBR sequences, there are two persistently different stretches of amino acids
(designated here as Module-A and Module-B) between Tau and MAP2 from a number of 
organisms. To evaluate the role of charged residues in these modules as potential
morphology-specifying elements, we used site-directed mutagenesis to replace
selected residues within the MAP2 MTBR by residues at corresponding positions in 
Tau. We then employed electron microscopy to determine the frequency of
occurrence of SF and PHF morphology in filaments assembled from these mutant
microtubule-binding regions. Our experimental results indicate that a very small 
number of residues are especially significant determinants of filament
morphology; this inference is also supported by the observation that
site-directed substitutions of individual Tau residues into MAP2 Module-B
likewise result in the formation of PHF-like structures. Because the Module-B in 
Tau contains two naturally occurring FTD mutations, residues in this region may
play a critical role in neuropathic filament assembly.

PMID: 12023276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Heart. 2002 Jun;87(6):559-65.

Non-invasive measurement of coronary flow reserve in children with Kawasaki
disease.

Noto N(1), Karasawa K, Kanamaru H, Ayusawa M, Sumitomo N, Okada T, Harada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Cardiology, Nihon University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan. nnoto@med.email.ne.jp

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether transthoracic Doppler echocardiography (TTE)
can reliably measure the coronary flow reserve in the left anterior descending
coronary artery in children with Kawasaki disease.
DESIGN: Coronary flow velocity in the distal left anterior descending coronary
artery was measured by TTE and was compared with that obtained by intracoronary
Doppler guide wire. The ratio of maximum hyperaemia (intravenous administration
of adenosine triphosphate, 160 microg/kg/min) to baseline peak (mean) diastolic
coronary flow velocity in the distal artery was used as an estimate of coronary
flow reserve.
SETTING: University hospital.
PATIENTS: 10 patients with significant left anterior descending coronary stenosis
(> 70% diameter stenosis) (group A) in the proximal or middle portion of the
artery and 14 patients (group B) without significant stenosis, all with Kawasaki 
disease documented by previous coronary angiography.
RESULTS: The reduced hyperaemic coronary flow velocity in group A compared with
group B resulted in a markedly lower coronary flow reserve, derived from both
peak diastolic velocity and mean diastolic velocity by either technique of
investigation. Multivariate analysis identified the best predictor of left
anterior descending coronary artery stenosis to be a coronary flow reserve of <
or = 2.2, derived from mean diastolic flow velocity measured using TTE
(sensitivity 90%, specificity 100%, accuracy 96%). A good correlation was found
between diastolic velocity derived values for coronary flow reserve measured
using both TTE and Doppler guide wire (r = 0.92, p = 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Coronary flow reserve in the distal left anterior descending
coronary artery can be accurately measured using TTE without any intravascular
instrumentation in children with Kawasaki disease.

PMCID: PMC1767145
PMID: 12010941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Org Chem. 2002 May 3;67(9):2948-53.

Host-guest interactions between beta-cyclodextrin and the (Z)-phenylhydrazone of 
3-benzoyl-5-phenyl-1,2,4-oxadiazole: the first kinetic study of a ring-ring
interconversion in a "confined environment".

Guernelli S(1), Laganà MF, Spinelli D, Lo Meo P, Noto R, Riela S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica A Mangini, Bologna, Italia.

The effect of beta-cyclodextrin (beta-CD) on the mononuclear heterocyclic
rearrangement of the (Z)-phenylhydrazone of 3-benzoyl-5-phenyl-1,2,4-oxadiazole
(1) in aqueous borate buffer at pH = 9.6 has been analyzed at temperatures
ranging from 293.15 to 313.15 K. The trend of the absorption spectra of 1 as a
function of time has been accounted for with the formation of two different 1:1
complexes between beta-CD and 1, the first, "unreactive" complex being formed
faster than the "reactive" one. The occurrence of negative activation enthalpy
values for the studied interconversion evidences the kinetic relevance of
inclusion processes. Computational models elaborated using the MM2 molecular
mechanics force field give an idea of the relative importance of the different
complexes, additionally helping us to formulate a suitable reaction scheme.

PMID: 11975551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002 Apr;956:155-63.

Cerebellar influences on saccade plasticity.

Robinson FR(1), Fuchs AF, Noto CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, and Regional Primate Research Center,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.
robinsn@u.washington.edu

Inaccurate saccades adapt to become more accurate. In this experiment the role of
cerebellar output to the oculomotor system in adapting saccade size was
investigated. We measured saccade adaptation after temporary inactivation of
saccade-related neurons in the caudal part of the fastigial nucleus which
projects to the oculomotor brain stem. We located caudal fastigial nucleus
neurons with single unit recording and injected 0.1% muscimol among them. Two
monkeys received bilateral injections and two monkeys unilateral injections.
Unilateral injections made ipsiversive saccades hypermetric (gains >1.5) and
contraversive saccades hypometric (gains approximately 0.6). Bilateral injections
made both leftward and rightward saccades hypermetric (gains >1.5). During
unilateral inactivation neither ipsiversive nor contraversive saccade size
adapted after approximately 1,000 saccades. During bilateral inactivation,
adaptation was either small or very slow. Most intact monkeys completely adapt
after approximately 1,000 saccades to similar dysmetrias produced by
intrasaccadic target displacement. After the monkeys receiving bilateral
injections made >1,000 saccades in each horizontal direction, we placed them in
the dark so that the muscimol dissipated without the monkeys receiving visual
feedback about its saccade gain. After the dark period, 20-degree saccades were
adapted to be 12% smaller, and 4-degree saccades to be 7% smaller. We expect this
difference in adaptation because during caudal fastigial nucleus inactivation,
monkeys made many large overshooting saccades and few small overshooting
saccades. We conclude from these results that: (1) caudal fastigial nucleus
activity is important in adapting dysmetric saccades; and (2) bilateral caudal
fastigial nucleus inactivation impairs the relay of adapted signals to the
oculomotor system, but it does not stop all adaptation from occurring.

PMID: 11960801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Eur J Pharmacol. 2002 Apr 5;440(1):45-52.

Sildenafil and T-1032, phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors, showed a different
vasorelaxant property in the isolated rat aorta.

Mochida H(1), Inoue H, Takagi M, Noto T, Yano K, Kikkawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Research Laboratory, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., 2-2-50, Kawagishi,
Toda, Saitama 335-8505, Japan. mochida@tanabe.co.jp

The vasorelaxant effects of sildenafil and T-1032
[methyl-2-(4-aminophenyl)-1,2-dihydro-1-oxo-7-(2-pyridinylmethoxy)-4-(3,4,5-trime
thoxyphenyl)-3-isoquinoline carboxylate sulfate], two phosphodiesterase type 5
inhibitors, were examined in the isolated rat aorta. Sildenafil and T-1032, both 
of which have almost the same potency and selectivity regarding phosphodiesterase
type 5 inhibitory activity, produced a similar, moderate, relaxation at 10(-10)
to 10(-7) M (sildenafil: 66.8 +/- 13.7%; T-1032: 77.9 +/- 10.8% at 10(-7) M).
However, sildenafil, but not T-1032, produced further relaxation at the higher
concentrations (sildenafil: 102.0 +/- 0.6%; T-1032: 81.0 +/- 7.2% at 10(-4) M, P 
< 0.05). Sildenafil also produced a more potent relaxation than did T-1032 at the
high concentrations (10(-5) and 10(-4) M) in endothelium-denuded aortic rings and
in the presence of N(G)-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester (L-NAME), a nitric oxide
synthase inhibitor (3 x 10(-4) M). Moreover, the high concentrations of
sildenafil, but not of T-1032, caused a rightward shift of the
concentration-response curve for calcium chloride in K(+)-depolarized
endothelium-denuded preparations. In the ligand binding assay for the L-type
Ca(2+) channels, the affinities of sildenafil at 10(-5) M for binding sites of
nitrendipine and (--)-desmethoxyverapamil [(--)- D888] (35.2 +/- 3.3% and 35.8
+/- 1.9%, respectively) were higher than those of T-1032 (11.8 +/- 4.0% and -13.1
+/- 1.3%, respectively, P < 0.05). Regarding cyclic nucleotide levels, both
phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors increased cGMP levels at 10(-6) M. However,
sildenafil, but not T-1032, further increased cGMP levels at the higher
concentrations (sildenafil: 15.7 +/- 2.7 pmol/mg protein; T-1032: 5.6 +/- 0.6
pmol/mg protein at 10(-4) M, P < 0.05). These results suggested that high
concentrations of sildenafil had additional vasorelaxant properties through
mechanisms other than phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibition. Sildenafil-induced
relaxation appears to be due to inhibition of the external Ca(2+)-dependent
cascade for contraction and/or to an increase in cGMP levels. In contrast, T-1032
only showed a vasorelaxant property due to phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibition.
In conclusion, T-1032 appears to be a specific phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor
compared with sildenafil and a useful compound to examine the physiological
function of phosphodiesterase type 5.

PMID: 11959087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Int J Hematol. 2002 Feb;75(2):178-81.

MLL gene rearrangement in acute myelogenous leukemia after exposure to
tegafur/uracil.

Fukushima T(1), Yoshio N, Noto Y, Kida H.

Author information: 
(1)National Kanazawa Hospital, Japan.

We report a case of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) with MLL (myeloid-lymphoid
leukemia or mixed-lineage leukemia) gene rearrangement after exposure to
tegafur/uracil. Cytogenetic and clinical findings in this patient: t(11;17)
(q23;q25), AML-M4 morphology, development of AML within a short latent period
after first exposure to tegafur/uracil, and good response to remission induction 
chemotherapy but short remission duration, have been considered typical features 
of therapy-related acute myelogenous leukemia (t-AML) after exposure to
topoisomerase II-targeting agents. This case report suggests that t-AML may
develop after exposure to tegafur/uracil and that MLL gene rearrangement may not 
necessarily be specific to t-AML after exposure to topoisomerase II-targeting
agents.

PMID: 11939265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cancer. 2002 Mar 15;94(6):1654-60.

A multiinstitutional, concurrent chemoradiation trial of strontium-89,
estramustine, and vinblastine for hormone refractory prostate carcinoma involving
bone.

Akerley W(1), Butera J, Wehbe T, Noto R, Stein B, Safran H, Cummings F, Sambandam
S, Maynard J, Di Rienzo G, Leone L.

Author information: 
(1)Boston University Medical Center, Oncology-Hematology, Boston, Massachusetts
02118, USA. Wallace.Arkerley@bmc.org

BACKGROUND: Estramustine phosphate (EMP) and vinblastine have radiosensitizing
properties and significant activity against hormone refractory prostate
carcinoma. Strontium-89 is a palliative agent that acts as a selective radiation 
source for bone metastasis. The combination of EMP, vinblastine, and strontium-89
was developed to exploit the potential for radiosynergy. PATIENTS AND METHODS
Forty-four patients at the Brown Oncology Group affiliated hospitals were treated
with oral EMP 600 mg/m2 daily on Weeks 1-4 and 7-10, vinblastine 4 mg/m2
intravenously once each week on Weeks 1-4 and 7-10, and strontium-89 2.2 MBq/kg
on Day 1. Courses were repeated every 12 weeks. Response assessment was based on 
a change in the serum prostate specific antigen (PSA) levels, correlated with
change in measurable disease and bone scan appearance.
RESULTS: A greater than or equal to 50% decline in PSA for at least 6 weeks was
observed in 21 patients (48%, 95% confidence interval, 33-62%). Median duration
of response was 23 weeks (range, 6-70.8 weeks). The median survival was 13 months
with 1- and 2-year survival rates of 55% and 25%, respectively. After completion 
of protocol therapy, a retrospective review showed that only nine patients
received subsequent palliative external beam radiation after progression.
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of strontium-89 to the regimen of EMP and vinblastine
can be delivered safely and in repeated doses, provides effective palliation, and
may decrease the need for future radiation therapy. A randomized trial is
necessary to quantify these effects.

Copyright 2002 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 11920525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Acad Radiol. 2002 Feb;9(2):217-20.

Importance of radiology clerkships in teaching medical students life-threatening 
abnormalities on conventional chest radiographs.

Scheiner JD(1), Noto RB, McCarten KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Rhode Island Hospital, Brown Medical School,
Providence 02903, USA.

Comment in
    Acad Radiol. 2002 Feb;9(2):224-5.

RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to investigate the
ability of medical students who had already completed medicine and surgery
clerkships to identify life-threatening abnormalities on conventional chest
radiographs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: From May 2000 to August 2001, 72 consecutive 3rd- and
4th-year medical students enrolled in the radiology clerkship at Rhode Island
Hospital completed examinations before and after the radiology clerkship. During 
the examination, they were asked to identify acute abnormalities on five
conventional chest radiographs. Only students who had already completed both
medicine and surgery clerkships were included in this prospective study.
RESULTS: Before the radiology clerkship, the frequency of correct diagnoses of
pneumothorax, pneumoperitoneum, congestive heart failure, misplaced endotracheal 
tube, and misplaced feeding tube were 40%, 61%, 57%, 6%, and 6%, respectively.
After the radiology clerkship, these findings were correctly identified more than
94% of the time (P < .001).
CONCLUSION: Learning to identify life-threatening abnormalities on conventional
chest radiographs through medicine and surgery clerkships is insufficient. The
radiology clerkship provides a unique educational experience that significantly
improves these abilities.

PMID: 11918377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002 Mar 20;39(6):999-1004.

Low event rate for stress-only perfusion imaging in patients evaluated for chest 
pain.

Gibson PB(1), Demus D, Noto R, Hudson W, Johnson LL.

Author information: 
(1)Rhode Island Hospital and Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island 02903,
USA.

OBJECTIVES: We sought to demonstrate the safety of stress-only perfusion imaging 
among patients with low to medium probability of coronary disease being evaluated
for chest pain.
BACKGROUND: The need for performing rest in addition to stress perfusion imaging 
to confirm normalcy is due largely to defects created on the stress images by
attenuation artifacts. A low cardiac event rate among patients undergoing
stress-only imaging with attenuation correction (AC) would validate the safety of
stress-only imaging.
METHODS: Patients with low to medium pretest probability for coronary artery
disease (CAD) referred for chest pain evaluation from July 1, 1997 to July 1,
1999, were scheduled for a two-day stress/rest tomographic (single photon
emission computerized tomography, or SPECT) perfusion imaging study with Tc-99m
sestamibi. Patients were imaged on a variable angle camera with AC using Gd-153
scanning line sources (Vantage ADAC, Milpitas, California). If the stress scan
was normal without AC or corrected with AC, the patient did not return for rest
scan and was followed.
RESULTS: Seven hundred twenty-nine patients underwent stress-only imaging, and
follow-up was obtained on 652 (89%) of those patients. There were 224 males and
428 females with mean age of 52 +/- 13 years. Mean follow-up was 22.3 +/- 6.4
months. The mean pretest probability was 37 +/- 24%. The non-AC images showed
breast and/or diaphragmatic attenuation artifacts severe enough to have required 
the patient to return for rest imaging in 37% of patients, and all corrected
completely with AC. During follow-up, there were two noncardiac deaths and no
cardiac deaths. There was one myocardial infarction; three patients with
progressive unstable angina underwent diagnostic coronary angiography showing
significant CAD. The overall cardiac event rate was 0.6%.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support stress-only imaging in patients with low to
medium probability for CAD as a safe, time- and cost-efficient imaging modality.

PMID: 11897442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Water Sci Technol. 2002;45(2):49-54.

Investigating the changes in extreme rainfall series recorded in an urbanised
area.

Aronica G(1), Cannarozzo M, Noto L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Costruzioni e Tecnologie Avanzate, Università di Messina,
Italy.

The aim of this study is to investigate and quantify changes in the rainfall
regime of the metropolitan area of Palermo characterised by increasingly strong
urbanisation. The rainfall data, considered in this study, were collected on a
yearly basis from eight rain gauges within and outside the metropolitan area of
Palermo, Sicily, Italy. A preliminary analysis made on the annual total rainfall 
depths showed a global reduction of total annual rainfall, with two different
trends: more regular for the series observed in the rain gauges within the
urbanised area and more variable for the series observed in the rain gauges
outside the area. A further analysis has been performed using the series of
maximum intensity for fixed duration (1, 3, 6, 12, 24 hrs) and annual daily
maxima. The analysis of the trend in the extreme rainfall series has been
performed by estimating the maximum rainfall depth corresponding to a fixed
return period using the EV1 distribution with parameters estimated using
L-moments. The analysis of all series indicates a global reduction of rainfall
intensities, both for internal and external series, in disagreement with the
results obtained by other authors.

PMID: 11888183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2001 Sep 10;121(21):2467-71.

[Use of statins in hospitals after myocardial infarction].

[Article in Norwegian]

Notø AT(1), Steffensen L, Nordøy A, Hansen JB.

Author information: 
(1)Medisinsk avdeling Regionsykehuset i Tromsø 9038 Tromsø.

BACKGROUND: The objective of this study was to register the frequency of statin
prescription during the initial hospitalization for acute myocardial infarction
and therapeutic intensity at follow-up.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A retrospective study among patients aged below 70 of both 
sexes with acute myocardial infarction, who survived the initial hospitalization 
at the University Hospital of Tromsø during 1995-1998.
RESULTS: 473 patients with acute myocardial infarction, 76% men, mean age 57.4
(range 33-70 yrs) were included. Statin treatment was started in 55% of the
patients within discharge from the hospital. Total cholesterol (odds ratio 0.51, 
0.41-0.64; 95% CI) and decreasing age (1.60, 1.21-2.10) were significant
predictors for statin prescription. Statin treatment started during
hospitalization increased gradually from 42% in 1995 to 91% in 1998 (p < 0.001)
among patients with total cholesterol above 5.0 mmol/l at admission. 54% of the
statin users achieved the treatment goal at their first outpatient control 8-12
weeks after discharge.
INTERPRETATION: The proportion of statin users has increased satisfactory during 
1995-98, but the therapeutic intensity is unsatisfactory compared to guidelines
for cholesterol-lowering treatment of patients with acute myocardial infarction.

PMID: 11875920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Thromb Haemost. 2002 Feb;87(2):206-10.

Factor VII activity is an independent predictor of cardiovascular mortality in
elderly women of a Sicilian population: results of an 11-year follow-up.

Noto D(1), Barbagallo CM, Cefalu' AB, Cavera G, Sapienza M, Notarbartolo A, Davi'
G, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, University of Palermo, Italy.

The aim of the Epidemiological project "Ventimiglia di Sicilia" is to identify
the cardiovascular risk factors in a Sicilian population with a low risk profile 
and healthy nutritional habits. The risk of cardiovascular mortality in older
subjects (over 60 years of age) is presented for an 11 year follow-up. Females
showed higher prevalence of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, obesity and higher
levels of total, LDL and HDL cholesterol, factor VII activity and fibrinogen
compared to males. Cardiovascular mortality was related to hypertension and
obesity in males, to high factor VII activity, obesity and diabetes mellitus in
females. In a Logistic Regression model the same variables were independently
correlated to cardiovascular mortality with the exception of obesity. In
conclusion, these findings suggest that in a population with a low risk profile, 
other factors, such as factor VII activity, may emerge as predictors of
cardiovascular mortality.

PMID: 11858478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Minerva Med. 2002 Feb;93(1):75-8.

[Usefulness of ultrasonography in the study of superficial lymph nodes. A case of
cat scratch disease].

[Article in Italian]

Meli S(1), Pignata S, Noto P, Rapisarda A, Gelsomino M, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Patologie Sistemiche, Università degli
Studi, Catania, Italy.

Ultrasonography is a wide spread, non-invasive and repeatable imaging
methodology. It is able to evidence any type of lesion and to describe its
extent, its site and its content. The ultrasound role in the diagnosis of a case 
of cat scratch disease in a 44 year old man is described. Symptoms included
intermittent fever, pain and palpable tumefactions in right armpit and elbow. The
patient underwent routine and lymphoadenopathy specific laboratory data.
Ultrasound examination and echo-guided fine-needle biopsy of the evident lesions 
were performed. These exams, related to pathological clinical presentation, have 
shown a chronic granulomatous lymphadenopathy like cat scratch disease. This case
provides further evidence that ultrasound procedures might play an important role
in differential diagnosis of palpable lesions.

PMID: 11850615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Clin Radiol. 2001 Dec;56(12):984-8.

Pre-operative localization of parathyroid adenomas: a comparison of power and
colour Doppler ultrasonography with nuclear medicine scintigraphy.

Scheiner JD(1), Dupuy DE, Monchik JM, Noto RB, Cronan JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Brown University School of Medicine, Rhode
Island Hospital, Providence, Rhode Island 02903, USA. jscheiner@lifespan.org

AIM: To compare power and colour Doppler ultrasonography (US) with nuclear
medicine scintigraphy (NM) in the preoperative localization of parathyroid
adenomas in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-one patients with biochemical evidence of PHPT
underwent pre-operative US and NM for parathyroid adenoma localization. Both
studies were interpreted independently without prior knowledge of the other
study's findings. All patients had surgical removal of the parathyroid adenoma
utilizing standard neck exploration or minimally invasive unilateral surgical
techniques with rapid serum assay of circulating parathyroid hormone levels.
RESULTS: All patients had single parathyroid adenomas at surgery. Prospective
sensitivities for US, NM and both studies combined were 65%, 68%, and 74%,
respectively, with a positive predictive value of 100% each. The adenoma was
localized by only one imaging modality in 16% of cases.
CONCLUSIONS: US and NM provide complementary roles in the pre-operative
localization of parathyroid adenomas in patients with PHPT.

PMID: 11795928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Ann Chim. 2001 Nov-Dec;91(11-12):823-32.

A key factor in modern protection of historic buildings: the assessment of
penetration of water-repellent polymers into porous stone-materials.

Toniolo L(1), Casadio F, Cariati F.

Author information: 
(1)Centro CNR Gino Bozza, Politecnico di Milano, P.zza L. Da Vinci 32, 20133.
Lucia.Toniolo@polimi.it

From the 1960s on, the conservation of monuments and stone masonry has witnessed 
an increasing use of polymeric products during restoration interventions. Actual 
penetration depths reached by different polymers within the porous stone matrix
are supposed to be key factors in determining the efficacy of the treatments
themselves (besides, of course, the chemical-mineralogical nature of the stone
and the chemical-physical characteristics of the various polymers). This work
presents some preliminary results obtained on specimens of Noto calcarenite
treated with various polymeric protective products. Samples were investigated
with direct analytical methods (micro-ATR spectroscopy, SEM) in order to assess
penetration depths reached by polymers inside the stone while reducing to a
minimum the necessary manipulation of specimens. The obtained results highlighted
the following trend in penetration depths for the various products tested:
siloxane product > partially fluorinated acrylic resin > acrylic resin. Moreover,
data obtained allowed to establish direct correlation between long term efficacy 
of products and relative penetration depths.

PMID: 11836960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Am J Cardiol. 2002 Feb 15;89(4):460-2.

Changes in plasma lipids and low-density lipoprotein peak particle size during
and after acute myocardial infarction.

Barbagallo CM(1), Rizzo M, Cefalu' AB, Noto D, Scimeca A, Castello A, Sarullo F, 
Notarbartolo A, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, University of Palermo, Italy. 
carlob@unipa.it

PMID: 11835930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Clin Exp Med. 2001 Sep;1(3):151-4.

Italian familial defective apolipoprotein B patients share a unique haplotype
with other Caucasian patients.

Cefalù AB(1), Barbagallo CM, Sesti E, Caldarella R, Polizzi F, Marino G, Noto D, 
Rolleri M, Travali S, Scalisi G, Notarbartolo A, Corsini A, Bertolini S, Averna
MR.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Medicina Interna e Geriatria, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Palermo, Policlinico Paolo Giaccone, Italy.

Familial defective apolipoprotein (apo) B-100 together with familial
hypercholesterolemia are the two common genetic conditions that cause
hypercholesterolemia. Familial defective apolipoprotein B-100 is due to mutations
around codon 3500 of the apo B gene. The most-characterized mutation is a G>A
transition at nucleotide 10,708 that results in the substitution of arginine by
glutamine at codon 3500 (Apo B Arg3500Gln). Two other mutations are caused by a
C>T transition, one at nucleotide 10,800 (Apo B Arg3531Cys) and the other at
nucleotide 10,707 (apo B Arg3500Trp). In the present study we describe three new 
Italian cases of familial defective apolipoprotein B-100 (Apo B Arg3500Gln), one 
from the Liguria region and two from Sicily, and the haplotype of the apo B gene 
co-segregating with the mutation. By screening two groups of probands, clinically
diagnosed as having Familial Hypercholesterolemia (700 from mainland Italy and
305 from Sicily), the prevalence of familial defective apolipoprotein B-100 due
to Arg3500Gln was found to be very low (0.28% and 0.65%, respectively). The
Arg3531Cys mutation was not detected in any proband. In the three new families
with Arg3500Gln mutation in the present study and in one previously described in 
Italy, the mutation was associated with a unique apo B haplotype, which is
consistent with data previously reported for Caucasian patients [XbaI-, MspI+,
EcoRI-, presence of the 5' signal peptide insertion (Ins) allele, and the
49-repeat allele of the 3'-VNTR].

PMID: 11833852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2002 Jan;29(1):115-8.

[A case of locally recurrent breast cancer in which phlebothrombosis of the right
leg after hormonal therapy using a high dose of toremifene citrate].

[Article in Japanese]

Sakuta M(1), Sumiyama Y, Okamoto Y, Noto Y, Naka I, Kiribayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Third Dept. of Surgery, Toho University School of Medicine.

A 72-year-old female had undergone mastectomy at the age of 67 for right breast
cancer (T2a, n1 alpha, positive for ER). In the surgery the pectoralis muscle was
preserved. For adjuvant therapy, 20 mg/day of tamoxifen was orally administered
for 5 years. Six years after surgery, relapse was detected in the right major
pectoralis muscle. Irradiation at this site and oral administration of 120 mg/day
of toremifene citrate were started. The patient had a medical history of
diabetes, and the control of her blood sugar was poor. About 2 months after oral 
administration of toremifene citrate was started, flares with blebs and swelling 
were observed in the right lower leg, suggesting acute phlebothrombosis of the
right lower limb. The symptoms were ameliorated by intravenous administration of 
heparin and an antibiotic. In administering a high dose of toremifene citrate to 
patients with complications, careful follow-up is needed.

PMID: 11816466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Acta Derm Venereol. 2001 Oct-Nov;81(5):370-1.

Milia en plaque: treatment with open spray cryosurgery.

Noto G, Dawber R.

PMID: 11800150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Biol Sci Space. 2001 Mar;15(1):3-14.

[Physiology of vertebrates under micro-gravity with special reference to the Ca
metabolism].

[Article in Japanese]

Sasayama Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, University of Kanazawa, Ogi, Uchiura, Ishikawa, Japan.
sasayama@suzu2.suzu.or.jp

On April 12, 1961, Major Yurii A. Gagarin of the former-U.S.S.R. Air Force
circled the Earth in a spacecraft named "Vostok", a word which means "east". He
spent 1 hour and 48 minutes in space. Since then, the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A.
have sent many astronauts into space. In one case, the stay in space exceeded a
year in length, reaching 438 days. Through these experiences, it became clear
that micro-gravity caused various problems in human physiology. One of the most
serious problems was the loss of Ca from bones, as a result of the negative
expenditure of Ca. Under 1G on the ground, bone absorption and bone formation
proceed in accordance. Under micro-gravity, however, this balance is broken.
Although this phenomenon has been widely analyzed from the viewpoint of molecular
biology as well, studies to clarify the mechanism that causes the disorder of Ca 
metabolism in bones have just started. At present, no perfect treatment to
prevent the loss of Ca from bones is available.

PMID: 11799251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Okajimas Folia Anat Jpn. 2001 Aug;78(2-3):101-6.

Ultimobranchial glands in the teleost (Plecoglossus altivelis ryukyuensis):
special references to changes of gland volume with maturation.

Sasayama Y(1), Takemura M, Takano K.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Faculty of Science, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa
927-0553, Japan.

In lower vertebrates, the bone-mineralizing hormone "calcitonin" is secreted from
ultimobranchial glands, which assume various shapes, e.g., follicles, cellular
masses, or cell strands. Histological observations support the view that in some 
teleosts, the glands increase in size when females maturate. We determined the
exact volume of the gland in juveniles and adult males and females of a teleost, 
Ryukyuayu (Plecoglossus altivelis ryukyuensis). Furthermore, we examined plasma
Ca, Na and K levels. In this species, the gland was fundamentally composed of a
single follicle. The gland volume was converted to numerical data under a certain
condition. It thus became clear that the value of the follicle wall was
significantly increased only in maturing and mature females with high plasma Ca
levels and that the value of the lumen did not show any statistically significant
changes during growth and maturation.

PMID: 11732203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Nov 30;289(2):395-401.

Exclusive association of paraoxonase 1 with high-density lipoprotein particles in
apolipoprotein A-I deficiency.

Noto H(1), Hashimoto Y, Satoh H, Hara M, Iso-o N, Togo M, Kimura S, Tsukamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Paraoxonase1 (PON1) is a high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-associated protein which 
removes peroxidized lipids from lipoproteins. It has been proposed that
apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I) is an important determinant for its stabilization on 
HDL. However, little is known about its existence and activity in an
apoA-I-deficient state in humans. To characterize the nature of PON1 in apoA-I
deficiency, we investigated PON1 in an apoA-I-deficient patient. When serum was
analyzed on fast protein liquid chromatography, PON1 protein was distributed
almost exclusively on HDL despite the absence of apoA-I; on the other hand, 38.5%
of PON1 protein was found in the lipoprotein-free fraction when the lipoproteins 
were fractionated through ultracentrifugation. The stability of PON1 activity in 
the patient serum was almost the same as in the normal control sera throughout
incubation at 14 degrees C for 7 days. However, when the sera were incubated at
37 degrees C for 24 h, its activity declined more than those in the normal
controls (19% versus 4% reduction of the initial values). Our results
demonstrated that PON1 protein possesses a preferential association with HDL even
in the absence of apoA-I, although apoA-I is a crucial factor for the maximal
activity and stabilization of PON1.

PMID: 11716486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Med Sci Monit. 2001 Nov-Dec;7(6):1339-43.

Is altropane SPECT more sensitive to fluoroDOPA PET for detecting early
Parkinson's disease?

Fernandez HH(1), Friedman JH, Fischman AJ, Noto RB, Lannon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Brown University School of Medicine,
Providence, RI, USA. FernandezH@pol.net

BACKGROUND: Positron emission tomography (PET) cameras are expensive and scarce, 
and the tests are non-reimbursable. A less costly and more available test such as
a single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) may be helpful in the
diagnosis of early or atypical Parkinson's disease (PD) if its sensitivity is
comparable to a PET scan. Altropane is an iodinated form of the N-allyl analog of
WIN 35,428 which acts as a dopamine transport inhibitor. When radiolabeled with
the gamma emitting isotope [123I], altropane serves as a SPECT ligand with high
affinity and selectivity for the dopamine transporter. It is a good marker for
dopamine neurons and is useful in detecting PD.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We describe 2 patients with typical, early PD and their
[123I]-altropane SPECT and [18F]-6-flouroDOPA PET scan results which were
performed within a three-month interval. PET studies were performed using a
PC-4096 scanner (Scanditronix AB, Sweden) with 15 axial slices and resolution of 
6 mm FWHM. The SPECT acquisitions were performed on a MultiSPECT gamma camera
(Siemens, Hoffman Estates, IL) equipped with fan-beam collimators with an
intrinsic resolution of 4.6 FWHM (for Case 1) and a DSI Ceraspect camera with an 
annular crystal, with resolution of approximately 6.4 mm FWHM (for Case 2).
RESULTS: Both patients, aged 54 and 38 years, had a one-year history of
intermittent right hand tremor with right arm rigidity and hypokinesia and
bradykinesia on fine finger movements. A significant and sustained improvement of
their parkinsonian symptoms was noted using a dopamine agonist. SPECT and PET
scans showed non-diagnostic fluoroDOPA PET scans with clear unilateral striatal
reduction of tracer uptake contralateral to their parkinsonian side on altropane 
SPECT scans.
CONCLUSIONS: Altropane SPECT may be an accessible and sensitive imaging modality 
for detecting early PD. Further and more controlled studies are needed to define 
its potential role in detecting presymptomatic, early and atypical PD cases.

PMID: 11687754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2001 Oct;98(10):1195-8.

[A case of small cell carcinoma of the common bile duct].

[Article in Japanese]

Miyashita T(1), Konishi K, Noto M, Taniguchi K, Kaji M, Kimura H, Maeda K,
Yabushita K, Miwa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Toyama Prefectural Central Hospital.

PMID: 11680995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Eur J Pharmacol. 2001 Aug 3;425(1):51-5.

Role of adenosine and P2 receptors in the penile tumescence in anesthetized dogs.

Noto T(1), Inoue H, Mochida H, Kikkawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Research Laboratory, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., 2-2-50, Kawagishi,
Toda, Saitama 335-8505, Japan. t-noto@tanabe.co.jp

We studied the role of adenosine and P2 receptors in the pelvic nerve
stimulation-induced penile tumescence in anesthetized dogs. A local
intracavernous injection of adenosine induced the tumescence, which was abolished
by intracavernous 8-(p-sulfophenyl)theophylline (8-SPT), an unspecific adenosine 
receptor antagonist, and by
4-(2-[7-amino-2-(2-furyl)[1,2,4]triazolo[2,3-a][1,3,5]triazin-5-yl
amino]ethyl)phenol (ZM241385), an adenosine A(2A) receptor antagonist. ATP also
induced the tumescence, which was diminished by 8-SPT, but not by reactive
blue-2, a P2 receptor antagonist. Neither intracavernous beta, gamma-meATP nor
ADP(beta)S, P2X and P2Y receptor agonists, induced tumescence.
N(G)-nitro-L-arginine (L-NAME), a nitric oxide synthase inhibitor, and T-1032, a 
phosphodiesterase type V inhibitor, had no effects on the tumescence induced by
adenosine. 8-SPT and reactive blue-2 had no effects on the tumescence induced by 
pelvic nerve stimulation. These results show that although exogenous adenosine
and ATP induce tumescence, neither the adenosine nor the P2 receptor is involved 
in the tumescence induced by pelvic nerve stimulation in anesthetized dogs.

PMID: 11672574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Endocr J. 2001 Aug;48(4):483-6.

Spontaneous recovery from hypopituitarism in a man with lymphocytic hypophysitis:
a case report.

Noto H(1), Tsukamoto K, Hayashi S, Takano K, Fujita T, Kimura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolism, Tokyo University Hospital, Japan.

A 50-year-old man presented with hypopituitarism and a pituitary lesion on
magnetic resonance imaging scan. He was diagnosed as having lymphocytic
hypophysitis, and replacement therapy with hydrocortisone and thyroxine was
started. He regained normal pituitary function after 10 months. Reports of
spontaneous recovery from lymphocytic hypophysitis in men are rare. While the
natural history of lymphocytic hypophysitis remains elusive and its management is
not well established, our report shows that spontaneous resolution may occur with
steroid supplementation even in men.

PMID: 11603571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Immunol. 2001 Oct 15;167(8):4351-7.

Impaired activation of islet-reactive CD4 T cells in pancreatic lymph nodes of B 
cell-deficient nonobese diabetic mice.

Greeley SA(1), Moore DJ, Noorchashm H, Noto LE, Rostami SY, Schlachterman A, Song
HK, Koeberlein B, Barker CF, Naji A.

Author information: 
(1)Harrison Department of Surgical Research, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Despite the impressive protection of B cell-deficient (muMT(-/-)) nonobese
diabetic (NOD) mice from spontaneous diabetes, existence of mild pancreatic islet
inflammation in these mice indicates that initial autoimmune targeting of beta
cells has occurred. Furthermore, muMT(-/-) NOD mice are shown to harbor a latent 
repertoire of diabetogenic T cells, as evidenced by their susceptibility to
cyclophosphamide-induced diabetes. The quiescence of this pool of islet-reactive 
T cells may be a consequence of impaired activation of T lymphocytes in B
cell-deficient NOD mice. In this regard, in vitro anti-CD3-mediated stimulation
demonstrates impaired activation of lymph node CD4 T cells in muMT(-/-) NOD mice 
as compared with that of wild-type counterparts, a deficiency that is correlated 
with an exaggerated CD4 T cell:APC ratio in lymph nodes of muMT(-/-) NOD mice.
This feature points to an insufficient availability of APC costimulation on a per
T cell basis, resulting in impaired CD4 T cell activation in lymph nodes of
muMT(-/-) NOD mice. In accordance with these findings, an islet-reactive CD4 T
cell clonotype undergoes suboptimal activation in pancreatic lymph nodes of
muMT(-/-) NOD recipients. Overall, the present study indicates that B cells in
the pancreatic lymph node microenvironment are critical in overcoming a
checkpoint involving the provision of optimal costimulation to islet-reactive NOD
CD4 T cells.

PMID: 11591759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res. 2001 Oct;12(2):301-5.

Visual error is the stimulus for saccade gain adaptation.

Noto CT(1), Robinson FR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure and Regional Primate Research Center,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-7420, USA. noto@u.washington.edu

Saccade accuracy is fundamental to clear vision. The brain maintains saccade
accuracy by altering commands for saccades that are consistently inaccurate. For 
example, saccades that consistently overshoot their targets gradually become
smaller. The signal that drives the adaptation of saccade size is not well
understood. Previous reports propose that corrective movements and visual errors,
both generated after inaccurate saccades, could be responsible for a change in
saccade size. Here we show that we can elicit normal reductions in saccade size
while eliciting few or no correction saccades. These normal reductions in saccade
size indicate that visual errors, not correction saccades, drive the adaptation
of saccades.

PMID: 11587898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Leukemia. 2001 Oct;15(10):1641-9.

Characterization of two novel cell lines, DERL-2 (CD56+/CD3+/Tcry5+) and DERL-7
(CD56+/CD3-/TCRgammadelta-), derived from a single patient with CD56+
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Di Noto R(1), Pane F, Camera A, Luciano L, Barone M, Lo Pardo C, Boccuni P,
Intrieri M, Izzo B, Villa MR, Macrí M, Rotoli B, Sacchetti L, Salvatore F, Del
Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate and Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biotecnologie
Mediche, Università Federico II, Naples, Italy.

Two novel IL2-dependent cell lines, DERL-2 and DERL-7, were established from a
patient with hepatosplenic gammadelta T cell lymphoma. This patient presented, at
diagnosis, two discrete populations of CD56+ cells, one TCRgammadelta+, the
second lacking T cell-restricted antigens. The cell lines derived displayed
features corresponding to the two cellular components of the disease: DERL-2 was 
CD56+/CD3+/TcRgammadelta+ while DERL-7 was CD56+/CD3-/TcRgammadelta-. Along with 
CD56, the two cell lines shared the expression of CD7, CD2, CD158b and CD117.
Karyotype analysis showed that both cell lines were near-diploid, with iso-7q and
loss of one chromosome 10. In addition, DERL-2 showed 5q+ in all metaphases
analyzed, while DERL-7 revealed loss of one chromosome 4. Genotypically, both
cell lines shared the same STR pattern at nine loci and demonstrated an identical
rearranged pattern of the T cell receptor genes beta, gamma and delta, with
respect to the original tumor cells. These data indicated that both cell lines
and the original neoplastic populations were T cell-derived and arose from a
common ancestor. Among a large panel of cytokines tested, only SCF was able to
substitute IL2 in supporting cell proliferation. Moreover, SCF and IL2 acted
synergistically, dramatically enhancing cell growth. These cell lines may
represent a model to further analyze the overlap area between T and NK cell
malignancies, and may provide new information about the synergistic action of IL2
and SCF on normal and neoplastic T/NK cells.

PMID: 11587224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2001 Sep;4(5):411-8.

6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase: suiting structure to need, 
in a family of tissue-specific enzymes.

El-Maghrabi MR(1), Noto F, Wu N, Manes N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, State University of New York at Stony
Brook, Stony Brook, New York 11794-8661, USA. raafat@physiology.pnb.synysb.edu

Comment in
    Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2001 Sep;4(5):407-10.

The present review addresses recent advances in research into a family of
bifunctional enzymes that are responsible for the twofold task of synthesizing
and hydrolyzing fructose-2,6-bisphosphate (Fru-2,6-P2), which in turn regulates
the rate of glycolysis in most cells. The structure of the synthetic kinase,
conjoined at its carboxyl-terminus to the phosphatase, is very highly conserved
throughout evolution and differentiation, with isotypic expression arising from
highly variable amino-terminal and carboxyl-terminal regulatory domains. These
domains, which frequently contain protein-kinase-catalyzed phosphorylation
motifs, are responsible for the widely divergent kinetics observed in various
tissues and species, and for the hormonal modulation that alters intracellular
levels of Fru-2,6-P2. The present review discusses recent advances in relating
structure to function, and the identification of new pathways of transcriptional 
regulation of this important family of regulatory enzymes.

PMID: 11568503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Clin Nephrol. 2001 Aug;56(2):96-103.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and probucol suppress the time-dependent
increase in urinary Type IV collagen excretion of Type II diabetes mellitus
patients with early diabetic nephropathy.

Nishimura M(1), Sasaki T, Ohishi A, Oishi M, Kono S, Totani Y, Kato Y, Noto Y,
Misaki S, Higashi K, Shimada F, Wakasugi H, Inoue K, Hoshiyama Y, Yamada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Sakura National Hospital, Chiba, Japan.
mnishi@snh.hosp.go.jp.

BACKGROUND: A multicenter prospective clinical trial was carried out in 9
National Hospitals in Japan to elucidate the time-dependent change in urinary
Type IV collagen excretion rate of Type II diabetes mellitus (DM) patients, and
to investigate whether an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I) or
probucol is effective in preventing progression of renal involvement of diabetics
by evaluating urinary Type IV collagen excretion.
METHODS: Normo- and microalbuminuric patients with Type II DM were recruited.
Patients were assigned to either the control (n = 88), ACE-I (n = 43) or probucol
(n = 37) group and treated for 24 months. Besides albumin excretion rate (AER),
urinary Type IV collagen excretion rate was also measured.
RESULTS: Although, AER, urinary N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase and
beta2-microglobulin excretion rates in the control group did not vary over 24
months, urinary Type IV collagen excretion rate in the control group increased
time-dependently (p < 0.01 vs baseline at 18 months and p < 0.005 vs baseline at 
24 months). In the ACE-I and probucol groups, time-dependent increases in urinary
Type IV collagen excretion rates were not observed. In the ACE-I group, the
urinary Type IV collagen excretion rate was significantly lower than that in the 
control group at 24 months (p < 0.05). In the probucol group, the urinary Type IV
collagen excretion rate was significantly lower than that in the control group at
6 months (p < 0.05). In the ACE-I group, AER decreased significantly compared
with baseline at 18 months (p < 0.05) and at 24 months (p < 0.005).
CONCLUSIONS: ACE-I has a beneficial effect and probucol may have a beneficial
effect in preventing the progression of early diabetic nephropathy. Measurement
of the urinary Type IV collagen excretion rate in combination with AER would be
useful for the management of early renal involvement in Type II DM.

PMID: 11522101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Peptides. 2001 Sep;22(9):1435-8.

Cloning of a calcitonin gene-related peptide from genomic DNA and its mRNA
expression in flounder, Paralichthys olivaceus.

Suzuki N(1), Suzuki T, Kurokawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Faculty of Science, Kanazawa University, Uchiura,
927-0553, Ishikawa, Japan. nobuo@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

A part of genomic DNA including the calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) gene
was cloned from flounder by the genome-walking method. The intron/exon boundary
was predicted to occur exactly at the same position as in salmon. The 37-amino
acid molecule coded by the region from the intron/exon boundary to the stop codon
was preceded by a typical Lys-Arg cleavage signal and included a
cleavage/amidation site common to the CGRP of other vertebrates. The predicted
amino acid sequence of flounder CGRP had 78%, 78%, 78%, 81%, and 73-78% identity 
to that of salmon, cod, frog, chicken, and mammalian CGRPs, respectively. Among
vertebrates, CGRP is more conserved than calcitonin (CT) because the identity of 
flounder CT to mammalian CTs is 31-50%. Expression analysis indicated that this
hormone is synthesized in the brain, heart, intestine, testis, and ovary. Since
we have previously shown that the CGRP receptor is expressed in these tissues, it
is suggested that CGRP secreted from each tissue functions in a paracrine or
autocrine manner.

PMID: 11514025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Chemosphere. 2001 Aug;44(4):709-20.

Characterization of mucilage aggregates in Adriatic and Tyrrhenian Sea: structure
similarities between mucilage samples and the insoluble fractions of marine humic
substance.

Mecozzi M(1), Acquistucci R, Di Noto V, Pietrantonio E, Amici M, Cardarilli D.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Centrale per la Ricerca Scientifica e Tecnologica Applicata al Mare, 
Roma, Italy. mecoma@rdn.it

The appearance of gelatinous aggregates called mucilages causes serious damages
to tourism and fishery industries of the Adriatic Sea. So, many studies have been
planned and some of them are still in progress to clarify the origin and causes
of the phenomenon. The scientific research has showed that mucilages are produced
by several marine organisms when peculiar climatic and trophic conditions occur. 
Moreover, as far as the mucilage composition is concerned, although it is well
known that polysaccharides give a high contribution, knowledge of the structural 
characteristics of mucilages and their relationship with the natural organic
matter of the marine environment has not been clarified yet. In this paper a
study on the characterization of the marine mucilage samples collected in the
Adriatic and Tyrrhenian Seas is described. The study was performed by
spectroscopic (infrared and colorimetric) techniques, and elemental analysis. The
results showed that mucilage samples have chemical and structural similarities
with the insoluble fraction of the marine humic substance (humin). According to
experimental evidences it is possible to establish the relationship between
mucilages and the dissolved organic matter (DOM) in the marine environment in
order to identify the most likely pathways of mucilage formation.

PMID: 11482660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2000 Dec;28(6):345-51.

Histological changes in the rabbit condyle following posterolateral disk
perforation.

Narinobou M(1), Takatsuka S, Nakagawa K, Kubota Y, Terai K, Yamamoto E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Noto General Hospital, Ishikawa,
Japan.

PURPOSE: To examine changes in condylar cartilage following perforation in the
posterolateral region of the articular disk of the craniomandibular joint of a
rabbit.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The circular perforation in the left joint of 25 female
Japanese white rabbits measured precisely one-sixteenth of a disk. Histological
examination, including the immunohistochemical proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA) procedure, was performed on separate sets of five rabbits each 2, 4, 8,
12, and 24 weeks postoperatively.
RESULTS: Microscopic examination revealed hypertrophy of the condylar cartilage
with osteophyte formation up to 8 weeks after perforation. Proliferative activity
then decreased near the condylar surface as the perforation flattened.
Twenty-four weeks postoperatively, the condylar surface was found to be fibrous
and flattened. Positive PCNA results in cartilage cells indicated proliferation
following disk perforation which peaked in the 4th week and then decreased.
CONCLUSION: Disk perforation was followed initially by hypertrophy of condylar
cartilage, and later by degeneration of the condylar surface. Although
osteoarthritic cartilage was found 24 weeks after perforation, degeneration
decreased over time. This suggests that remodelling took place after the
perforation.

PMID: 11465142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Neuroimaging. 2001 Jul;11(3):253-60.

Single photon emission computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging
hyperintensity, and cognitive impairments in patients with vascular dementia.

Cohen RA(1), Paul RH, Zawacki TM, Sethi M, Ott BR, Moser DJ, Stone W, Noto R,
Gordon N.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Psychiatry and Neurology, Brown University School of Medicine, 
Providence, Rhode Island, USA. rac@brown.edu

BACKGROUND: The relationship between subcortical hyperintensity (SH) on magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI), cortical perfusion on single photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT), and cognitive function is not well understood. The authors
examined these relationships in individuals with vascular dementia (VaD), paying 
particular attention to frontal lobe function to determine whether the presence
of SH on MRI was associated with frontal hypoperfusion on SPECT, which in turn
would be associated with impairments of executive-attention function.
METHODS: Patients with vascular dementia (n = 26) were assessed on neurocognitive
tests and brain MRI and SPECT. SH volume was quantified from the axial
T2-weighted fluid attenuated inversion recovery MRI. Total counts of activation
across voxels for 12 cortical regions of interest were determined from SPECT.
Perfusion ratios of both total cortical and frontal activation relative to
cerebellum activation were derived, and regression analyses were performed to
determine the relationships between cognitive, MRI, and SPECT indices.
RESULTS: SH volume on MRI was significantly associated with frontal lobe
perfusion, but not with global cortical perfusion as measured by SPECT. Frontal
lobe perfusion did not consistently correlate with performance on measures of
executive-attention function, although both total and frontal perfusion ratios
were significantly associated with other cognitive functions.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that a functional "disconnection" between the 
frontal lobes and subcortical structures does not fully account for the magnitude
of global cognitive impairment in VaD. Cortical perfusion as measured by SPECT
appears to be associated with cognitive performance, but not specifically
executive-attention dysfunction. Additional studies are needed to further examine
the relationship between subcortical and cortical function in VaD.

PMID: 11462291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Radiographics. 2001 Jul-Aug;21(4):995-1012.

State-of-the-art adrenal imaging.

Mayo-Smith WW(1), Boland GW, Noto RB, Lee MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology of Brown University, Rhode Island Hospital, 593 Eddy
St, Providence, RI 02903, USA. william_mayo-smith@brown.edu

The adrenal gland is a common site of disease, and detection of adrenal masses
has increased with the expanding use of cross-sectional imaging. Radiology is
playing a critical role in not only the detection of adrenal abnormalities but in
characterizing them as benign or malignant. The purpose of the article is to
illustrate and describe the appropriate radiologic work-up for diseases affecting
the adrenal gland. The work-up of a suspected hyperfunctioning adrenal mass
(pheochromocytoma and aldosteronoma) should start with appropriate biochemical
screening tests followed by thin-collimation computed tomography (CT). If results
of CT are not diagnostic, magnetic resonance (MR) and nuclear medicine imaging
examinations should be performed. CT has become the study of choice to
differentiate a benign adenoma from a metastasis in the oncology patient. If the 
attenuation of the adrenal gland is over 10 HU at nonenhanced CT, contrast
material-enhanced CT should be performed and washout calculated. Over 50% washout
of contrast material on a 10-minute delayed CT scan is diagnostic of an adenoma. 
For adrenal lesions that are indeterminate at CT in the oncology patient,
chemical shift MR imaging or adrenal biopsy should be performed. Certain features
can be used by the radiologist to establish a definitive diagnosis for most
adrenal masses (including carcinoma, infections, and hemorrhage) based on imaging
findings alone.

PMID: 11452074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2001 Apr;11(2):96-103.

Carotid atherosclerosis in hypercholesterolemic patients: relationship with
cardiovascular events.

Parrinello G(1), Barbagallo CM, Pinto A, Amato P, Cecala MG, Noto D, Cefalù AB,
Scalisi G, Notarbartolo A, Averna MR, Licata G.

Author information: 
(1)Chair of Internal Medicine, Institute of Medical Clinic, University of
Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Extracranial cerebrovascular atherosclerosis is a common
feature of hypercholesterolemia and carotid lesions are good predictors of
cardiovascular events in the general population. Factors associated with the
carotid damage of hypercholesterolemic patients and their relationships with the 
occurrence of clinical events are investigated in this study.
METHODS AND RESULTS: One hundred and seventeen cardiovascular event-free
hypercholesterolemic subjects underwent a complete clinical examination to look
for additional risk factors. A blood sample was collected for lipoprotein
determination and an ultrasound high resolution B-mode imaging examination of the
common carotid arteries was performed. Patients were treated according to the
current guidelines during a 4-yr follow-up and all major cardiovascular events
were recorded. The prevalence of subjects with increased intima-media thickness
and plaque was 21.4% and 29.9% respectively, higher than in normolipidemic
controls. Carotid lesions were significantly related to age, hypertension and
LDL-cholesterol and HDL-cholesterol levels. The relative risk of developing a
major clinical event was 3.92 (95% CI 1.54-9.95, p < 0.004) among categories of
carotid status. At multivariate analysis, cardiovascular events were
independently related to the diagnosis of familial hypercolesterolemia (FH),
baseline carotid score and mean levels of LDL-cholesterol and HDL-cholesterol
during the follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Common risk factors cooperate with plasma lipoprotein levels in
increasing the frequency of carotid lesions of hypercholesterolemic patients.
Since such lesions are useful predictors of clinical events, B-mode ultrasound
evaluation of the carotids should be routinely included in the management of
these patients.

PMID: 11434194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Eur J Pharmacol. 2001 Jun 22;422(1-3):109-14.

T-1032, a novel specific phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor, increases venous
compliance in anesthetized rats.

Inoue H(1), Yano K, Ikeo T, Noto T, Kikkawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Research Laboratory, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., 2-2-50, Kawagishi
Toda, Saitama, 335-8505, Japan. inoue-h@tanabe.co.jp

Nitric oxide (NO) donors including organic nitrates dilate capacitance vessels.
As inhibition of phosphodiesterase type 5 results in the accumulation of
guanosine 3'5'-cyclic monophosphate (cGMP), specific phosphodiesterase type 5
inhibitors are expected to have a vasodilator property similar to that of NO
donors. To test this hypothesis, we examined the effect of
methyl2-(4-aminophenyl)-1,2-dihydro-1-oxo-7-(2-pyridinylmethoxy)-4-(3,4,5-trimeth
oxyphenyl)-3-isoquinoline carboxylate sulfate (T-1032), a novel specific
phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor, on mean arterial pressure and mean
circulatory filling pressure (an index of venodilation) compared with that of
nitroglycerin and diltiazem in mecamylamine- and noradrenaline-treated
anesthetized rats. Intravenous infusion of T-1032 (0.1, 1, 10 microg/kg/min)
dose-dependently decreased mean arterial pressure (-3.8+/-0.3%, -9.1+/-0.8%,
-16.8+/-1.5% at doses of 0.1, 1 and 10 microg/kg/min, respectively) and mean
circulatory filling pressure (-6.1+/-0.9%, -12.5+/-0.7%, -18.6+/-3.0% at doses of
0.1, 1 and 10 microg/kg/min, respectively). The mean circulatory filling
pressure-mean arterial pressure relationship revealed that T-1032 had a selective
action on the mean circulatory filling pressure compared with diltiazem (10, 100 
microg/kg/min) and a similar or more selective effect than nitroglycerin (0.3, 3 
and 30 microg/kg/min). In the next study, we calculated venous compliance and
unstressed volume from the mean circulatory filling pressure-volume relationship.
Intravenous infusion of T-1032 (3 microg/kg/min) increased venous compliance
(3.35+/-0.40 in T-1032 vs. 2.31+/-0.15 ml/kg/mm Hg in vehicle, P<0.05) without
changing the unstressed volume (37.2+/-2.80 in T-1032 vs. 42.6+/-2.37 ml/kg in
vehicle, P>0.05). It was concluded that T-1032 increased venous capacitance by
increasing venous compliance, and that this selective phosphodiesterase type 5
inhibitor appeared to have a different vasodilator action from that of an NO
donor and a Ca(2+) channel antagonist in that it had a selective action on the
mean circulatory filling pressure.

PMID: 11430921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Atherosclerosis. 2001 Jul;157(1):225-31.

Leukocyte count, diabetes mellitus and age are strong predictors of stroke in a
rural population in southern Italy: an 8-year follow-up.

Noto D(1), Barbagallo CM, Cavera G, Cefalu' AB, Caimi G, Marino G, Lo Coco L,
Caldarella R, Notarbartolo A, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, University of Palermo, I-90127
Palermo, Italy.

Stroke incidence rates in the Mediterranean area are higher compared to northern 
European countries. In this study, we present the 8-year prospective data from a 
small rural Sicilian town. This population, consisting of 1351 subjects (622
males and 729 females), is homogeneous for ethnic background with traditional
healthy dietary habits and shows low cholesterol mean levels. We found that the
risk of stroke was significantly associated with the record of at least one
previous neurological symptom (PNS), such as lack of strength, loss of vision or 
speech or possible drop attacks, and high hematocrit in males, and to high body
mass index (BMI) and waist-hip ratio (WHR), diabetes, hypertension, high
leukocyte count in females. We also documented age-related differences: stroke
was associated in younger subjects (age<65 years) with diabetes, high BMI, high
uric acid levels and in older patients (age>/=65 years) with high WHR,
hypertension, diabetes, PNS, leukocyte count and hematocrit above the 95th
percentile. Multivariate analysis demonstrated an independent association between
stroke and age, diabetes, leukocyte count, hypertension and PNS. In conclusion,
in this rural Sicilian population, the incidence rate of stroke is 1.72 cases per
1000/year in the subjects between 40 and 75 years of age. The risk factors
associated with stroke are different in younger and older subjects. Leukocyte
count, as an expression of an undergoing inflammatory process, may have a
relevant role at least in the elderly.

PMID: 11427225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2000 Jan-Apr;4(1-2):25-30.

Blood pressure variations assessed by continuous 24-hour monitoring in menopausal
and climacteric women.

Noto R(1), Rapisarda A, Mirabella C, Landolina C, Meli S, Leanza A, Quartarone D,
Rizzo S, Sciacchitano G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Medicina Interna e Medicina d'Urgenza, Università degli Studi di
Catania, Italy.

Changes in the metabolic hormonal balance during the climacteric and menopause,
especially surgically induced menopause, increase the risk of acute
cerebrocardiovascular complications. This major risk may be linked to changes in 
blood pressure. In this study we performed twenty-four ambulatory blood pressure 
monitoring in climacteric (C), menopausal (PM), and surgically induced menopausal
women (SM) to determine mean diurnal and nocturnal systodiastolic levels and
percentage peaks, as variations in the pressure profile may be linked to organ
damage. Our results showed that the entire series presented mainly diastolic
increments (mDBP: HPM = 104.4 +/- 5.1; HSM = 106.3 +/- 2.9; HC = 100.2 +/- 3.1), 
and that this rise was greater in surgically induced menopausal women. In
addition, these subjects presented the highest diastolic and systolic pressure
peaks (HSM 37/42 versus HPM 35/36 and HC 29/31) also during the night (nocturnal 
peak: HSM 15/19 versus HPM 10/12 and HC 5/15). Non dippers seem more exposed to
cerebrocardiovascular disease. Our results revealed that climacteric patients
affected by arterial hypertension (mSBP = 162.2 +/- 4.1; mDBP = 100.2 +/- 3.1; 24
h systolic peak % = 24, diastolic peak % = 24) during the climacteric presented
the same levels as observed in conclaimed menopause (mSBP 165.2 +/- 5.5; mDBP =
104.2 +/- 5.1; 24 h systolic peak % = 28, diastolic peak % = 29). Therefore, 24 h
blood pressure monitoring is able to show that the pressure changes in
hypertensive climacteric and menopausal women and could detect women who are at a
greater risk of organ damage.

PMID: 11409186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2001 Feb;25(2):185-90.

Prevalence of overweight and obesity in a rural southern Italy population and
relationships with total and cardiovascular mortality: the Ventimiglia di Sicilia
project.

Barbagallo CM(1), Cavera G, Sapienza M, Noto D, Cefalù AB, Pagano M, Montalto G, 
Notarbartolo A, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, University of Palermo,
Palermo, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the prevalence of overweight and obesity and their
relationships with the main cardiovascular risk factors in the population of
Ventimiglia di Sicilia, a rural village in Southern Italy characterized by low
cholesterol levels and by a low incidence of early coronary heart disease
mortality. We related all deaths to body weight and fat distribution during an 8 
y follow-up.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional and prospective observational study.
SUBJECTS: A total of 835 free-living individuals, 363 males and 472 females, of
age between 20 and 69 y.
MEASUREMENTS: In all participants body weight, waist-to-hip ratio (WHR),
cardiovascular risk factors and plasma lipids were measured. During the
follow-up, total and cardiovascular deaths were registered.
RESULTS: We found a high overall prevalence of subjects with overweight or
obesity (respectively 45.0% and 27.7%), with great differences among classes of
age. As expected, body weight and fat distribution were associated with diabetes,
hypertension, dyslipidemia and with a worsening of lipid profile. During the
follow-up we registered 37 total and 11 cardiovascular deaths. All-cause and
cardiovascular mortality risks were, respectively, 1.64 (95% CI 0.65-4.15) and
2.71 (95% CI 0.29-25.26) in subjects with a body mass index (BMI) of 27-29.99
kg/m2 and 2.45 (95% CI 1.03-5.87) and 5.36 (95% CI 1.41-62.01) in subjects with a
BMI of > or =30 kg/m2 in comparison with participants with a BMI of <27 kg/m2,
and 3.48 (95% CI 1.46-8.30) and 4.55 (95% CI 1.12-18.40) in subjects with a WHR
higher than the median in comparison with individuals with a WHR lower than the
median.
CONCLUSION: The Ventimiglia di Sicilia Study highlights the great importance of
overweight and obesity as a public health issue in a rural population and
indicates that it is necessary to consider the impact of body weight and fat
distribution on both total and CHD mortality.

PMID: 11410818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2001 Jun;129(2-3):319-26.

Calcitonin-like substance in the plasma of Cyclostomata and its putative role.

Suzuki N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Faculty of Science, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa
927-0553, Uchiura, Japan. nobuo@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

The present study indicated that in the lamprey, Lampetra japonica, which
undergoes a spawning migration from seawater to freshwater in its life cycle, a
calcitonin (CT)-like substance was not detected in the plasma of seawater-adapted
specimens (both sexes), but it was detected in the plasma of freshwater-adapted
specimens (both sexes) by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay using anti-salmon CT 
serum. Furthermore, this substance increased with the gonad somatic index (GSI)
in both sexes. In lamprey, therefore, this CT-like substance may have some
relationship with gonadal maturation. In the plasma of the hagfish, Eptatretus
burgeri, on the other hand, the CT-like substance was always extremely high
(47.2+/-4.2 ng/ml) independently of GSI in both sexes. However, a correlation was
found between this substance and plasma calcium. In hagfish, the CT-like
substance may participate in calcium homeostasis, as does calcium excretion via
bile, because the hagfish has the highest bile calcium concentration determined
to date among vertebrates, with a level corresponding to 12-fold that in plasma. 
This speculation is supported by reports that, in rat and cartilaginous fish, CT 
acts on calcium excretion via bile. In both fishes, moreover, the molecular
weight of these substances was equal to that of salmon CT, which strongly
suggests that these substances detected here are their CTs.

PMID: 11399465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Colloid Interface Sci. 2001 Jul 1;239(1):217-221.

Effects of Nonionic Micelles on the Rate of Mononuclear Heterocyclic
Rearrangement of (Z)-Phenylhydrazones of 5-Substituted
3-Benzoyl-1,2,4-oxadiazoles.

Guernelli S(1), Noto R, Sbriziolo C, Spinelli D, Liveri ML.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica "E. Paternó", Viale delle Scienze, Palermo,
90128, Italy

Nonionic Triton X-100 micelles solubilize the otherwise water-insoluble
(Z)-phenylhydrazones of some 5-substituted 3-benzoyl-1,2,4-oxadiazoles to an
extent suitable for studying the occurrence of a general-base-catalyzed
rearrangement in the presence of borate buffers (pH 9.6). The kinetic data,
obtained at 40.0 degrees C over a wide range of surfactant concentrations, are
found to conform to a reaction scheme which implies partitioning of the
substrates and the base between water and the micellar pseudophase. Evidence that
both the rate of the rearrangement reactions and the binding of the substrates to
the micellar aggregates are primarily governed by the steric requirements of the 
5-substituent group is obtained. Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11397067  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


118. Gynecol Oncol. 2001 Jun;81(3):391-7.

Use of GnRH analogs for functional protection of the ovary and preservation of
fertility during cancer treatment in adolescents: a preliminary report.

Pereyra Pacheco B(1), Méndez Ribas JM, Milone G, Fernández I, Kvicala R, Mila T, 
Di Noto A, Contreras Ortiz O, Pavlovsky S.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology Section, Hospital de Clinicas, Universidad
de Buenos Aires, Argentina. pereyrapachecob@vianetworks.com.ar

OBJECTIVE: Recent success in polychemotherapy (PCT) in adolescent female cancer
patients has become a source of concern for specialists who also strive to
preserve fertility. We studied whether gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
analogs could prevent the early onset of ovarian insufficiency postchemotherapy
and protect fertility.
METHODS: The patients were divided into three groups: Control group 1 (Group A), 
premenarchal patients aged 3 to 7.5 years (n = 5), were not given GnRH analogs
administered prior to PCT. Postmenarchal patients (Group B), aged 14.7 to 20
years (n = 12) with normal menstrual rhythm and ovulatory cycles, received
treatment with GnRH analogs prior to PCT. Control group 2 (Group C),
postmenarchal patients aged 15.9 to 20 years (n = 4), received PCT but no GnRH
analog protection. All groups received the PCT regimens CAVPE, CVPP, ABVD, TAMO, 
ARA-C, and MTT. In group B, leuprolide acetate inhibition was obtained with a
depot injection administered each month before and during treatment with PCT. To 
accelerate the timing of ovarian regression, a subcutaneous injection (0.2 mg)
was administered simultaneously.
RESULTS: In Group A, patients had spontaneous menarche between the ages of 12 and
17.9 years, followed by normal menstruation and ovulatory cycles. Three patients 
became pregnant. After GnRH analog withdrawal, Group B patients continued with
normal ovulatory cycles. Two patients became pregnant. Group C patients presented
hypergonadotrophic hypoestrogenic amenorrhea.
CONCLUSION: GnRH analog treatment before and during PCT enhances ovarian function
and preserves adolescent fertility. The results must be confirmed in a larger
study.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11371127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Pediatrics. 2001 May;107(5):1095-9.

Noninvasive assessment of the early progression of atherosclerosis in adolescents
with Kawasaki disease and coronary artery lesions.

Noto N(1), Okada T, Yamasuge M, Taniguchi K, Karasawa K, Ayusawa M, Sumitomo N,
Harada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Cardiology, Nihon University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan. nnoto@med.email.ne.jp

OBJECTIVES: The severity of carotid arteriosclerosis, defined as increased
intima-media thickness (IMT) visible with B-mode ultrasound, is correlated with
risk factors for coronary heart disease. Little is known, however, about the
relation of IMT, the stiffness of the common carotid artery, and the progression 
of atherosclerosis in children with Kawasaki disease (KD) and coronary artery
lesions (CAL).
DESIGN: We investigated the associations among total cholesterol (TC), high
density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), low density lipoprotein cholesterol
(LDL-C), triglyceride, TC/HDL-C, ApoE genotype, glycohemoglobin, IMT, and
arterial stiffness by high resolution ultrasound in 20 adolescents with KD and
CAL (age: 16.6 +/- 4.1 years, males: 60%) and 20 sex- and age-matched healthy
controls (Cont).
RESULTS: No significant differences were observed in the values of body mass
index and blood pressure between the 2 groups. Also no significant differences
were observed in the levels of TC, LDL-C, HDL-C, triglyceride, TC/HDL-C within
normal values, or the allele frequency of Apo E4 between the 2 groups. However,
the values of IMT, stiffness, and glycohemoglobin in patients with KD were
significantly higher than those in Cont (0.53 +/- 0.07 vs 0.46 +/- 0.05 mm, P
<.05; 4.11 +/- 0.86 vs 2.94 +/- 0.91, P <.001; 5.0 +/- 0.4 vs 4.6 +/- 0.2%, P
<.05). A significant relationship was observed between sex and the mean IMT (r = 
0.46) in Cont; however, no significant correlation was found between mean IMT and
other variables in either group. Although the arterial stiffness was strongly
related to body mass index (r = 0.58) and systolic blood pressure (r = 0.55) in
Cont, no significant relationship was observed between the stiffness and any
variable tested in patients with KD.
CONCLUSIONS: The less distensible carotid wall in patients with KD compared with 
that in Cont without major alteration of the lipid profile is likely to be
secondary to the changes in arterial walls after a diffuse vasculitis involving
noncoronary arteries. These results indicate that the coronary arteries may be
predisposed to accelerated atherosclerosis in patients with KD and CAL.

PMID: 11331692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Toxicol Sci. 2000 Oct;25 Spec No:79-85.

Collaborative work to evaluate toxicity on male reproductive organs by repeated
dose studies in rats 7). Effects of reserpine in 2- and 4-weeks studies.

Yamauchi K(1), Takaura Y, Noto T, Saegusa T, Nakatsuji S, Ohishi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Toxicology Research Laboratories, Fujisawa Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 2-1-6
Kashima, Yodogawa, Osaka 532-8514, Japan.

To assess the efficacy of different period of treatment for evaluating male
reproductive toxicity in rats, reserpine was subcutaneously administered on a
daily basis to male Sprague-Dawley rats at dosages of 0.05, 0.1 or 0.2 mg/kg for 
2 weeks or at dosages of 0.05 or 0.1 mg/kg for 4 weeks. At the end of the
administration period the animals were sacrificed and sperm counts, organ weights
and histopathological changes in the reproductive organs were examined. The sperm
number in the caudal epididymis and genital organ weights were not affected by
reserpine with either 2- or 4-weeks treatment. In the 4-weeks study,
histopathological examination of the testes revealed retention of step 19
spermatids in the seminiferous tubules of stages IX to XII and decreased
secretory content of the prostate in the 0.05 and 0.1 mg/kg groups. In the
2-weeks study, although no distinct histopathological changes were observed in
the 0.05 mg/kg group, decreased secretory content of the prostate, apoptosis of
spermatocytes in the seminiferous tubules of stage VII and cell debris of the
epididymis were observed in the 0.1 and 0.2 mg/kg groups. These results suggested
that 2-weeks treatment with reserpine is sufficient for detection of testicular
toxicity, although higher dosage levels are appropriate than for 4-weeks
treatment.

PMID: 11349458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Med Health R I. 2001 Apr;84(4):132.

Images in medicine. Positron emission tomography (PET) in the evaluation of a
solitary pulmonary nodule.

Scheiner JD(1), Noto RB.

Author information: 
(1)Brown Medical School, USA. jscheiner@lifespan.org

PMID: 11347350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Nihon Rinsho. 2001 Mar;59 Suppl 3:442-7.

[VA-HIT Study [Veterans Affairs High-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol Intervention
Trial Study]].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto H(1), Kinoshita M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolism, Tokyo University Hospital.

PMID: 11347111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 May;86(5):1865-7.

Thyroid storm in a child following radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy: a
consequence of RAI versus withdrawal of antithyroid medication.

Kadmon PM(1), Noto RB, Boney CM, Goodwin G, Gruppuso PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Rhode Island Hospital and Brown University,
Providence, Rhode Island 02903, USA.

A 7.5-yr-old boy with Graves' disease, difficult to control with antithyroid
medication and radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy, developed thyroid storm
encephalopathy on day 13 after withdrawal of methimazole therapy, 4 days after
iodine-131 treatment. We attributed his thyroid storm to withdrawal of
antithyroid medication as opposed to RAI therapy. We interpret this case as
indicating that there may be a need to reevaluate the duration of antithyroid
medication withdrawal before RAI therapy for hyperthyroid children at increased
risk for thyroid storm.

PMID: 11344172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2001 Feb;24(1):43-50.

Genetic analysis of phytosterolaemia.

Togo M(1), Toda T, Nguyen LA, Kubota S, Tsukamoto K, Satoh H, Hara M, Iso-o N,
Noto H, Kimura S, Nakahara K, Seyama Y, Hashimoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The University
of Tokyo, Japan.

Two women with multiple xanthomas, intermittent arthritis and thrombocytopenia
were diagnosed as phytosterolaemia, an autosomal-recessive lipid storage disease,
based on their increased serum concentrations of beta-sitosterol, campesterol and
sitostanol. The gene responsible for this disease is located within a distance of
18 cM between microsatellite markers of D2S 1788 and D2S1352 at chromosome 2p21. 
We genotyped the patients and their family members with 16 microsatellite markers
around this locus. The results from the homozygosity mapping of one family
suggested that the gene was located within the distance of 12.6 cM between
D2S2328 and D2S1352. We have shortened the genetic distance by 5.4 cM.

PMID: 11286381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Acta Haematol. 2000;104(4):207-11.

Evolution to acute myeloblastic leukemia from chronic neutrophilic leukemia with 
dysplastic features in granulocytic lineage.

Ota S(1), Tanaka J, Kobayashi S, Tsuda Y, Mori A, Noto S, Yamamoto Y, Hashino S, 
Musashi M, Imamura M, Asaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine,
Kita-15, Nishi-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo, 060-8648, Japan. shuota@med.hokudai.ac.jp

We experienced the case of an 82-year-old man with chronic neutrophilic leukemia 
(CNL) with dysplastic features in the granulocytic lineage which subsequently
progressed to acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML) with myelofibrosis. The patient
had hepatosplenomegaly, but there was no evident cause of neutrophilic
leukocytosis. The cytogenetic study showed that he had a normal karyotype.
Concentrations of the serum granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) were
not detectable. Two years after the diagnosis of CNL, blastic transformation to
AML occurred with myelofibrosis and significant morphological abnormalities in
neutrophils. The blasts were positive for myeloperoxidase, CD33, CD34, and
HLA-DR, and the presence of dysplasia within the granulocytic lineage suggested
that he had an abnormality at the level of the granulocyte-committed progenitors.
Heterogeneous origins of CNL might lead to various clinicopathological features
in each case.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11279313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Int J Urol. 2001 Apr;8(4):177-83.

Effect of KMD-3213, an alpha1A-adrenoceptor antagonist, on the prostatic urethral
pressure and blood pressure in male decerebrate dogs.

Akiyama K(1), Noto H, Nishizawa O, Sugaya K, Yamagishi R, Kitazawa M, Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Central Research Laboratories, KISSEI Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Minamiazumi,
Nagano, Japan. katsuyoshi_akiyama@pharm.kissei.co.jp

BACKGROUND: KMD-3213 is an alpha1A-adrenoceptor-selective antagonist currently
being developed for the treatment of urinary outlet obstruction in patients with 
benign prostatic hyperplasia. In the present study, the uroselectivity of
KMD-3213 was evaluated and compared with that of prazosin and tamsulosin in a
decerebrate dog model.
METHODS: Intercollicular decerebration was carried out in male mongrel dogs under
anesthesia. The inhibitory effects of intravenously and intraduodenally
administered compounds on the increase in intraurethral pressure (IUP) induced by
electrical stimulation of the hypogastric nerve were estimated. Systemic blood
pressure was measured simultaneously.
RESULTS: The alpha1-antagonists tested produced a dose-dependent inhibition of
the induced IUP response and decreased mean blood pressure (MBP). The ID50 of
KMD-3213, tamsulosin and prazosin for IUP (dose required to inhibit the increase 
in IUP by 50%) was 3.15, 1.73 and 11.8 microg/kg i.v., respectively, and the ED20
for the hypotensive effect (dose required to reduce MBP by 20%) was 8.03, 0.59
and 2.46 microg/kg i.v., respectively. The data indicate that uroselectivity
(ED20/ID50) of KMD-3213 is 12- and 7.5-fold higher than that of prazosin and
tamsulosin, respectively. When the drugs were administered intraduodenally,
KMD-3213 was sufficiently absorbed from the digestive tract and continued to
demonstrate at least 3.8-fold higher uroselectivity than tamsulosin.
CONCLUSION: Based on these findings, KMD-3213 appears to be an effective orally
active compound for decreasing urethral resistance during micturition that does
not induce any negative cardiovascular effects in patients with benign prostatic 
hyperplasia.

PMID: 11260350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Ther Apher. 2001 Feb;5(1):64-7.

Plasma exchange in stiff-man syndrome.

Shariatmadar S(1), Noto TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Miami/Jackson Memorial Medical Center, 
Florida 33101, USA.

Stiff-man syndrome (STS) is a rare neurological disorder characterized by
involuntary axial and proximal limb rigidity and continuous motor unit activity
on electromyography (EMG). Autoantibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD)
present in 60% of the patients are implicated. We report on the use of plasma
exchange (PE) in 2 patients with STS whose serum and cerebrospinal fluid were
negative for GAD autoantibodies. One patient showed minimal clinical improvement 
following PE while the second reported subjective improvement, but not any
different from that with medications. Based on the results of PE in our patients,
it seems that those who are autoantibody negative are less likely to respond.
Whether a more aggressive approach to PE will be beneficial remains speculative.

PMID: 11258614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Epidemiol. 2001 Jan;11(1):16-23.

Characteristics of cataracts in the Chinese Singaporean.

Sasaki H(1), Shui YB, Kojima M, Chew SJ, Ono M, Katoh N, Cheng HM, Takahashi N,
Sasaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Ophthalmology, Kanazawa Medical University, Uchinada, Ishikawa,
Japan.

PURPOSE: To conduct an epidemiological survey of cataracts and examine the
characteristics of lens opacities in Chinese Singaporeans. The results are then
compared with those from two similar surveys previously done in Japan in Noto
Area, Honshu, and Amami, Kyushu, respectively.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: 468 subjects of > or = 50 years of age, who responded to
the invitation to participate, were examined. Examination principally included
photo-documentation of the anterior and posterior segments of both eyes.
Evaluation and grading of lens opacities were done using graphical analysis of
Scheimpflug and retro-illumination images. Inter-group comparisons were based on 
statistical analysis of cataract prevalence and distribution.
RESULTS: The prevalence of clear lenses decreased with aging with no significant 
difference between males and females--a finding common to Singapore and the two
Japanese study groups. The prevalence of cataracts (or lens opacities of Grade II
and above) in 60-79 year-old Singapore subjects was significantly higher than
Noto and Amami subjects in the same age group. Further, cortical opacity was the 
main type in Singapore subjects in their 50s and which was significantly higher
than Noto subjects of the same age group. In all age groups, the distribution and
prevalence of both nuclear and subcapsular types in the Singapore group were
higher than the two Japanese study groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Cataracts in Chinese Singaporeans are characterized by a high
prevalence of nuclear opacities which was generally seen in tropics and
sub-tropics. Our study also suggested the involvement of solar-UV in cortical
cataracts as well as that of additional risk factors, such as environmental
temperature and race, in nuclear and subcapsular cataract formation.

PMID: 11253906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Gend Specif Med. 2000 Sep-Oct;3(6):29-35.

Lateralized cortical perfusion in women with Alzheimer's disease.

Ott BR(1), Heindel WC, Tan Z, Noto RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Memorial Hospital of Rhode Island, 111
Brewster St, Pawtucket, RI 02860, USA. Brian_Ott@mhri.org

OBJECTIVE: To define the pathophysiologic substrate of gender differences in
cognition and behavior in Alzheimer's disease (AD).
DESIGN: Hemispheric regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) was studied in a
consecutive series of dementia patients using single photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT).
PARTICIPANTS: Subjects included 300 outpatients who were studied with SPECT as
part of a diagnostic evaluation for degenerative dementia or memory disorder.
METHOD: Based on qualitative descriptions by a radiologist, subjects were
classified as having unilateral left, unilateral right, bilateral, or no
perfusion defects. Semiquantitative analysis of SPECT images was also performed
using region of interest radionuclide counts normalized to the cerebellum.
RESULTS: Among 174 females and 126 males, unilateral left hemisphere defects were
found more commonly in women than men (24% vs 10%; chi 2 = 9.4; P = .009). This
observation was most significant for the 103 females and 62 males regarded as
having probable AD (26% vs 8%; chi 2 = 9.3; P = .01). In a multiple regression
model of clinical variables, shorter duration of disease and female gender were
significant independent predictors of the unilateral left hemisphere pattern
among those with probable AD. Age, family history, education, handedness, and
severity of cognitive impairment were not significant contributors.
CONCLUSIONS: Women with AD exhibit greater heterogeneity in rCBF than men.
Asymmetry in rCBF occurs more often in women. In some cases, this is related to
relative preservation of right hemisphere function in women.

PMID: 11253380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Panminerva Med. 2000 Sep;42(3):187-92.

Association of alpha-interferon and acetyl cysteine in patients with chronic C
hepatitis.

Neri S(1), Ierna D, Antoci S, Campanile E, D'Amico RA, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Internal and Emergency Medicine, University of Catania, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Numerous experimental findings have underlined the relationships
between liver damage and production of oxygen-derived free radicals during
inflammation. In chronic hepatitis C liver disease this damage may be attributed 
to altered oxide-reductive balance and glutathione (GSH) depletion. Moreover, it 
may be linked to chronic inflammation provoked by the replicative activity of the
hepatitis C virus and its relationships with immune system cells. Our aim was to 
assess the effects of combined IFN + NAC treatment to compare the effects of
interferon alpha-n1 associated with N-acetyl cysteine treatment with the results 
observed using interferon therapy alone.
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: prospective randomised study.
SETTING: Ambulatory and hospitalised care.
PATIENTS: 77 selected patients affected by chronic C hepatitis.
INTERVENTIONS: our patients were investigated by laboratory tests (ALT values,
RIBA test, HCV-RNA, oxide-reductive balance), liver biopsy and liver US. The
recruited subjects were treated with interferon and N-acetyl cysteine or with
interferon alone.
RESULTS: Our findings confirmed the presence of oxidative stress in patients with
chronic hepatitis C and showed earlier relapse in patients treated with
interferon alone. The difference between the results in patients treated with
interferon and N-acetyl cysteine and those on interferon alone was significant.
CONCLUSIONS: The good results and absence of side effects in patients treated
with interferon + N-acetyl cysteine recommend wider use of this association.

PMID: 11218623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Psychoactive Drugs. 2000 Oct-Dec;32(4):399-405.

Concepts of dependence among Brazilian alcohol- and drug-dependent patients.

da Silva EA(1), Noto AR, Faria RF, Formigoni ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology, UNIFESP (Federal University of São Paulo),
Brazil. eroy@psicobio.epm.br

Studies suggest that the concepts that drug dependent persons have about their
problems could influence adherence to treatment and outcome. The objective of
this study was to compare these concepts in different groups of patients. Three
groups of drug-dependent patients (diagnosed according to DSM-III-R criteria)
were compared: 64 dependent on alcohol only, 56 dependent only on other drugs and
39 dependent on both alcohol and drugs. They were asked: "What do you think about
your problem?" and the responses were qualitatively analyzed and classified into 
themes. For the whole sample, the main themes mentioned were: the function of
alcohol and drugs in their lives (50%), the etiology of dependence (32%) and
reasons for initial use (21%). Patients dependent on alcohol associated their use
with coping, while patients dependent on other drugs reported pleasure seeking.
In regard to etiology, most patients classified their dependence as a habit.
Patients dependent on alcohol tended to attribute an organic etiology to their
problem, while those dependent on other drugs most frequently considered moral
aspects as important. This study suggests that there are differences between
these three groups in the appraisal of their problem. Professionals interested in
treatment matching need to take these findings into account, as they may
influence compliance and treatment outcome.

PMID: 11210202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Cardiol. 2000 Dec;36(6):387-95.

[Assessment of cardiac sympathetic nerve activity in children with chronic heart 
failure using quantitative iodine-123 metaiodobenzylguanidine imaging].

[Article in Japanese]

Karasawa K(1), Ayusawa M, Noto N, Sumitomo N, Okada T, Harada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nihon University School of Medicine, Ohyaguchi
Kamimachi 30-1, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8610.

OBJECTIVES: Cardiac sympathetic nerve activity in children with chronic heart
failure was examined by quantitative iodine-123 metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG)
myocardial imaging in 33 patients aged 7.5 +/- 6.1 years (range 0-18 years),
including 8 with cardiomyopathy, 15 with congenital heart disease, 3 with
anthracycrine cardiotoxicity, 3 with myocarditis, 3 with primary pulmonary
hypertension and 1 with Pompe's disease.
METHODS: Anterior planar images were obtained 15 min and 3 hr after the injection
of iodine-123 MIBG. The cardiac iodine-123 MIBG uptake was assessed as the heart 
to upper mediastinum uptake activity ratio of the delayed image (H/M) and the
cardiac percentage washout rate (%WR).
RESULTS: The severity of chronic heart failure was class I (no medication) in 8
patients, class II (no symptom with medication) in 9, class III (symptom even
with medication) in 10 and class IV (late cardiac death) in 6. H/M was 2.33 +/-
0.22 in chronic heart failure class I, 2.50 +/- 0.34 in class II, 1.95 +/- 0.61
in class III, and 1.39 +/- 0.29 in class IV (p < 0.05). %WR was 24.8 +/- 12.8% in
chronic heart failure class I, 23.3 +/- 10.2% in class II, 49.2 +/- 24.5% in
class III, and 66.3 +/- 26.5% in class IV (p < 0.05). The low H/M and high %WR
were proportionate to the severity of chronic heart failure.
CONCLUSIONS: Cardiac iodine-123 MIBG showed cardiac adrenergic neuronal
dysfunction in children with severe chronic heart failure. Quantitative
iodine-123 MIBG myocardial imaging is clinically useful as a predictor of
therapeutic outcome and mortality in children with chronic heart failure.

PMID: 11190582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Breast Cancer. 2001;8(1):84-9.

A case of adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) of the breast and review of the utility 
of preoperative imaging diagnose.

Okamoto Y(1), Sumiyama Y, Arima Y, Sakuta M, Okuda T, Noto Y, Naka I, Kiribayashi
T, Takahashi K, Kuwajima A.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Surgery, Toho University School of Medicine, 2-17-6
Oohashi, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8515, Japan.

A case of adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) of the breast in a 66-year-old woman is 
reported herein. ACC accounts for about 0.1% of all breast cancers. Our patient
presented with a small, elastic and hard mass, measuring 2.0x2.0 cm, between both
outer quadrants of the right breast. Although physical examination,
ultrasonography and magnetic resonance (MR) mammography suggested a benign tumor,
aspiration biopsy cytology (ABC) was performed twice, and the second ABC specimen
was evaluated as suspicious for breast carcinoma. Breast conserving surgery with 
a level II lymph node dissection was subsequently performed. There was no lymph
node metastases and estrogen receptor (ER) status was negative. Light microscopy 
revealed various growth patterns, with the cells showing biphasic cellularity.
According to immunohistochemical analyses, CEA, actin and vimentin were positive,
S-100 protein was negative, and the cytokeratin reaction was partially positive. 
Therefore, ACC of the breast was diagnosed. Although ACC of the breast is a rare 
neoplasm, it should be considered in the differential diagnosis even if various
diagnostic imaging studies suggest a benign tumor of the breast. Awareness of
this tumor will help prevent misdiagnosis.

PMID: 11180772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. JAMA. 2000 Apr 5;283(13):1686-7.

Tourism and smoke-free restaurant ordinances.

Noto H.

Comment on
    JAMA. 1999 May 26;281(20):1911-8.

PMID: 10755488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Minerva Ginecol. 2000 Jul-Aug;52(7-8):283-8.

[Combined vaginal and laparoscopic surgical treatment of genito-urinary
prolapse].

[Article in Italian]

Montironi PL(1), Petruzzelli P, Di Noto C, Gibbone C, De Sanctis C, Fedele M.

Author information: 
(1)Ospedale Santa Croce, Moncalieri.

BACKGROUND: A new combined technique for vaginal prolapse and cystocele using
minimal access surgery is presented and evaluated.
METHODS: Thirty-five patients (mean age 57.1) with genitourinary prolapse (II-IV 
degree Baden-Walker) without urinary incontinence underwent surgery between
January 98 and December 99 with 4-24 months of follow-up (mean 14.6 months). The 
surgical stages include total vaginal hysterectomy with bilateral adnexectomy,
wide opening of the vagina without excessive removal of the vaginal mucosa; the
bladder is loosened and the polypropylene mesh (PPM) is lightly fixed to the
bladder and stitched to the anterior and posterior vaginal wall. The PPM is
introduced into the abdomen and laparoscopically fixed to the sacral promontory
with titanium spirals having checked vaginally the right tension of the mesh.
Accurately laparoscopic peritonization of the PPM ends the surgical procedure.
RESULTS: The operation time was 90'-140' (mean 112') followed by 3-7 days of
hospitalization (mean 4.3). Vaginal prolapse and cystocele were corrected in all 
cases. No surgical complications, de novo urinary incontinence, prolapse
recurrence or inconvenience to sexual activity have been observed. There was one 
erosion of the vaginal wall by the PPM 45 days after the operation.
CONCLUSIONS: Initial studies suggest that laparoscopic sacrocolpopexy and
cystocele repair with PPM is an effective treatment for genitourinary prolapse.
If subsequent studies will confirm these findings, the development of minimal
access techniques for genitourinary prolapse will represent a significant
surgical advance.

PMID: 11148850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Eur J Pharmacol. 2001 Jan 5;411(1-2):161-168.

Pharmacological profile of T-1032, a novel specific phosphodiesterase type 5
inhibitor, in isolated rat aorta and rabbit corpus cavernosum.

Takagi M(1), Mochida H, Noto T, Yano K, Inoue H, Ikeo T, Kikkawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Research Laboratory, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., 2-2-50, Kawagishi,
Saitama 335-8505, Toda, Japan.

This study was designed to examine the pharmacological properties of T-1032
(methyl-2-(4-aminophenyl)-1,2-dihydro-1-oxo-7-(2-pyridinylmethoxy)-4-(3,4,5-trime
thoxyphenyl)-3-isoquinoline carboxylate sulfate), a novel phosphodiesterase type 
5 inhibitor, in isolated rat aorta and rabbit corpus cavernosum. T-1032
(3x10(-11) to 3x10(-7) M) caused an endothelium-dependent relaxation in the
isolated rat aorta precontracted with phenylephrine, and the relaxation was
accompanied by an increase in cGMP but not cAMP levels. The T-1032-induced
relaxation was attenuated by N(G)-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester (L-NAME) (10(-3) 
M), a nitric oxide (NO) synthase inhibitor, or
1H-[1,2,4]oxadiazolo[4,3-alpha]quinoxalin-1-one (ODQ) (10(-5) M), a guanylyl
cyclase inhibitor. T-1032 (10(-9), 10(-8) M) produced a potentiation of the
relaxation induced by sodium nitroprusside, but not of the relaxation induced by 
isoproterenol. In the isolated rabbit corpus cavernosum precontracted with
phenylephrine, the electrical field stimulation-induced relaxation was attenuated
by treatment with tetrodotoxin (10(-6) M) as well as L-NAME (10(-4) M). The
L-NAME-inhibited relaxation was restored by treatment with L-arginine (5x10(-4)
M). T-1032 (10(-9) to 10(-6) M) and sildenafil (10(-9) to 10(-6) M) produced a
potentiation of the electrical field stimulation-induced relaxation as well as a 
decrease in basal tension in a concentration-dependent manner. It was concluded
that T-1032 had potentiating effects on the NO/cGMP signaling pathway in isolated
tissues, probably through specific blockade of phosphodiesterase type 5. T-1032
would be a useful compound to examine the physiologic functions of
phosphodiesterase type 5 in mammalian tissues.

PMID: 11137871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Immunol. 2000 Oct 15;165(8):4685-96.

Impaired CD4 T cell activation due to reliance upon B cell-mediated costimulation
in nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice.

Noorchashm H(1), Moore DJ, Noto LE, Noorchashm N, Reed AJ, Reed AL, Song HK,
Mozaffari R, Jevnikar AM, Barker CF, Naji A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pennsylvania Medical Center,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Diabetes in nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice results from the activation of
I-A(g7)-restricted, islet-reactive T cells. This study delineates several
characteristics of NOD CD4 T cell activation, which, independent of I-A(g7), are 
likely to promote a dysregulated state of peripheral T cell tolerance. NOD CD4 T 
cell activation was found to be resistant to antigenic stimulation via the TCR
complex, using the progression of cell division as a measure. The extent of NOD
CD4 T cell division was highly sensitive to changes in Ag ligand density.
Moreover, even upon maximal TCR complex-mediated stimulation, NOD CD4 T cell
division prematurely terminated. Maximally stimulated NOD CD4 T cells failed to
achieve the threshold number of division cycles required for optimal
susceptibility to activation-induced death, a critical mechanism for the
regulation of peripheral T cell tolerance. Importantly, these aberrant activation
characteristics were not T cell-intrinsic but resulted from reliance on B cell
costimulatory function in NOD mice. Costimulation delivered by nonautoimmune
strain APCs normalized NOD CD4 T cell division and the extent of
activation-induced death. Thus, by disrupting the progression of CD4 T cell
division, polarization of APC costimulatory function to the B cell compartment
could allow the persistence and activation of diabetogenic cells in NOD mice.

PMID: 11035112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2000 Oct;19(3):223-8.

Drinking on campus. What Do we know about reducing alcohol use among college
students?

Walters ST(1), Bennett ME, Noto JV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of New Mexico, Logan Hall, Albuquerque,
NM 87131, USA. swalters@unm.edu

Drinking and related problems on the college campus have reached near epidemic
levels. In order to address this trend, many colleges have launched alcohol
prevention and intervention programs for college students. Unfortunately, most
such programs are either not empirically validated or are plainly based on models
that have shown poor efficacy. This overview of the college treatment literature 
describes the kinds of interventions that have shown the best success and offers 
directions for future studies. In general, educational and abstinence-based
approaches show the least efficacy, while other types of skills, attitudinal and 
feedback-based interventions based on aspects of the social learning model appear
to be more successful. In addition to employing those approaches that have shown 
empirical success, a re-examination of the role that alcohol plays in the larger 
campus culture is crucial.

PMID: 11027891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2000 Sep;294(3):870-5.

Potentiation of penile tumescence by T-1032, a new potent and specific
phosphodiesterase type V inhibitor, in dogs.

Noto T(1), Inoue H, Ikeo T, Kikkawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Research Laboratory, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., Toda, Saitama, Japan.
t-noto@tanabe.co.jp

We examined the mechanism underlying the potentiation of penile tumescence by
methyl 2-(4-aminophenyl)-1, 2dihydro-1-oxo-7-(2-pyridinylmethoxy)-4-(3,4,
5-trimethoxyphenyl)3-isoquinoline carboxylate sulfate (T-1032), a new potent and 
selective phosphodiesterase type V inhibitor. In vivo, pelvic nerve stimulation
induced a penile tumescence together with increase of total nitric oxide
metabolite levels within the corpus cavernosa of anesthetized dogs. Intravenous
(1-100 microg/kg) and intraduodenal (3, 30, 300 microg/kg) treatment with T-1032 
dose dependently potentiated the tumescence. The potency of T-1032 was equivalent
to that of sildenafil. T-1032 did not influence the intracavernous pressure when 
the pelvic nerve stimulation was absent. The potentiation of tumescence was more 
pronounced by intracavernous than i.v. injection. Intracavernous
N(G)-nitro-L-arginine, a nitric-oxide synthase inhibitor, but not
N(G)-nitro-D-arginine diminished the effects of T-1032 on the tumescence.
Furthermore, i.v. T-1032 augmented the tumescence induced by sodium nitroprusside
(SNP) but not by vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP). In vitro, in isolated
preparations of canine corpus cavernosum precontracted with phenylephrine, SNP
(0. 01-100 microM) and VIP (0.01-1 microM) produced a dose-dependent relaxation
accompanied by an increase in cGMP and cAMP levels, respectively. T-1032
augmented the relaxation induced by SNP but not by VIP. These data suggest that
oral treatment with T-1032 has potential to improve erectile dysfunction through 
the inhibition of phosphodiesterase type V in the smooth muscles of corpus
cavernosa.

PMID: 10945835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Nihon Naika Gakkai Zasshi. 2000 Jul 10;89(7):1358-65.

[Hyperthyroidism presenting as dysphagia] [In Process Citation]

[Article in Japanese]

Noto H, Mitsuhashi T, Ishibashi S, Kemura S.

PMID: 10934763  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


141. Vision Res. 2000;40(17):2359-67.

Effect of visual background on saccade adaptation in monkeys.

Robinson F(1), Noto C, Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure and Regional Primate Research Center,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-7420, USA. robinsn@u.washington.edu

The brain maintains saccade accuracy by modifying saccades that are consistently 
inaccurate (e.g. hypermetric). To determine whether this adaptation is influenced
by the visual background we used several different target and background
movements to elicit changes in saccade gain. In almost all cases, the target spot
drove gain changes. The background had no effect on, or slightly reduced,
adaptation. We conclude that the saccade adaptation mechanism is driven almost
entirely by stimuli on or near the fovea and is affected very little by visual
stimuli falling more peripherally.

PMID: 10927121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Int J Hematol. 2000 Jun;71(4):366-71.

Treatment with low-dose cytosine arabinoside followed by administration of
macrophage colony-stimulating factor prolongs the survival of patients with RAEB,
RAEB-T, or leukemic phase myelodysplastic syndrome: a pilot study.

Fukuhara T(1), Miyake T, Maekawa I, Kurosawa M, Suzuki S, Noto S, Mori A, Chiba
K, Toyoshima T, Hirano T, Morioka M, Tsutsumi Y, Okabe M, Kakinoki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Asahikawa City Hospital, Japan.

The treatment of patients with aggressive subclasses of myelodysplastic syndrome 
(MDS) remains a challenge. In an effort to improve the survival of patients with 
refractory anemia with excess blasts (RAEB), RAEB in transformation (RAEB-t), or 
acute myelogenous leukemia transformed from MDS (MDS-AML), we conducted a small
trial in which 28 such patients were treated with low-dose cytosine arabinoside
(LDAraC) followed by administration of macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(M-CSF). The overall rate of response to the treatment was 61%, including 39%
with a complete response, which is higher than rates obtained in previous studies
in which LDAraC alone was administered to patients with MDS. Median survival was 
23.5 months in cases of RAEB, 16.7 months in cases of RAEB-t, and 19.7 months in 
cases of MDS-AML. The overall survival of the study group appeared to be
prolonged in comparison with a historical control group of patients treated with 
LDAraC alone. It is suggested that M-CSF added to the administration of LDAraC
plays an active role in the therapy. No therapy-related death occurred. Some
unique actions of M-CSF were suggested in this trial. It is concluded that
therapy with LDAraC + M-CSF is a useful treatment option for patients with
aggressive subclasses of MDS and MDS-AML to provide better response and survival.

PMID: 10905057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Neurophysiol. 2000 Jul;84(1):88-95.

Temporal characteristics of error signals driving saccadic gain adaptation in the
macaque monkey.

Shafer JL(1), Noto CT, Fuchs AF.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Primate Research Center and Department of Physiology and Biophysics, 
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

Saccadic gain (saccade amplitude/target amplitude) can be reduced gradually by
repeatedly stepping the target backward during the saccade. The gain reduction
produced by this paradigm is thought to be driven by an error signal created by
the backstep. We investigated the effects of varying the timing of this error
signal relative to the end of the saccade by using two different paradigms in
macaques. In the brief backstep paradigm, the target was stepped backward 30%
during the saccade but extinguished after different durations. For very short
backstep durations (32 ms), little gain reduction occurred. As backstep duration 
increased, the amount of gain reduction also increased. When backstep duration
reached 80 ms, the amount of gain reduction was just under that achieved during
the conventional adaptation paradigm in which the backstep remained visible for
1000-1200 ms. In the delayed backstep paradigm, as the saccade occurred, we
extinguished the target and then, after a delay, illuminated it for 1 s at the
backstep location. In most experiments with short delay times of 16-64 ms, the
saccadic gain reduction reached that achieved during conventional adaptation. At 
delays of 112-208 ms, the amount of gain reduction decreased to approximately 75%
of that reached during conventional adaptation. With still longer delays, the
amount of gain reduction decreased more gradually. At delays of 750 ms, average
gain reduction was 10%. By delays of 1.5 s, gain reduction had fallen essentially
to zero. Taken together, these data suggest that the error signal must be present
for a limited time ( approximately 80-100 ms) after the saccade to produce the
most robust saccadic gain adaptation. However, errors present as long as 750 ms
after the saccade still can produce a significant gain reduction.

PMID: 10899186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Surg Today. 2000;30(6):544-7.

Herniation through both Winslow's foramen and a lesser omental defect: report of 
a case.

Saida Y(1), Nagao J, Takase M, Noto Y, Kusachi S, Kajiwara Y, Sumiyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Surgery, Toho University, School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.

The herniation of small bowel through Winslow's foramen is a rare type of
internal hernia which can cause ileus; however, a hernia traversing the lesser
sac is even more unusual. To the best of our knowledge, only 25 cases of
herniation through Winslow's foramen and 10 cases of lesser sac hernia have been 
reported in the Japanese literature. We describe herein the case of a 33-year-old
man who presented to our hospital complaining of abdominal pain in whom a plain
abdominal radiograph revealed small bowel gas with air-fluid levels, suggesting
ileus. Following admission, an ileus tube was inserted, but the intestinal shadow
did not improve and surgery was performed based on suspicion of an internal
hernia. Approximately 100 cm of ileum was found to have herniated through a
defect in the lesser omentum after passing through Winslow's foramen. Since the
herniated bowel was viable, manual reduction without resection was performed. The
patient had a satisfactory postoperative course, and was discharged on
postoperative day 11. There are many unknown aspects surrounding the etiology of 
Winslow's foramen hernia and lesser sac hernia, and although internal hernia is a
rare cause of ileus, its possibility should be kept in mind.

PMID: 10883469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Nihon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. 2000 Mar;37(3):250-4.

[A senile case of acute necrotizing myopathy presenting prolonged severe muscle
paralysis due to high dose glucocorticoid and muscle relaxant].

[Article in Japanese]

Sato T(1), Takahashi K, Okuma Y, Mizuno Y, Noto K, Katae M, Dambara T, Fukuchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Neurology, Juntendo University School
of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

An 82-year old man was admitted with dyspnea, productive cough and wheezing. In
addition to antibiotics (meropenem trihydrate 0.5 g/day), glucocorticoids
(hydrocortisone 1.250 mg, methylpredonisolone 4.250 mg) were administered for the
severe bronchospasms. Since his respiratory condition deteriorated, he underwent 
mechanical ventilation using a muscle relaxant (vecuronium bromide, total dose
776 mg) in combination with high dose glucocorticoid. As his pneumonia improved
on the 10th hospital day, we started weaning him from the ventilator. However, we
were unable to complete weaning from the ventilator because of prolonged
quadriplegia and paralysis of the respiratory muscles. A few days later,
myoglobinuria appeared. Electrophysiological examinations suggested the
involvement of both neuromuscular junctions and muscles. Muscle biopsy showed
rhabdomyolysis. Acute necrotizing myopathy was diagnosed due to high doses of
glucocorticoid, muscle relaxant, or both. He required about 3 months to be weaned
from the mechanical ventilation, and another 3 months to leave the hospital.
Based on our experience, we should consider acute myopathy as an adverse effect
of glucocorticoids, muscle relaxants or both in elderly patients who require
mechanical ventilation.

PMID: 10879076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Diabetes Care. 2000 Jan;23(1):129.

Glyburide-induced hemolysis in myelodysplastic syndrome.

Noto H, Tsukamoto K, Kimura S.

PMID: 10857987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Intern Med. 2000 Jun;39(6):472-3.

Hyperthyroidism presenting as dysphagia.

Noto H(1), Mitsuhashi T, Ishibashi S, Kimura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, Tokyo University.

Comment in
    Intern Med. 2000 Jun;39(6):442-3.

A 65-year-old man presented with hyperthyroidism associated with thyrotoxic
dysphagia. Treatment with thiamazole improved his symptoms promptly. Although
dysphagia is a rare manifestation of thyrotoxicosis, it should be emphasized that
the possibility of hyperthyroidism must be discussed in unexplained dysphagia
because it is readily treatable.

PMID: 10852166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Nihon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi. 2000 Mar;38(3):217-22.

[Microscopic polyangitis with pleuritis as the only pulmonary complication].

[Article in Japanese]

Katae M(1), Takahashi K, Noto K, Sato T, Suzuki T, Dambara T, Fukuchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

A 75-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital because of high fever and
appetite loss. A chest roentgenogram and computed tomographic scans revealed
pleural effusion without obvious infitrative or interstitial shadows in both lung
fields. Laboratory data showed microhematuria, proteinuria, and telescoped
sediment with a moderate increase in C-reactive protein, suggestive of acute
glomerulonephritis. Because infectious pleuritis, was initially suspected, the
patient was treated with antibiotics. However, her general condition
deteriorated, and the right pleural effusion increased. Levels of
myeloperoxidase-specific anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (MPO-ANCA) in serum
and pleural effusion were markedly elevated, yielding a conclusive diagnosis of
MPO-ANCA-related vasculitis, especially microscopic polyangitis (MPA). The
Patient was immediately treated treated with prednisolone, cyclophosphamide, and 
plasma exchange. Several weeks later, her general condition dramatically
improved, and the level of MPO-ANCA in serum markedly decreased. In addition, the
pleural effusion completely disappeared. Unfortunately, the patient eventually
died of opportunistic infections (MRSA-pneumonia and Aspergillus-pneumonia) 6
months after admission. This was a unique case of MPA associated with pleuritis
without interstitial pneumonia or alveolar hemorrhage.

PMID: 10846405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Jpn J Cancer Res. 2000 May;91(5):527-33.

Ras and signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) are essential and
sufficient downstream components of Janus kinases in cell proliferation.

Mizuguchi R(1), Noto S, Yamada M, Ashizawa S, Higashi H, Hatakeyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for Cancer
Research, 1-37-1 Kami-Ikebukuro, Toshima-ku, Tokyo 170-8455, Japan.

Cytokines exert their activities in cell growth and differentiation by binding
specific cell membrane receptors. Janus kinases (JAKs) are cytoplasmic protein
tyrosine kinases that physically interact with intracellular domains of the
cytokine receptors and they play crucial roles in transducing signals triggered
by the cytokine-receptor interaction. We have previously shown that conditional
activation of JAK through membrane-proximal dimerization confers
cytokine-independence on interleukin-3 (IL-3)-dependent Ba / F3 lymphoid cells
and that the cytokine-independent proliferation is completely inhibited by
dominant negative Ras. In this work, we demonstrate that ectopic expression of a 
dominant negative form of Stat5, a major signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) expressed in Ba / F3 cells, also inhibits JAK-triggered
mitogenesis. In contrast, overexpression of constitutively active Ras or
conditional activation of Stat5 by chemical dimerization fails to confer
cytokine-independence. However, concomitant activation of ectopic Ras and Stat5
molecules in Ba / F3 cells suffices for cell proliferation in the absence of
IL-3. Our results indicate that Ras and STAT are essential and sufficient
components of JAK-triggered mitogenesis. Our findings further indicate that the
cytokine signal bifurcates into Ras and STAT pathways following JAK activation.

PMID: 10835498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Nurs Manage. 2000 Feb;31(2):16-7.

Nurse managers flex their budgetary might.

Carruth AK(1), Carruth PJ, Noto EC.

Author information: 
(1)Southeastern Louisiana University, Hammond, USA.

A survey measures the control that nurse managers have gained over budgeting.

PMID: 10827687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Int J Dermatol. 2000 Apr;39(4):270-3.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa folliculitis after shower/bath exposure.

Zichichi L(1), Asta G, Noto G.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Dermatology and Microbiology, S. Antonio Abate Hospital,
Trapani, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Pseudomonas aeruginosa folliculitis (PF) can develop after exposure
to contaminated water in heated swimming pools, whirlpools, and hot-tubes, or
after diving suit dressing.
METHODS: We observed and studied 14 cases of PF after shower/bath exposure, an
underestimated pathogenic event. Cutaneous and environmental microbiological
evaluations were performed.
RESULTS: In our cases, the clinical expression of dermatitis was constant, PF
being a clinically well recognizable skin infection, presenting with follicular, 
macular, and papulopustular lesions located on the lateral aspect of the trunk,
axillary folds, hips, buttocks, and suprapubic area. In all cases, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa was isolated from lesional skin; seven cases were serotyped revealing,
in three cases, serotype 0 : 1, in two cases 0 : 8, in one case 0 : 10, and in
one case 0 : 11. In three families, Pseudomonas aeruginosa was isolated in the
well water. In a further three families, Pseudomonas aeruginosa was isolated from
bathroom and kitchen components.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our experience, we suggest that shower/bath exposure should
be definitively included amongst the possible pathogenic events causing PF.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is responsible for a number of clinical pictures, e.g.
otitis externa, conjunctivitis, toe web intertrigo, green nail syndrome,
infection of burns and wounds, and folliculitis. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
folliculitis (PF) has been reported to develop as a consequence of exposure to
contaminated water in heated swimming pools, whirlpools, and hot-tubes, or
related to diving suits and leg waxing.1-4 We observed 14 cases of PF after
shower/bath exposure. This is probably an underestimated pathogenic event; to our
knowledge, only one case has been reported to date.5 In our patients, the
clinical expression of dermatitis was constant, PF being a clinically well
recognizable skin condition.

PMID: 10809975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Diabetes Metab. 2000 Apr;26(2):145-7.

Hypothermia with acute renal failure in a patient suffering from diabetic
nephropathy and malnutrition.

Yokoyama M(1), Noto Y, Kida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kanazawa National Hospital, Japan.
cay65511@popor.odn.ne.jp

We report a rare case of hypothermia with acute renal failure in a patient
suffering from diabetic nephropathy. A 71-year-old male who had been receiving
insulin therapy for the treatment of diabetes mellitus complicated with advanced 
diabetic nephropathy since 1998 was malnourished with an extremely decreased
muscle mass. Without any prolonged exposure to excessively low external
temperatures or hypothyroidism, pituitary insufficiency, adrenal insufficiency,
sepsis, hypoglycemia, and diabetic ketoacidosis, acute hypothermia appeared
together with an aggravation of diabetic nephropathy. His skin temperature fell
to below measurable levels and his rectal temperature fell to 30.0 degrees C. His
consciousness was drowsy and the hypothermia was not accompanied by shivering.
Skeletal muscle is known to play an important role as a center of heat production
and shivering thermogenesis in skeletal muscle mainly operates on acute cold
stress. Therefore, in this case, hypothermia may have occurred because the
shivering thermogenesis could not fully act on the acute cold stress due to the
dramatically reduced muscle mass. We should always keep in mind that older,
malnourished diabetic patients can easily suffer from impairments of the
thermoregulatory system.

PMID: 10804330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Intern Med. 2000 Apr;39(4):300-4.

Regression of gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma with reduced
telomerase activity after eradication of Helicobacter pylori.

Miwa W(1), Toyama K, Kamata K, Watanabe T, Takeyoshi Y, Watanabe K, Honma J, Noto
M, Kanayama M, Hisatomi H, Nagashima Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hiratsuka Kyosai Hospital, Kanagawa.

Comment in
    Intern Med. 2000 Apr;39(4):273-4.

Recently, telomerase activity has been demonstrated in a large number of
malignant tumors whereas its activity is not detected in most normal somatic
cells suggesting its role in the immortalization process. Here we report the
first investigation of telomerase activity in a case of gastric mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma. Elevated telomerase activity was detected in
biopsy specimens of the lymphoma. After eradication of Helicobacter pylori, the
level of telomerase activity returned to normal with histological regression of
the lymphoma. The telomerase activity was associated with the disease activity of
the gastric MALT lymphoma after eradication therapy in the present case.

PMID: 10801144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Haematologica. 2000 May;85(5):496-501.

Coexistence of two distinct cell populations (CD56(+)TcRgammadelta(+) and
CD56(+)TcRgammadelta(-)) in a case of aggressive CD56(+) lymphoma/leukemia.

Camera A(1), Pezzullo L, Villa MR, Luciano L, Pane F, Izzo B, Boccuni P, Di Noto 
R, Del Vecchio L, Salvatore F, Rotoli B.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Ematologia, Ospedale A. Cardarelli, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Large granular lymphocytes derive from two major
lineages: one expressing the CD3 surface antigen (T-lymphocytes), and the other
lacking this marker (NK-cells). Although developmental overlaps between natural
killer cells and T-cells have been described, malignancies derived from these two
cell types are considered as distinct lymphoid disorders.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We report the case of a 30-year old man affected by a
lymphoma/leukemia syndrome presenting with hepatosplenic lymphoma which rapidly
transformed into aggressive NK-leukemia. Extensive flow cytometry studies and
molecular analysis were repeated during the course of the disease, and showed an 
unexpected changing pattern.
RESULTS: At diagnosis, flow cytometry analysis showed the co-existence of two
cell populations, one CD56(+), CD3(+), TcRgd(+), and the other CD56(+), CD3(-)
and TcRgd(-). Molecular analysis showed that the TcR genes had the same clonally 
rearranged pattern involving b, g and d genes in both populations. At disease
relapse and during the terminal refractory phase, only CD3(-) cells were present.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: This is an unusual case of CD56(+) aggressive
lymphoma/leukemia characterized by the clonal expansion of two phenotypically
different cell populations, variably balanced during the course of the disease.
The presence of the same TcR genomic rearrangement suggests the origin from a
common progenitor able to differentiate along both T- and NK-pathways.

PMID: 10800166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2000 May-Jun;11(3):153-60.

A single-photon emission computed tomography imaging study of driving impairment 
in patients with Alzheimer's disease.

Ott BR(1), Heindel WC, Whelihan WM, Caron MD, Piatt AL, Noto RB.

Author information: 
(1)Brown University School of Medicine and Neurology Division at Memorial
Hospital, Pawtucket, RI 02860, USA.

Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) was used in this study to
examine the neurophysiologic basis of driving impairment in 79 subjects with
dementia. Driving impairment, as measured by caregiver ratings, was significantly
related to regional reduction of right hemisphere cortical perfusion on SPECT,
particularly in the temporo-occipital area. With increased severity of driving
impairment, frontal cortical perfusion was also reduced. Clock drawing was more
significantly related to driving impairment than the Mini-Mental State
Examination (MMSE). Driving impairment in Alzheimer's disease is related to
changes in cortical function which vary according to the severity of the disease.
Cognitive tests of visuoperceptual and executive functions may be more useful
screening tools for identifying those at greatest risk for driving problems than 
examinations like the MMSE that are weighted toward left-hemisphere-based verbal 
tasks.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMCID: PMC3292192
PMID: 10765046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Minerva Chir. 1999 Dec;54(12):843-50.

[Acute biliary pancreatitis. Therapeutic trends].

[Article in Italian]

Maione G(1), Guffanti E, Fontana A, Pozzi C, Baticci F, Noto S, Franzetti M.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Chirurgia d'Urgenza, Ente Ospedaliero Niguarda Cà Granda, Milano.

BACKGROUND: Treatment of biliary pancreatitis includes suppression of the biliary
cause by cholecystectomy and common bile duct clearance. Endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and endoscopic sphincterotomy for eradication of 
biliary stones and laparoscopic cholecystectomy (L.C.) for residual gallbladder
stones would be ideal but were once considered to be contraindicated by most
surgeons. The timing of definitive biliary tract surgery and the role of ERCP
have been the focus of discussion in recent years.
METHODS: During a two-year study period 51 patients with acute biliary
pancreatitis were studied. Seven patients (14%) underwent emergency laparotomy,
necrosectomy, cholecystectomy, exploration of the common bile duct and T-tube
insertion, because unstable clinical conditions, with evidence of pancreatic and 
peripancreatic necrosis on CT-scan. Elective open cholecystectomy and CBD
exploration were performed in 7 patients after the resolution of acute
pancreatitis during the same hospital admission.
RESULTS: Early ERCP and L.C. were associated with favourable outcomes. 33
patients underwent ERCP preoperatively: 17 within 72 hours of admission and 16
after signs of clinical improvement. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy performed 3-25 
days after admission was successful in 27 of 29 patients. Postsphincterectomy
bleeding occurred in one patient and was treated successfully by endoscopic
epinephrine injection. For median hospital stay and recurrence there were
statistical differences between early and delayed ERCP.
CONCLUSIONS: ERCP and sphincterectomy have a certain role in conjunction with
laparoscopic cholecystectomy in the management of patients with acute biliary
pancreatitis, particularly in institutions where there is easy access to expert
interventional endoscopic techniques. This policy should reduce the risk of
cholangitis and recurrent pancreatitis.

PMID: 10736988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Clin Oncol. 2000 Mar;18(6):1295-300.

CD56 expression is an indicator of poor clinical outcome in patients with acute
promyelocytic leukemia treated with simultaneous all-trans-retinoic acid and
chemotherapy.

Ferrara F(1), Morabito F, Martino B, Specchia G, Liso V, Nobile F, Boccuni P, Di 
Noto R, Pane F, Annunziata M, Schiavone EM, De Simone M, Guglielmi C, Del Vecchio
L, Lo Coco F.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Ematologia, Sezione TERE, Servizio di Immunoematologia, Ospedale 
Cardarelli, Naples, Italy. ferrara@itb.it

PURPOSE: Preliminary reports suggest that leukemic cell expression of CD56, a
neural cell adhesion molecule, is associated with adverse clinical outcome in
either acute myeloid leukemia with t(8;21) or acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL).
We investigated the prognostic relevance of CD56 in a series of patients with APL
who were treated homogeneously with all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) and
chemotherapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Clinicobiologic presenting features and therapeutic results
were analyzed in a series of 100 patients with genetically proven APL who were
treated, according to the example of the Gruppo Italiano Malattie Ematologiche
Maligne dell'Adulto multicenter trial, with ATRA plus idarubicin (AIDA) and for
whom data on CD56 expression were available at diagnosis.
RESULTS: Fifteen patients (15%) showed expression of CD56 in greater than or
equal to 20% blasts at diagnosis and were considered as CD56(+). No differences
were found regarding age, sex, WBC and platelet counts, incidence of
coagulopathy, hemoglobin and fibrinogen levels, promyelocytic leukemia/retinoic
acid receptor (PML/RAR) alpha fusion type, or complete remission (CR) rate in the
comparison of the CD56(+) and CD56(-) populations. Conversely, compared with
patients who were CD56(-), patients with CD56(+) APL had shorter CR duration (P
=.04) and overall survival (P =.002). In the multivariate analysis, CD56
positivity and initial WBC count greater than 10 x 10(9) cells/L retained
statistical significance in overall survival (P =.04 and P =.02, respectively).
CONCLUSION: The expression of CD56 is significantly associated with inferior CR
duration and survival in patients with APL who were treated with modern frontline
treatment that included ATRA and simultaneous chemotherapy. Combined with other
well-established prognostic factors such as WBC count, CD56 expression at
diagnosis might be used to build prognostic scores for risk-adapted therapy in
APL.

PMID: 10715300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2000 Jan;33(1):25-43.

Glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored molecules and the pathogenesis of
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.

Boccuni P(1), Del Vecchio L, Di Noto R, Rotoli B.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Immunoematologia, Ospedale Cardarelli, Napoli, Italy.
piernib@tin.it

Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is characterized by the expansion of
one or more clones of stem cells producing progeny of mature blood cells
deficient in the plasma membrane expression of all glycosyl phosphatidylinositol 
(GPI)-anchored proteins (AP). This is due to somatic mutations in the X-linked
gene PIGA, encoding one of the several enzymes required for GPI anchor
biosynthesis. More than 20 GPI-APs are variously expressed on hematological
cells. GPI-APs may function as enzymes, receptors, complement regulatory proteins
or adhesion molecules; they are often involved in signal transduction. The
absence of GPI-APs may well explain the main clinical findings of PNH, i.e.,
hemolysis and thrombosis in the venous system. Other aspects of PNH
pathophysiology such as various degrees of bone marrow failure and the dominance 
of the PNH clone may also be linked to the biology and function of GPI-APs.
Results of in vitro and in vivo experiments on embryoid bodies and mice chimeric 
for nonfunctional Piga have recently demonstrated that Piga inactivation confers 
no intrinsic advantage to the affected hematopoietic clone under physiological
conditions; thus additional factors are required to allow for the expansion of
the mutated cells. A close association between PNH and aplastic anemia suggests
that immune system mediated bone marrow failure creates and maintains the
conditions for the expansion of GPI-AP deficient cells. In this scenario, a PIGA 
mutation would render GPI-AP deficient cells resistant to the cytotoxic
autoimmune attack, enabling them to emerge. Even though the 'survival advantage' 
hypothesis may explain all the various aspects of this intriguing disease, a
formal proof of this theory is still lacking.

PMID: 10714960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Epidemiol. 1999 Dec;9(6 Suppl):S33-8.

Epidemiological studies on UV-related cataract in climatically different
countries.

Sasaki K(1), Sasaki H, Kojima M, Shui YB, Hockwin O, Jonasson F, Cheng HM, Ono M,
Katoh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Kanazawa Medical University, Uchinada, Japan.

Cataract epidemiological surveys applying objective judgement through lens images
in the climatically different places of Noto and Amami, Japan, Singapore and
Reykjavik, Iceland yielded several significant results about the influence of
solar UV. 1) The percentage of transparent and of lens opacification was
significantly higher in the Reykjavik subjects than in the Singaporeans. 2) The
percentages including early changes were higher in Amami and Singapore than in
Noto and Reykjavik. 3) Progressed lens opacification was highest in Singapore.
While the main type of lens opacification was cortical in Noto and Reykjavik,
that of Singapore was nuclear. 4) A significant correlation between cortical
opacification and the history of time spent outdoors was noticed. The UV risk for
formation and/or progression of cortical opacification should be acceptable from 
the epidemiological standpoint.

PMID: 10709348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Peptides. 2000 Jan;21(1):115-24.

Suppression of osteoclastic activities by calcitonin in the scales of goldfish
(freshwater teleost) and nibbler fish (seawater teleost).

Suzuki N(1), Suzuki T, Kurokawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Faculty of Science, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa,
Japan. nobuo@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Using a tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRACP) activity, the effects of
calcitonin (CT) and estradiol-17beta(E(2)) on osteoclastic activities in cultured
scales of goldfish (freshwater fish) and nibbler fish (seawater fish) were
examined. In mature male and female goldfish, scales were collected and incubated
in Earle's minimun essential medium (MEM) supplemented with either CT (100 ng/ml)
or E(2) (100 ng/ml). In both sexes, CT suppressed TRACP activities in the scales,
whereas E(2) increased them. When CT (100 ng/ml) and E(2) (100 ng/ml) were added 
simultaneously to MEM, TRACP activities in the scales did not change as compared 
with the control. Similar results were obtained with the scales of female nibbler
fish. In goldfish, furthermore, the activation of scale TRACP by E(2) was
suppressed, depending on CT concentrations (100 pg/ml to 1 microg/ml). In fish
reproduction, this function of CT may be useful to protect scales from excess
degradation of calcium at vitellogenesis.

PMID: 10704727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Gene. 2000 Feb 22;244(1-2):81-8.

Cloning of a calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor and a novel calcitonin
receptor-like receptor from the gill of flounder, Paralichthys olivaceus.

Suzuki N(1), Suzuki T, Kurokawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Faculty of Science, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa,
Japan. nobuo@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

For the first time in non-mammalian vertebrates, cDNA encoding CGRPR was isolated
from the gill cDNA library of flounder. The nucleotide sequence consists of a
237bp 5'-UTR, a 1398bp coding sequence for a 465-amino-acid protein, and a 981bp 
3'-UTR. The predicted amino-acid sequence has a high degree of identity to hCGRPR
(72.3%) and rCGRPR (71.6%) and, to a lesser degree, to hCTR (55.6%) and rCTR
(59.3%). In addition, a different type of receptor cDNA was also obtained from
the gill cDNA. The nucleotide sequence contains an open-reading frame of 1380bp
to produce a 459-amino-acid protein. The open-reading frame of this receptor
shows the same degree of identity to mammalian CTR (60.2% to hCTR; 62.3% to rCTR)
and CGRPR (64.6% to hCGRPR; 64.4% to rCGRPR). However, the predicted amino-acid
sequence was more homologous to hCGRPR (60.2%) and rCGRPR (61.3%) than to hCTR
(48.8%) and rCTR (49.5%). The identity of this receptor to fCGRPR is 66.6% at the
nucleotide level and 64.2% at the amino-acid level, indicating that the receptor 
is not likely to be an isoform of CGRPR. The receptor, but not fCGRPR, is
expressed in bones, suggesting the possibility that this receptor corresponds to 
the flounder CTR.

PMID: 10689190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Tissue Antigens. 1999 Dec;54(6):597-602.

In vitro exposure of acute promyelocytic leukemia cells to arsenic trioxide
(As2O3) induces the solitary expression of CD66c (NCA-50/90), a member of the CEA
family.

Di Noto R(1), Boccuni P, Costantini S, Dello Russo A, Lo Pardo C, Copia C,
Annunziata M, Cimino R, Ferrara F, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Ematologia, Ospedale A. Cardarelli, Napoli, Italy.

Arsenic trioxide (As2O3) is a useful drug for the treatment of acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL), acting through a complex mechanism involving the
induction of apoptosis. We investigated by flow cytometry whether in vitro
treatment of APL leukemic cells with As2O3 determined specific surface membrane
changes. Twelve APL bone marrow aspirates were analyzed following 7 days of in
vitro treatment with As2O3 (0.25, 0.5 and 2.5 microM) with regard to the
expression of a series of differentiation antigens. Twelve acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) samples of non-APL morphotype were analyzed as controls. Exposure of APL as
well as non-APL samples to any concentration of As2O3 did not affect the
expression of beta2 integrins (CD11a and CD11b), CD45 isoforms (RA, RB and R0),
CD44/H-CAM, CD33 and the CEA-related antigen family members CD66ade and CD66b,
thus failing to disclose any maturating effect. Of interest, in all APL samples
(but not in AML) every tested dose of As2O3 determined a dramatic upregulation of
CD66c display; intermediate concentration (0.5 microM) of As2O3 increased the
median percentage of CD66c+ cells from 5% in control cultures (25th-75th
percentile 2-12%) to 80% in drug-exposed cultures (25th-75th percentile 58-90%)
(P<0.001). The induction of solitary expression of CD66c is a new finding which
demonstrates As2O3 capability of generating phenotypic changes absolutely
restricted to APL cells Moreover, these results provide experimental basis for
considering the involvement of the newly described CD66 signalling pathway in
As2O3-driven programmed cell death.

PMID: 10674975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Intern Med. 2000 Jan;39(1):66-8.

Acute eosinophilic pneumonia caused by cigarette smoking.

Shintani H(1), Fujimura M, Yasui M, Ueda K, Kameda S, Noto M, Matsuda T,
Kobayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Komatsu Municipal Hospital.

Comment in
    Intern Med. 2000 Dec;39(12):1131-2.

It has been suggested that acute eosinophilic pneumonia (AEP) is associated with 
cigarette smoking because in Japan, the patients with AEP are young and have a
high incidence of short-term smoking history. However, there has been no direct
evidence to support that cigarette smoke causes AEP. Herein is reported the first
case showing the direct evidence and a long-term clinical course of cigarette
smoking-induced AEP, in which tolerance to repeated resumption of smoking
cigarettes might have occurred. We should pay attention to the history of
cigarette smoking in seeing patients with AEP, especially in young patients.

PMID: 10674853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Exp Brain Res. 2000 Jan;130(2):169-76.

Flexibility of saccade adaptation in the monkey: different gain states for
saccades in the same direction.

Watanabe S(1), Noto CT, Fuchs AF.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Primate Research Center, University of Washington, Seattle
98195-7330, USA.

Saccadic accuracy, measured as the ratio of the size of a saccade to the size of 
the target step that elicits it, i.e., saccade gain, can be altered by jumping
the target surreptitiously during the targeting saccade. The gain change produced
by this paradigm does not generalize or transfer to saccades of all sizes.
Instead, the amount of transfer decreases the more the tested saccade differs in 
amplitude and direction from that adapted. Here, we tested the limits of this
saccade-size specificity by attempting to impose quite different gain states on
saccades in the same direction. We altered the saccadic gain by intrasaccadic
target jumps of 30% of the initial target step, either forward to produce a gain 
increase or backward to produce a gain decrease. Three different conditions were 
studied: (1) saccades to target steps of 20 degrees or 7 degrees were adapted in 
individual sessions with backward and forward jumps, respectively; (2) saccades
to target steps of 20 degrees caused backward target jumps during the same
session in which saccades to 7 degrees target steps caused forward steps; (3) the
target jumps accompanying 20 and 7 degrees saccades were the same as in (2), but 
in addition, there were intermediate-sized saccades to 13.5 degrees target steps 
with no intrasaccadic target jumps. Saccadic gain adaptation was quite flexible. 
In condition 2, we could simultaneously increase the gain of saccades to 7
degrees target steps while decreasing the gain of saccades to 20 degrees steps in
the same direction. Intermediate horizontal saccades to 13.5 degrees target steps
experienced gain reductions (average: 6.9%), which were not the sum of gain
changes expected from separate 20 degrees gain decreases and 7 degrees gain
increases alone, as predicted from condition 1. If adaptation at 20 degrees and 7
degrees occurred while an animal also tracked a non-adapting 13.5 degrees target 
step (paradigm 3), the gain reduction of saccades to the 13.5 degrees step was
reduced considerably (3.4%). Thus, the mechanism that adapts saccade size can
support a robust gain increase for saccades of one size while simultaneously
supporting a robust gain decrease for saccades only 13 degrees larger.
Furthermore, the presence during adaptation of a non-adapted target step with a
size intermediate to the two adapting steps reestablishes a nearly normal gain
within only 6.5 degrees of a robust gain increase and decrease. These data
indicate that saccadic gain adaptation can set very different gain states for
saccades with rather similar vectors.

PMID: 10672470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Heart Vessels. 1998;13(6):306-8.

A new method for right ventricular endomyocardial biopsy via the femoral veins: a
novel approach employing a right ventriculography catheter (Nishiya type).

Nishiya Y(1), Fujimura M, Toshima M, Noto H, Usuda K, Iuchi K, Ishikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Toyama Prefectural Central 
Hospital, Japan.

We have devised a new method for right ventricular endomyocardial biopsy, in
which the use of a right ventriculography catheter (Nishiya Type) allows us to
ensure the introduction of a guiding sheath (Cordis, right-angled long sheath) to
the apical portion of the right ventricle by way of the femoral vein. With this
method, we have biopsied the endomyocardium in 52 patients during the last 4
years. In each case, it only took us several minutes to complete the biopsy
procedure. Neither failed applications nor significant complications were seen.
We believe that this technique provides a clinically beneficial means as it
enables us to readily and safely achieve right ventricular endomyocardial biopsy.

PMID: 10651173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Chest. 2000 Jan;117(1):277-9.

A case of cigarette smoking-induced acute eosinophilic pneumonia showing
tolerance.

Shintani H(1), Fujimura M, Ishiura Y, Noto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Komatsu Municipal Hospital, Komatsu, Japan.

Comment in
    Chest. 2000 Nov;118(5):1517-8.

It has been proposed that acute eosinophilic pneumonia (AEP), which is
characterized by the absence of recurrence, is associated with cigarette smoking 
(CS), because Japanese patients with AEP are young and have a high incidence of
short-term smoking history. However, there has been no direct evidence that CS
causes AEP. We hypothesized that tolerance might develop against repeated
resumption of smoking cigarettes in CS-induced AEP cases. In this connection, we 
challenged a patient with CS-induced AEP with repeated resumption of CS, and it
was demonstrated that CS induced AEP in conjunction with tolerance to repeated
resumption of smoking.

PMID: 10631231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Biochemistry. 2000 Jan 18;39(2):324-31.

Kinetics and free energy profiles of spermine transport in liver mitochondria.

Toninello A(1), Dalla Via L, Stevanato R, Yagisawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Biologica, Università di Padova, and Centro di Studio 
delle Biomembrane del C.N.R. di Padova, Viale G. Colombo 3, 35121 Padova, Italy. 
toninell@civ.bio.unipd.it

In the present study, the voltage-dependent mechanism of spermine transport in
liver mitochondria [Toninello, A., Dalla Via, L., Siliprandi, D., and Garlid, K. 
D. (1992) J. Biol. Chem. 267, 18393-18397] was further characterized by
determining the rate constants J(max) and K(m) as functions of membrane
potential. An increase in mitochondrial membrane potential from 150 to 210 mV
promoted spermine transport, as reflected by an approximate 4-fold increase in
J(max) and 25% decrease in K(m). The mechanism for the voltage dependence of
transport was examined using the beta value, i. e., the slope of ln(flux) vs
FDeltaPsi/RT plots. Flux-voltage analyses performed at very high and very low
spermine concentrations yielded beta values of 0.125 and 0.25, for J(max) and
J(max)/K(m), respectively. The physical significance of these beta values was
analyzed by means of a theory relating the enzyme reaction rate to the free
energy profiles [Yagisawa, S. (1985) Biochem. J. 303, 305-311]. Depending on the 
nature of K(m), two possible models could be proposed to describe the location
and shape of the barriers in the membrane. Analysis of previous data concerning
spermine binding [Dalla Via, L., Di Noto, V., Siliprandi, D., and Toninello, A.
(1996) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1284, 247-252] by a new rationale provided evidence
for an asymmetrical energy profile composed of two peaks with the binding site
near the membrane surface followed by a rate-determining energy barrier for the
movement of the bound spermine toward the internal region of the membrane.

PMID: 10630992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Biochem Pharmacol. 1999 Dec 15;58(12):1899-906.

The effects of methylglyoxal-bis(guanylhydrazone) on spermine binding and
transport in liver mitochondria.

Toninello A(1), Via LD, Di Noto V, Mancon M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Biologica, Universita' di Padova, Centro di Studio
Delle Biomembrane Del CNR, Padua, Italy. toninell@civ.bio.unipd.it

This study evaluated the effect of the anticancer drug
methylglyoxal-bis(guanylhydrazone) (MGBG) on the binding of the polyamine
spermine to the mitochondrial membrane and its transport into the inner
compartment of this organelle. Spermine binding was studied by applying a new
thermodynamic treatment of ligand-receptor interactions (Di Noto et al., Macromol
Theory Simul 5: 165-181, 1996). Results showed that MGBG inhibited the binding of
spermine to the site competent for the first step in polyamine transport; the
interaction of spermine with this site, termed S1, also mediates the inhibitory
effect of the polyamine on the mitochondrial permeability transition (Dalla Via
et al., Biochim Biophys Acta 1284: 247-252, 1996). In the presence of 1 mM MGBG, 
the binding capacity and affinity of this site were reduced by about 2.6-fold; on
the contrary, the binding capacity of the S2 site, which is most likely
responsible for the internalization of cytoplasmic proteins (see Dalla Via et
al., reference cited above), increased by about 1.3-fold, and its binding
affinity remained unaffected. MGBG also inhibited the initial rate of spermine
transport in a dose-dependent manner by establishing apparently sigmoidal
kinetics. Consequently, the total extent of spermine accumulation inside
mitochondria was inhibited. This inhibition in transport seems to reflect a
conformational change at the level of the channel protein constituting the
polyamine transport system, rather than competitive inhibition at the inner
active site of the channel, thereby excluding the possibility that the polyamine 
and drug use the same transport pathway. Furthermore, it is suggested that, in
the presence of MGBG, the S2 site is able to participate in residual spermine
transport. MGBG also strongly inhibits deltapH-dependent spermine efflux,
resulting in a complete block in the bidirectional flux of the polyamine and its 
sequestration inside the matrix space. The effects of MGBG on spermine
accumulation are consistent with in vivo disruption of the regulator of energy
metabolism and replication of the mitochondrial genome.

PMID: 10591144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Mol Cell Biol Res Commun. 1999 Jul;2(1):71-6.

Disulfide-cross-linked tau and MAP2 homodimers readily promote microtubule
assembly.

Di Noto L(1), DeTure MA, Purich DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Health Science Center, Gainesville 32610-0245, USA.

The neuronal proteins Tau and MAP2 use homologous C-terminal MT-binding regions
(MTBRs) to interact with microtubules, F-actin, and intermediate filaments.
Although Tau-MTBR is the principal component of pronase-treated Alzheimer paired 
helical filaments, both Tau and MAP2 form filaments in vitro from
disulfide-linked homodimers. That the critical thiol lies within a domain needed 
for MT binding raised the question: Does disulfide formation block Tau-Tau or
MAP2-MAP2 dimer binding to microtubules, thereby acting to divert dimers toward
filament formation? We now report that cross-linked Tau and MAP2 homodimers
readily promote tubulin polymerization and that monomer and dimer affinity for
MTs is surprisingly similar. Therefore, disulfide cross-bridging into homodimers 
is unlikely to be a drive force for filament formation in Alzheimer's disease.

PMID: 10527895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Ann Plast Surg. 1999 Nov;43(5):574-5.

Re: Malignant transformation of a giant proliferating trichilemmal tumor of the
scalp.

Noto G.

Comment on
    Ann Plast Surg. 1998 Sep;41(3):314-6.

PMID: 10560882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Histopathology. 1999 Oct;35(4):386-7.

'Benign' proliferating trichilemmal tumour: does it really exist?

Noto G.

Comment on
    Histopathology. 1998 Dec;33(6):542-6.

PMID: 10564395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Kyobu Geka. 1999 Oct;52(11):954-7.

[Tricuspid valve replacement in a patient with idiopathic tricuspid
regurgitation].

[Article in Japanese]

Nishiya Y(1), Fujimura M, Toshima M, Noto H, Ishikawa T, Miwa A, Watanabe H,
Takayanagi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Toyama Prefectural Central 
Hospital, Japan.

Tricuspid regurgitation is often seen but is rarely categorized as "idiopathic". 
A 66-year-old man suspected of idiopathic tricuspid regurgitation underwent
tricuspid valve replacement. With right heart failure over twenty years, his CTR 
increased to eighty six (86) per cent. During operation, no abnormal findings
were observed except for the dilated tricuspid valve ring. Then a stented porcine
xenograft (Carpentier-Edwards 33 mm) was inserted in the tricuspid valve annulus.
Seven years after replacement, he died. Autopsy demonstrated myocardial
hypertrophy of the right ventricle and dilatation of the right heart, supporting 
the diagnosis of idiopathic tricuspid regurgitation.

PMID: 10513165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Br J Haematol. 1999 Aug;106(2):520-3.

Complete remission in acute myeloid leukaemia with t(8;21) following treatment
with G-CSF: flow cytometric analysis of in vivo and in vitro effects on cell
maturation.

Ferrara F(1), Di Noto R, Viola A, Russo C, Boccuni P, Costantini S, Dello Russo
A, Lo Pardo C, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Haematology, Cardarelli General Hospital, Napoli, Italy.
ferrara@itb.it

A 75-year-old patient diagnosed as having acute myeloid leukaemia with t(8;21)
received G-CSF alone as induction therapy. Complete remission was achieved
following 2 weeks of treatment. Flow cytometric analysis, performed by CD45
technique modified by the introduction of preliminary gating with LDS-751,
confirmed the disappearance of blast cells along with myeloid maturation.
Finally, in vitro studies demonstrated that G-CSF, as compared to other
differentiation inducers, was able to induce a striking effect toward
neutrophilic differentiation.

PMID: 10460615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Nippon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi. 1999 Jul;103(7):556-63.

[Epidemiological survey of ocular diseases in K Island, Amami Islands: prevalence
of cataract and pterygium].

[Article in Japanese]

Sasaki H(1), Asano K, Kojima M, Sakamoto Y, Kasuga T, Nagata M, Takahashi N,
Sasaki K, Ono M, Katoh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa, Japan.

PURPOSE: An epidemiological survey of ocular disease was performed in a town of
the Amami Islands in southwestern Japan.
OBJECT AND METHODS: A total of 339 participants over 40 years joined the survey. 
Among the 339 participants, the lens findings of 602 eyes of 301 subjects were
analyzed.
RESULTS: The prevalence of lens opacification was 32.0, 54.0, 83.1, 96.9% and
100% among subjects in their 40, 50, 60, 70 s, and over 80 years. Lens
opacification over grade II was 4.0, 12.7, 26.2, 60.0% and 83.3%. The cataract
type most frequently seen was cortical (96.1%), followed by 48.5% with nuclear
opacity and 14.7% with subcapsular type. A high prevalence was seen of pterygium 
at 25.4%. Although the prevalence of lens opacification was higher in the group
with pterygium in their 70 s, no significant difference was noticed in persons in
their 40, 50, 60 s, and over 80 years old between the pterygium and non-pterygium
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Similarly to the results of a previous survey in Okinawa, Noto, and 
Hokkaido, the main type of lens opacification was cortical in Amami. The
prevalence of nuclear opacification and pterygium was higher than in Noto and
Hokkaido, and close to that seen in Okinawa.

PMID: 10443131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Med Health R I. 1999 Jun;82(6):190-4.

Advances in nuclear medicine: current concepts.

Noto RB(1), Scheiner JD.

Author information: 
(1)Brown University School of Medicine/Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI
02903, USA.

As described above, many scintigraphic studies have recently become available
which provide vital clinical information in a wide variety of diseases. The
future of nuclear medicine also appears bright. Modifications to current gamma
cameras will likely occur in the next few years to replace sodium iodide crystals
with new scintillators like oxyorthosilicates which have better imaging
characteristics for both single photon and positron-emitting radionuclides.
Ongoing computer improvements will allow improved reconstruction and processing
with newer systems already capable of advanced iterative reconstruction
algorithms. Development of new radiopharmaceuticals is progressing at a rapid
pace, with emphasis on new tracers that can provide information about diseases at
the molecular level, such as receptor imaging agents. In addition, radiolabeled
tracers for therapeutic purposes will continue to progress, including monoclonal 
antibodies labeled with beta emitters. Overall, nuclear medicine will continue to
evolve in many new directions and provide useful functional imaging data about a 
variety of different organ systems and diseases.

PMID: 10402834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Ann Ital Med Int. 1998 Oct-Dec;13(4):205-8.

Lipoprotein(A) levels and apoprotein(a) phenotypes in a Sicilian population.

Noto D(1), Barbagallo CM, Cavera G, Caldarella R, Marino G, Pace A, Notarbartolo 
A, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di Medicina Interna, Università degli Studi di Palermo.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the influence of lipoprotein(a) levels and 
apoprotein(a) isoform size in determining the low cardiovascular risk of a rural,
inland Sicilian population. Plasma levels of total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, 
HDL-cholesterol, triglycerides, lipoprotein(a) and apoprotein B and AI were
measured in a sample of 278 subjects (141 males, 137 females) representative of a
population of 1351 subjects (622 males, 729 females). The apoprotein(a) isoforms 
were also identified. Results indicated that the levels of the common
lipo-apoliproprotein parameters were lower than those of other populations, while
lipoprotein(a) plasmatic levels and apoprotein(a) isoform distribution were
similar to those of other Caucasian populations. The distribution of
lipoprotein(a) levels was skewed to the right, with a higher prevalence of low
levels, the apoprotein(a) isoforms most strongly represented in our sample were
of intermediate size (25-27 kringles IV). Univariate analysis showed that
lipoprotein(a) levels were correlated to apoprotein(a) isoform size (R = -0.48, p
< 0.001) and to the age of the subjects (R = +0.13, p < 0.01). In a multiple
regression analysis, lipoprotein(a) levels were correlated to the apoprotein(a)
isoform size of the homozygous isoforms or smaller heterozygous isoforms, while
larger heterozygous forms were not correlated. In conclusion, our study showed
that in our population, lipoprotein(a) levels and apoprotein(a) isoforms are
similar to those of other Caucasian populations. Other factors, such as the
physical activity of a rural population or the Mediterranean diet, must be
considered in order to explain the lower cardiovascular risk of this population.

PMID: 10400464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Nephron. 1999;82(3):199-204.

Effects of Mediterranean diet on lipid levels and cardiovascular risk in renal
transplant recipients.

Barbagallo CM(1), Cefalù AB, Gallo S, Rizzo M, Noto D, Cavera G, Rao Camemi A,
Marino G, Caldarella R, Notarbartolo A, Averna MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, University of Palermo, Italy. 
carlob@mbox.unipa.it

BACKGROUND: Renal transplant recipients have an increased incidence of
cardiovascular disease. These patients present abnormalities of lipoprotein
profile which are persistent and involve an increasing number of individuals,
suggesting the opportunity of an early therapeutic intervention.
METHODS: We evaluated the effects of a 10- to 12-week diet based on the American 
Heart Association step-one diet criteria, modified with an increased intake of
monounsaturated fats and alimentary fibers, on lipid profile and lipid-related
cardiovascular risk in 78 normolipidemic and hyperlipidemic renal transplant
recipients.
RESULTS: Diet led to a significant reduction in total cholesterol levels by 10%, 
triglycerides by 6.5%, low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol by 10.4% and
LDL-cholesterol/high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-cholesterol ratio by 10%, whereas 
HDL-cholesterol levels remained unchanged. Dividing renal transplant recipients
into risk classes according to the National Cholesterol Expert Program guidelines
and LDL-cholesterol levels, we observed a progressively increasing reduction in
total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol levels among 'desirable LDL-cholesterol',
'borderline high-risk LDL-cholesterol' and 'high-risk LDL-cholesterol' patients, 
while HDL-cholesterol levels did not change in any group and the
LDL-cholesterol/HDL-cholesterol ratio significantly decreased in 'borderline
high-risk LDL-cholesterol' and in 'high-risk LDL-cholesterol' patients
(respectively by 6.8%, p < 0.05, and by 21.1%, p < 0.0001). Reduction in
triglyceride levels was statistically significant only in subjects with
'desirable LDL-cholesterol' (by 12.3%, p < 0.01). Patients in the 'desirable
LDL-cholesterol' class increased from 28 (35.9% of total patients) before diet to
45 (57.7% of total patients, p < 0.01), while subjects in the 'high-risk
LDL-cholesterol' class reduced from 24 (30.8% of total patients) to 8 (10.2% of
total patients, p < 0.005).
CONCLUSION: These data suggest the possibility of a nutritional hypolipidemic
approach in renal transplant recipients, even if normolipidemic. Dietetic
treatment determined an inversion in the typical trend of renal transplant
recipients, reducing instead of increasing the number of subjects with
hypercholesterolemia, permitting the selection of individual candidates for
further pharmacological treatment by carefully evaluating risk/benefit costs.

PMID: 10395991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Immunol. 1999 Jul 15;163(2):743-50.

I-Ag7-mediated antigen presentation by B lymphocytes is critical in overcoming a 
checkpoint in T cell tolerance to islet beta cells of nonobese diabetic mice.

Noorchashm H(1), Lieu YK, Noorchashm N, Rostami SY, Greeley SA, Schlachterman A, 
Song HK, Noto LE, Jevnikar AM, Barker CF, Naji A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, Philadelphia
19104, USA.

B cell-deficient nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice are protected from the development 
of spontaneous autoimmune diabetes, suggesting a requisite role for Ag
presentation by B lymphocytes for the activation of a diabetogenic T cell
repertoire. This study specifically examines the importance of B cell-mediated
MHC class II Ag presentation as a regulator of peripheral T cell tolerance to
islet beta cells. We describe the construction of NOD mice with an I-Ag7
deficiency confined to the B cell compartment. Analysis of these mice, termed NOD
BCIID, revealed the presence of functionally competent non-B cell APCs
(macrophages/dendritic cells) with normal I-Ag7 expression and capable of
activating Ag-reactive T cells. In addition, the secondary lymphoid organs of
these mice harbored phenotypically normal CD4+ and CD8+ T cell compartments.
Interestingly, whereas control NOD mice harboring I-Ag7-sufficient B cells
developed diabetes spontaneously, NOD BCIID mice were resistant to the
development of autoimmune diabetes. Despite their diabetes resistance, histologic
examination of pancreata from NOD BCIID mice revealed foci of noninvasive
peri-insulitis that could be intentionally converted into a destructive process
upon treatment with cyclophosphamide. We conclude that I-Ag7-mediated Ag
presentation by B cells serves to overcome a checkpoint in T cell tolerance to
islet beta cells after their initial targeting has occurred. Overall, this work
indicates that the full expression of the autoimmune potential of anti-islet T
cells in NOD mice is intimately regulated by B cell-mediated MHC class II Ag
presentation.

PMID: 10395666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 1999 May;72(3):161-8.

Detection of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon metabolites by high-pressure liquid 
chromatography after purification on immunoaffinity columns in urine from
occupationally exposed workers.

Bentsen-Farmen RK(1), Botnen IV, Notø H, Jacob J, Ovrebø S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, National Institute of Occupational Health, Oslo,
Norway.

OBJECTIVE: The objective in our study was to quantitate benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P)
metabolites by a combination of immunoaffinity chromatography and high-pressure
liquid chromatography (HPLC) with fluorescence detection in urine from workers
exposed to high levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). Furthermore, by
the simultaneous quantitation of 1-hydroxypyrene, the correlation between the
B[a]P-tetrol and 1-hydroxypyrene would provide a means of evaluating the validity
of 1-hydroxypyrene as a surrogate biomarker for occupational exposure to the
potent carcinogen B[a]P in an electrode paste plant.
METHODS: The study was carried out at an electrode paste plant that produces
electrode paste for Söderberg electrodes. A total of 34 pre- and post-shift urine
samples and 17 personal air samples were collected from 17 workers during a
normal work week. The concentration of 1-hydroxypyrene was measured in all urine 
samples. A recent method of quantitating B[a]P-r-7, t-8, t-9, c-10-tetrol in
urine of humans exposed to low levels of PAH has been described. A modified
version of this method involving purification of urine samples on immunoaffinity 
columns and HPLC analysis with fluorescence detection was used on urine samples
from workers exposed to high levels of PAH. A monoclonal antibody (8E11) with
binding affinity to B[a]P-tetrols was used. This antibody also binds several
PAH-DNA adducts and metabolites, including 1-hydroxypyrene. Gas
chromatography/mass spectroscopy (GC/MS) was also used for identification of
metabolites isolated by HPLC fractionation.
RESULTS: From personal air sampling the mean exposure to particulate PAHs was 38 
microg/m3. The mean concentration of urinary 1-hydroxypyrene was 3.9 micromol/mol
creatinine in preshift samples and 10.2 micromol/mol creatinine in postshift
samples. We could not identify detectable amounts of urinary B[a]P-tetrol by HPLC
or fluorescence spectroscopy after purification on immunoaffinity columns.
However, in the HPLC analysis we identified several hydroxyphenantrene
metabolites that were detected at relatively high concentrations in all of the
workers' urine samples. We could not separate 2- and 3-hydroxyphenanthrene (2 +
3-OH-Phe) in peak 1, and peak 2 contained both 1- and 9-hydroxyphenanthrene (1 + 
9-OH-Phe). The phenanthrene metabolites were mainly conjugated to glucuronic acid
and sulfate. There was a significant correlation between the 1-hydroxypyrene
concentration and 2 + 3-OH-Phe (r = 0.73) and 1 + 9-OH-Phe (r = 0.64) in the
urine samples. 1-Hydroxypyrene was measured in all post-shift urine samples but
was not significantly correlated with workplace pyrene exposure, indicating that 
skin exposure is an important route of pyrene exposure in this factory. As with
1-hydroxypyrene, dermal PAH uptake may also account for the poor correlation
between 2 + 3- and 1 + 9-OH-Phe and ambient phenanthrene.
DISCUSSION: Since dermal uptake is likely to be important in occupational PAH
exposure in addition to inhalation, estimation of total PAH exposure is best
achieved by quantitation of PAHs excreted into body fluids. However, it remains
unclear whether there might be a difference in uptake and urinary excretion of
3-ring, 4-ring, or 5-ring PAHs and in the correlation between these metabolites
and ambient-air PAH measurements. In summary, using immunaffinity chromatography,
we did not find detectable amounts of B[a]P-tetrol in urine from workers
occupationally exposed to PAH. However, by an HPLC/immunoaffinity method,
relatively high amounts of 1-hydroxypyrene as well as 2 + 3- and 1 + 9-OH-Phe
were quantitated in the urine samples, both of which are relevant as biomarkers
of PAH exposure.

PMID: 10392563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Neurophysiol. 1999 Jun;81(6):2798-813.

Characteristics of simian adaptation fields produced by behavioral changes in
saccade size and direction.

Noto CT(1), Watanabe S, Fuchs AF.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Primate Research Center and Department of Physiology and Biophysics, 
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195-7330, USA.

The gain of saccadic eye movements can be altered gradually by moving targets
either forward or backward during targeting saccades. If the gain of saccades to 
targets of only one size is adapted, the gain change generalizes or transfers
only to saccades with similar vectors. In this study, we examined the spatial
extent of such saccadic size adaptation, i.e., the gain adaptation field. We also
attempted to adapt saccade direction by moving the target orthogonally during the
targeting saccade to document the extent of a direction or cross-axis adaptation 
field. After adaptive gain decreases of horizontal saccades to 15 degrees target 
steps, >82% of the gain reduction transferred to saccades to 25 degrees
horizontal target steps but only approximately 30% transferred to saccades to 5
degrees steps. For the horizontal component of oblique saccades to target steps
with 15 degrees horizontal components and 10 degrees upward or downward vertical 
components, the transfer was similar at 51 and 60%, respectively. Thus the gain
decrease adaptation field was quite asymmetric in the horizontal dimension but
symmetric in the vertical dimension. Although gain increase adaptation produced a
smaller gain change (13% increase for a 30% forward adapting target step) than
did gain decrease adaptation (20% decrease for a 30% backward adapting target
step), the spatial extent of gain transfer was quite similar. In particular, the 
gain increase adaptation field displayed asymmetry in the horizontal dimension
(58% transfer to 25 degrees saccades but only 32% transfer to 5 degrees saccades)
and symmetry in the vertical direction (50% transfer to the horizontal component 
of 10 degrees upward and 40% transfer to 10 degrees downward oblique saccades).
When a 5 degrees vertical target movement was made to occur during a saccade to a
horizontal 10 degrees target step, a vertical component gradually appeared in
saccades to horizontal targets. More than 88% of the cross-axis change in the
vertical component produced in 10 degrees saccades transferred to 20 degrees
saccades but only 12% transferred to 4 degrees saccades. The transfer was similar
to the vertical component of oblique saccades to target steps with either 10
degrees upward (46%) or 10 degrees downward (46%) vertical components. Therefore 
both gain and cross-axis adaptation fields have similar spatial profiles. These
profiles resemble those of movement fields of neurons in the frontal eye fields
and superior colliculus. How those structures might participate in the adaptation
process is considered in the DISCUSSION.

PMID: 10368398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Kidney Int. 1999 Jun;55(6):2433-9.

Lipoprotein(a) levels in relation to albumin concentration in childhood nephrotic
syndrome.

Noto D(1), Barbagallo CM, Cascio AL, Cefalù AB, Cavera G, Caldarella R, Marino G,
Travali S, Cutaia I, Maringhini S, Notarbartolo A, Averna M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] is a lipoprotein consisting of a low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) particle linked to a polymorphic glycoprotein, apoprotein(a)
[apo(a)]. Prior studies have reported high Lp(a) levels in the nephrotic
syndrome, but it is still controversial whether this is due to the degree of
hypoalbuminemia or proteinuria.
METHODS: To investigate a model of nephrotic syndrome in the absence of renal
failure, we studied a group of 84 children in different clinical stages of the
disease for a period of five years. We evaluated the direct relationships between
lipoproteins, including Lp(a), and/or plasma albumin and proteinuria.
RESULTS: Lp(a) levels were significantly higher in the subjects with the active
disease compared with patients in remission, and were also significantly
different when subjects were ranked by albumin quartiles. Multiple regression
analysis revealed that Lp(a) levels were inversely correlated with apo(a) isoform
size and plasma albumin levels but not with the proteinuria/creatinine clearance 
ratio. Among subjects in complete remission, Lp(a) levels were different in
patients with albumin levels below or above the fifth percentile. After the
improvement of the clinical stage of the disease, the Delta% variation of albumin
levels was related to the Delta% of apoB and LDL cholesterol (LDL-C), but not
with the Delta% variation of Lp(a), whereas the Delta% variation of LDL-C was, in
turn, related to the Delta% of Lp(a) levels.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that in the childhood nephrotic syndrome, the 
increased Lp(a) levels are mainly related to hypoalbuminemia, probably through a 
mechanism involving apoB overproduction, which leads to an increased number of
LDL particles to be converted into Lp(a).

PMID: 10354292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 1999 Jan;46(1):24-31.

Lessons learned from the review of cardiac catheterization laboratories: a report
from the Laboratory Survey Committee of the Society for Cardiac Angiography and
Interventions.

Dehmer GJ(1), Arani D, Noto T, Scanlon P, Hildner F, Clark D, Sheldon W.

Author information: 
(1)Society for Cardiac Angiography and Interventions, Raleigh, NC 27607, USA.

The Laboratory Survey Committee of the Society for Cardiac Angiography and
Interventions was created as a resource for physicians and administrators to
provide comprehensive independent outside review services for cardiac
catheterization laboratories. Since 1989, when the committee began its work,
surveys of 23 catheterization laboratories have been completed. Our review of
this experience identified several recurring problems among the laboratories. The
purpose of this paper is to summarize our experience and highlight the lessons we
learned in the hope that this information will benefit many other laboratories.

PMID: 10348561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Leuk Lymphoma. 1999 May;33(5-6):559-66.

Possible role of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in increased serum soluble
interleukin-2 receptor-alpha levels after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.

Kobayashi S(1), Imamura M, Hashino S, Noto S, Mori A, Tanaka J, Naohara T, Kasai 
M, Asaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine,
Sapporo Hokuyu Hospital, Japan.

Serum soluble interleukin-2 receptor - alpha (sIL-2R) levels markedly increased
at the engraftment period in patients who underwent allogeneic bone marrow
transplantation (BMT). Since serum G-CSF levels increased during G-CSF
administration and decreased after the cessation, increased sIL-2R levels
appeared to be induced by G-CSF administration. There was no increase in sIL-2R
levels in a patient given macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF). The
sIL-2R levels at the engraftment period and the onset of acute graft-versus-host 
disease (GVHD) were higher in patients who developed acute GVHD during G-CSF
administration than in those who developed acute GVHD after G-CSF cessation. This
finding suggests that G-CSF administration may possibly augment acute GVHD.
However, it appears to be unlikely, because in the entire population, 18 of 35
patients had acute GVHD while only 6 of 17 patients had acute GVHD during G-CSF
administration. Further analysis is still needed in order to draw definite
conclusions. Preconditioning regimens did not appear to affect the sIL-2R levels,
when the variable frequencies of methotrexate (MTX) administration were compared.

PMID: 10342583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 1999 Jun;114(3):324-9.

Plasma calcium and calcitonin levels in eels fed a high calcium solution or
transferred to seawater.

Suzuki N(1), Suzuki D, Sasayama Y, Srivastav AK, Kambegawa A, Asahina K.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Faculty of Science, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa,
927-0553, Japan.

To examine the physiological role of calcitonin (CT) in calcium homeostasis of
teleosts, we compared calcium and CT levels in freshwater eels fed a high
calcium-consomme solution (Ca2+: 1.25 M; 1 ml/100 g body wt) into the stomach
(Experiment I), and in freshwater eels transferred from freshwater to seawater
(Experiment II). In experiment I, plasma calcium and CT levels in the high
calcium-treated eels rapidly increased (calcium: 2.63 mM at 0 h to 8. 50 mM at 3 
h; CT: below detection level at 0 h to 1118.2 pg/ml at 3 h). Plasma calcium and
CT levels in the control eels remained below detection level during the 3 h of
the experiment. In experiment II, the plasma CT levels did not increase, although
the plasma calcium levels increased from 3.23 mM at 0 h to 4.10 mM at 8 h.
Therefore, in eels, we demonstrate a correlation between plasma CT and plasma
calcium raised by dietary calcium in the consomme form, but it does not
participate in the initial processes of seawater adaptation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10336820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 May 15;365(2):231-8.

Binding of spermidine and putrescine to energized liver mitochondria.

Dalla Via L(1), Di Noto V, Toninello A.

Author information: 
(1)Università di Padova, Centro di Studio delle Biomembrane del CNR di Padova,
viale G. Colombo 3, Padova, 35121, Italy.

The binding of spermidine and putrescine to mitochondrial membranes was studied
by applying a thermodynamic model of ligand-receptor interactions developed both 
for equilibrium and far-from-equilibrium binding processes (V. Di Noto, L. Dalla 
Via, A. Toninello, and M. Vidali Macromol. Theory Simul. 5, 165-181, 1996).
Results demonstrate the presence of two monocoordinated binding sites (S1 and S2)
for spermidine and one monocoordinated binding site (S2) for putrescine, all
exhibiting high capacity and low affinity. It is proposed that differences in the
polyamines' flexibility and hydrophilicity perhaps contributes to the observed
variations in their interactions with the two sites. A comparison of the binding 
parameters of these polyamines with those of spermine reveals differences in the 
specific function of the S1 and S2 sites, identified in studies of spermine
binding (L. Dalla Via, V. Di Noto, D. Siliprandi, and A. Toninello Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1284, 247-252, 1996).

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10328817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Kaku Igaku. 1999 Feb;36(2):113-20.

[Assessment of a new non-invasive cerebral blood flow determination method using 
the brain uptake ratio of 99mTc-ECD].

[Article in Japanese]

Miyazaki Y(1), Mizuta Y, Honda K, Niio Y, Shinohara H, Kinuya S, Hashimoto M,
Matsuda H.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Nuclear Medicine, Noto General Hospital.

We modified the method of calculating brain uptake ratio (BUR) reported
previously, and devised a new non-invasive cerebral blood flow measurements for
99mTc-ECD that does not require blood sampling. This method yields BUR that is
not influenced by the gamma camera type and the choice of
acquisition-reconstruction conditions, when corrected by the SPECT/Planar cross
calibration coefficient. A good correlation was observed between the BUR obtained
by this method and the cerebral blood flow (CBF) obtained by the 123I-IMP
continuous arterial blood sampling method. And based on these results, it is now 
possible to convert BUR to CBF. This method is applicable to small field type of 
gamma cameras, and it is expected to be useful as a routine test.

PMID: 10213978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Brain Dev. 1999 Mar;21(2):103-6.

Excessive water drinking behavior in autism.

Terai K(1), Munesue T, Hiratani M.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Second Hospital (Division of Neuropsychiatry), Nanao, Ishikawa, Japan.

The aim of this study was to determine the incidence of polydipsia in 49 autistic
children, and also the influence of psychotropic drugs and residential factors on
water drinking behavior, as compared with in 89 mentally retarded children, in
schools for mentally handicapped children in Fukui prefecture. Questionnaires
were used to detect polydipsia and to assess the severity of the water drinking
behavior in the autistic children and mentally retarded children. The incidence
of polydipsia in the autistic children tended to be higher (P = 0.074) than that 
in the retarded children. The severity of water drinking behavior was
significantly higher in autism (P = 0.022) than in mental retardation. The
majority of the autistic children with polydipsia had been taking no psychotropic
drugs. The incidence of polydipsia showed no significant difference between two
residential situations, i.e. 'not at home' and 'at home'. The present study
suggests that polydipsia or excessive water drinking behavior occurs more often
in autism than in mental retardation, possibly due to some intrinsic factor in
autism itself.

PMID: 10206527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Jpn J Pharmacol. 1999 Feb;79(2):195-202.

Implication of endogenous nitric oxide in gastric mucosal protective effect of
T-593, a novel anti-ulcer agent, in rats.

Marubuchi S(1), Mori Y, Noto M, Urata N, Mizuo M, Arai H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratories, Toyama Chemical Co., Ltd., Japan.

The relationship of endogenous nitric oxide (NO) to the gastric mucosal
protective effect of the novel anti-ulcer agent T-593,
(+/-)-(E)-1-[2-hydroxy-2-(4-hydroxyphenyl)ethyl]-3-[2-[[[5-(methylamino)
methyl-2-furyl]methyl]thio]ethyl]-2-(methylsulfonyl) guanidine, was investigated 
in rats. T-593 (3-30 mg/kg, p.o.) dose dependently prevented the formation of
gastric mucosal lesions induced by oral administration of aspirin (200 mg/kg) in 
0.15 N HCl (HCl-aspirin). Pretreatment with N(G)-nitro-L-arginine methylester
(L-NAME), a selective inhibitor of NO synthase (NOS), attenuated the mucosal
protective effect of T-593. This effect of L-NAME was antagonized by pretreatment
with L-arginine, a substrate of NOS, but not with D-arginine. Activity of total
NOS composed of inducible and constitutive NOS in the gastric mucosa was
decreased by HCl-aspirin, and T-593 inhibited this decrease. On the other hand,
HCl-aspirin and T-593 did not affect inducible NOS activity in the gastric
mucosa. Furthermore, we confirmed that T-593 inhibits the decrease in gastric
mucosal blood flow (GMBF) induced by HCl-aspirin, and this effect is completely
inhibited by pretreatment with L-NAME. These results suggest that the mucosal
protective effect of T-593 is partly mediated by endogenous NO via improvement of
GMBF and that a possible mechanism for the effect of T-593 is the maintenance of 
constitutive NOS activity in gastric mucosa.

PMID: 10202855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Ann Hematol. 1999 Feb;78(2):87-8.

Complete remission of refractory anemia following a single high dose of
cyclophosphamide.

Ferrara F(1), Copia C, Annunziata M, di Noto R, Russo C, Palmieri S, Spasiano A, 
del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Cardarelli General Hospital, Naples, Italy.
ferrara@itb.it

We describe a case of stable complete remission in a patient with refractory
anemia complicated by severe autoimmune hemolytic anemia, achieved with a single 
high dose (4 g/m2) of cyclophosphamide (cyclo). Concomitantly, an effective
mobilization of CD34-positive cells was induced. Other immunosuppressive
approaches including high-dose methylprednisolone, high-dose immunoglobulin, and 
cyclosporine had been ineffective. This finding suggests that, in selected cases,
an immunologic mechanism may mediate cytopenia in myelodysplastic syndromes
(MDS). In addition, it demonstrates that successful mobilization of peripheral
blood stem cells can be induced with high-dose cyclo in MDS.

PMID: 10089024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 1999 Mar;113(3):369-73.

Fish calcitonin genes: primitive bony fish genes have been conserved in some
lower vertebrates.

Suzuki N(1), Ueda K, Sakamoto H, Sasayama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Faculty of Science, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa,
927-0553, USA.

Using the polymerase chain reaction method, we amplified calcitonin genes from
the cDNA of the ultimobranchial glands or from the genomic DNA of the blood cells
and liver of various fishes. The fishes examined were primitive bony fishes
(lungfish, polypterus, sturgeon, and gar), 16 species of teleosts, and
cartilaginous fishes (stingray). Sequenced calcitonin genes were compared among
fishes and with those of reptiles and chickens. The similarity of the calcitonin 
genes was the highest between the reptile and chicken groups and the primitive
bony fishes (sequence similarity of the nucleotides 81-90%). The values between
teleosts and the primitive bony fishes were 70-81%, with the exception of eels.
Eel calcitonin genes were very similar to those of primitive bony fishes
(83-88%). Stingray calcitonin genes were relatively more similar to those of the 
primitive bony fishes (74-78%) than to teleosts (63-73%). In goldfish and
sardine, two types of calcitonin genes were found. We concluded that the genes of
primitive bony fish are placed at a fundamental position in this hormone, at
least among these vertebrates.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10068498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Respiration. 1999;66(1):73-7.

Hemoglobin SC disease presenting as acute chest syndrome with
ventilation-perfusion mismatches.

Noto H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Medical Center, New York, N.Y., USA.

Acute chest syndrome, characterized by fever, chest pain and pulmonary
infiltrates, is a known complication of hemoglobin SC disease. A 41-year-old
African male with previously unknown hemoglobinopathy developed an acute episode 
of fever, chest pain and dyspnea right after surgery for retinal detachment. The 
patient was suspected of having pulmonary thromboembolism. This was further
suggested by a 'high probability' ventilation-perfusion scan. However, a
pulmonary angiogram revealed no evidence of thromboembolism. Subsequently, the
patient was recognized to have hemoglobin SC disease, with the acute chest
syndrome. After appropriate treatment with antibiotics, hydration and exchange
transfusion, the patient underwent another surgery without complications.

PMID: 9973696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Ophthalmic Res. 1999;31(2):75-85.

Cataract epidemiology performed with Scheimpflug documentation.

Sasaki K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Kanazawa Medical University, Uchinada, Japan.
kmu-op@po.sphere.ne.jp

Cataract epidemiological surveys applying a photodocumentation system were
performed by the author's group in three climatically different sites with
racially different populations: Noto (Japan), Reykjavik (Iceland) and Singapore. 
Data regarding age- and sex-related changes in lens transparency decrease,
prevalence and type of opacification are specific for the three populations
studied. Direct comparisons of the three different populations revealed that the 
age-related prevalence of lens opacification, including whole grades, in the
Japanese and Icelandic populations was almost the same, whereas that of the
Singaporeans was significantly higher. However, the percentage of progressed
cases was highest among Singaporeans, followed by the Japanese and Icelanders.
Although the application of photodocumentation for cataract epidemiological
studies has been limited up to now mainly because of high cost and sophisticated 
and time-consuming examination methods, more accurate, reliable and objective
data can be obtained which will allow prospective decisions on the incidence of
cataract.

PMID: 9933768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 1999 Feb;12(1):33-5.

Two cases of breast lymphoma mimicking juvenile hypertrophy.

Di Noto A(1), Pacheco BP, Vicala R, Itala J, Pellegrino J, Mendez Ribas J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hospital de Clínicas Jose de San
Martin, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Córdoba, Argentina.

Two cases of mammary lymphosarcoma in adolescents, a secondary localization of a 
systemic process, are described. These cases clinically presented as bilateral
virginal hypertrophies. One patient died while being treated with chemotherapy;
the tumoral mass in the other patient had been reduced at the end of treatment.

PMID: 9929839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. FEBS Lett. 1998 Dec 11;441(1):127-31.

A novel human RasGAP-like gene that maps within the prostate cancer
susceptibility locus at chromosome 1q25.

Noto S(1), Maeda T, Hattori S, Inazawa J, Imamura M, Asaka M, Hatakeyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for Cancer
Research, Tokyo.

We report the molecular cloning of a human cDNA that encodes a molecule having
striking homology with Ras-specific GTPase-activating proteins (RasGAPs). Among
previously described RasGAPs, the cDNA product is most closely related to
Caenorhabditis elegans GAP-2, including a predicted coiled-coil structure near
the carboxyl terminus. Expression of the cDNA in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
defective in one of two RasGAPs, Ira2, complemented loss of the Ira2 function,
indicating that the cDNA product functions as a RasGAP. The RasGAP-like gene is
located on the human chromosome 1q25, the locus that appears to contain a
hereditary prostate cancer susceptible gene, HPC1.

PMID: 9877179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Clin Chim Acta. 1998 Nov;278(1):35-43.

Stabilities of N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase (NAG) isoenzymes in urine:
advantage of NAG isoenzyme B measurement in clinical applications.

Morita A(1), Numata Y, Kosugi Y, Noto A, Takeuchi N, Uchida K.

Author information: 
(1)Diagnostic Science Division, Shionogi & Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan.

N-Acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase (NAG) is a widely used urinary enzyme for the
assessment of renal diseases. We studied the stabilities of NAG isoenzymes in
urine at 37 degrees C by enzyme assay and ELISA using a model simulating in vivo 
conditions. The stabilities were found to be affected by the pH. Under mild
acidic condition (about pH 6), there was no significant loss of enzymatic
activity of NAG isoenzyme A, enzymatic activity of NAG isoenzyme B and
immunological activity of NAG isoenzyme B even after 8 h incubation. In contrast,
under alkaline condition (about pH 8), the enzymatic activity of NAG isoenzyme A 
was rapidly lost, whereas both enzymatic and immunological activities of NAG
isoenzyme B were maintained at more than 80% of their initial values. Also, we
found that the ratios of endogenous NAG isoenzyme B to total NAG were elevated in
alkaline urine samples. These results indicate that NAG isoenzyme A, which is a
major isoenzyme in normal urine (pH 5-7), seems to be inactivated in alkaline
urine. Our results suggest that for alkaline urine, NAG isoenzyme B should be
measured to avoid misinterpretation of total NAG enzymatic activities.

PMID: 9877122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Int J Dermatol. 1998 Nov;37(11):829-32.

Reticulate postinflammatory hyperpigmentation with band-like mucin deposition.

Noto G(1), Pravatà G, Aricò M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Palermo, Policlinico P. Giaccone,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Mucinoses of the skin are a group of disorders sharing accumulation
of mucin in the skin or hair follicles. Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, with 
pigmentary incontinence, is due to loss of melanin from epidermal basal cells and
its accumulation in dermal macrophages.
METHODS: We describe clinicopathologic features of two patients presenting with
the association of pigmentary incontinence with an unusual diffuse, band-like
dermal deposition of mucin, clinically presenting with reticular pigmented
macular lesions.
RESULTS: Two patients were observed with asymptomatic, persistent, reticular,
pigmented patches located in the flexures, thighs, neck and back. Histology
showed melanophages with a diffuse, band-like dermal deposition of mucin, an
increased number of fibroblasts, a slight T-cell infiltrate and scattered mast
cells. Blood markers of lupus erythematosus were negative.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings may draw attention to pigmentary disorders such as
lichen planus pigmentosus, erythema dyschromicum perstans, pigmentatio maculos
eruptiva idiopathica, dermatopathia pigmentosa reticularis, prurigo pigmentosa
and frictional melanosis. None of these entities, however, includes mucin
deposition among its microscopic features. Macules were not preceded by erythema 
or any other lesions. We suggest that our cases could belong to group II of
Rongioletti and Rebora's classification, i.e. they could be cases of secondary
mucin deposition in postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, possibly in an unusual
form of lichen planus pigmentosus or, less likely, frictional melanosis.

PMID: 9865868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Kyobu Geka. 1998 Nov;51(12):1060-3.

[A case of mediastinal teratoma discovered availing of pneumonia].

[Article in Japanese]

Sasaki H(1), Noto H, Miyazawa H, Toshima M, Hagino I, Komiyama S, Nishiya Y,
Fujimura M, Izumi S, Miwa A, Yamashita H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Toyama Prefectural Central 
Hospital, Japan.

A 42-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with hemosputum and an abnormal 
shadow on chest X-ray. Although her hemosputum disappeared after the treatment of
pneumonia, the abnormal shadow was not improved. Chest CT showed a mediastinal
mass. She underwent thoracotomy and the tumor, measuring 6 x 5 x 5 cm in size,
was resected. Pathological diagnosis was a mature type teratoma with direct
invasion to the lung. We have to take mediastinal teratoma into consideration as 
one of the causes of pneumonia.

PMID: 9838790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Clin Apher. 1998;13(3):99-102.

Femoral vascular access for large-volume collection of peripheral blood
progenitor cells.

Shariatmadar S(1), Noto TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Transfusion Medicine Services, University of
Miami/Jackson Memorial Medical Center, Florida, USA.

Central venous catheters are used frequently in large-volume leukapheresis to
provide high flow rates for peripheral blood progenitor cell (PBPC) collection.
In a retrospective study, we evaluated the safety and efficacy of short-term use 
of large-bore femoral venous catheters for the collection of PBPCs in 63 patients
with hematologic and solid organ malignancies. All catheters were placed in an
outpatient setting on the day of apheresis and remained in site if subsequent
collections became necessary. A total of 101 procedures were performed.
Thirty-five patients (56%) reached target levels after 1 collection. Twenty-four 
patients (38%) had 2 consecutive day collections while 4 patients (6%) required
more than 2 collections. In this latter group, 2 patients did not have
consecutive day collections. One had 2 consecutive day collections followed by a 
third collection 48 hours later. In the other, leukapheresis was performed for 2 
consecutive days and then resumed 3 days later with 2 subsequent collections. The
longest duration the catheter remained in site was 6 days. Catheter care was
provided by the apheresis staff. All patients who had more than 1 collection were
given instructions on how to care for their catheters at home. Only 1 patient had
oozing at the catheter site during the collection. Thrombosis, mechanical, and
infectious complications were not encountered. The short-term use of femoral
venous catheters appears safe and effective for the collection of PBPCs.

PMID: 9828018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Hinyokika Kiyo. 1998 Aug;44(8):565-73.

[Clinical efficacy and reduction effect on prostatic volume of chlormadinone
acetate combined with tamsulosin hydrochloride in benign prostatic hyperplasia
patients insufficiently treated with tamsulosin hydrochloride only].

[Article in Japanese]

Ueki O(1), Kawaguchi K, Katsumi T, Murayama K, Kameda K, Nishino A, Sakai A,
Haginaka T, Miyazaki K, Asari T, Egawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Noto General Hospital.

Alpha adrenergic blocker has become the first choice in the medical treatment of 
benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). The efficacy of alpha adrenergic blocker has 
been suggested to be related to the prostatic tissue components, and to be
ineffective in treating the clinical symptoms caused by BPH in some cases. The
efficacy and prostate reduction of an anti-androgenic agent, chlormadinone
acetate, combined with alpha adrenergic blocker, tamsulosin hydrochloride, were
evaluated using 40-BPH patients insufficiently treated with tamsulosin
hydrochloride alone. Fifty mg of chlormadinone acetate and 0.2 mg of tamsulosin
hydrochloride were administered orally once a day for 16 weeks to patients with a
prostate subjective symptoms score, I-PSS, of greater than 13 or a peak flow rate
of less than 12 ml/s, even after the treatment with 0.2 mg of tamsulosin
hydrochloride alone for more than four weeks. Total I-PSS decreased significantly
after four weeks. The total irritative symptom score did not change for 16 weeks,
but the total obstructive symptom score decreased significantly, as did the total
I-PSS. In objective data, the estimated volume of both total prostate and the
transition zone on transrectal ultrasonogram decreased significantly at the end
of the treatment, and the peak flow rate decreased significantly after 12 weeks. 
These findings suggest that the addition of chlormadinone acetate may be a
reasonable alternative in the treatment of BPH patients responding insufficiently
to tamsulosin hydrochloride alone, and that combination therapy using
chlormadinone acetate and tamsulosin hydrochloride may be useful for BPH patients
with serious obstructive symptoms.

PMID: 9783192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Tissue Antigens. 1998 Jul;52(1):1-8.

CD66c antigen expression is myeloid restricted in normal bone marrow but is a
common feature of CD10+ early-B-cell malignancies.

Boccuni P(1), Di Noto R, Lo Pardo C, Villa MR, Ferrara F, Rotoli B, Del Vecchio
L.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Ematologia, Università Frederico II, Napoli, Italy.

CD66c is a surface (and intracellular) molecule bound to the membrane by a
glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol anchor. While its expression on peripheral
granulocytes is well recognized, less is known about its distribution in early
steps of normal and neoplastic hematopoiesis. We analyzed by flow cytometry cell 
surface expression of CD66c on bone marrow cells from 4 healthy subjects and on
bone marrow or peripheral blood cells from 127 patients with newly diagnosed
hematologic malignancies: 70 de novo acute myeloid leukemias (AML), 6 refractory 
anemias with excess of blasts in transformation, 3 myeloid and 3 lymphoid blastic
phases of chronic myelogenous leukemia, 33 B-lineage and 6 T-lineage acute
lymphoblastic leukemias (B- and T-ALL), and 3 B-cell and 3 T-cell non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas in the leukemic phase. We found that in normal bone marrow CD66c
expression was myeloid restricted, reaching its highest level on promyelocytes.
As for de novo AML, slight expression of CD66c was found on 6/25 (24%) AML-M4 and
only occasionally in other subgroups. In 9 out of 10 cases of acute promyelocytic
leukemia, CD66c was totally absent, but antigen expression was easily detectable 
following in vitro exposure to all-trans retinoic acid. Among lymphoid
malignancies, CD10+ early-B-ALL consistently expressed the molecule (20/23 cases,
or 87%) whereas both CD10- early-B ALL and SmIg+ B-ALL completely lacked it.
Finally, dual staining with CD66c and CD10 proved to be a suitable tool for
distinguishing even low percentages of residual leukemic cells (CD10+/CD66c+)
from normal regenerating early-B cells (CD10+/CD66c ) in CD10+ early-B-ALL
induced into remission.

PMID: 9714468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Br J Haematol. 1998 Jul;102(2):444-8.

Immunophenotypic analysis enables the correct prediction of t(8;21) in acute
myeloid leukaemia.

Ferrara F(1), Di Noto R, Annunziata M, Copia C, Lo Pardo C, Boccuni P, Sebastio
L, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Ematologia, Ospedale A. Cardarelli, Napoli, Italy.

Immunophenotypic findings from 14 patients affected by acute myeloid leukaemia
(AML) with t(8;21) were compared to those obtained from 79 AML patients with
normal or other aberrant karyotypes. Classic lineage markers, adhesion molecules,
surface enzymes, stem-cell-related antigens and HLA-DR were investigated.
Following evaluation by the Mann-Whitney test, we found that t(8;21) AMLs showed 
a significantly higher expression of CD19, CD34, CD56, CD45RA and CD54.
Conversely, blasts from patients in the control group significantly expressed
higher levels of CD45RO, CD33, CD36, CD11b and CD14. In order to split the data
at the best cut-off point to achieve the most homogeneous subset with regard to
cytogenetic pattern, i.e. t(8;21) or not, the CART (Classification and Regression
Trees) method was applied. In the univariate analysis by CART, statistically
significant differences were found when CD19 was dichotomized at 10%, CD34 at
37%, CD45RA at 84%, CD54 at 21%, CD56 at 12%, CD36 at 14%, CD45RO at 25%, CD11b
at 18% and CD14 at 12%. Once cut-off points were established by CART, we applied 
the logistic regression model to establish which combination of two or more
antigens was most predictive for t(8;21). The combination CD19-CD34 at the
cut-off points indicated above correctly classified 92/93 cases (98.9%). The
addition of any other antigen combination to the CD19/CD34 model failed to
improve the level of prediction. We conclude that AML with t(8;21) displays an
exclusive immunophenotype that is highly predictive of the cytogenetic pattern.

PMID: 9695958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Scand J Infect Dis. 1998;30(1):11-5.

Sporadic hepatitis C virus infection: a case-control study of transmission routes
in a selected hospital sample of the general population in Italy.

Comandini UV(1), Tossini G, Longo MA, Ferri F, Cuzzi G, Noto P, Zaccarelli M,
Visco G.

Author information: 
(1)L. Spallanzani Hospital of Infectious Diseases, Rome, Italy.

A case-control study was performed on 9,175 Italian adult outpatients in 5
hospitals in Rome. The study was carried out to clarify the role of some less
investigated risk factors (RF) in the spread of hepatitis C virus (HCV)
infection. All subjects were contacted by interviewers, who completed a
questionnaire. Their sera were stored and subsequently tested for both HCV and
hepatitis B virus core (HBc) antibodies. 365 subjects, positive for anti-HCV and 
anti-HBc-negative, and who had denied intravenous drug use (IDU) (cases) were
compared with an equal number of suitable random controls negative for anti-HCV
and anti-HBc. Gender, age and region of birth and residence were matched. The
prevalence of 13 RFs were statistically compared by univariate and multivariate
analysis. A positive anti-HCV test was significantly associated, by multivariate 
analysis with intravenous treatments and minor surgical procedures (both before
1975) (p < 0.001), blood transfusions (before 1991) (p < 0.01), diabetes (p <
0.01), and deliveries in hospital (p < 0.05) (both before 1975). After 1975 (1991
for transfusions), all associations lost their significance. Intra-familial
(sexual and non sexual), occupational RFs and dental care were not significantly 
associated with the presence of anti-HCV. We suggest that non-disposable
syringes, commonly used until 1975 in Italy for i.v. treatments, have been the
major route for HCV transmission in Italy among non-IDU subjects.

PMID: 9670352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1998 Jul 1;64(7):2528-32.

Molecular Analysis of Bacterial Communities in a Three-Compartment Granular
Activated Sludge System Indicates Community-Level Control by Incompatible
Nitrification Processes.

Holben WE(1), Noto K, Sumino T, Suwa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, The University of Montana, Missoula, Montana 
59812-1002, Japan.

Bacterial community structure and the predominant nitrifying activities and
populations in each compartment of a three-compartment activated sludge system
were determined. Each compartment was originally inoculated with the same
activated sludge community entrapped in polyethylene glycol gel granules, and
ammonium nitrogen was supplied to the system in an inorganic salts solution at a 
rate of 5.0 g of N liter of granular activated sludge-1 day-1. After 150 days of 
operation, the system was found to comprise a series of sequential nitrifying
reactions (K. Noto, T. Ogasawara, Y. Suwa, and T. Sumino, Water Res. 32:769-773, 
1998), presumably mediated by different bacterial populations. Activity data
showed that all NH4-N was completely oxidized in compartments one and two
(approximately half in each), but no significant nitrite oxidation was observed
in these compartments. In contrast, all available nitrite was oxidized to nitrate
in compartment three. To study the microbial populations and communities in this 
system, total bacterial DNA isolated from each compartment was analyzed for
community structure based on the G+C contents of the component populations.
Compartment one showed dominant populations having 50 and 67% G+C contents.
Compartment two was similar in structure to compartment one. The bacterial
community in compartment three had dominant populations with 62 and 67% G+C
contents and retained the 50% G+C content population only at a greatly diminished
level. The 50% G+C content population from compartment one hybridized strongly
with amo (ammonia monooxygenase) and hao (hydroxylamine oxidoreductase) gene
probes from Nitrosomonas europaea. However, the 50% G+C content population from
compartment two hybridized strongly with the hao probe but only weakly with the
amo probe, suggesting that the predominant ammonia-oxidizing populations in
compartments one and two might be different. Since different activities and
populations come to dominate in each compartment from an identical inoculum, it
appears that the nitrification processes may be somewhat incompatible, resulting 
in a series of sequential reactions and different communities in this
three-compartment system.

PMCID: PMC106421
PMID: 9647825  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


204. Leuk Lymphoma. 1998 May;29(5-6):613-6.

Spontaneous splenic rupture in a patient with acute lymphoblastic leukemia of
Burkitt type.

Ferrara F(1), D'Ambrosio V, Di Noto R, Mele G, Giovine S, Romano L.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Ematologia, Ospedale A. Cardarelli, Napoli, Italy.

We describe a case of spontaneous splenic rupture occurred in a patient with
acute lymphoblastic leukemia of Burkitt type before starting cytotoxic
chemotherapy. Left hypochondrial pain radiating to the homolateral shoulder was
the only clinical symptom. Emergency computed tomography showed splenic
laceration and hemoperitoneum. The patient underwent immediate laparatomy with
splenectomy and experienced an uneventful postoperative recovery. Eight days
after surgery, chemotherapy could be administered and complete remission was
achieved. Although spontaneous rupture of the spleen is rare in leukemia and
related disorders, this diagnosis should be taken in account also when clinical
symptoms are mild. Following immediate operative management, patients may
completely recover and receive cytotoxic chemotherapy with substantial
possibilities of achieving complete remission.

PMID: 9643575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Chem Biol Interact. 1998 Apr 3;110(3):203-20.

Action of antitumoral platinum complexes on in vitro platelet functions.

Dalla Via L(1), Di Noto V, Vidali M, Scomazzon F, Ni D, Deana R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Padova, Italy.

This report presents a comparison of the effects of cis- and
trans-diamminedichloroplatinum complexes on in vitro platelet functions.
Pretreatment of platelets with cis-platinum (cisplatin) induced a slow,
dose-dependent (0.1-0.45 mM), increase in the cytosolic Ca2+ concentration,
pleckstrin (47 kDa) phosphorylation and serotonin secretion, as well as a slight 
shape modification with emission of a few pseudopodia. All these effects were
remarkably increased in platelets exposed to trans-platinum (transplatin). The
rise in cytosolic Ca2+ concentration and serotonin secretion evoked by
stimulation of platelets with thrombin were not significantly influenced by
cellular exposure to cis-platinum, whereas they were enhanced and inhibited,
respectively, by exposure to trans-platinum. Trans-platinum also inhibited
thrombin-promoted platelet aggregation to a greater extent than the cis-isomer.
While the viscosity of platelet rich-plasma tended to decrease in the presence of
cis-platinum, it tended to increase in the presence of trans-platinum. Taken
together, these results indicate that the effects on platelet functions of the
efficacious antitumor complex cis-platinum is rather different from that of the
inactive complex trans-platinum. Therefore, the in vitro tests of platelet
functions employed in this study might provide an index of antitumor drug
toxicity and serve as a preliminary indicator of therapeutic efficacy.

PMID: 9609387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1998 May;46(5):657-9.

Brain SPECT scanning.

Noto RB, Ott BR.

Comment on
    J Am Geriatr Soc. 1997 Jan;45(1):15-20.

PMID: 9588386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Acta Paediatr Jpn. 1998 Feb;40(1):35-40.

Relationship between fat distribution and lipid and apolipoprotein profiles in
young teenagers.

Okada T(1), Sato Y, Yamazaki H, Iwata F, Hara M, Misawa M, Kim H, Karasawa K,
Noto N, Harada K, Ryo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

The influence of obesity and fat distribution on serum levels of lipoprotein and 
apolipoprotein was investigated in 294 Japanese junior high school children
(12-13 years of age). Serum levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDLC) 
(P = 0.013), triglycerides (TG) (P = 0.0006), and apolipoprotein B (apoB) (P =
0.003), and the apoB/A-I ratio (P = 0.005) were significantly higher and serum
levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDLC) (P = 0.00003) and apoA-1(P 
= 0.003) were significantly lower in obese boys than in non-obese boys. The serum
levels of TG (P = 0.013) and the apoB/A-I ratio (P = 0.011) were significantly
higher and the serum levels of HDLC (P = 0.004) was significantly lower in obese 
girls than in non-obese girls. The LDLC/apoB ratio was lower in obese girls than 
in non-obese girls (P = 0.03). Obesity (> or = 20% of ideal weight) was strongly 
correlated with the serum levels of lipids and apolipoproteins in boys; this
relationship was less clear in girls. The degree of obesity and the body mass
index (BMI) were more strongly correlated with serum levels of lipids and
apolipoproteins in boys than in girls. In boys, atherogenic lipoproteins and
apolipoproteins, such as LDLC and apoB, showed a stronger correlation with the
thickness of the triceps skinfold, while in girls the anti-atherogenic
lipoproteins and apolipoproteins, such as HDLC and apoA-I, showed a stronger
correlation with both the triceps and the subscapular skinfold thicknesses. In
girls the relationships between the BMI and the degree of obesity and the
thickness of the subscapular skinfold (S) thickness were similar to the
relationships between those parameters and the triceps skinfold (T) thickness. In
boys, these parameters showed a stronger correlation with the subscapular
skinfold thickness than with the triceps skinfold thickness. The correlation
coefficients for the relationships between skinfold thickness and lipid and
apolipoprotein levels were similar to the coefficients for the relationships
between skinfold thicknesses and the severity of obesity and the BMI. The
distribution of central-type fat accumulation, which is indicated by the
thickness of the subscapular skinfold, the S/T ratio and S-T value, was inversely
correlated with the HDLC level in both boys and girls. The degree of obesity was 
strongly correlated with the atherogenic lipoprotein profile in boys, in part
because the subscapular skinfold thickness was strongly correlated with the
degree of obesity and the BMI. In girls, the correlations between indices of
central-type obesity and atherogenic lipid and apolipoprotein profiles were
stronger than in boys. These data suggest that childhood obesity may be an early 
cardiovascular risk factor.

PMID: 9583198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Oncol Rep. 1998 May-Jun;5(3):689-92.

Prognosis for patients with pneumonectomy or lesser resections for non-small cell
lung cancer based on histologic cell type.

Mizushima Y(1), Sugiyama S, Noto H, Kusajima Y, Yamashita R, Sassa K, Kobayashi
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Hirosaki University, School of Medicine, Hirosaki,
036-8216, Japan.

Contrary results have been reported regarding prognosis by histologic cell type
in surgical treatment for lung cancer. To evaluate whether histologic cell type
has influence on prognosis, we separately analyzed the prognostic outcome of
patients who had undergone pneumonectomy (n=119) and lesser resections (n=124)
for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) between January, 1985 and March, 1996. The
pneumonectomy group included 87 (73%) squamous cell carcinoma (Sq), 25 (21%)
adenocarcinoma (Ad) and 7 other types with 10 (8%) patients in postoperative
stage I of the disease, 29 (24%) stage II, 74 (62%) stage III and 6 in stage IV. 
The lesser resection group included 45 (36%) Sq, 63 (51%) Ad and 16 other types
with 71 (57%) patients in stage I, 9 (7%) stage II, 32 (26%) stage III and 12
stage IV. In patients with stages I-III, the 5-year survival rate was 42.8% for
the Sq group and 41.1% for the Ad group in the case of lesser resections and
37.1% for the Sq group and 0% for the Ad group (p<0.05) in the case of
pneumonectomy. The poorer prognosis for patients with Ad in the case of
pneumonectomy was suspected to be due to the N factor; the percentage of patients
with N0-1 was significantly lower in the Ad group than for the Sq group (28 vs
62%, p<0.005). Histologic cell type can be a prognostic factor for patients
undergoing surgical treatments for NSCLC. One possible reason for the contrary
results on prognosis by histologic cell type among investigators may be due to
the mixed results of pneumonectomy and lesser resections.

PMID: 9538177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Ann Occup Hyg. 1998 Feb;42(2):135-44.

The effect of dust-protective respirator mask and the relevance of work category 
on urinary 1-hydroxypyrene concentration in PAH exposed electrode paste plant
workers.

Bentsen RK(1), Notø H, Halgard K, Ovrebø S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, National Institute of Occupational Health, Oslo,
Norway.

Large amounts of polycyclic-aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) are found in the work
environment of electrode paste workers. Inhalation and skin uptake are both
important routes for PAH exposure. We have studied the effect of dust-protective 
respirator masks by measuring urinary 1-hydroxypyrene as a biomarker for PAH
exposure. Eighteen workers divided into work categories at the factory were
monitored by personal air sampling and urinary 1-hydroxypyrene every work shift
for two consecutive weeks. In the second week of the study, the workers were
encouraged to wear respirator masks persistently, which resulted in a significant
reduction in urinary 1-hydroxypyrene in end-of-shift samples (paired t-test, P = 
0.009). When correcting urinary 1-hydroxypyrene for ambient air pyrene we found
on average 41% reduction in urinary 1-hydroxypyrene concentration in the second
week of the intervention study. There was a work-category dependent variation in 
the correlation between end-of-shift urinary 1-hydroxypyrene samples and pyrene
measured in the breathing zone of the workers, most likely due to variable skin
uptake of pyrene; the overall correlation coefficient was 0.26 (P = 0.015). The
1-hydroxypyrene concentration in pre- and post-shift urine samples varied between
0.7 and 69.6 mumol/mol creatinine in the normal work week, and depended on the
work category. The particulate PAH exposure ranged from 0.6 to 21.4
micrograms/m3. The ratio of particulate pyrene to benzo[a]pyrene varied from 1.6 
to 8.0 amongst the various work categories within the same plant. Multiple
regression analysis showed that smoking and work day are explanatory variables
for the concentration of 1-hydroxypyrene in urine. Thirty-nine percent of the
variation in the urinary 1-hydroxypyrene level at the end of shift could be
explained by the independent variables pyrene concentration in air, smoking
habits, work day, use of respiratory mask, work category and age.

PMID: 9559574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Artif Organs. 1998 Apr;22(4):300-7.

Effect of high concentrations of bile acids on cultured hepatocytes.

Noto H(1), Matsushita M, Koike M, Takahashi M, Matsue H, Kimura J, Todo S.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo, 
Japan.

High concentrations of bile acids have been reported as injurious to hepatocytes.
We report the influence of various combinations of bile acids on the
liver-specific function of cultured rat hepatocytes. Using 4 bile acids
(glycocholate [GC], taurocholate [TC], glycohenodeoxycholate [GCDC], and
taurochenodeoxycholate [TCDC]), we obtained 6 bile-acid mixtures, each containing
equal amounts of 2 bile acids (total bile acids [TBA], 2 mM). Changes in
gluconeogenesis, ureagenesis, DNA contents, medium alanine aminotransferase, and 
morphologies were compared among the paired bile acid compositions by measuring
the C/CDC ratio ([GC + TC]/[GCDC + TCDC]) of each. In terms of their relative
impairments of ureagenesis from greatest to least, the acids were GCDC, TCDC, and
GC, which was almost the same as TC. When the C/CDC ratio was 0, the values of
all parameters measured deteriorated. When the C/CDC ratio was 1 in the presence 
of 1 mM GCDC, only the rate of ureagenesis was diminished. When the C/CDC ratio
was infinite, no hepatocellular injury was observed. GCDC and TCDC, together or
separately, showed significant hepatocellular injury when the TBA concentration
was 2 mM.

PMID: 9555961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Oncol Rep. 1998 Mar-Apr;5(2):437-40.

Results of pneumonectomy for non-small cell lung cancer: appropriateness of the
new TNM staging system.

Mizushima Y(1), Noto H, Kusajima Y, Sugiyama S, Yamashita R, Sassa K, Kobayashi
M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical
University, Toyama, 930-01, Japan.

In the new TNM staging system for lung cancer in 1997, stage T3N0M0 was revised
from stage IIIA to stage IIB. Therefore, we initiated a study to assess the
appropriateness of this revision. One hundred and nineteen patients who had
undergone pneumonectomy for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) between January
1985 and March 1996 were analyzed. They included 87 squamous cell carcinoma (sq),
25 adenocarcinoma (ad), 4 large cell carcinoma (la), and 3 adenosquamous cell
carcinoma (ad-sq), with 10 patients in postoperative stage I (3 IA + 7 IB), 29
stage II (1 IIA + 28 IIB), 74 stage III (39 IIIA + 35 IIIB) and 6 in stage IV of 
the disease. Stage IIB included 14 patients with T3N0M0 (12 sq, 1 ad, 1 la). The 
5-year survival rate for patients with T3N0M0 was 69.6%, which was superior to
that (55.7%) for patients with stage II (T1-2N1M0) of the previous system.
According to the new TNM staging system, the 5-year survival rate was 40% in
stage I, 66.2% in stage II, 24% in stage IIIA, 0% in stages IIIB and IV (stage I 
vs stage II, NS; stage II vs stage IIIA, p<0.01; stage IIIA vs stage IIIB,
p<0.01; stage IIIB vs stage IV, p<0.01). A significant prognostic difference
between stage II and stage IIIA was observed, which had not been observed in the 
previous system. Our results show that the revision of T3N0M0 from stage IIIA to 
stage II in the new TNM staging system seems appropriate with regard to the
pneumonectomy group.

PMID: 9468575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Sci Total Environ. 1998 Mar 5;212(1):59-67.

Correlation between urinary 1-hydroxypyrene and ambient air pyrene measured with 
an inhalable aerosol sampler and a total dust sampler in an electrode paste
plant.

Bentsen RK(1), Halgard K, Notø H, Daae HL, Ovrebø S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, National Institute of Occupational Health, Oslo,
Norway.

The aim of this study was to investigate whether the use of an inhalable aerosol 
sampler would improve the correlation between urinary 1-hydroxypyrene and
occupational pyrene exposure compared to measurements with a total dust sampler
in an electrode paste plant. PAHs were collected on a filter and adsorbent by a
37-mm closed-face total aerosol sampler and an open-face sampler for inhalable
aerosol from the Institute of Occupational Medicine (IOM). 1-Hydroxypyrene in
pre- and post-shift urine samples was quantitated by high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC). In this study, the use of the IOM sampler resulted in
approximately four times higher concentrations of particulate PAH and pyrene than
the total dust sampler. The correlation between pyrene levels measured with the
two samplers was good with a correlation coefficient of 0.83. The correlation
between workplace air pyrene and 1-hydroxypyrene in post-shift urine was poor (r 
= -0.12), but a small non-significant improvement was found with the IOM sampler 
(r = 0.11). In this factory the use of an inhalable aerosol sampler had only
marginal effect on the correlation between 1-hydroxypyrene in urine and breathing
zone pyrene. These results indicate that skin exposure is an important route of
PAH uptake in this plant.

PMID: 9525047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Gerontology. 1998;44(2):106-10.

Lipoprotein profile and high-density lipoproteins: subfractions distribution in
centenarians.

Barbagallo CM(1), Averna MR, Fradà G, Noto D, Cavera G, Notarbartolo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Italy. CarloB@mbox.unipa.it

In order to assess the role of HDL on longevity, we studied HDL subfraction
distribution in centenarian women compared with a group of weight- and
gender-matched healthy normolipidemic controls. We did not find any significant
difference in the mean plasma lipid, apolipoprotein, and Lp(a) levels. On the
contrary, in spite of similar HDL-cholesterol concentrations (1.32 +/- 0.41
mmol/l in centenarians vs. 1.32 +/- 0.25 mmol/l in controls, p = not
significant), HDL2b and HDL3a levels were, respectively, significantly increased 
and significantly reduced in centenarians in comparison with controls (HDL2b 32.4
+/- 9.2% in centenarians vs. 23.4 +/- 7.7% in controls, p < 0.002, and HDL3a 26.3
+/- 9.8% in centenarians vs. 34.1 +/- 7.3% in controls, p < 0.01). Moreover,
HDL2b levels were significantly raised and HDL3a levels were significantly
reduced in centenarians in comparison with both 'middle-aged' and 'elderly'
subjects, whereas no difference for any HDL subfraction was found between the two
groups of controls of different ages. Age was significantly correlated with HDL2b
and HDL3a (respectively, +0.452, p < 0.001, and -0.370, p < 0.01) in all
subjects, but not with all the other lipid, lipoprotein and apolipoprotein
parameters, but we observed a large overlapping of individual values of HDL2b
between centenarians and controls. Since HDL2b levels were found to be inversely 
correlated with coronary heart disease risk, we could speculate that, in some
cases, this may probably favor a healthy ageing, but long-term longitudinal
studies are necessary to define the relative importance of HDL subfractions
distribution as a marker of longevity. Probably other factors or clinical
characteristics play a major role in the ageing process.

PMID: 9523222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Arzneimittelforschung. 1998 Jan;48(1):70-3.

Gastric mucosal function following withdrawal of omeprazole in rats.

Noto T(1), Nagasaki M, Yomota E, Endo T.

Author information: 
(1)Lead Optimization Research Laboratory, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., Saitama,
Japan.

In the following study the function of gastric mucosa after withdrawal of 4-week 
suppression of acid secretion was examined. Rats were treated orally for 4 weeks 
with omeprazole (CAS 73590-58-6, 150 mg/kg/day). While elevated plasma gastrin
levels during the treatment returned to normal 4 days after the last dosing,
exogenously applied pentagastrin induced higher acid secretion compared with the 
vehicle-treated controls. Acetylsalicylic acid induced mucosal lesion 3.6-fold
over the control as well. In contrast, the HCl-induced lesion was inhibited by
24.4%. These results indicate that not only the acid secretion but also the
mucosal protection is enhanced after 4-week treatment with omeprazole in rats.

PMID: 9522036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. FEBS Lett. 1998 Jan 23;422(1):36-42.

Spermine binding to liver mitochondria deenergized by ruthenium red plus either
FCCP or antimycin A.

Dalla Via L(1), Di Noto V, Toninello A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmaceutiche, Università di Padova, Padua, Italy.

Thermodynamic analysis of spermine binding to mitochondria treated with ruthenium
red and deenergized with either FCCP or antimycin A confirms the presence of two 
polyamine binding sites, S1 and S2, both with monocoordination, as previously
observed in energized mitochondria [Dalla Via et al., Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1284
(1996) 247-252]. Both sites undergo a marked change in binding capacity and
binding affinity upon mitochondrial deenergization. This change is most likely
responsible for the incomplete or delayed spermine-mediated inhibition of the
permeability transition induced in deenergized mitochondria.

PMID: 9475165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Zoolog Sci. 1997 Oct;14(5):833-6.

Nucleotide sequences of reptile calcitonins: their high homology to chicken
calcitonin.

Suzuki N(1), Eguchi C, Hirai T, Sasayama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Faculty of Science, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa,
Japan.

The calcitonin genes of four species of reptiles (Reeve's turtle, rat snake,
grass lizard, and spectacled caiman) were amplified from the genomic DNA, as well
as from the mRNA of the ultimobranchial glands of the former three species, by
the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method, and were sequenced. Among several
primer sets, only one primer set synthesized from the chicken calcitonin gene was
compatible with those of the reptiles. The nucleotide sequences of the reptile
calcitonin genes were highly homologous with that of chicken calcitonin (100% for
turtle, 99% for caiman, 96% for lizard and 93% for snake). The products amplified
from mRNA by the RT-PCR method matched completely those from genomic DNA in the
turtle, snake and lizard.

PMID: 9450396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Cardiol. 1997 Dec;30(6):331-9.

[Optimum protocol of technetium-99m tetrofosmin myocardial perfusion imaging for 
the detection of coronary stenosis lesions in Kawasaki disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Karasawa K(1), Ayusawa M, Noto N, Sumitomo N, Okada T, Harada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo.

The clinical usefulness of a new myocardial perfusion imaging agent,
technetium-99m tetrofosmin, was assessed in 58 patients for a total of 76 times
(mean age 9.7 years, 1-15 years) including 20 with and 26 without significant
coronary stenotic lesions in Kawasaki disease. Pharmacological (dobutamine or
adenosine triphosphate disodium) or exercise stress technetium-99m tetrofosmin
single photon emission computed tomography was performed under stress and at rest
on the same day. The sensitivity for detection of stress-induced perfusion
defects by this method was 90% (18/ 20) and the specificity was 85% (22/26). The 
dose was 9.3 +/- 2.5 MBq/kg under stress and 18.7 +/- 5.6 MBq/kg at rest. No
significant correlation was recognized between the dose and the image quality.
Adequate image quality was provided by projection time 20-40 sec per frame.
Increased liver accumulation was seen in 24% (18/76), especially in younger and
pharmacological stress cases. The acquisition starting time after tetrofosmin
injection was 58.4 +/- 18.7 min in the negative increased liver accumulation
group and 43.7 +/- 18.3 min in the positive group (p < 0.01). We recommend that
the following protocol is used for pediatric imaging. 1) The standard tetrofosmin
dose is rougly 10 MBq/kg (upper limit 370 MBq) at stress and the double dose for 
the rest imaging. 2) SPECT projection time of 20-40 sec per frame. 3) In
practice, the patient should be fasting prior to stress injection, and the
imaging should be done 1 hour after eating. The rest injection should be done
immediately thereafter, and the rest image should be obtained 1 hour later.

PMID: 9436075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 1997 Dec;45(12):1945-54.

Efficient synthesis and gastric (H+/K+)-ATPase-inhibitory activity of
2-aryl-4,5-dihydro-1H-thieno[3,2-e]benzimidazoles.

Homma K(1), Watanabe T, Iijima T, Yato M, Matsuki K, Noto T, Ishida A.

Author information: 
(1)Lead Optimization Research Laboratory, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., Saitama,
Japan.

A series of 2-aryl-4,5-dihydro-1H-thieno[3,2-e]benzimidazoles (1, 2) was prepared
by condensation of 5-acylamino-4,5,6,7-tetrahydrobenzo[b]thiophen-4-ones (9, 10) 
with ammonium acetate under azeotropic reaction conditions. Various congeners,
N-methyl and N-phenyl analogues (3-5), 4,5-dihydro-1H-thieno[2,3-e]benzimidazoles
(6), 4,5-dihydro-1H-thieno[2,3-g]benzoxazoles (7), and
4,5-dihydro-1H-thieno[2,3-g]benzothiazoles (8), were also prepared. Several
compounds in this series were shown to be K(+)-competitive inhibitors of the
gastric (H+/K+)-ATPase and more potent inhibitors than SK&F-96067,
3-butyryl-8-methoxy-4-(2-tolylamino)quinoline, on pentagastrin-stimulated acid
secretion in chronic gastric fistula rats after intraduodenal administration.

PMID: 9433764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Int Med Res. 1997 Nov-Dec;25(6):364-8.

Spinal cord compression by heterotopic ossification associated with
pseudohypoparathyroidism.

Yamamoto Y(1), Noto Y, Saito M, Ichizen H, Kida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kanazawa National Hospital, Japan.

This report describes a 37-year-old man presenting with a gait disturbance due to
spastic paraparesis. Physical findings showed typical features of Albright's
hereditary osteodystrophy, including short stature, obesity, brachydactyly and
dental hypoplasia. He was diagnosed as having pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia,
on the basis of his hypocalcaemia, hyperphosphataemia, increased plasma level of 
parathyroid hormone (PTH), and the unresponsiveness to exogenous PTH loading of
his urinary excretion of both nephrogenous cyclic adenosine monophosphate and
phosphate. Magnetic resonance imaging and myelographic computed tomographic scans
clearly demonstrated severe compression of the spinal cord at T 9/10 by
tumour-like ossifications of the paravertebral ligaments. Neurosurgical
decompression therapy was, therefore, performed to alleviate his spastic
paraparesis. This was a rare case of pseudohypoparathyroidism complicated with
spinal cord compression caused by ectopic ossification of the ligaments.

PMID: 9427170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Am J Cardiol. 1997 Dec 15;80(12):1638-9.

Measurement of coronary flow reserve in children by transthoracic Doppler
echocardiography.

Noto N(1), Karasawa K, Ayusawa M, Misawa M, Sumitomo N, Okada T, Harada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Cardiology, Nihon University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.

Noninvasive measurement of coronary flow reserve was performed by transthoracic
color Doppler echocardiography in 28 children with Kawasaki disease.

PMID: 9416958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Nov 17;240(2):395-8.

Altered N-glycosylation of glucose transporter-1 associated with
radiation-induced tumorigenesis of human cell hybrids.

Noto Y(1), Iwazaki A, Nagao J, Sumiyama Y, Redpath JL, Stanbridge EJ, Kitagawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, National Institute of Infectious 
Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.

Studies on human cell hybrids between a cervical carcinoma cell line, HeLa, and
normal fibroblasts have indicated that their tumorigenicity is under the control 
of a putative tumor suppressor on chromosome 11. We have previously demonstrated 
that a tumorigenic cell hybrid CGL4 expresses a larger glucose transporter,
GLUT1, due to altered glycosylation when compared to the nontumorigenic
counterpart CGL1. In this study, we demonstrated this glycosylation change in
GLUT1 in gamma-ray-induced tumorigenic mutants (GIMs) isolated from CGL1 cells as
expressing a tumor-associated surface antigen, intestinal alkaline phosphatase.
In contrast, GLUT1 in the gamma-irradiated nontumorigenic control cells (CONs)
did not show this alteration. In accordance with this glycosylation change,
affinity to 2-deoxyglucose in these GIM clones was increased by about twofold
when compared to the nontumorigenic CONs. These results suggest a close
correlation between the glycosylation change in GLUT1 with increased affinity to 
D-glucose and tumorigenicity of these human cell hybrids.

PMID: 9388489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 1997 Nov-Dec;8(6):348-54.

A SPECT imaging study of MRI white matter hyperintensity in patients with
degenerative dementia.

Ott BR(1), Faberman RS, Noto RB, Rogg JM, Hough TJ, Tung GA, Spencer PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Brown University School of Medicine,
Providence, R.I., USA. Brian-Ott@mhri.org

We investigated the correlation between cortical perfusion and white matter
hyperintensities on magnetic resonance images (MRI) of patients with dementia.
The study included 40 subjects, each of whom had undergone both MRI and
single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) studies as part of their
diagnostic evaluation for degenerative dementia. Two neuroradiologists rated the 
MRI films for severity of periventricular white matter changes on a 0-5 point
scale and severity of subcortical white matter changes on a 0-4 point scale.
Twelve regions of interest from association cortex were sampled for the
semiquantitative analysis of SPECT images. No relationship was found between
these global MRI ratings and semiquantitative or qualitative SPECT findings.
Dementia severity as measured by the Mini-Mental State Examination and the
Clinical Dementia Rating was significantly correlated with SPECT, whereas age was
significantly correlated with MRI ratings, particularly in the periventricular
regions. These data support the view that cortical SPECT abnormalities are not
associated with global MRI abnormalities in the subcortical and periventricular
regions of patients with a clinical picture of degenerative dementia.

PMID: 9370087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Toxicol Pathol. 1997 Sep-Oct;25(5):495-9.

Congenital intrahepatic arteriovenous fistulae in a young beagle dog.

Yoshizawa K(1), Oishi Y, Matsumoto M, Fukuhara Y, Makino N, Noto T, Fujii T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and General Toxicology, Fujisawa Pharmaceutical Co.,
Ltd., Osaka, Japan. katsuhiko_yoshizawa@rnd.fujisawa.co.jp

Congenital intrahepatic arteriovenous fistulae, a rare hepatic vascular anomaly, 
in an 8-mo-old female beagle dog was investigated. The animal showed anorexia,
repeated vomiting, hemorrhagic diarrhea, and jaundice for approximately 2 wk.
There was mild to severe increase of serum alkaline phosphatase,
glutamic-oxalacetic transaminase, glutamic pyruvic transaminase, total
cholesterol, total bilirubin, and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase. Macroscopically,
the main abdominal organs showed hemorrhagic edema together with bloody ascites. 
Other characteristic findings were severe hepatic atrophy (right medial,
quadrate, left medial, and lateral lobes) with multiple vascular cysts and
compensatory hypertrophy of the other lobes. The cystic vessels seemed to extend 
from the proper hepatic arteries and their branches but were indistinguishable
from the portal vein. Histopathologically, the atrophied hepatic lobes were
characterized by wide, fibrous septa containing severe hyperplasia and
anastomosis of the arteriolae and venulae and proliferation of bile ducts.

PMID: 9323840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Leukemia. 1997 Sep;11(9):1554-64.

JURL-MK1 (c-kit(high)/CD30-/CD40-) and JURL-MK2 (c-kit(low)/CD30+/CD40+) cell
lines: 'two-sided' model for investigating leukemic megakaryocytopoiesis.

Di Noto R(1), Luciano L, Lo Pardo C, Ferrara F, Frigeri F, Mercuro O, Lombardi
ML, Pane F, Vacca C, Manzo C, Salvatore F, Rotoli B, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Oncologia Sperimentale C, Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Naples, 
Italy.

Two novel cell lines (JURL-MK1 and JURL-MK2) have been established from the
peripheral blood of a patient in the blastic phase of chronic myelogenous
leukemia. The cells grow in a single cell suspension with doubling times of 48 h 
(JURL-MK1) and 72 h (JURL-MK2). Cytogenetic analysis has shown that JURL-MK1 is
hypodiploid whereas JURL-MK2 is near triploid and that both cell lines retain
t(9;22). Moreover, JURL-MK1 and JURL-MK2 have a bcr/abl-fused gene with the same 
junction found in the patient's fresh cells, and both cell lines express the
b3/a2 type of hybrid bcr/abl mRNA. The morphology and immunophenotype of these
cell lines are reminiscent of megakaryoblasts. In both lines, a limited but
consistent percentage of cells expresses gpIIbIIIa (CD41a), gpIIIa (CD61) and
CD36, with no expression of gplb (CD42b), glycophorin A, hemoglobin and CD34.
Both cell lines are clearly positive for CD33, CD43, CD45RO and CD63, while CD13,
CD44, CD54, CD30 and CD40 are specific features of JURL-MK2. Among cytokine
receptors, CD117/SCF-R is strongly displayed by a large fraction of JURL-MK1
cells but is hardly detectable on about 20% JURL-MK2 cells. Both cell lines are
clearly positive for CD25/IL2R alpha, while a marked expression of CD116/GM-CSF-R
and CDw123/IL3R alpha is restricted to JURL-MK2. Induction of cell
differentiation in vitro has demonstrated that TPA is able to modulate the
JURL-MK1 phenotype, causing an increased expression of platelet-associated
antigens. The JURL-MK2 phenotype is easily modulated by both TPA and DMSO, which 
cause an increased expression of CD41a and CD117 accompanied by a decreased
expression of CD30. Proliferation studies demonstrated that JURL-MK1 cell growth 
is enhanced by stem cell factor, while JURL-MK2 proliferation is unaffected by
this cytokine. JURL-MK1 and JURL-MK2 are two novel cell lines with divergent
biological features, representing a 'two-sided' model for investigating new
aspects of megakaryocytopoiesis.

PMID: 9305612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Transplantation. 1997 Jul 27;64(2):362-4.

Donor peripheral blood stem cell infusions in recipients of living-related liver 
allografts.

Tsaroucha AK(1), Ricordi C, Noto TA, Kenyon NS, Garcia-Morales R, Nery JR, Miller
J, Tzakis AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Miami School of Medicine, Florida 33136, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: In this pilot study, donor peripheral blood stem cell (DPBSC)
infusions were performed in three recipients of living-related liver transplants 
(LRLT).
METHODS: DPBSCs were obtained by leukapheresis after mobilization with
granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor (Filgrastim). Donor leukapheresis was
performed on the 5th postoperative day, and half of the DPBSCs were infused into 
the recipient on the day of collection. The second half of the pheresed product
was cryopreserved for delayed administration.
RESULTS: Results from preliminary studies of chimerism in LRLT recipients, at 20 
weeks posttransplant, suggested that the levels of donor cells detected in LRLT
recipients treated with DPBSC infusions may be higher than those observed for
recipients of cadaver donor liver allografts and vertebral body marrow infusions.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this pilot study indicate that administration of
mobilized DPBSC to recipients of LRLT is a feasible procedure for both donor and 
recipient.

PMID: 9256202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 1997 Jul-Aug;1(4):115-8.

Evaluation of cardiovascular parameters by continuous 24 hour monitoring in
diabetic hypertensive patients with autonomic neuropathies.

Scuderi R(1), Viglianisi FG, Landolina C, Privitera PP, Sfogliano L, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Medicina Interna e Medicina D'Urgenza, Catania, Italy.

Correlations between scores of autonomic neuropathy severity in diabetic
hypertensive subjects and behaviour of cardiovascular parameters detected by
continuous 24 hour monitoring were investigated in order to reveal any
alterations hat indicated onset and progression of disautonomy. R-R and Q-T
patterns, circadian pressure rhythm and ECG Holter over 24 hours were analysed in
30 patients divided into various groups (age, duration of disease, treatment) and
10 controls. Three autonomic tests (deep breathing, postural hypotension, lying
to standing) were performed and the relative Ewing scores recorded. Data obtained
were analysed using Pearson's correlation test and simple linear regression. The 
results not only confirm circadian rhythm demodulation of arterial pressure, but 
also show progressive correlation between the scores obtained and modified
cardiovascular parameters. According to the authors, detection of these
intermediate alterations may be useful in forecasting possible onset or evolution
of dysautonomic pathologies.

PMID: 9558776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Ann Thorac Surg. 1997 Jul;64(1):193-8.

Survival and prognosis after pneumonectomy for lung cancer in the elderly.

Mizushima Y(1), Noto H, Sugiyama S, Kusajima Y, Yamashita R, Kashii T, Kobayashi 
M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical
University, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The number of elderly patients with lung cancer is increasing. This
study was undertaken to assess the validity of pneumonectomy for the treatment of
lung cancer in this patient group.
METHODS: Twenty-seven patients 70 years old or older (elderly group) and 95
patients younger than 70 years (younger group) who underwent pneumonectomy
between January 1985 and March 1996 formed the study group. In the elderly group,
22 patients had squamous cell carcinoma, 2 had adenocarcinoma and 3, small cell
carcinoma; 1 patient was in postoperative stage I, 4 patients were in stage II,
14 in stage IIIA, 5 in stage IIIB, and 3 in stage IV of the disease. The only
significant differences in patient characteristics between the two groups were
the percentage of patients undergoing right pneumonectomy and the percentage of
patients receiving chemotherapy or radiotherapy within 3 months before or after
operation or both times.
RESULTS: The prognosis for the elderly group was comparable to that of the
younger group for all stages of the disease; the overall 5-year survival rate was
30.5% for the younger group and 11.5% for the elderly group. However,
operation-associated mortality was significantly higher in the elderly group
(22.2% versus 3.2%; p < 0.005). The prognosis was better for patients with a
centrally located tumor than a peripheral tumor in both groups [13.5% versus 2.0%
in the elderly group and 46.7% versus 5.2% (p < 0.01) in the younger group] and
significantly better for patients having a left pneumonectomy than a right
pneumonectomy in the younger group (46.7% versus 5.2%; p < 0.01) but not in the
elderly group (13.7% versus 22.2%). Adjuvant treatment did not have any
beneficial effect on the prognosis in either group.
CONCLUSIONS: Pneumonectomy for lung cancer in elderly patients appears to be
justified because the outcome in our study was comparable with that for the
younger patients. However, it should be performed only in carefully selected
patients because of the increased operative risk.

PMID: 9236359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Nihon Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1997 Jun;98(6):580-3.

[A case of anastomotic aneurysm-enteric fistula].

[Article in Japanese]

Takiguchi M(1), Huzimura M, Nishiya Y, Toshima M, Kodera K, Miyazawa H, Noto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoraco-Cardio-vascular Surgery, Toyama Central Hospital, Japan.

We successfully performed circulation reconstructive surgery and repair of a
small intestine resection, primarily at an anatomical position, for perforation
of a pseudoaneurysm in the small intestine, which occurred in an anastomosis site
of the right leg of a Y graft of an artificial blood vessel and internal iliac
artery graft on a patient, at the remote time of 18 years after she had received 
a Y-type artificial blood vessel. The patient's life was saved. The results
suggest that it is important to make a definitive diagnosis quickly after the
occurrence of symptoms and to select an appropriate surgical technique according 
to the findings of infection adjacent to the perforation site.

PMID: 9255811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 1997 Jun;17(6):1032-8.

Organ loci of catabolism of short truncations of apoB.

Zhu XF(1), Noto D, Seip R, Shaish A, Schonfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Atherosclerosis, Nutrition, and Lipid Research, Washington
University School of Medicine, St Louis, Mo 63110, USA.

Truncations of apolipoprotein (apo) B shorter than 3200 amino acids (3200/4536 = 
apoB-70) do not possess the LDL receptor-recognition domain and are not
recognized by altered cells with normally functioning LDL receptors. To ascertain
which organs remove such truncated apoB-containing particles, we isolated
apoB-31-, apoB-38.9-, and apoB-43.7-containing particles from plasmas of familial
hypobetalipoproteinemia heterozygous humans by a combination of sequential
ultracentrifugation and preparative electrophoresis. Particles with labeled 125I-
or 131I-dilactitol tyramine (I-DLT), were injected into New Zealand White
rabbits, along with I-DLT-apoB-100-containing LDLs, and the decay of 125I- and
131I-TCA-precipitated counts was followed over 24 hours. At the end of 24 hours, 
rabbits were anesthetized and their bodies perfused. Organs were removed and
homogenized, and TCA-precipitable counts determined. Fractional catabolic rates
of apoB truncation particles were two to five times greater than those of
apoB-100 LDLs. ApoB truncations accumulated in adrenals at one fifth the rates of
apoB-100 LDL, compatible with the functional absences of LDL receptor-recognition
domains in truncated apoBs. The major organ of uptake for apoB-100-LDLs was the
liver, whereas truncation particles were readily removed by the kidney (kidney:
liver uptake ratios were 0.10 to 0.30 for apoB-100 LDLs and 1.03 to 3.77 for
truncations). Spleens accumulated little of either apoB-100 or truncation
particles, suggesting particles were not "damaged" or aggregated. Thus, the
absence of > 56% of the carboxyl end of apoB-100 increases the plasma clearance
and redirects the organ uptake of the apoB truncation-containing lipoproteins
from liver to kidney.

PMID: 9194751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Transplant Proc. 1997 Jun;29(4):2249-51.

Removal of preformed cytotoxic antibody using PROSORBA (Staph Protein-A-Silica)
column without immunosuppression.

Burke GW(1), Colona J, Noto T, Reik R, Ciancio G, Roth D, Cochran S, Hoyt H,
Rosen A, Grand B, Gomez C, Esquenazi V, Miller J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Miami School of Medicine, FL 33136, USA.

PMID: 9193611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Int Immunol. 1997 May;9(5):791-8.

Cytotoxic T lymphocytes derived from bone marrow mononuclear cells of multiple
myeloma patients recognize an underglycosylated form of MUC1 mucin.

Noto H(1), Takahashi T, Makiguchi Y, Hayashi T, Hinoda Y, Imai K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University School of
Medicine, Japan.

MUC1 is a highly immunogenic epithelial mucin and serves as a tumor-associated
antigen in breast, pancreatic and ovarian carcinomas. We previously reported the 
expression of MUC1 on myeloma cells and the establishment of an HLA-unrestricted 
cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) line TN that recognized MUC1 from peripheral blood
mononuclear cells in a multiple myeloma patient. In this study, we attempted to
induce such CTL from six other multiple myeloma patients consecutively in order
to show that the induction of the CTL line TN had not resulted from some
idiosyncrasy of the first patient. Bone marrow mononuclear cells were used to
induce CTL, because they contain myeloma cells that might stimulate the
autologous lymphocytes. Bulk CTL lines were induced from two out of six patients.
The CTL line TS was CD8+ cell dominant and KY was CD4+ cell dominant. Both CTL
lines lysed MUC1+ myeloma and breast carcinoma cell lines. The cytotoxicity of
the CTL lines was inhibited by anti-CD3, anti-alpha beta TCR and anti-MUC1 mAb.
It was also inhibited by a MUC1 transfectant, but not by a mock transfectant in
cold target inhibition assays. MUC1 was transfected into a human colonic
carcinoma cell line. The reactivity of anti-MUC1 core protein mAb and the
cytotoxicity of the CTL against the transfectant was enhanced by the treatment of
the cells with an O-glycosylation inhibitor. Thus it is generally accepted that
the HLA-unrestricted CTL which directly recognize the underglycosylated from of
MUC1 using their TCR could be induced from a certain proportion (approximately
30%) of untreated multiple myeloma patients.

PMID: 9184925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Psychoactive Drugs. 1997 Apr-Jun;29(2):185-92.

Use of drugs among street children in Brazil.

Noto AR(1), Nappo SA, Galduróz JC, Mattei R, Carlini EA.

Author information: 
(1)CEBRID-Brazilian Center for Information on Psychotropic Drugs, Department of
Psychobiology, UNIFESP-EPM (Federal University of São Paulo), Brazil.

The purpose of this study has been to assess drug consumption among children in
five Brazilian state capitals during 1993. The sample was composed of street
children who were given assistance in institutions, and data was collected by
means of anonymous individual interviews. Five hundred sixty five boys and girls 
were interviewed: 74.3% reported having used drugs (not including alcohol and
tobacco) at least once in their life. Solvents, followed by marijuana, were the
most cited drugs. Important regional differences were observed concerning other
drugs. Consumption of cocaine, including crack, seems restricted to the southeast
region, whereas psychotropic medication was consumed more in the northeast of the
country. Drug initiation among these children seems to be a consequence of street
life and is part of their group lifestyle.

PMID: 9250945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 1997 Apr;37(4):309-13.

[Successful direct thrombolysis in a patient with extensive dural sinus
thrombosis induced by danazol].

[Article in Japanese]

Satake R(1), Arakawa S, Hashimoto M, Minamide H, Takamori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Noto General Hospital.

A 43-year-old woman was suffered from an increasing headache with nausea and
vomiting for nine days. She had received danazol 400 mg daily for endometriosis
last two months. CT scan and neurological examinations revealed no evidence of
abnormality. MRI showed isosignal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal
intensity on T2-weighted images in the superior sagittal, right transverse,
sigmoid and straight sinuses suggesting thrombosis. With angiography, we
confirmed extensive dural sinus thrombosis in the superior sagittal, straight,
right transverse and sigmoid sinuses. She, then, developed progressing
neurological deterioration with dysarthria and drowsy. Microcatheter was placed
directly into the thrombus at dural sinus via transfemoral route. Thrombolytic
therapy with urokinase was performed in right transverse, confluens sinuum,
superior sagittal and straight sinuses. Successful recanalization with remarkable
improvement of symptoms was achieved except right transverse sinus. We believe
danazol played a role in the occurrence of dural sinus thrombosis. MRI and MRV
were noninvasive and useful for diagnosis and follow-up of dural sinus
thrombosis. Direct thrombolysis should be considered for dural sinus thrombosis, 
especially when clinical symptoms are rapidly deterioration with conventional
anticoagulant therapy.

PMID: 9248340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Am J Dermatopathol. 1997 Apr;19(2):202-4.

Malignant proliferating trichilemmal tumor.

Noto G, Pravatà G, Aricò M.

Comment in
    Am J Dermatopathol. 1998 Aug;20(4):433-4.

PMID: 9129708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Bone Marrow Transplant. 1997 Mar;19(6):571-6.

The important balance between cytokines derived from type 1 and type 2 helper T
cells in the control of graft-versus-host disease.

Tanaka J(1), Imamura M, Kasai M, Hashino S, Kobayashi S, Noto S, Higa T, Sakurada
K, Asaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan.

We have investigated cytokine mRNA expression in the peripheral blood mononuclear
cells of 20 patients who received allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplants 
to assess the cytokine network after transplantation. IL-4 mRNA expression
decreased in five of five (100%) patients with > or = grade III (severe) acute
GVHD and increased in 10 of 22 (45%) patients without severe GVHD. In contrast,
IL-12 mRNA expression increased in two of two (100%) patients with severe GVHD,
but increased in only six of 18 (33%) patients without severe GVHD. Furthermore, 
IL-10 and/or IL-13 mRNA expression increased in 19 of 22 (86%) patients without
severe GVHD, but increased in only one of three (33%) patients with severe GVHD. 
In patients with allogeneic PBSCT who had severe acute GVHD, the cytokine mRNA
expression in patients with allogeneic PBSCT, who had no severe GVHD, showed a
similar pattern to that in patients with allogeneic BMT. IL-4 mRNA expression
increased in three of five (60%) patients and IL-10 and/or IL-13 mRNA expression 
increased in five of five (100%) patients. In contrast, IL-12 mRNA expression
increased in only one of three (33%) patients. Serum IL-4 concentration in
allogeneic PBSCT patients in the early engraftment phase was relatively high,
while serum IL-12 concentration was low. These findings suggest that severe GVHD 
may be related to the cytokine imbalance between type 1 helper T (Th1) cells and 
type 2 helper T (Th2) cells.

PMID: 9085737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1997 Mar;88(3):406-13.

[Determination of urinary CA19-9 levels in urothelial cancer--assessment of its
role in diagnosis].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto K(1), Fujime M, Isobe H, Wakumato Y, Kawachi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Juntendo University School of Medicine.

Erratum in
    Nippon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi 1997 Apr;88(4):511.

BACKGROUND: Although Carbohydrate antigen19-9 (CA19-9) is known to be high of its
positive rate in blood in pancreatic cancer, etc., recently there have been
scattered of cases of urothelial carcinoma in which elevated CA19-9 levels have
been detected in both serum and urine. In this study we determined both urine and
serum levels of CA19-9 in order to evaluate their diagnostic role of urinary
CA19-9.
MATERIALS: A total 82 patients, i.e., 32 with bladder cancer, 4 with renal
pelvic/ureteral cancer, 5 with renal cancer, 13 with prostatic cancer, 5 with
other malignancies, 10 with prostatic hyperplasia, 6 with urolithiasis, 7 with
other benign diseases, served as the subjects of this study.
METHODS: CA19-9 was determined by EIA method in first-morning urine and serum
using a CA19-9 measurement kit (Centocor). Urinary values corrected for the
creatinine level in the same sample have been used and are shown as U/mg
creatinine (Cr). Urinary CA19-9 and urinary cytology were evaluated in some
cases. An immunohistochemical study of CA19-9 for surgical specimens was
conducted by the ABC method, using a Histo 19-9 kit (COMPAGNIE ORIS INDUSTRIES
S.A.).
RESULTS: The cut-off value for serum levels was 37 U/ml, and urine levels were
determined in U/mg Cr with a cut-off value of 100 U/mg Cr. The urinary CA19-9
levels was significantly higher (390.9 +/- 934.1 U/mg Cr) in urothelial cancer
than in the control group (91.48 +/- 20.0 U/ mg Cr). In urothelial cancer, grade 
1 and grade 2 cases were more sensitive than grade 3 cases and they also tended
to be high level, although only 27.8% of urothelial cancer patients showed an
elevation of serum CA19-9. CA19-9 was detected in all urothelial cancers which
could be studied immunohistochemically. In 8 out of 16 superficial cancers CA19-9
was detected in more than 90% of cancer cells, though there were few CA19-9
positive cells in infiltrating cancers. Urinary CA19-9 was more sensitive than
urinary cytology, especially in low grade cancers.
CONCLUSION: The determination of urinary CA19-9 may be a useful tumor marker of
urothelial cancer, and especially in low grade cancer it may be useful in
diagnosing of them because its urinary level is high and it is more sensitive
than urinary cytology.

PMID: 9125864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Am J Physiol. 1997 Feb;272(2 Pt 1):G335-9.

Role of vagus nerves and gastrin in the gastric phase of acid secretion in male
anesthetized rats.

Noto T(1), Nagasaki M, Endo T.

Author information: 
(1)Lead Optimization Research Laboratory, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., Toda,
Saitama, Japan.

We used the pylorus ligation model to determine the role of vagus nerves and
gastrin in acid secretion induced by mechanical and chemical stimulation of the
gastric lumen in anesthetized male rats. Gastric distension induced by
intragastric instillation of saline resulted in a 17-fold increase in acid
secretion over the basal level without an alteration in serum gastrin levels.
Distension-stimulated acid secretion was inhibited by bilateral subdiaphragmatic 
vagotomy but not by CI-988, a gastrin receptor antagonist. Intragastric peptone
produced a 71-fold increase in acid secretion over the basal level that was
accompanied by a significant increase in serum gastrin levels. Whereas vagotomy
almost abolished peptone-stimulated acid secretion, CI-988 inhibited
peptone-stimulated acid secretion by only 50%. We conclude that the vagus nerves 
mediate acid secretion by mechanical and chemical stimulation and that gastrin
mediates acid secretion partly by chemical stimulation but not by mechanical
stimulation in anesthetized male rats.

PMID: 9124358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Consult Clin Psychol. 1997 Feb;65(1):190-4.

Prospective evaluation of three smoking interventions in 205 recovering
alcoholics: one-year results of Project SCRAP-Tobacco.

Martin JE(1), Calfas KJ, Patten CA, Polarek M, Hofstetter CR, Noto J, Beach D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, San Diego State University, California 92120, USA.
jmartin@sdsu.edu

A total of 205 (113 male, 92 female) nonhospitalized recovering alcoholics with >
3 months of continuous abstinence from alcohol and drugs and relatively heavy
tobacco dependence (Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire score = 7.7; mean number
of cigarettes per day, 26.8; mean number of years smoked, 24.4) were randomized
to standard treatment (ST) American Lung Association quit program plus nicotine
anonymous meetings (n = 70), behavioral counseling plus physical exercise (BEX; n
= 72), or behavioral counseling plus nicotine gum (BNIC; n = 63). A 3 x 4
repeated measures design was used to evaluate the effectiveness of the
interventions on smoking outcome at baseline, posttreatment, and 6- and 12-month 
follow-ups. Self-reported smoking status was verified with biochemical and
informant report. Verified self-report indicated that significantly more smokers 
in BEX quit by posttreatment (60%) than in either BNIC (52%) or ST (31%), chi 2
(2, N = 205) = 17.85, p < .01, but not at the 6-month (29%, 27%, and 21%,
respectively) or 12-month (27%, 27%, and 26%, respectively) follow-up. Only 4% (7
of 188) relapsed to alcohol or drugs. Alcohol relapse did not differ by treatment
group or smoking status. Length of alcohol abstinence was not associated with
smoking cessation outcome.

PMID: 9103749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Acta Haematol. 1997;98(3):167-9.

Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis complicated by subclavian artery occlusion
following allogeneic stem cell transplantation.

Hashino S(1), Imamura M, Tanaka J, Mori A, Noto S, Kobayashi S, Kasai M, Asaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan. shashino@med.hokudai.ac.jp

We describe an unusual case of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA) complicated
by subclavian artery occlusion in a 32-year-old man with severe aplastic anemia, 
who underwent allogeneic stem cell transplantation. He was severely neutropenic
after the conditioning for transplantation, but he had no history of fungal
infection. Five days after the transplantation, he developed IPA in the left
upper lung, complicated by left subclavian artery occlusion. Extensive chronic
graft-versus-host disease, which required the administration of potent
immunosuppressants for a long period of time, interfered with the resolution of
the IPA.

PMID: 9352750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol. 1997;24(2):82-5.

Blood pressure peaks correlated with plasma fibronectin levels and
microalbuminuria in hypertensive pregnancies.

Panella M(1), Rocchi MC, Landolina C, Rizzo S, Viglianisi G, Noto R, Longhitano
A, Garozzo G.

Author information: 
(1)1a Clinica Ostetrica e Ginecologia, Università di Catania, Italy.

A group of 32 selected hypertensive pregnant women under antihypertensive
therapy, with biochemical parameters, functional parameters, plasma fibronectin
levels (PLF), microalbuminuria (MA) levels and continuous 24 h blood pressure
monitoring, were followed monthly until delivery and during puerperium. Also
possible biochemical and clinical markers and the predictive value in the
complications during PIH were attempted to be identified. There was a statistical
correlation between systolic pressure peaks associated with high levels of PLF
and MA in hypertensive pregnant women who may have a higher risk of pregnancy or 
cardiovascular complications. Continuous 24 h blood pressure monitoring in
hypertensive pregnancies was found to be helpful in identifying the highest risk 
patients especially by reading the night peak percentages.

PMID: 9342469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Acta Oncol. 1997;36(5):493-7.

Results of pneumonectomy for non-small cell lung cancer.

Mizushima Y(1), Noto H, Kusajima Y, Yamashita R, Sugiyama S, Kashii T, Kobayashi 
M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical
University, Japan.

To assess the role of pneumonectomy for lung cancer and the factors affecting the
prognosis, 107 patients who had undergone pneumonectomy for non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) between January, 1985 and March, 1996, were analyzed. They
included 81 squamous cell carcinoma, 22 adenocarcinoma, 3 large cell carcinoma,
and one adenosquamous cell carcinoma, with 8 patients in post-operative stage I, 
15 in stage II, 51 in stage IIIA, and 33 in stage IIIB of the disease. The 5-year
survival rate was 54.7% in stages I + II, 38.0% in stage IIIA, and <4% in stage
IIIB. In stages I-IIIA, the patients with squamous cell carcinoma showed a
significantly better prognosis than those with adenocarcinoma (50.6 vs. 0%, p <
0.01). The prognosis was also better, but not statistically significant, for
patients with central type compared with those with peripheral type in both all
histologic types (58.0 vs. 8.4%) and only squamous cell type (59.3 vs. 18.8%). A 
better prognosis observed in squamous histologic type or central type seemed to
be related to a better N factor. Pneumonectomy remains the treatment of choice
for lung cancer, but seems not to be justified for patients with stage IIIB due
to their poor prognosis.

PMID: 9292746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Gynecol Obstet Biol Reprod (Paris). 1997;26(4):430-4.

[Agenesia of the canal of Arantius. A case report].

[Article in French]

Cayol V(1), Braig S, Noto S, Jannet D, Bouillie J, Marpeau L, Milliez J.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris.

Looking for the etiology of hydramnios which became symptomatic at 21 weeks'
gestation ultrasonography revealed a hepatic vascular abnormality without other
symptoms. The suspected diagnosis was agenesis of the ductus venosus with
creation of a high grade arteriovenous shunt between the umbilical vein and the
inferior vena cava. Agenesis of the ductus venosus may be one expression of the
different possible systemic-portal-umbilical abnormalities. Physiological
consequences vary according to the type of substitutive anastomoses.

PMID: 9265070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Dermatology. 1997;194(4):374-5.

Proliferating tricholemmal cyst should always be considered as a low-grade
carcinoma.

Noto G, Pravatà G, Aricò M.

PMID: 9252767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Clin Apher. 1997;12(1):10-3.

Safety of large-volume leukapheresis for collection of peripheral blood
progenitor cells.

Reik RA(1), Noto TA, Fernandez HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Miami/Jackson Memorial Medical Center, 
Florida, USA.

Large volume leukapheresis (LVL) reduces the number of procedures required to
obtain adequate peripheral blood progenitor cells (PBPCs) for autologous
hematopoietic reconstitution. LVL involves the processing of > 15 L or 5 patient 
blood volumes using high flow rates. We report our experience with LVL evaluating
its efficiency and adverse effects in 71 adult patients with hematologic or solid
organ malignancies. All were mobilized with chemotherapy and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). All collections used a double lumen apheresis 
catheter. Mean values per LVL were as follows: blood processed, 24.6 L; patient
blood volumes processed, 5.9; ACD-A used, 1,048 ml; heparin used, 6,148 units;
collect time, 290 min; blood flow rate, 89 ml/min. Eighty percent of the
collections were completed in one or two procedures to obtain > or = 6.0 x 10(8) 
MNCs/kg body weight. The most frequent side effect (39%) was parasthesia due to
citrate-related hypocalcemia. This was managed with oral calcium supplements
and/or slower flow rates. Post-LVL electrolyte changes were generally
asymptomatic. Prophylactic oral potassium supplements were administered in 57% of
cases. Other reactions included hypotension (4%), prolonged parasthesia (1.4%),
and headache (1.4%). Catheter problems in 9 (13%) of the procedures were
attributed to clot formation (37%) or positional effects (63%). No bleeding
occurred. Post-LVL decreases in hematocrit and platelet count averaged 3.5% and
46%, respectively. Six (4%) of the procedures required red blood cell
transfusions. Platelet transfusions were given in 19 (13%) of the procedures. We 
conclude that adverse reactions with LVL are similar to those reported for
conventional PBPC collections, making it safe and efficacious as an outpatient
procedure.

PMID: 9097229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Kaku Igaku. 1997 Jan;34(1):49-52.

[Brain uptake ratio as an index of cerebral blood flow obtained with 99mTc-ECD].

[Article in Japanese]

Miyazaki Y(1), Kinuya S, Hashimoto M, Satake R, Inoue H, Shiozaki J, Takimoto M, 
Itoh H, Taki J, Tonami N.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Nuclear Medicine, Noto General Hospital.

A new index of cerebral blood flow (brain uptake ratio, BUR) using 99mTc-ECD was 
developed and evaluated in 66 patients (132 cerebral hemispheres). BUR was
calculated from brain count in anterior planar image (60-80 sec after injection
of 99mTc-ECD) divided by the summation of the count of aortic arch during first
transit of radionuclide. BUR correlated well with brain perfusion index (BPI)
obtained with Patlak plot method (r = 0.960, p < 0.001). In conclusion, BUR is
useful as a simple and non-invasive index reflecting cerebral blood flow.

PMID: 9059014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Br J Urol. 1997 Jan;79(1):135-6.

Cystic lymph node metastasis caused by a Bellini duct carcinoma.

Arai T(1), Tanaka M, Noto K, Sakamoto Y, Kawachi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Juntendo University Urayasu Hospital, Chiba, Japan.

PMID: 9043518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Intensive Care Med. 1997 Jan;23(1):128.

Myopathy and ventilatory failure in severe sepsis.

Iapichino G, Veschi G, Zanforlin G, Noto A, Cappellari A, Prelle A.

PMID: 9037655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Dev Ophthalmol. 1997;27:56-62.

Relationship between pure cortical cataract appearance and the wearing of
glasses. A preliminary report of a case-control study performed on the subjects
in the Noto area, Japan.

Katoh N(1), Ono M, Fujisawa K, Kojima M, Sakamoto Y, Sasaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene and Public Health, Tokyo Women's Medical College, Japan.

PMID: 8969963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Leukemia. 1996 Dec;10(12):1990-2.

Interstitial 9q deletion is associated with CD7+ acute leukemia of myeloid and T 
lymphoid lineage.

Ferrara F, Scognamiglio M, Di Noto R, Schiavone EM, Poggi V, Fiorillo A,
Libertini R, Vicari L, Del Vecchio L, Sebastio L.

We report the clinical, hematological and immunophenotypic characteristics from
four cases of acute leukemia with interstitial deletion of chromosome 9, ie
del(9)(q12-q22), as a single chromosomal abnormality. Three patients had acute
myeloblastic leukemia (AML) and one T origin acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). 
According to FAB classification, blasts were classified as M1 (two patients), M2 
(one patient), and L2 (one patient). In two out of three AML cases a
myelodysplastic syndrome, one AREB-t and one AREB diagnosed 6 and 11 months
before respectively, preceded the onset of AML. Morphological examination showed 
dysgranulopoiesis, dyserythropoiesis and cytoplasmic vacuoles in two AML
patients, while a strong positivity to myeloperoxidases was observed in all AML
cases. As concerns immunophenotypic findings, blast cells from two of three AML
patients expressed CD7 and CD34, while those from the T-ALL case displayed CD33
and CD34 along with CD7. These observations suggest that del (9q) is associated
with CD7+ acute leukemia of myeloid or lymphoid lineage.

PMID: 8946942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. FEBS Lett. 1996 Nov 25;398(1):61-6.

Bafilomycin A1 induces apoptosis in PC12 cells independently of intracellular pH.

Kinoshita K(1), Waritani T, Noto M, Takizawa K, Minemoto Y, Nishikawa A, Ohkuma
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kanazawa
University, Ishikawa, Japan.

Erratum in
    FEBS Lett 1997 Feb 10;403(1):112. Nishikawa Y [corrected to Nishikawa A].

PC12 cells growth-arrested with bafilomycin A1 died showing apoptotic chromatin
condensation in the nuclei. The bafilomycin A1-induced chromatin condensation was
preceded by neurite outgrowth (NOG), required higher concentrations of
bafilomycin A1 than NOG, and was suppressed by cycloheximide and
aurintricarboxylic acid. NH4Cl (10 mM), another acidotropic pH perturbing agent, 
neither induced apoptotic chromatin condensation by itself nor suppressed that
induced by bafilomycin A1, suggesting that bafilomycin A1-induced apoptosis
occurs independently of intracellular pH in PC12 cells.

PMID: 8946954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Anticancer Res. 1996 Nov-Dec;16(6B):3895-900.

Clinical study on thymoma: assessment of prognostic factors.

Sassa K(1), Mizushima Y, Kusajima Y, Sugiyama S, Noto H, Kobayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical
University, Japan.

In order to define the clinical features of thymoma, we reviewed 51 thymoma
patients in our departments from 1980 to 1995. Of 146 mediastinal tumors, 51
(35%) had thymoma, the most frequent tumor, and 21 (14%) had neurinoma.
Twenty-one patients had non-invasive thymoma (Masaoka staging = stage I) and 30
had invasive thymoma (stages II-IV). In the non-invasive group, the male to
female ratio was 0.8 (9/12) and the majority were of mixed histologic type (13/21
= 62%). Conversely in the invasive group, the male to female ratio was 1.7
(19/11), and the occurrence of the epithelial type (12 = 40%) was as frequent as 
the mixed type (13 = 43%). Patients with non-invasive thymoma were all treated
with surgery only, and those with invasive thymoma were treated with
multimodalities except for one. The 5-year survival rate was 100% for the
non-invasive group, and 67% for the invasive group. Patients with accompanying
myasthenia gravis (MG) showed a better prognosis than the non-MG patients (P <
0.05). The lymphocytic type also showed a better prognosis than the epithelial
type, but this was not statistically significant. The prognosis for patients with
thymoma was much better than for those with thymic cancer (n = 9). Thymoma showed
a variety of clinical features depending on histologic type and association with 
myasthenia gravis.

PMID: 9042277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Leukemia. 1996 Nov;10(11):1832-3.

Immunological classification of acute leukemias: comments on the EGIL proposals.

Del Vecchio L(1), Di Noto R, Lo Pardo C, Schiavone EM, Vacca C, Ferrara F, Rotoli
B.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Immunoematologia, Ospedale A Cardarelli, Naples, Italy.

PMID: 8892689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 1996 Nov;18(4):401-4.

Langerhans cell histiocytosis associated with partial DiGeorge syndrome in a
newborn.

Levendoglu-Tugal O(1), Noto R, Juster F, Brudnicki A, Slim M, Beneck D, Jayabose 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, New York Medical College, Valhalla, USA.

PURPOSE: We report the unrecognized association of Langerhans cell histiocytosis 
(LCH) with partial DiGeorge syndrome.
PATIENT AND METHODS: A 7-week-old infant with endocrine and immunologic
characteristics of DiGeorge syndrome displayed multisystem involvement of
Letterer-Siwe disease at birth.
RESULTS: Despite vigorous medical support and chemotherapy, she died at 9 months 
of age with multisystem failure.
CONCLUSIONS: This case supports the role of the thymus n the pathogenesis of LCH.

PMID: 8888752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1996 Oct 23;1284(2):247-52.

Spermine binding to liver mitochondria.

Dalla Via L(1), Di Noto V, Siliprandi D, Toninello A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Biologica, Università di Padova, Italy.

Non-equilibrium binding of spermine to mitochondrial membranes is studied in rat 
liver mitochondria by applying a new thermodynamic treatment of ligand-receptor
interactions (Di Noto, V., Dalla Via, L., Toninello, A. and Vidali, M. (1996)
Macromol. Theory Simul. 5, 165-181). The presence on mitochondrial membranes of
two spermine binding sites, both with monocoordination, is demonstrated. The
calculated binding energy is characteristic for weak interactions. The treatment 
allows also to evaluate the variations of the molar fraction ratio of spermine
bound to sites 1 and 2 as function of total bound spermine. The possible role of 
the two sites is discussed.

PMID: 8914591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Nihon Koshu Eisei Zasshi. 1996 Oct;43(10):882-93.

[Cross sectional study of the relationship between bone density to diet and life 
style using ultrasound bone densitometry].

[Article in Japanese]

Higashi A(1), Ikeda J, Watanabe Y, Ozasa K, Shimouchi A, Hayashi K, Kiyama T,
Nakatani K, Shigeto K, Noto T, Matsuno K, Fujita K, Yoshida K, Kawai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine.

The relationship between bone density to diet and life style was investigated in 
pre- and postmenopausal women in Kyoto Prefecture in 1994 by a cross-sectional
study. Bone densities of 453 women aged 30-86 years were measured by ultrasound
bone densitometry. History of pregnancy and delivery, menstruation, medical
history, bone and arthral symptoms, life style, food intake frequency, current
and past intake of dairy products, and physical activity were examined by
self-administered questionnaire. Analysis of covariance and multiple-regression
analysis were performed to determine the relation between bone density and life
style adjusted for age and obesity index among 151 premenopausal women (PRE), 244
postmenopausal but not sedentary (under 65 years of age) women (POST), and 58
sedentary (older than 65 years of age) women (SED). The results were as follows; 
1) A marked age-related decline in bone density was observed at 45-55 years of
age. The correlation coefficient between age and bone density was significant at 
-0.65 (p < 0.01). 2) Obesity index and bone density were positively correlated in
each group. 3) Among the PRE group women, there was no relation between life
style and bone density. Those who experienced bone fractures tended toward low
bone density. Among the POST group, time since menopause, exercise, and current
milk intake were significantly correlated with bone density. In the SED group,
women with arthralgia showed significantly lower densities. 4) From
multiple-regression analysis, age, obesity index, and milk intake during
childhood were shown to be related to bone density in each group.

PMID: 9017919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Bone Marrow Transplant. 1996 Oct;18(4):807-8.

Renal Salmonella enteritidis abscess in a patient with severe aplastic anemia
after allogeneic stem cell transplantation.

Hashino S(1), Imamura M, Tanaka J, Noto S, Kobayashi S, Kasai M, Asaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan.

We describe an unusual case of a renal abscess by Salmonella enteritidis in a
32-year-old man with severe aplastic anemia undergoing allogeneic stem cell
transplantation. He was receiving immunosuppressive therapy with CsA and
corticosteroids for chronic GVHD. He was not neutropenic and had no history of
enterocolitis or cholelithiasis before the onset. Four months after the
transplantation, he developed an abscess in the upper pole of his right kidney
from which Salmonella enteritidis was isolated in culture. He was successfully
treated with a combination of percutaneous drainage and washing the cyst through 
the catheter using piperacillin sodium-containing solution. The possibility of
salmonellosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of such
patients.

PMID: 8899201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 1996 Oct;17(9):1681-6.

Single-photon emission CT in the evaluation of recurrent brain tumor in patients 
treated with gamma knife radiosurgery or conventional radiation therapy.

Kline JL(1), Noto RB, Glantz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Brown University School of Medicine,
Providence, RI 02906, USA.

PURPOSE: To differentiate radiation necrosis from tumor recurrence using
single-photon emission CT (SPECT).
METHODS: Forty-two thallium-201 SPECT scans were obtained in 33 adult patients.
All patients had previously been treated with either conventional external-beam
radiation therapy (XRT) (26 patients) or gamma knife radiosurgery (16 patients)
and had subsequent contrast-enhanced MR examinations before nuclear medicine
imaging. Patients were injected intravenously with 4 mCi of thallous chloride Tl 
201 with rapid acquisition of SPECT scans thereafter. Findings on thallium-201
SPECT scans were categorized as either positive or negative on the basis of an
abnormal focus of increased activity in the area of the known lesion. Evaluation 
of the accuracy of the thallium-201 SPECT scan was made by correlation with
subsequent histologic or cytologic analysis (28 cases) or, in cases in which
biopsy was not performed, by subsequent clinical course or MR findings (14
cases).
RESULTS: For all patients in this series, the sensitivity and specificity of
thallium-201 SPECT scans in detecting tumor recurrence were 94% and 63%,
respectively. The sensitivity and specificity for patients who had been treated
with XRT were 95% and 60%, respectively. The sensitivity and specificity for
patients who had been treated with gamma knife therapy were 92% and 67%,
respectively. Tumor/scalp (T/S) ratios were calculated for all patients. High T/S
ratios (> 2.0) had a positive predictive value for tumor recurrence of 92%. T/S
ratios less than 0.5 had a negative predictive value for tumor recurrence of 83%.
CONCLUSION: Thallium-201 SPECT is a sensitive and accurate test to differentiate 
tumor recurrence from radiation necrosis in a population of patients with
abnormal MR findings. This technique was equally efficacious in patients who had 
undergone gamma knife radiosurgery and in those who had received XRT.

PMID: 8896622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Metabolism. 1996 Oct;45(10):1296-304.

A new apolipoprotein B truncation (apo B-43.7) in familial
hypobetalipoproteinemia: genetic and metabolic studies.

Srivastava N(1), Noto D, Averna M, Pulai J, Srivastava RA, Cole TG, Latour MA,
Patterson BW, Schonfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO, USA.

We describe a new truncation of apolipoprotein (apo) B in a white kindred with
familial hypobetalipoproteinemia (FHBL). Apo B-43.7, found in a daughter and her 
father, was due to a C --> T change in base position 6162 of the apo B gene
converting the arginine (residue 1986) codon CGA to a stop codon TGA. Both
subjects were heterozygotes, and both apo B-43.7- and apo B-100-containing
particles were present in plasma. On density gradient ultracentrifugation (DGUC),
approximately 30% to 40% of apo B-43.7 floated with very-low-density lipoprotein 
(VLDL)/intermediate-density lipoprotein (IDL)-density particles and 60% to 70%
floated with high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-density particles. To assess the
metabolism of apo B, 13C-leucine was infused and its rates of appearance in and
disappearance from apo B-43.7- and apo B-100-containing particles were quantified
by multicompartmental kinetic analysis. Apo B-100 entered plasma via VLDL with a 
production rate of 30 mg x kg-1 x d-1. Fractional catabolic rates (FCRs) for apo 
B-100 VLDL, IDL, and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) were 20.0, 16.0, and 0.46
pools x d-1, respectively. The production rate of apo B-43.7 was 9.6 mg x kg-1 x 
d-1, and FCRs for apo B-43.7 VLDL- and HDL-like particles were 12.0 and 1.8 pools
x d-1, respectively. Approximately 30% of apo B-43.7 in HDL-density particles was
derived from VLDL apo B-43.7, and about 70% appeared to enter the plasma as HDLs.
The relatively low production rate of apo B-43.7 is compatible with previous
reports that apo B truncations are produced at lower rates than their apo B-100
counterparts.

PMID: 8843188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Cathet Cardiovasc Diagn. 1996 Sep;39(1):31-5.

Five year trends in cardiac catheterization: a report from the Registry of the
Society for Cardiac Angiography and Interventions.

Krone RJ(1), Johnson L, Noto T.

Author information: 
(1)Society for Cardiac Angiography and Interventions, Breckenridge, Colorado
80424, USA.

The Society for Cardiac Angiography and Interventions has maintained a registry
of cardiac catheterizations since 1979 and of percutaneous cardiac interventions 
since 1990. Data from 392,923 procedures (317,592 diagnostic catheterizations,
74,963 coronary interventions, and 368 valvuloplasties) for the years 1990-1994
inclusive are presented. Over the 5 year period there was a trend toward same day
and 23 hr discharges (19% in 1990 to 29% in 1994), and a decrease in combined
right and left heart procedures from 38% to 26%. For cardiac catheterizations
ionic contrast use declined from 26% of procedures to 13% in 1994. The use of
ionic contrast was even lower in interventional procedures, with laboratories
reporting use in 21% of procedures in 1990 dropping to 9% in 1994. Balloons were 
the first choice device in 92.5% of native arteries and 82.7% of grafts in 1994. 
For the first time in 1994 more mitral than aortic valvuloplasties were reported.

PMID: 8874942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Analyst. 1996 Sep;121(9):1191-6.

Comparative study of an inhalable and a total dust sampler for personal sampling 
of dust and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in the gas and particulate phase.

Notø H(1), Halgard K, Daae HL, Bentsen RK, Eduard W.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Occupational Health, Oslo, Norway.

For many years the closed-face plastic cassette has been widely used for
monitoring 'total' dust in working atmospheres. In the late 1980s a different
personal sampler was developed at the Institute of Occupational Medicine in
Edinburgh. This so-called IOM sampler was designed to meet the criteria for
inhalable dust (EN 481). In this work, a comparison of the closed-face 25 mm
Gelman total dust sampler and the IOM inhalable sampler was made for exposure
measurements of dust and PAHs among workers in an electrode paste plant. The two 
samplers were modified in order to permit sampling of both particulate and
gas-phase PAHs. Three groups with different tasks were examined. The particle
size distribution was determined using personal inhalable dust spectrometers and 
the GRIMM particle counter. The results showed that higher concentrations of dust
and particulate PAHs were measured with the IOM inhalable sampler than the Gelman
total dust sampler and the difference between the samplers was significant. This 
is in agreement with previously reported studies. In some samples collected with 
the IOM sampler very large particles were observed. There was no significant
difference between volatile PAHs measured with the two samplers. For
semi-volatile PAHs a significant difference between the samplers was observed,
which was ascribed to evaporation loss from the filters during storage.

PMID: 8831276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Acta Paediatr. 1996 Aug;85(8):1006-8.

A case of Guillain-Barré syndrome accompanied by sympathetic overactivity and
hypertensive encephalopathy.

Okada T(1), Hiyoshi K, Noto N, Fujita Y, Fuchigami T, Okubo O, Harada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Hypertension has often been observed in patients with Guillain-Barré syndrome,
and various underlying mechanisms have been implicated. We report the case of a
child with the Guillain-Barré syndrome whose hypertension was associated with
increases in both renin activity and circulating catecholamines. This case also
appeared to be complicated by hypertensive encephalopathy. Following
administration of intravenous regitine, a blood pressure change was observed and 
cardiac performance was assessed by two-dimensional echocardiography. Results
indicated that increased total peripheral resistance may have been responsible
for the symptoms and the hypertension. The hypertension was effectively managed
by nifedipine, captopril and prazosin without the need for beta-blockade.

PMID: 8863889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Br J Urol. 1996 Aug;78(2):312-4.

An ureteric polyp resected by ureteroscopy.

Kawachi Y(1), Noto K, Sakamoto Y, Arai T, Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Junetendo University Urayasu Hospital, Japan.

PMID: 8846007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Eur J Haematol. 1996 Jul;57(1):111-3.

Th2 cytokines (IL-4, IL-10 and IL-13) and IL-12 mRNA expression by concanavalin
A-stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells during chronic graft-versus-host 
disease.

Tanaka J, Imamura M, Kasai M, Hashino S, Kobayashi S, Noto S, Higa T, Sakurada K,
Asaka M.

PMID: 8698123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1996 Jun;93(6):437-40.

[A case of primary sclerosing cholangitis associated with Sjögren's syndrome and 
chronic pancreatitis].

[Article in Japanese]

Takahashi T(1), Makiguchi Y, Ohe Y, Tanda M, Noto H, Sakamoto H, Sakamoto S, Imai
K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University School of
Medicine, Hokkaido, Japan.

PMID: 8752764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Transplant Proc. 1996 Jun;28(3):1789-91.

Study of liver function in a graft suffering from warm ischemia in porcine liver 
transplantation.

Kamachi H(1), Nakajima Y, Isai H, Kimura J, Tamura M, Ito K, Nishikawa M, Noto H,
Taguchi K, Kon H, Uchino J.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo, 
Japan.

PMID: 8658884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Transplant Proc. 1996 Jun;28(3):1746-7.

Cytokine network in peripheral blood mononuclear cells after allogeneic bone
marrow transplantation.

Tanaka J(1), Imamura M, Kasai M, Hashino S, Kobayashi S, Noto S, Sakurada K,
Asaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine,
Japan.

PMID: 8658865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Nihon Rinsho. 1996 May;54(5):1230-5.

[Recent advance of endoscopic ultrasonography for evaluating gastroenterologic
early cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Kida M(1), Yamada Y, Sakaguchi T, Matsuda K, Sugano S, Kondo K, Kobayashi K, Noto
M, Saigenji K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Kitasato University.

Lutz et al. made the first report in which ultrasonographic probe could
differentiate cystic tumor from solid one. After that, endoscopic ultrasonography
(EUS) have advanced rapidly in engineering and clinical application. EUS is the
most accurate diagnostic method presently available to determine the depth of
gastrointestinal cancer invasion. We have proposed the pattern analysis for the
differentiation between cancer invasion and ulcer fibrosis, because fibrosis and 
cancer invasion have of the same echo level. USP is more useful and easy than EUS
in cases with small and flat lesion without ulcer, and EUS should perform in
remaining lesions that look like early cancer with ulcer and advanced cancer.
Clinically, it is believed that the invasion of early gallbladder cancer limited 
to the proper muscle, the early pancreas cancer is less than 1 cm. It is also
practicable with EUS to detect the these cancer easily and diagnose the local
stage of gall bladder and pancreas cancer. Now we are performing IDUS (ER-US,
PT-US) and 3D-EUS, and believing that these technics will be used commonly in the
near future.

PMID: 8965343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Br J Haematol. 1996 May;93(2):392-3.

Differential regulation of GPI-linked molecules on leukaemic promyelocytes
treated in vitro with all-trans retinoic acid.

Di Noto R(1), Schiavone EM, Lo Pardo C, Ferrara F, Manzo C, Vacca C, Del Vecchio 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Oncologia Sperimentale C, Immunologia, Istituto Nazionale dei
Tumori, Fondazione G. Pascale, Naples, Italy.

It has been demonstrated that certain cell-surface proteins are anchored to the
cell membrane by a unique structure known as the glycosylphosphatidylinositol
(GPI) anchor whose absence has been reported on blood cells from patients with
paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria. We have investigated the expression of
CD16/Fc(tau)R-III and CD66b GPI linked molecules at the surface of blast cells
from five acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) patients before and after in vitro 
stimulation with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). We observed that whereas CD66b
antigen exhibited a strong ATRA-driven up-regulation in all cases studied, CD16
expression was unaffected by the treatment with the drug.

PMID: 8639434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Pediatr. 1996 May;128(5 Pt 2):S18-21.

Growth hormone treatment in Noonan syndrome: the National Cooperative Growth
Study experience.

Romano AA(1), Blethen SL, Dana K, Noto RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, New York Medical College, Valhalla 10595, USA.

Comment in
    J Pediatr. 1999 Mar;134(3):385-6.

We evaluated the response to growth hormone (GH) therapy in 150 children (97
boys) with Noonan syndrome (NS) by analyzing growth data from children with NS
who were enrolled in the National Cooperative Growth Study and compared those
data with National Cooperative Growth Study growth data from children with
idiopathic growth hormone deficiency (IGHD) and Turner syndrome (TS). Children
with NS were significantly shorter than those with IGHD and TS. The annualized
growth rates for years 1, 2, 3, and 4 of therapy in patients with NS who were
naive to previous GH therapy were significantly greater than baseline. Their
growth rates for years 1, 2, 3, and 4 were intermediate between those in children
with IGHD and TS and were significantly different from both. A significant
improvement occurred in height SD scores for those 42 children with NS who have
been monitored for at least 4 years of GH therapy. Three of six boys with NS for 
whom adult height data were available exceeded their pretreatment predicted
heights.

PMID: 8627463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Subst Use Misuse. 1996 Apr;31(5):565-79.

Crack use in São Paulo.

Nappo SA(1), Galduróz JC, Noto AR.

Author information: 
(1)CEBRID-Brazilian Center for Information on Psychotropic Drugs, Departamento de
Psicobiologia, Escola Paulista de Medicina, SP, Brazil.

Documented crack use emerged in São Paulo, Brazil, from 1991 onward. Therefore,
it is a recent behavior among drug users. The present work draws a profile of São
Paulo crack users, employing an ethnographic approach. Twenty-five crack users
were interviewed on selected social and demographic characteristics, on the drug 
itself and its consumption, and on the consequences of this use. Crack cocaine is
harmful for the user, leading within a short period to a condition of dependence.
The crack users reported ultimately lapsing into "marginality" due to social
isolation, neglect of bodily needs, and breakdown of family ties and other
relationships.

PMID: 8777739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Leuk Lymphoma. 1996 Apr;21(3-4):201-9.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and the regulation of adhesion molecules in acute 
myeloid leukemia.

Di Noto R(1), Lo Pardo C, Schiavone EM, Ferrara F, Manzo C, Vacca C, Del Vecchio 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Oncologia Sperimentale C, Ospedale A. Cardarelli, Naples, Italy.

A review of recent information on the expression and the ATRA-driven modulation
of cell surface adhesion molecules of acute myelogenous leukemia blast cells is
presented. Cytofluorometric studies on fresh blast cells have demonstrated that
CD11a, CD11b CD11c, CD15, CD45RO and CD54 expression is significantly lower in
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) than is acute myeloid leukemia of other
subtypes (AML). In vitro treatment with ATRA dramatically modifies the adhesion
phenotype of APL blast cells, promoting a consistently striking up-regulation of 
CD11b, CD11c, CD15, CD65, CD54, and CD38. Which is in general, poorly
demonstrable in AML. The behaviour of CD15s is variable and fully independent
from CD15 and CD65 in induction experiments, suggesting a differential enzyme
regulation within the selectin ligand system. ATRA is capable, in both APL and
AML, of producing a switch from the high- (RA) to the low- (RO) molecular weight 
isoform of CD54, Moreover, treatment with this retinoid exerts a negative
regulation of the membrane expression of CD49e, CD58 and CD11a in APL as well as 
in AML. Of particular interest is the fact that the negative effect on CD1 1a
expression generates an asynchronous phenotype in APL (CD11a-, CD11b+, CD15+),
undetectable on normal maturing myeloid cells. In the last part of this review
the possible implications of adhesion molecule modulation in the pathogenesis of 
ATRA syndrome are discussed.

PMID: 8726400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1996 Apr;277(1):28-33.

Reversible inhibition of rat gastric H+/K+-ATPase by T-330,
2-[2-dimethylaminobenzyl)sulfinyl]-1-(3-methylpyridine-2-yl)imidazole.

Kinoshita M(1), Saito N, Noto T, Tamaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Pharmaceutical Development Research Laboratory,
Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., Saitama, Japan.

The effect of
2-[(2-dimethylaminobenzyl)sulfinyl]-1-(3-methylpyridine-2-yl)imidazole (T-330),
on rat gastric H+/K+-ATPase was studied in vitro and in vivo in comparison with
the irreversible proton pump inhibitor omeprazole. T-330 and omeprazole inhibited
rat gastric H+/K+-ATPase at pH 6.1, and their IC50 values were 75 microM and 4.6 
microM, respectively. Recovery from the T-330-inhibited H+K/+-AtPase activity was
effected by beta-mercaptoethanol at concentrations above 10 microM, whereas
significant recovery from the inhibition by omeprazole required 100 mM. When
intraduodenally administered, T-330 (0.6-10 mg/kg) induced a more potent yet
shorter-lasting inhibition of both gastric H+/K+ -ATPase activity and gastric
acid secretion than did omeprazole (2.5-40 mg/kg). Recovery of the gastric
H+/K+-ATPase activity depressed by omeprazole was completely blocked by an
inhibitor of protein synthesis, cycloheximide, whereas that by T-330 was not
prevented. This indicates that restoration of the enzyme activity after
inhibition in vivo by T-330 does not require de novo synthesis of the enzyme in
contrast to inhibition by omeprazole. beta-Mercaptoethanol (1 mM) fully restored 
the H+/K+-ATPase activity inhibited in vivo by T-330 but not by omeprazole. These
observations indicate that T-330 reversibly inhibits gastric H+/K+-ATPase,
resulting in a short-lasting antisecretory effect, and that the sulfhydryl groups
of the enzyme are involved in the action of T-330.

PMID: 8613931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996 Apr;27(5):1251-6.

Dobutamine stress echocardiography for detection of coronary artery stenosis in
children with Kawasaki disease.

Noto N(1), Ayusawa M, Karasawa K, Yamaguchi H, Sumitomo N, Okada T, Harada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: This study was designed to assess the feasibility and diagnostic
accuracy of dobutamine stress echocardiography for detection of coronary artery
stenosis in children with Kawasaki disease.
BACKGROUND: Dobutamine stress echocardiography is valuable as an alternative test
for detection of coronary artery disease in adult patients; however, its
usefulness for children has been demonstrated only in limited cases.
METHODS: Dobutamine stress echocardiography (up to 30 microgram/kg body weight
per min) was performed in 50 patients at the convalescent stage of Kawasaki
disease, including 26 patients with coronary sequelae documented by previous
coronary angiography (sequelae group, 3 to 15 years old) and 24 patients with
normal coronary arteries documented by echocardiography (normal group, 7 to 16
years old), who underwent quantitative coronary angiography on a separate day.
Left ventricular regional wall motion divided into 16 segments was assessed in
relation to the extent of coronary artery disease. A positive test response was
defined as a new or worsened wall motion abnormalities.
RESULTS: Significant coronary artery disease (> or = 50% diameter stenosis of
major vessels) was present in 21 patients in the sequelae group. There was no
significant difference in the maximal dose of dobutamine between the sequelae and
normal groups ([mean +/- SD] 22.4 +/- 5.1 vs. 24.2 +/- 2.5 microgram/kg per min).
Heart rate and systolic blood pressure were significantly increased (p < 0.01) at
maximal dose of dobutamine compared with values at rest in both groups;
consequently, the rate-pressure product exceeded 20,000 in 20 (40%) of the 50
patients during dobutamine infusion. Ten patients had self-limiting side effects;
however, there were no serious complications from stress-induced ischemia. New
wall motion abnormalities corresponding to the extent of coronary artery disease 
were detected in 19 of 21 patients in the sequelae group, whereas no wall motion 
abnormalities were detected in the normal group. Thus, the sensitivity and
specificity of dobutamine stress echocardiography for the detection of coronary
artery disease were 90% and 100%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that dobutamine stress echocardiography is a safe and
accurate diagnostic method for detection of coronary artery stenosis in Kawasaki 
disease. Moreover, this is a possible alternative method for patients unable to
exercise adequately, even if they are small children.

PMID: 8609352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Phys Rev B Condens Matter. 1996 Mar 1;53(10):R6034-R6037.

In-plane and out-of-plane thermal conductivity of a large single crystal of
YBa2Cu3O7-x.

Matsukawa M, Mizukoshi T, Noto K, Shiohara Y.

PMID: 9982104  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


275. Minerva Anestesiol. 1996 Mar;62(3):89-92.

[Respiratory failure caused by myopathy in severe sepsis].

[Article in Italian]

Veschi G(1), Zanforlin G, Breda G, Calappi E, Cigada M, Colombo A, Marzorati S,
Mulazzi D, Noto A, Parma A, Rotelli S, Prelle A, Cappellari A, Iapichino G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Anestesia e Rianimazione, Istituto di Neurologia, IRCCS,
Ospedale Maggiore, Università degli Studi, Milano.

OBJECTIVE: To describe a generalized myopathic disorder occurred in the
convalescence phase of illness of a critically ill patient.
SETTING: Neurological Intensive Care Unit.
PATIENT: A 43-year-old man with acute leukoencephalopathy and severe sepsis
complicated by sustained and prolonged cardiovascular, respiratory and renal
failure. After 15 days of complete respiratory autonomy, the patient presented an
acute ventilatory failure associated with generalized muscle weakness. Neither a 
relapse of sepsis nor neurological worsening were detected.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Electromyogram resulted in normal conduction velocity
in both motor and sensitive nervous fibers. Muscular biopsy showed marked fiber
size variability with several hypotrophic fibers type II fiber grouping, several 
areas of degeneration-necrosis with macrophage invasion, dishomogeneous oxidative
enzymatic activity, no increase in glycogen or lipid content.
CONCLUSIONS: These results excluded critical illness polyneuropathy and all the
other known myopathies. Prolonged period of sepsis with multiple organ failure
can result in a direct generalized myopathy. This possibility should be kept in
mind while treating long term critically ill survivors.

PMID: 8767153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Okajimas Folia Anat Jpn. 1996 Mar;72(6):329-32.

The non-effect of parathyroidectomy in the aquatic limbless newt (Apoda,
Amphibia).

Sasayama Y(1), Taniguchi K, Suzuki N, Srivastav AK.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Faculty of Science, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa,
Japan.

In the aquatic limbless newt, Typhlonectes compressicauda (Apoda, Amphibia),
serum Ca levels of parathyroidectomized newts were no lower than for the control 
newts at 1 week after the operation. In this species, the parathyroid glands may 
not be functional in raising the serum Ca levels.

PMID: 8637670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Kaku Igaku. 1996 Mar;33(3):285-91.

[Modifications of fractional uptake method for 123I-IMP].

[Article in Japanese]

Miyazaki Y(1), Hashimoto M, Kinuya S, Satake R, Inoue H, Shiozaki J, Takimoto M, 
Ito H, Tonami N.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Nuclear Medicine, Noto General Hospital, Japan.

We intended to improve the fractional uptake (FU) method which was developed to
quantify cerebral blood flow using 123I-IMP without blood sampling. The
quantification of cardiac output (CO) using first-pass data was adapted to FU
method while the original FU method used CO which was estimated from the body
surface area of patients. Time-radioactivity curves of the lungs and brain were
separately obtained by a small-field-of-view gamma camera. In 24 cases, mean
cerebral blood flow (mCBF) obtained by the modified FU method showed the better
correlation (r = 0.833, P< 0.001) to mCBF measured by the Patlak plot with
99mTc-HMPAO than the original FU method (r=0.667, p<0.01). With these
modifications, the reliability of FU method could be improved and the modified FU
method might be performed in the other institutions.

PMID: 8622262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Br J Haematol. 1996 Mar;92(3):562-4.

Stem cell factor receptor (c-kit, CD117) is expressed on blast cells from most
immature types of acute myeloid mallignancies but is also a characteristic of a
subset of acute promyelocytic leukaemia.

Di Noto R(1), Lo Pardo C, Schiavone EM, Manzo C, Vacca C, Ferrara F, Del Vecchio 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Divisone di Oncologia Sperimentale C. Immunologia, Istituto Nazionale dei
Tumori, Fondazione G. Pascale, Naples, Italy.

Investigating 208 patients with acute haematological malignancies, we found that 
stem cell factor receptor (SCFR) was expressed on high numbers of blast cells
from the vast majority of patients (93%) with refractory anaemia with excess of
blasts in transformation. SCFR was also detected in 62% of AMLs, in which it was 
directly associated to the expression of CD7, interleukin 6 receptor and CD34,
and inversely to that of CD11b and CD14. SCFR-positive cases were preferentially 
represented in AML-M1 (70%) and in AML-M2 (83%) subsets, whereas only 45% of the 
remaining samples (M3-M4-M5) exhibited SCFR positively. Interestingly, 50% of
cases with acute promyelocytic leukaemia expressed SCFR and this molecule was
heterogenously regulated by in vitro treatment with all-trans retinoic acid.

PMID: 8616017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1996 Feb;81(2):571-6.

Mullerian inhibiting substance in humans: normal levels from infancy to
adulthood.

Lee MM(1), Donahoe PK, Hasegawa T, Silverman B, Crist GB, Best S, Hasegawa Y,
Noto RA, Schoenfeld D, MacLaughlin DT.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114, USA.

Mullerian-inhibiting substance (MIS) is a gonadal hormone synthesized by Sertoli 
cells of the testis and granulosa cells of the ovary. To facilitate the use of
MIS for the evaluation of intersex disorders and as a tumor marker in women with 
MIS-expressing ovarian tumors, we measured MIS in 600 serum samples from males
and females. These data show that mean MIS values for males rise rapidly during
the first year of life and are highest during late infancy, then gradually
decline until puberty. In contrast, MIS values in females are lowest at birth and
exhibit a minimal increase throughout the prepubertal years. Whereas MIS is
uniformly measurable in all prepubertal boys studied, it is undetectable in most 
prepubertal female subjects. These data reveal an easily discernible sexually
dimorphic pattern of expression and confirm that MIS can be used as a
testis-specific marker during infancy and early childhood. MIS values that are
above the upper limits for females are discriminatory for the presence of
testicular tissue or ovarian tumor, and those below the lower limits for males
are consistent with dysgenetic or absent testes or the presence of ovarian
tissue. These data will enable normal and abnormal levels of MIS to be
differentiated with higher precision and will facilitate the use of MIS in the
management of gonadal disorders.

PMID: 8636269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Oncol Rep. 1996 Jan;3(1):91-4.

The retrospective assessment of surgical resection in the management of small
cell carcinoma of the lung.

Mizushima Y(1), Noto H, Sugiyama S, Kusajima Y, Yamashita R, Kobayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)TOYAMA MED & PHARMACEUT UNIV,DEPT SURG 1,TOYAMA 93001,JAPAN. TOYAMA
PREFECTURAL CENT HOSP,DEPT THORAC & CARDIOVASC SURG,TOYAMA 930,JAPAN. TOYAMA CIV 
HOSP,DEPT THORAC SURG,TOYAMA 939,JAPAN. TOMANI GEN HOSP,DEPT THORAC SURG,TOMANI
93913,JAPAN.

Role of surgical resection for small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) was
retrospectively assessed in 16 patients with pTNM-stage I and 13 with pTNM-stages
II and IIIA. The 3-year and 5-year survival rates in patients with stage I were
61% and 45%, respectively, and the median survival time (MST) was 23.5 months. On
the other hand, the 3-year survival rate for the 13 surgical patients with stages
II and IIIA was 28% (MST=19 m), which showed no statistical difference between
that of 21% (MST=10 m) for the 16 non-surgical patients with clinical stages II
acid IIIA. These results suggest that resection is desirable for patients with
stage I, but is of no benefit for patients with stages II and IIIA.

PMID: 21594321  [PubMed]


281. Ryoikibetsu Shokogun Shirizu. 1996;(13):293-6.

[Idiopathic enlargement of the right atrium].

[Article in Japanese]

Ueda K(1), Fujita H, Sugihara N, Noto M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Internal Medicine, Komatsu City Hospital.

PMID: 9117631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Ryoikibetsu Shokogun Shirizu. 1996;(15):39-42.

[Hyperuricemia].

[Article in Japanese]

Takeda M(1), Noto M, Tofuku Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine Komatsu Municipal Hospital.

PMID: 9047941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Nephron. 1996;72(3):407-12.

HDL subfractions distribution in renal transplant recipients: lack of evidence of
a reduction of HDL2 particles.

Barbagallo CA(1), Averna MR, Sparacino V, Cefalù AB, Caputo F, Noto D, Verghi F, 
Notarbartolo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, University of Palermo, Italy.

Since the high rate of cardiovascular disease in renal transplant recipients,
alterations of lipoprotein profile in such patients were extensively evaluated,
but the HDL subclass profile was not completely clarified. Renal transplant
recipients usually show normal to high plasma levels of HDL cholesterol, even if 
some investigations suggested a persistence of low HDL2 levels: this was not
useful in terms of cardiovascular protection. We designed this study in order to 
evaluate HDL subfractions distribution in renal transplant recipients. We studied
55 renal transplant recipients, treated with prednisone, azathioprine and/or
cyclosporine, and 34 healthy normolipidemics as controls. In all subjects
cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, apolipoproteins A-I
and B levels and HDL subfractions, as determined by nondenaturing polyacrylamide 
gradient gel electrophoresis, were assayed. Renal transplant recipients had
cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL cholesterol and apolipoproteins A-I and B levels 
significantly higher than controls; HDL cholesterol levels were slightly, but not
significantly, increased in comparison with controls (respectively 51.1 +/- 15.5 
and 46.1 +/- 10.8 mg/dl). Multivariate analysis showed that only the time since
transplantation was significantly associated with HDL cholesterol levels. When
HDL subfractions were analyzed, renal transplant recipients presented
significantly lower levels of HDL3a and HDL3b and, in males, higher levels of
HDL2b than controls. HDL cholesterol levels were positively correlated with HDL2b
levels in both renal transplant recipients and controls, and negatively
correlated with HDL3b in controls. In conclusion, in renal transplant recipients,
we failed to demonstrate any decrease of HDL2 particles. On the basis of a
nonatherogenic HDL profile, we suggest that the increased cardiovascular risk in 
renal transplant recipients might be accounted for by other risk factors.

PMID: 8852488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 1996 Winter;8(1):41-6.

Apathy and loss of insight in Alzheimer's disease: a SPECT imaging study.

Ott BR(1), Noto RB, Fogel BS.

Author information: 
(1)Roger Williams Medical Center Division of Neurology, Providence, RI 02908, US

Apathy and loss of insight as correlates of behavior in Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
were studied in 40 patients by using clinical scales and cerebral blood flow
measurements from SPECT imaging. Apathy was significantly correlated with
decreased right temporoparietal perfusion and problem behaviors. Loss of insight 
was significantly correlated with decreased right temporo-occipital perfusion and
impairment in daily functioning. Dementia severity as measured by the Mini-Mental
State Examination (MMSE) was a poor predictor of behavioral problems or daily
functioning. These data suggest that global measures of cognitive ability, which 
are weighted toward measuring left hemisphere function, are less important as
indicators of management problems in AD than are measures of right hemisphere
function such as motivation and insight.

PMID: 8845700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Horm Res. 1996;45(6):295-9.

The first case of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with prominent spurious
hyperglucagonemia due to interference of immunoglobulin G in glucagon
radioimmunoassay (OAL-123) system.

Yamamoto Y(1), Yamagishi S, Noto Y, Taniguchi M, Nagai Y, Ohsawa K, Kida H,
Kobayashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kanazawa National Hospital, Japan.

A 51-year-old male was admitted to our hospital because of diabetic ketoacidosis.
His symptoms were promptly improved with intensive insulin therapy, but his
plasma glucagon immunoreactivity measured by the OAL-123 radioimmunoassay (RIA)
system showed persistently high values (3,090-3,210 pg/ml). A computed
tomographic scan, abdominal angiography and endoscopic examination of his
gastrointestinal tract showed no evidence of glucagonoma. After removing the
immunoglobulin fraction from the plasma, his immunoreactive plasma glucagon level
returned to normal. Moreover, the immunoglobulin G fraction purified from the
patient's plasma inhibited the binding of [125I]glucagon to rabbit antiglucagon
antiserum, OAL-123. Dot-blot analysis demonstrated that the immunoglobulin G of
this patient cross-reacted against OAL-123. Therefore, it was considered that the
prominent hyperglucagonemia in this patient was due to the presence of IgG, which
interfered with the measurement of plasma-immunoreactive glucagon.

PMID: 8793525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Gen Pharmacol. 1996 Jan;27(1):129-32.

Inhibition of contractile tension by capsaicin in isolated rat papillary muscle.

Yamato T(1), Aomine M, Ikeda M, Noto H, Ohta C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Physiology, Nakamura Gakuen University, Fukuoka,
Japan.

1. We examined effects of capsaicin (10(-9) - 10(-5) M), a pungent agent
extracted from red pepper, on the contractile tension of rat ventricular
papillary muscles stimulated at various cycle lengths (0.2, 0.5, 1, 2 and 5 sec).
2. Capsaicin produced a marked concentration-dependent decrease in the amplitude,
the rate of rise (dp/dt) and the rate of relaxation (dr/dt) of the tension. 3.
However, the half relaxation time and the time to peak tension of the tension
were slightly affected by the agent. 4. The negative inotropic effect of
capsaicin was stimulus cycle length (CL) dependent. In particular, IC50 (50%
inhibitive concentration) of the agent in the amplitude of the tension was
stimulus CL dependent. That is, the values of IC50 were around 10(-7) M at longer
CLs (1, 2 and 5 sec), and the value of IC50 at CL 0.2 sec was 4 x 10(-6) M. 5.
These capsaicin-induced negative inotropic effects were reversible. Other studies
from our laboratory show that the negative inotropic effects may be largely due
to a decrease in Ca2+ current.

PMID: 8742509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Gen Pharmacol. 1996 Jan;27(1):105-8.

Capsaicin does not inhibit the intracellular calcium handling process in rat
ventricular papillary muscle.

Yamato T(1), Aomine M, Noto H, Ikeda M, Ohta C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Physiology, Nakamura Gakuen University, Fukuoka,
Japan.

1. We studied the effects of capsaicin, a pungent agent extracted from red
pepper, on rested-state contraction (RSC) of isolated rat ventricular papillary
muscles. 2. The RSC was induced by stimulation, after a rest interval of 5 sec to
10 min, after the twitch tension of the muscle preparation stimulated at the
regular stimulus frequency of cycle lengths of 5, 1 or 0.2 sec attained the
steady state. 3. Drug effects were evaluated on the RSC in the presence of
capsaicin 10(-5) M, caffeine 10(-2) M or ryanodine 10(-7) M, respectively. 4. All
drugs inhibited the RSC but to different degrees. Ryanodine was the most
effective in inhibiting RSC, followed by caffeine and capsaicin, in that order.
However, the inhibitory mode varied, depending on the drugs. 5. These findings
suggest that capsaicin may not inhibit the function of intracellular Ca2+ store
in rat cardiac muscle.

PMID: 8742504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Surg Today. 1996;26(1):1-4.

Advantages of using the midline incision right retroperitoneal approach for
abdominal aortic aneurysm repair.

Endo M(1), Kobayashi K, Tsubota M, Seki M, Sato H, Noto T, Iwa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Ishikawa Prefectural Central 
Hospital, Japan.

This study was conducted to compare the midline incision right retroperitoneal
approach for repairing abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) with the transperitoneal 
approach. The intra- and postoperative course of 15 patients who underwent AAA
repair using the transperitoneal approach between 1987 and 1991 and another 15
patients who underwent AAA repair using the retroperitoneal approach between 1991
and 1994 were evaluated. The incidence of postoperative wound complications was
also assessed. There was no operative or hospital death in either group. Although
a significantly longer interval was required from the incision to the aortic
clamp using the extraperitoneal method, there were no statistical differences in 
the aortic clamping time, total operation time, or blood loss between the two
groups. On the other hand, there was a statistically significant improvement in
bowel function and a significant reduction in the length of postoperative
hospitalization following the extraperitoneal procedure. Furthermore, no wound
complications such as those associated with the left flank incision developed
after the extraperitoneal procedure. Thus, we recommend the midline incision
right retroperitoneal approach for AAA as it does not involve muscle division and
is associated with fewer complications.

PMID: 8680113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Br J Haematol. 1995 Dec;91(4):899-906.

Expression of the leucocyte common antigen (LCA, CD45) isoforms RA and RO in
acute haematological malignancies: possible relevance in the definition of new
overlap points between normal and leukaemic haemopoiesis.

Schiavone EM(1), Lo Pardo C, Di Noto R, Manzo C, Ferrara F, Vacca C, Del Vecchio 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Immunoematologia, Laboratorio di Immunocitologia, Napoli, Italy.

The membrane expression of CD45RA and CD45RO on fresh leukaemic cells taken from 
529 cases of acute haemopoietic malignancies, including 117 B-origin acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia (B-origin ALL), 37 T-origin acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
(T-origin ALL0, 297 de novo acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), 42 refractory anaemia 
with excess of blasts in transformation (RAEB-T) and 36 myeloid blastic phase of 
chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML-BP-my), was analysed. B-origin ALLs were
characterized by the lack of the RO isoform along with the consistent presence of
RA. Conversely, a differential expression of the two isoforms was detected in
different subsets of T-origin ALL, in that T-stem cell leukaemias (T-SCL: CD7+,
CD4-, CD8-, CD1-) preferentially expressed CD45RA whereas conventional T-acute
lymphoblastic leukaemias (T-ALL: CD7+, CD4+ and/or CD8+ and/or CD1+) were
consistently marked by CD45RO. Within myeloid malignancies, most of AMLs
displayed CD45RA, while a substantial group of CML-BP-my preferentially exhibited
CD45RO. As a general rule, a reciprocal exclusion of the two isoforms was
observed in AML as well as in ALL. Nevertheless, a frequent coexpression of
CD45RA and CD45RO was observed in CD14+ AML. In vitro treatment with all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA) was able to promote a switch from CD45RA to CD45RO
expression in 27 de novo AML, independently from morphological subtyping. To our 
knowledge, this is the first report on CD45 isoform expression in a large series 
of patients with acute leukaemia. The knowledge of the differential expression of
CD45RA and CD45RO can ameliorate our classificative approach to haematological
malignancies, as well as disclose new multiple overlap points between normal and 
leukaemic cell differentiation.

PMID: 8547136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 1995 Dec;15(12):2165-75.

Familial hypobetalipoproteinemia is not associated with low levels of
lipoprotein(a).

Averna M(1), Marcovina SM, Noto D, Cole TG, Krul ES, Schonfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO
63110, USA.

To assess whether very low concentrations of LDL affected lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] 
concentrations and apo(a) associations with lipoproteins, we studied Lp(a) levels
and associations in heterozygous subjects with familial hypobeta-lipoproteinemia 
FHBL) associated with several truncated forms of apoB-100, ranging from apoB-31
to apoB-89. Distributions of apo(a) isotypes were assessed by a combined
electrophoresis-immunoblotting procedure that detects 34 isoforms. Lp(a)
concentrations were quantified by two ELISAs, one detecting total apo(a) and the 
other apoB-bound apo(a) in plasma. Associations of apo(a) with plasma
lipoproteins were evaluated by gel permeation chromatography (FPLC) and DGUC
followed by analyses of elution and gradient fractions by apo(a) ELISA. In
addition, associations were examined by nondenaturing electrophoresis or
immunoprecipitation of whole plasma and examination of contents by
immunoblotting. Finally, interactions between r-apo(a) and LDLs were evaluated in
reconstitution experiments. The distributions of apo(a) isotypes did not differ
between FHBL-affected and unaffected members of the same kindreds, and
concentrations of Lp(a) were similar even when subjects were matched for isotypes
both within and across kindreds. In subjects heterozygous for apo(a) isoforms,
the smaller isoforms were inversely related to Lp(a) concentrations, the larger
isoforms were not. The regression lines between Lp(a) concentrations and the
smaller apo(a) isoforms were significant and negative in slope for both
FHBL-affected and unaffected subjects, but the slopes of the lines did not
differ. In multiple regression analyses, only the sizes of the smaller apo(a)
isoforms contributed to the prediction of Lp(a) concentrations. ApoB-size made no
difference. In simple apoB-100/apoB-truncation heterozygotes, virtually all
apo(a) was complexed with apoB-100-containing particles but not apoB-truncation
particles, and r-apo(a) recombined with apoB-100-containing LDLs but not with
apoB-89-containing LDLs. Thus, (1) low apoB levels do not affect the plasma
concentrations of Lp(a), (2) apo(a) binds apoB-100 to form Lp(a) particles of
usual sizes and densities, and (3) apoB truncations even as large as apoB-89 do
not form covalent bands with apo(a), although noncovalent associations with
apoB-89 may be present in plasma.

PMID: 7489238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Acta Derm Venereol. 1995 Nov;75(6):499.

Concordant urticaria pigmentosa in a couple of identical twins. A five-year
follow-up.

Noto G, Pravatà G, Aricò M.

PMID: 8651038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Zoolog Sci. 1995 Oct;12(5):607-10.

Calcitonin-like substance in plasma of the hagfish, Eptatretus burgeri
(Cyclostomata).

Suzuki N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan.

Cyclostomes have been regarded as having no ultimobranchial gland. However, cells
producing immunoreactive calcitonin (CT) were recently found in cyclostome
brains. In the present study, we examined using biochemical and biological
methods whether there is a CT-like substance in the plasma of the hagfish,
Eptatretus burgeri. Hagfish plasma was first subjected to reverse-phase
high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) and then separated into twenty
fractions. The presence of immunoreactive CT in each fraction was then
investigated by Western blotting with salmon CT antiserum. Two fractions (36-39% 
CH3CN; 39-42% CH3CN) showed positive immunoreactivity. Hypocalcemic and
hypophosphatemic activities were detected by a rat bioassay only in the former
fraction (36-39% CH3CN). The molecular weight (MW) of the CT-like substance in
this fraction was 3.5 kDa, which is equal to that of genuine CT. Furthermore,
when hagfish plasma was examined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay using
anti-salmon CT, the dilution curve of the plasma paralleled the standard curve of
salmon CT. The CT-like substance detected here was present at a high
concentration (14 ng/ml) in the plasma. From the results of the present study,
the CT-like substance present in hagfish plasma appears to be very similar to
salmon CT.

PMID: 8590832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Nihon Kyobu Shikkan Gakkai Zasshi. 1995 Oct;33(10):1111-8.

[Cardiac sarcoidosis with myopathy and advanced A-V nodal block in a woman with a
previous diagnosis of sarcoidosis].

[Article in Japanese]

Sugo A(1), Seyama K, Yaguchi T, Noto K, Kira S, Yamaguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Juntendo University, School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.

In 1992, a 49-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital because of exertional
dyspnea. Three years earlier sarcoidosis had been diagnosed, and the patient was 
found to have bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy. The eye, skin, and knee joint were
also involved. During the second hospital stay, atrial flutter with advanced A-V 
nodal block, scattered defects on a 201T1 scintigram, and marked cardiomegaly on 
chest roentgenogram led to the diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis. Signs and
symptoms of cardiac failure subsided after placement of an artificial cardiac
pacemaker, but the patient still complained of mild muscle weakness in the lower 
extremities on exertion. 67Ga scintigraphy revealed marked accumulation in the
lower extremities, and muscle biopsy of the left gastrocnemius revealed numerous 
epithelioid cell granulomas with muscle fiber degeneration. Oral corticosteroid
therapy was effective. A review of the 24 cases of sarcoid myopathy reported in
Japan indicated that the male-to-female ratio is 1:3.8. As compared to patients
in whom myopathy led to the diagnosis of sarcoidosis, those in whom myopathy
developed after sarcoidosis was diagnosed were (1) relatively older, (2) more
likely to have multiple organ involvement, and (3) more likely to have cardiac
sarcoidosis. Corticosteroids were beneficial in about three quarters of these 16 
cases, who received corticosteroid therapy.

PMID: 8544384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Riv Eur Sci Med Farmacol. 1995 Sep-Oct;17(5):161-5.

Beta-endorphins ACTH and cortisol in CSF and plasma of HIV infected patients.

Spinazzola F(1), Barletta C, Demartino G, Martini F, Natili S, Noto P, Ferri F,
Tossini G, Visco G.

Author information: 
(1)Azienda Ospedaliera S. Camillo, Forlanini, Spallanzani, Roma.

Interactions between HPA (Hypothalamic-pituitary-axis) and immune system seem to 
involve the EPO (endogenous opioid peptides) system, as shown by some recent
findings. Possible relationships between beta-endorphin (beta-End) synthesis and 
severity rate of immunodeficiency have been studied in 48 HIV Ab positive
patients, at different stages of infection. A statistically significant decrease 
in the beta-End synthesis was observed in these patients, as compared to a
control group of 19 healthy subjects, but this decrease was not related to the
CD4+T lymphocytes number. Plasmatic levels modifications of HPA-related peptides 
were not observed in the IVC1 CDC group.

PMID: 8766783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Haematologica. 1995 Sep-Oct;80(5):434-6.

Trisomy 13 in a case of myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia with early blastic 
transformation.

Ferrara F(1), Vicari L, Festa B, Di Noto R, Pane F, Sebastio L, Cimino R.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Ematologia, Ospedale Cardarelli, Naples, Italy.

We describe a case of early myeloid blastic transformation in a 64-year-old man
suffering from myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia. Both chronic and blastic
phase cytogenetic analysis showed trisomy 13 to be the sole chromosome
aberration. A potential role for this rare abnormality in determining such an
unusually poor clinical outcome is discussed.

PMID: 8566885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Am J Hematol. 1995 Sep;50(1):49-52.

Simultaneous occurrence of tetrasomy 21 and trisomy 8 in a patient with early
blastic metamorphosis of chronic myeloproliferative disorder.

Sebastio L(1), Ferrara F, Vicari L, di Noto R, del Vecchio L, Pane F, Fasanaro A,
Cimino R, Salvatore F, Ventruto V.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio Di Genetica Medica, Ospedale Cardarelli, Napoli, Italia.

We report an unusual hyperdiploid karyotype characterized by the simultaneous
occurrence of tetrasomy 21 and trisomy 8 detected during early blastic evolution 
of a BCR-ABL-negative chronic myeloproliferative disorder. Blast cells from this 
patient showed a striking response to all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA)-induced
differentiation as evaluated by CD15 expression following in vitro exposure to
this inducer. Our report represents the first description of such a composite
karyotype in human hematologic malignancies.

PMID: 7668224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Dis Colon Rectum. 1995 Aug;38(8):842-7.

Immunohistochemical localization of carcinoembryonic antigen as a predictor of
lymph node status in submucosa-invasive colorectal carcinoma.

Tokunaga N(1), Kijima H, Noto T, Osamura Y, Sadahiro S, Tajima T, Mitomi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.

PURPOSE: Submucosa-invasive colorectal carcinoma is a colorectal carcinoma
extending only into the submucosal layer. To clarify the metastatic potential of 
submucosa-invasive colorectal carcinoma, we studied the relationship between the 
immunohistochemical staining pattern of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and that
of lymphatic invasion/lymph node metastasis.
METHODS: We investigated 49 submucosa-invasive colorectal carcinomas resected
surgically or endoscopically. CEA distribution patterns of the neoplastic tissues
were divided into three patterns: Pattern 1 = luminal type; Pattern 2 = apical
cytoplasmic type; and Pattern 3 = diffuse cytoplasmic type. We also observed the 
submucosal stromal staining of CEA.
RESULTS: Lymphatic invasion and lymph node metastasis were found in 48.8 percent 
(21/43) and 11.6 percent (5/43) of the Pattern 2/Pattern 3 cases, whereas these
were seen in none (0/6) of Pattern 1 cases. Lymphatic invasion and lymph node
metastasis were found in 63.3 percent (19/30) (chi-squared = 21.94; P < 0.001)
and 16.7 percent (5/30) of the positive stromal CEA cases, whereas these were
seen in 10.5 percent (2/19) and none (0/14) of the negative stromal CEA cases,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Pattern 2/Pattern 3 and stromal CEA can be predictors of the lymph
node metastasis with 11.6 percent and 16.7 percent risks.

PMID: 7543404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 1995 Jul-Aug;19(4):335-9.

Viability of fat obtained by syringe suction lipectomy: effects of local
anesthesia with lidocaine.

Moore JH Jr, Kolaczynski JW, Morales LM, Considine RV, Pietrzkowski Z, Noto PF,
Caro JF.

The results of transplantation of free autologous fat obtained by blunt syringe
suction lipectomy are unpredictable. We examined if adipose tissue viability is
compromised by using syringe suction lipectomy and by infiltration of the tissue 
with local anesthetics. As reference, we used adipose tissue samples excised
during elective surgery. Fat obtained intraoperatively and by lipectomy was
digested with collagenase to isolate adipocytes. The mechanical damage associated
with sample handling and cell isolation in both procedures was similar and did
not exceed 6% of the total cell mass. In addition, cells isolated from
intraoperative and lipectomy samples did not differ functionally, responded
similarly to insulin stimulation of glucose transport and epinephrine-stimulated 
lipolysis, and retained the same growth pattern in culture. Since during fat
transplantation the graft is exposed to local anesthetics at both the donor and
the recipient sites, we reexamined adipocyte function in the presence of
lidocaine. Lidocaine potently inhibited glucose transport and lipolysis in
adipocytes and their growth in culture. That effect, however, persisted only as
long as lidocaine was present; after washing, the cells were able to fully regain
their function and growth regardless of whether the exposure was as short as 30
minutes or as long as 10 days. These results indicate that adipose tissue
obtained by syringe lipectomy consists of fully viable and functional adipocytes,
but local anesthetics may halt their metabolism and growth.

PMID: 7484471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Dis Colon Rectum. 1995 Jun;38(6):615-8.

Fluctuation of blood pressure and pulse rate during colostomy irrigation.

Sadahiro S(1), Noto T, Tajima T, Mitomi T, Miyazaki T, Numata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tokai University School of Medicine, Japan.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to determine the effects of colostomy
irrigation on the vital signs of patients with left colostomy.
METHODS: Twenty-two consecutive patients who underwent abdominoperineal resection
for cancer of the lower rectum and had left lower quadrant end colostomy were
included in this study. Subjective symptoms, blood pressure, and pulse rate
during the first irrigation were investigated.
RESULTS: Fluctuation of blood pressure during instillation was 8.0/8.5 mmHg
(average) and 25.0/17.9 mmHg during evacuation. Fluctuation of pulse rate was 5.5
per minute (average) during instillation and 11.5 per minute during evacuation.
The number of subjects who showed more than 20% fluctuation of systolic pressure 
was 12 (54.5 percent) and that of diastolic pressure was 14 (63.6 percent). One
of 22 patients complained of illness during irrigation.
CONCLUSION: Although colostomy irrigation showed no significant effects on vital 
signs in the majority of patients, it caused a significant reduction in both
blood pressure and pulse rate in a small number of patients. Careful attention
should be paid to vital signs considering the possibility of such effects,
especially on the initial irrigation.

PMID: 7774473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Analyst. 1995 Jun;120(6):1669-73.

Determination of platinum in human blood using inductively coupled plasma atomic 
emission spectrometry with an ultrasonic nebulizer.

Di Noto V(1), Ni D, Dalla Via L, Scomazzon F, Vidali M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Inorganica Metallorganica ed Analitica, Università di 
Padova, Italia.

A rapid and accurate method for the determination of platinum in human plasma by 
using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry with an ultrasonic 
nebulizer is proposed. The emission lines at 214.423 and 265.945 nm were
investigated showing that the 214.423 nm line is the most sensitive and reliable 
for measuring platinum concentrations of as little as 20 micrograms l-1 (ppb) in 
biological materials. Microwave digestion for mineralizing human blood sample
matrices was used and the possible influence of the concentration of HNO3 on
platinum emission lines was investigated. Finally, the platinum concentration was
determined in whole human blood, in platelets and in other blood components. Two 
equivalent methods for the isolation of protein from the platelet-poor plasma
were investigated. The proposed method offers relative simplicity of sample
pre-treatment and lends itself to various routine biological studies.

PMID: 7604955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Oncology. 1995 May-Jun;52(3):219-25.

Studies on clinicopathological features of lung cancer patients with K-ras/p53
gene alterations: comparison between younger and older groups.

Kashii T(1), Mizushima Y, Lima CE, Noto H, Sato H, Saito H, Kusajima Y, Kitagawa 
M, Yamamoto K, Kobayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical
University, Japan.

In order to define the roles of the K-ras and p53 genes in the development of
lung cancer, especially in young adults, we compared the clinicopathological
features of the patients between younger (< or = 45 years, n = 47) and older (<
55 years, n = 50) groups. The gene alterations were examined by the polymerase
chain reaction-single strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) method. The
K-ras gene alterations were detected only in adenocarcinomas, and the p53 gene
alterations in all histologic types of lung cancer. There were no significant
differences in the frequency of both K-ras and p53 gene alterations between the
younger and older groups (9 vs. 11%, 36 vs. 32%). In the younger group, but not
in the older one, the percentage for smokers was significantly higher in the p53 
gene alteration-positive group than for the negative group (65 vs. 30%). As to
the prognosis, there were no significant differences between the p53 gene
alteration-positive and -negative cases in both the younger and older groups as
well as in all subjects, while a tendency of poorer prognosis was observed in
K-ras gene alteration-positive cases than for the -negative ones with
adenocarcinomas. These results suggest that (1) the K-ras and p53 gene
alterations would have no special roles in terms of the lung carcinogenesis in
young adults; (2) a positive relationship between smoking and p53 gene alteration
would exist in young adults with lung cancer, and (3) K-ras gene alteration would
become a prognostic factor in lung cancer.

PMID: 7715905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Int Med Res. 1995 May-Jun;23(3):184-90.

A new mechanism of serum creatine phosphokinase elevation in strangulated small
bowel obstruction: an experimental rat model.

Mukai M(1), Tamaki T, Noto T, Tajima T, Nakano S, Mitomi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.

An experimental rat model was used to investigate the mechanisms of serum
creatine phosphokinase (CPK) elevation in strangulated small bowel obstruction.
Two models were used: a strangulated ileus model with the bowel lumen and blood
flow obstructed simultaneously, and a control ileus model with only the bowel
lumen occluded. The experiments demonstrated that CPK was released into the blood
when the mesenteric blood flow was restored, and that CPK was released into the
intestinal lumen in the strangulated ileus model but not the control ileus model.
CPK activity in the mucosal layer of the strangulated ileus model was
significantly decreased compared with that in the control ileus model. Purified
CPK injected into the intestinal lumen was absorbed by the healthy intestine.
These results suggest a new mechanism of serum CPK elevation in strangulated
small bowel obstruction in which serum CPK is elevated with a significant
decrease in mucosal CPK. Strangulated bowel content including mucosal CPK may be 
reabsorbed by the healthy distal intestine when bowel obstruction is incomplete.

PMID: 7649342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Int Immunol. 1995 May;7(5):835-42.

Identification and functional characterization of mouse CD29 with a mAb.

Noto K(1), Kato K, Okumura K, Yagita H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo.

The beta 1 integrin subfamily, alternatively called very late activation antigen 
(VLA), has been implicated in various cellular functions. In this study, we
generated a mAb against the mouse beta 1 subunit (CD29) to examine the functional
property of mouse VLA proteins. After immunization with affinity-purified mouse
VLA-4 (alpha 4 beta 1), a hamster mAb, HM beta 1-1, was established by screening 
mAb that reacted with alpha 4-negative neuroblastoma C1300. The antigen defined
by HM beta 1-1 was widely distributed in various mouse cell lines and HM beta 1-1
immunoprecipitated a 110-120 kDa protein common to VLA-1 and VLA-6, indicating
that HM beta 1-1 recognizes the beta 1 subunit of mouse integrins. We then
examined the inhibitory effect of HM beta 1-1 on VLA-dependent cell adhesion and 
activation. HM beta 1-1 blocked the adhesion of mouse tumor cell lines to
extracellular matrix proteins including collagen, laminin and fibronectin.
Moreover, splenic T cell proliferation induced by anti-CD3 mAb and allogeneic
mixed lymphocyte response were strongly inhibited by HM beta 1-1 in combination
with an anti-LFA-1 mAb. We conclude that HM beta 1-1 reactive with mouse CD29 can
inhibit VLA-dependent cellular functions and, thus, would be useful for studying 
the physiological role of beta 1 integrins in vivo.

PMID: 7547709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Kyobu Geka. 1995 Apr;48(4):340-3.

[Long-term survival of a patient with lung cancer with skip metastasis to
supraclavicular lymph nodes].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohta Y(1), Nakaizumi H, Furukawa S, Ushijima S, Mori Y, Sato H, Kurumaya H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Noto General Hospital, Ishikawa, Japan.

A case of lung cancer with skip metastasis to supraclavicular lymph nodes is
described. The patient had undergone radical resection for gastric cancer about
nine years ago. For about one year, chemotherapy had been done by Tegafur (600
mg/day) after operation. Radical resection for lung cancer (p/d squamous cell
carcinoma) was performed about seven years ago. Pathologically, mediastinal lymph
node metastasis could not be detected. The needle aspiration biopsy of
supraclavicular lymph node revealed metastasis. Then, radical neck lymph nodes
dissection involving supraclavicular lymph nodes and radiation therapy were
added. There has been no sign of recurrence so far.

PMID: 7715125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Kyobu Geka. 1995 Apr;48(4):317-9.

[Cavernostomy and muscle plombage with the pedicled latissimus dorsi and serratus
anterior flap for recurrent large bullae with infection: a case report].

[Article in Japanese]

Miyazawa H(1), Noto H, Toshima M, Kodera K, Morishima K, Nishiya Y, Fujimura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Cardiovascular Surgery, Toyama Prefectural Central
Hospital, Japan.

A 70-year-old male, who suffered from infection by MRSA and Aspergillus of the
recurrent large bullae, was operated on cavernostomy for space sterilization.
About three months later he underwent muscle plombage with the pedicled
latissimus dorsi and serratus anterior flap. These muscles are ideal to place in 
open wound in the thorax because of the following reasons: These have the ability
to eliminate local infection, a sufficient length and volume to obliterate an
open cavity. And transposition of these muscles cause minimal functional upper
extremity disability. Therefore, we considered that this technic was useful for
the case of an infectious intrathoracic cavity with many bronchial fistulas.

PMID: 7715119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Ophthalmic Res. 1995 Mar-Apr;27(2):89-101.

Changes in light scattering intensity of the transparent lenses of subjects
selected from population-based surveys depending on age: analysis through
Scheimpflug images.

Fujisawa K(1), Sasaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Kanazawa Medical University, Uchinada, Japan.

The physiological ageing changes of decreasing lens transparency were objectively
evaluated in a total of 1,040 eyes selected from 1,685 individuals who were the
subjects of population-based cataract epidemiological surveys performed in three 
climatically different survey fields in Japan. The lens transparency changes were
evaluated from the light scattering intensity on thirteen different lens layers
seen in slit images taken by the latest type of Scheimpflug camera. The mean
percentage prevalence of cataracts in all the epidemiological survey subjects
including grading from I to III, which was also judged objectively through
documented images, was 64.6% in the Noto subjects, 46.6% in the Hokkaido subjects
and 38.0% in the Okinawa subjects. The lens transparency at all of the measuring 
points decreased with ageing. The above changes, seen in the lenses of subjects
in their 40s to 60s, were obviously more prominent compared with those seen in
subjects in their 40s. Although there were some differences in transparency
decrease with ageing among the subjects of the three areas, the authors
tentatively propose to show the data obtained from the Noto subjects as
representative of Japanese individuals. Lens transparency changes on each lens
layer showed characteristic ageing changes and those of the representative four
layers showed an exponential decrease in transparency. The decreasing ratio might
accelerate from age as early as the mid-40s.

PMID: 8538988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Biol Pharm Bull. 1995 Feb;18(2):223-6.

Effect of a combination of ecabet sodium and cimetidine on experimentally induced
gastric lesions and gastric mucosal resistance to ulcerogenic agents in rats.

Kinoshita M(1), Noto T, Tamaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacological Research Laboratory, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., Saitama, Japan.

We studied the effect of single oral administration of ecabet sodium (ecabet), a 
gastroprotective agent, in combination with the histamine H2-receptor antagonist 
cimetidine on gastric acid secretion, mucosal prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) production 
and experimentally induced acute hemorrhagic gastric lesions in rats. The effect 
repeated administration of ecabet in combination with cimetidine on the
vulnerability of gastric mucosa to the ulcerogenic agents 0.6N HCl and aspirin
was also studied. In pylorus-ligated rats, oral administration of cimetidine
reduced gastric acid secretion, whereas ecabet did not affect the
cimetidine-induced reduction in acid secretion. On the other hand, ecabet
increased the capacity of gastric mucosa to synthesize PGE2, while cimetidine
showed no effect on this parameter either in the presence of absence of ecabet.
Both ecabet and cimetidine inhibited the formation of aspirin-induced gastric
mucosal lesions, and the combination of ecabet and cimetidine showed a more
potent inhibition than either drug alone. After cessation of repeated
administration of cimetidine, but not ecabet, the 0.6N HCl- and aspirin-induced
gastric lesions were significantly aggravated. The co-administration of ecabet
improved the cimetidine-induced aggravation of these gastric lesions. These
results suggest that ecabet in combination with cimetidine augments the antiulcer
effect of cimetidine and improves the cimetidine-induced increase in gastric
mucosal vulnerability to the ulcerogenic agents.

PMID: 7742788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Intern Med. 1995 Feb;34(2):96-9.

Severe hyponatremia and hyperkalemia induced by trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole in 
patients with Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia.

Noto H(1), Kaneko Y, Takano T, Kurokawa K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo.

An antimicrobial agent trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (Tmp-Smx) does not usually
cause electrolyte disturbances at regular doses, and few cases of Tmp-Smx-induced
electrolyte imbalance have been reported in the English-language literature to
date. Recently, however, we treated two patients with Pneumocystis carinii
pneumonia who developed severe hyponatremia and hyperkalemia on administration of
high-dose Tmp-Smx. These electrolyte disturbances were attributable to the direct
effect of Tmp-Smx on the renal distal tubules, were reversible, and corrected by 
infusion of a sodium-enriched and potassium-free liquid. Therefore, it is
suggested that even after electrolyte disturbances have occurred, high-dose
Tmp-Smx therapy may be continued for severe infectious diseases under appropriate
electrolyte correction.

PMID: 7727887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Nippon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi. 1995 Feb;99(2):204-11.

[Cataract epidemiology survey in the three climatically different areas in
Japan--prevalence of cataracts and types of lens opacification].

[Article in Japanese]

Sasaki K(1), Ono M, Aoki K, Katou N, Morine M, Nakaizumi H, Fujisawa K, Kojima M,
Sakamoto Y, Hatano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa-ken, Japan.

A cataract epidemiology study of 1,615 subjects from three climatically different
places in Japan, village S in Hokkaido, town M in Noto and village Y in Okinawa, 
was conducted by one study group. Cataract diagnosis and grading of cataracts
were objectively done with a photo-documentation system. The percentages of
cataracts of over grade I classified by the Japanese Cooperative Cataract
Epidemiology Study Group were 46.6%, 64.6% and 38.0% in village S, town M, and
village Y, respectively. Those in their 50s, 60s, and 70s in the above places
were 24.3%, 51.1% and 71.4% (village S), 38.4%, 65.3% and 84.6% (town M), and
25.2%, 42.9% and 65.4% (village Y), respectively. Cortical cataract was the most 
common, followed by nuclear and subcapsular types. Although the highest
percentage of nuclear cataracts was seen in the subjects of village Y,
subcapsular cataract was seen almost equally in the three areas. Lens
transparency changes were evaluated by the light scattering intensities in the
lens layers through photographed images. Intensity increased with ageing either
linearly or exponentially.

PMID: 7701993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Int J Oncol. 1995 Jan;6(1):123-8.

Evaluation of prognostic-significance of p53 gene alterations in patients with
surgically resected lung-cancer.

Kashii T(1), Mizushima Y, Lima C, Noto H, Sato H, Saito H, Kusajima Y, Kitagawa
M, Sugiyama S, Kobayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)TOYAMA MED & PHARMACEUT UNIV,DEPT INTERNAL MED 1,TOYAMA 93001,JAPAN. TOYAMA
MED & PHARMACEUT UNIV,DEPT PATHOL 1,TOYAMA 93001,JAPAN. TOYAMA MED & PHARMACEUT
UNIV,DEPT SURG 1,TOYAMA 93001,JAPAN. TOYAMA PREFECTURAL CENT HOSP,DEPT CHEST &
CARDIOVASC SURG,TOYAMA 930,JAPAN. ISHIKAWA PREFECTURAL CENT HOSP,DEPT THORAC
SURG,KANAZAWA,ISHIKAWA 920,JAPAN. KOSEIREN TAKAOKA HOSP,DEPT SURG,TAKAOKA,TOYAMA 
933,JAPAN. TOYAMA CITY HOSP,DEPT CHEST SURG,TOYAMA 939,JAPAN.

Clinical significance of p53 gene alterations, as a prognostic factor, was
assessed in 69 patients with surgically resected lung cancer. The p53 gene
alterations (exon 5-9) were examined by the polymerase chain reaction-single
strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) method of genomic DNA. The p53 gene
alterations were detected in all histological types of lung cancer, with a
positive rate of 45% (31/69). In the alteration-positive group, patients in the
advanced stages of III and IV were seen more frequently than in the negative
group (58% vs. 21%, p<0.05). Such a difference was not observed in other
parameters such as age, gender, histological type and smoking habit. The
prognosis was, on a whole, poorer in the alteration-positive group than for the
-negative one (5-year survival rate: 19.3% vs. 40.6%, MST: 17 months vs. 36
months), but the difference did not reach statistical significance. However, in
the case of females (p<0.05), adenocarcinoma (p<0.01), early stages of I and II
(p<0.05) and non-smokers (p<0.005), a significantly poorer prognosis was observed
in the gene alteration-positive group than for the -negative one. These results
suggest that the p53 gene alteration may be a useful prognostic factor in certain
subgroups with lung resected for cancer.

PMID: 21556512  [PubMed]


311. Minerva Anestesiol. 1995 Jan-Feb;61(1-2):1-7.

[Energy metabolism and metabolite flow from muscle tissue during TPN of trauma
patients].

[Article in Italian]

Iapichino G(1), Radrizzani D, Colombo A, Bonetti G, Bordoni A, Breda G, Cambisano
M, Marzorati S, Noto A, Palandi A, et al.

Author information: 
(1)IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano.

AIM: We evaluated muscle-visceral interorgan flux of substrates in 8 critically
ill patients in the flow phase after injury.
SETTING: This study was conducted on critically ill patients admitted in ICU.
PATIENTS: 8 patients were studied immediately after injury.
RESULTS: We measured leg flux for oxygen, amino acids, glucose, lactate pyruvate,
keton bodies, free fatty acids (FFA), free and total carnitine, and whole body
oxygen consumption, nitrogen (N) balance and 3-methyl hystidine (3MEH) excretion 
during fasting and the second day of metabolic treatment (10.7 +/- 0.06 g x N x
m-2 e 1035.5 +/- 3.9 kcal x m-2 x die). During fast the leg shows a net release
of N, pyruvate, FFA and free carnitine while glucose, lactate and keton bodies
fluxes are not different from zero. The energy balance of the leg is markedly
negative (substrate for 79 kcal x m-2 burned for leg energy requirement and 347
kcal x m-2 released as a such). Assuming the body muscle tissue 4.5 times the leg
tissue and knowing whole body energy balance, we were able to assess that the non
muscular (visceral) part of the body resulted in a consistently positive energy
balance. The metabolic treatment is able to match the energy expenditure and the 
substrate efflux of the leg (and the whole body muscle tissue). In fact the
efflux of amino acids and FFA is reduced pyruvate blunted while glucose is
remarkably taken up (the uptake of the whole muscle tissue accounted for 72% of
the daily load). At the same time, the treatment blunts leg free carnitine and
reduces body 3MEH output. Moreover, the caloric balance of the non muscular part 
of the body remains positive even if the qualiquantitative uptake of substrates
is different from fasting.
CONCLUSION: Substrates for energy requirements of visceral tissue came from
muscular tissue. The metabolic treatment is able to modulate this process.

PMID: 7617234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Kaku Igaku. 1994 Dec;31(12):1539-45.

[Simple method to estimate cardiac output using first-pass data on RI
angiography].

[Article in Japanese]

Miyazaki Y(1), Kinuya S, Tonami N.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Nuclear Medicine, Noto General Hospital.

In order to estimate cardiac output (CO) without using data equilibrium state, a 
simple index (cardiac output index, COI) was developed from the first-pass data
as a ratio of the integrated radioactivity on the right ventricle to the total
injected radioactivity. COI was well correlated with CO calculated by the
conventional Stewart-Hamilton method (r = 0.894, p < 0.01), and thus, CO could be
readily estimated from COI. This index might be useful to estimate CO since it
can be obtained even with the agents which distribute to organs.

PMID: 7861653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Intern Med. 1994 Dec;33(12):783-5.

Peripheral neuroectodermal tumor presenting pleural effusion.

Kurashima K(1), Muramoto S, Ohta Y, Fujimura M, Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Noto General Hospital, Nanao.

Pleural effusion is a common finding of peripheral neuroectodermal tumor (PNET)
of the chest wall (Askin's tumor), but little is known about the characteristics.
A case of Askin's tumor with pleural effusion is reported. Repeated cytologies
were negative for malignancy, but levels of lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) and
neuron-specific enolase (NSE) in the pleural effusion were increased. Surgical
biopsy was performed and immunohistochemical study of the tumor revealed the
diagnosis.

PMID: 7718961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Int J Urol. 1994 Dec;1(4):357-8.

A case of arterial priapism treated by embolization.

Kawachi Y(1), Watanabe R, Noto K, Murata M, Sumi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Juntendo University Urayasu Hospital, Japan.

An 18-year-old unmarried man, who had shown arterial priapism caused by mild
perineal trauma sustained during skate-boarding, has been successfully treated by
autologous clot embolization at the common penile artery. He was able to have a
normal erection and ejaculate 5 d after embolization.

PMID: 7614402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Nihon Kyobu Shikkan Gakkai Zasshi. 1994 Dec;32 Suppl:86-95.

[Gene transfer to airway epithelial cells: current status and future direction].

[Article in Japanese]

Setoguchi Y(1), Noto K, Iwakami S, Tajima M, Kira S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Advances in recombinant DNA technology and molecular and cellular biology have
made it feasible to introduce genes into living cells. The most sophisticated
gene transduction methods have bee applied to gene therapy strategies for the
potential treatment of genetic diseases. In regard to lung diseases, alpha
1-antitrypsin deficiency and cystic fibrosis, the most common hereditary lung
disorders in Caucasians, have been targeted for gene therapy. To date, gene
therapy studies have been confined to ex vivo strategies for treatment of ADA
deficiency with retroviral vectors. However, there are two major obstacles to
gene transfer to the bronchial epithelium. First, bronchial epithelium, such as
that with ciliated cells, is terminally differentiated, and does not divide
rapidly. Second, the complex architecture of the lung precludes replacing the
existing bronchial epithelium with cells modified by gene transfer. In the
context of these properties of bronchial epithelium, adenovirus vectors have been
evaluated for direct introduction of therapeutic genes to bronchial epithelium
via the airway in vivo. An in vivo experiment revealed that gene transfer with a 
replication-deficient adenovirus containing the E. coli lacZ (beta-galactosidase)
gene driven by cytomegalovirus promoter (AdCMVlacZ) was 10(4) times more
efficient than gene transfer with a plasmid containing the same expression
cassette (pCMVlacZ). An experiment based on in vitro data was done to evaluate
the distribution of the expression of the exogenous genes transferred by
adenovirus vectors. Intratracheal administration of AdCMVlacZ into lungs of
experimental animals resulted in a high number of beta-gal-positive epithelial
cells in bronchiols, rather than in proximal bronchi. Thus, a
replication-deficient adenovirus can be used to transfer exogenous genes to
airway epithelial cells in vivo. This technique may be useful in gene therapy for
cystic fibrosis. Gene transfer can be thought of as the use of genetic
information to modity the milieu of the target organ. In addition, gene transfer 
may allow the introduction of new genes, or the alteration tion of existing genes
in intact animals. Gene transfer could them be used to produce animal models of
human lung diseases that are particularly difficult to study.

PMID: 7602850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Leukemia. 1994 Nov;8(11):1900-5.

Expression and ATRA-driven modulation of adhesion molecules in acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Di Noto R(1), Schiavone EM, Ferrara F, Manzo C, Lo Pardo C, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Oncologia Spermentale C, Immunologia, Istituto Nazionale dei
Tumori di Napoli, Italy.

On fresh leukemic cells taken from 30 patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia 
(APL) the membrane expression of a series of adhesion molecules including beta 2 
integrins (CD11a/LFA-1, CD11b/Mac-1), selectin ligands (CD15/Le(x), CD15s/Le(x)) 
and tyrosine-phosphatase isoforms (CD45RA, CD45R0) was analyzed. The expression
of these molecules was also studied in nine of these patients following the APL
cells' culture with and without all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). The fresh APL
promyelocytes expressed CD45RA and CD15s on their surface, while CD11a, CD11b,
CD15, and CD45R0 were constantly absent. In vitro treatment with ATRA
consistently increased the expression of CD15, CD11b, and CD45R0 on leukemic
promyelocytes; these changes were paralleled by a decrease of CD45RA display. The
expression of sialylated antigen CD15s was fully independent from CD15 suggesting
a differential enzymatic regulation within this selectin ligand system. ATRA was,
however, incapable of promoting the up-regulation of CD11a in APL. As a result,
asynchronous phenotype (CD11a-, CD11b+, CD15+, CD15s+/-, CD45RA-, CD45R0+) was
generated that is normally undetectable on maturing myeloid cells. In order to
provide a further control a case of acute agranulocytosis was also investigated, 
in which > 75% bone marrow cells were arrested at the promyelocyte stage; these
bone marrow cells showed a surface phenotype identical to non-leukemic
promyelocytes (CD11a+, CD11b+, CD15+, CD45R0+, CD45RA-) with a spontaneous
ability to differentiate in vivo towards the more mature stages of myeloid
differentiation. We therefore suggest that in fresh and ATRA-induced APL cells
distinct, regular phenotypic changes are identifiable that are probably
associated with t(15;17) and not seen in normal and activated bone marrow.

PMID: 7967734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Ann Ital Med Int. 1994 Oct-Dec;9(4):223-7.

[Assessment of body composition in groups of subjects with different body size.
Comparison of skinfold thickness and impedance methods].

[Article in Italian]

Buscemi S(1), Maneri R, Di Noto A, Verga S.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di Clinica Medica B, Università degli Studi di Palermo.

The aim of our study was to compare plicometry and bioelectrical impedance
analysis as methods for body composition assessment (fat mass-FM%, fat-free
mass-FFM) and to extrapolate population-specific equations in order to predict
the plicometrically-derived FM and FFM on the basis of body resistance. A
cross-sectional study was carried out at the Diabetes Out-Patient Clinic,
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Palermo, Italy. We examined 102
subjects (45 men, 57 women, age range 30-45 years) divided into three groups:
Group N (36 normal weight subjects, body mass index-BMI = weight/height2 = 24.5
+/- 0.8), Group O (35 obese subjects, BMI = 35.1 +/- 0.4), and Group GO (morbid
obese subjects, BMI = 49.2 +/- 1.2) as well as a control group of 30 subjects (12
men, 18 women, age range 30-45 years, BMI = 20.9-63.1). We measured the following
parameters: bioelectrical impedance analysis (body resistance: R), plicometry
(triceps, biceps, subscapular, and suprailiac skinfolds), height (Ht), weight
(W). The two methods were comparable in Groups N and O. In Group GO, however,
especially in men and for FM%, measurements were significantly different.
Plicometrically-determined FM% and FFM-Kg were significantly correlated to
R.W/Ht2 (r = 0.821, p < 0.0001) and to Ht2/R (r = 0.867, p < 0.0001)
respectively. The following prediction formulas for plicometric FM and FFM from
body resistance and anthropometric variables were obtained: 1) FM% = 22.3
(R.W/Ht2)-2.2, and 2) FFM-Kg = 1.1 (Ht2/R)-3.1.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7893571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Br J Haematol. 1994 Oct;88(2):247-55.

All-trans retinoic acid promotes a differential regulation of adhesion molecules 
on acute myeloid leukaemia blast cells.

Di Noto R(1), Schiavone EM, Ferrara F, Manzo C, Lo Pardo C, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Oncologia Sperimentale C, Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori di
Napoli, Italy.

In the present study we investigated the membrane expression of selectin ligands 
(CD15/Le(x), CDw65/VIM2, CD15s/sLe(x), beta 2 integrins (CD11a/LFA-1,
CD11b/Mac-1) and CD45 phosphatase isoforms (CD45RA, CD45O) on leukaemic cells
from 28 patients with acute myeloid malignancies cultured with and without
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). Within each adhesion system. ATRA was able to
differentially regulate distinct molecules. Furthermore, it was able to exert
effects specific for acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) blast cells, as well as 
to induce a series of non-cytotype-restricted phenotypic changes. An impressive
feature of ATRA induction was a simultaneous increase in the expression of CD15, 
CDw65 and CD11b on leukaemic promyelocytes. The sialylated antigen CD15s,
however, showed results independent from the other two carbohydrates (CD15 and
CDw65), suggesting a differential enzymatic regulation within the selectin
ligands system. In spite of the well-recognized expression of CD11a throughout
all stages of normal myeloid differentiation, APL blast cells were found to
virtually lack LFA-1 expression. Moreover, ATRA was unable to promote an
up-regulation of this antigen in APL, while inducing a frequent down-modulation
in non-APL cases constitutively expressing this antigen. In APL cases ATRA
generated an asynchronous phenotype (CD15+, CDw65+, CD11b+, CD11a-), undetectable
on normally maturing myeloid cells, but consistent with the concept that
incomplete differentiation, in terms of surface molecule expression, can be
sufficient to obtain therapeutic results.

PMID: 7803267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Int Angiol. 1994 Sep;13(3):223-8.

Apo-lipoprotein profile in subjects with extracranial carotid atherosclerosis.

Barbagallo CM(1), Averna MR, Novo S, Cavera G, Noto D, Liquori M, Spano L,
Notarbartolo A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Medicina Interna e Geriatria, Università degli Studi di Palermo,
Italy.

Relationships between plasma lipoproteins and cerebrovascular atherosclerosis are
not completely clear. In a group of asymptomatic nondiabetic normolipidemic
subjects, plasma lipid and apolipoprotein profiles have been related to
extracranial carotid atherosclerotic lesions, as assessed by B-mode
ultrasonography and independent relations between lipid and clinical parameters
and carotid atherosclerosis have been evaluated. We have found that subjects with
atherosclerotic lesions (both intimal thickening or plaque) had TG levels and
CHO/HDL-C and LDL-C/HDL-C ratios significantly higher and HDL-C and apo A-I
levels significantly lower in comparison with subjects with normal arteries. When
patients were divided according to the lesions of carotid arteries subjects with 
atherosclerotic plaque presented HDL-C and apo A-I levels significantly reduced
and TG and apo B levels and CHO/HDL-C and LDL-C/HDL-C ratios significantly
increased in comparison with subjects with normal arteries, and HDL-C levels
reduced and CHO/HDL-C and LDL-C/HDL-C ratios increased in comparison with
subjects with intimal thickening. Patients with intimal thickening and normal
subjects differed for HDL-C and TG levels and CHO/HDL-C and LDL-C/HDL-C ratios.
At multivariate analysis HDL-C levels (negatively), age, hypertension and
cigarette smoking (positively) resulted independently associated with
cerebrovascular atherosclerosis. Our data seem to show that, although several
lipid and apoprotein abnormalities are able to initiate the atherosclerotic
process in extracranial carotid district, probably the presence of low
HDL-cholesterol levels is an important condition to determine the further
worsening of the lesions.

PMID: 7822898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Br J Dermatol. 1994 Aug;131(2):275-9.

Granulomatous slack skin: report of a case associated with Hodgkin's disease and 
a review of the literature.

Noto G(1), Pravatà G, Miceli S, Aricò M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto di Dermatologia Sperimentale, University of Palermo, Policlinico P. 
Giaccone, Italy.

We report a case of granulomatous slack skin (GSS) associated with Hodgkin's
disease, and review the literature on this entity. GSS, a variant of cutaneous
T-cell lymphoma, clinically presents with erythematous patches in the flexures,
which gradually transform into bulky, pendulous areas of skin. Histology shows an
elastolytic granulomatous infiltrate, with atypical lymphoid cells, and
occasional epidermotropism. As far as we are aware, 10 cases of GSS, including
our patient, have been reported in detail. The male:female ratio of these cases
is 9:1, and the age range 15-51 years. Five cases were associated with Hodgkin's 
disease, one with small lymphocytic lymphoma, and one developed cutaneous T-cell 
lymphoma. The axillae, abdomen and groins were the most frequently affected
areas. No definitive management for GSS has been established. Surgery has been
performed in localized forms, and systemic treatments have included
corticosteroids, dapsone, chlorambucil, nitrogen mustard, and radiotherapy. Our
patient was treated with chemotherapy for his Hodgkin's disease, and this
resulted in complete remission of the lymphoma. Subsequent maintenance therapy
with interferon-alpha produced good control of the cutaneous lesions.

PMID: 7917995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Clin Nurse Spec. 1994 Jul;8(4):196-201.

Case management roles of clinicians: a research case study.

Sterling YM, Noto EC, Bowen MR.

Comment in
    Clin Nurse Spec. 1994 Jul;8(4):195, 207.

The purpose of this research multiple case study was to determine case management
roles as demonstrated by four clinicians employed at a university medical center.
Multiple sources of evidence were used to collect data, including interviews,
nonparticipant observations, and chart audits. Case management was defined by the
clinicians as a process for delivery of health care at the institution studied.
Despite a lack of a uniform framework for case management practice, the
clinicians used similar case management components. Chart audits demonstrated
deficits and inconsistency in documentation that were supported by interview and 
observations. It was recommended that exposure to formal case management models
and theory could strengthen clinical practice in this area. Additionally,
investigation of factors that facilitate and/or impede consistent documentation
of interventions and patient outcomes, particularly by CNSs is recommended.

PMID: 8055417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Ment Retard. 1994 Jun;32(3):200-5.

Some educational implications for students with profound disabilities at risk for
inadequate nutrition and the nontherapeutic effects of medication.

Ault MM(1), Guy B, Rues J, Noto L, Guess D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Special Education, Robert Dole Human Development Center,
University of Kansas, Lawrence 66045.

The educational relevance for students with profound disabilities of being at
risk for poor nutrition and the potential problems caused by the nontherapeutic
effects of some medications were examined, examples of their significance
presented, some reasons for their occurrence discussed, and some suggestions for 
instructional personnel offered. Two classroom-based cases were included that
described the resolution of a nutritional and a medication problem, including the
role of the teacher and health-related personnel.

PMID: 8084271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Kaku Igaku. 1994 Jun;31(6):551-8.

[A simple method to obtain semi-quantitative index of brain perfusion using
99mTc-HMPAO].

[Article in Japanese]

Miyazaki Y(1), Kinuya S, Tonami N.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Nuclear Medicine, Noto General Hospital.

We developed a new noninvasive index (brain uptake ratio, BUR) inferring brain
perfusion using 99mTc-HMPAO scintigraphy, and compared with the index (brain
perfusion index, BPI) reported by Matsuda, et al. BUR was obtained for 208
cerebral hemispheres from 104 cases as a ratio of radioactivity in a brain
against that passing through an aortic arch. BUR correlated well with BPI (r=
0.965, p < 0.01). Information in deep or occipital regions was reflected well to 
BUR when data of SPECT images were used. BUR can be obtained even with a small
field-of-view gamma camera. BUR is easily obtained and thought to be useful as a 
semi-quantitative index of brain perfusion.

PMID: 8072229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Masui. 1994 Jun;43(6):934-7.

[Respiratory arrest following diazepam administration during spinal anesthesia in
a patient with myotonic dystrophy].

[Article in Japanese]

Taki Y(1), Takada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Noto General Hospital, Ishikawa.

A 43 year old female with previously undiagnosed myotonic dystrophy received
abdominal hysterectomy under spinal anesthesia. Respiratory arrest occurred when 
diazepam 5 mg was slowly administered intravenously during operation. Mask
ventilation was continued during operation with nitrous oxide and pentazocine 30 
mg i.v. After the operation ventilatory failure continued. Arterial blood gas
analysis revealed pH; 7.21, Pao2; 57 mmHg, Paco2; 82 mmHg in spite of oxygen
therapy by a face mask. For 5 days after the operation, oxygen therapy was
necessary. The patient was diagnosed as myotonic dystrophy by further examination
after the operation. In a patient with myotonic dystrophy, we should be very
careful in administering a drug which may cause respiratory depression to prevent
respiratory complication.

PMID: 8072158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Am J Dermatopathol. 1994 Jun;16(3):280-4.

Multiple nevoid spiradenomas.

Noto G(1), Bongiorno MR, Pravatà G, Aricò M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Dermatology, University of Palermo, Italy.

This report delineates a new clinical presentation of multiple benign spiradenoma
(BS), a diffuse linear nevoid pattern. A 16-year-old girl, in otherwise good
health, had many papulonodular lesions, varying in color from blue-gray to bright
red, disposed linearly on the right half of her body, involving the periorbital
region, cheek, lateral side of the neck, trunk, linea alba, right thigh, and leg.
Only a few nodules were slightly painful. Lesions were reported to be present at 
birth; no family members had similar lesions, either in solitary or multiple
form. Excisional biopsies of three lesions from the neck, abdomen, and leg,
respectively, were performed; histologically, all three samples showed a picture 
of BS. In some areas, the tumor was directly connected to a pilosebaceous unit.
Furthermore, a focal area with pilar differentiation at the periphery of the
lobules was observed, which might suggest that BS can differentiate toward
various cutaneous adnexal structures. Our patient probably is the first one
reported with diffuse linear nevoid lesions of BS, present at birth and involving
the right half of the body.

PMID: 7943635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1994 Jun;311(2):350-3.

Identification of two aspartates and a glutamate essential for the activity of
endo-beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase H from Streptomyces plicatus.

Schmidt BF(1), Ashizawa E, Jarnagin AS, Lynn S, Noto G, Woodhouse L, Estell DA,
Lad P.

Author information: 
(1)Genencor International, Inc., South San Francisco, California 94080.

In order to identify groups essential for the activity of
endo-beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase H (Endo H), all 8 glutamate residues, all 19
aspartates, and both tryptophans were individually substituted with glutamines,
asparagines, and phenylalanines, respectively, by oligonucleotide site-directed
mutagenesis. Only variants D170N, D172N, and E174Q were found to have specific
activities significantly less than wild-type Endo H. Another variant, D173N, did 
not produce detectable amounts of protein. Wild-type enzyme was found to have a
bell-shaped pH activity profile, which was retained in the essential aspartate
mutants, but E174Q lost the basic pH limb of the curve, indicating that E174 is
good candidate for the proton donating group necessary for catalysis. The general
base needed for activity could not be unambiguously identified; although, of the 
essential aspartates, D172 is the only one conserved in other related
glucosidases.

PMID: 7911292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Toxicon. 1994 May;32(5):629-33.

Inhibition of NGF-induced neurite outgrowth of PC12 cells by Bacillus cereus
sphingomyelinase, a bacterial hemolysin.

Tamura H(1), Noto M, Kinoshita K, Ohkuma S, Ikezawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya 
City University, Japan.

Sphingomyelinase of Bacillus cereus, a bacterial hemolysin, reduced nerve growth 
factor (NGF)-induced neurite outgrowth of PC12 cells in a dose-dependent manner. 
At 200 mU/ml, sphingomyelinase repressed half the neurite outgrowth of the cells 
at 250 ng/ml NGF. The c-fos superinduction, one of the early responses induced by
NGF, was not influenced by this treatment, suggesting that the repression by
sphingomyelinase occurred via a protein kinase C-independent pathway.

PMID: 8079375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Minerva Med. 1994 Apr;85(4):155-9.

[Urinary enzymes in liver cirrhosis: useful early markers of renal damage?].

[Article in Italian]

Bruno CM(1), Raciti C, Urso G, Neri S, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Medicina Interna e Medicina d'Urgenza, Università degli Studi di
Catania.

Some urinary enzymes (NAG, AAP, lysozyme) considered to be sufficiently sensitive
and reliable markers of renal damage were controlled in 20 patients with
cirrhosis of the liver and in 20 healthy control subjects. The results, stated as
mean +/- SD, showed a statistically very significant increase (p < 0.01) of NAG
and lysozyme in cirrhotics. Furthermore, this increase could be at least in part 
related with the seriousness of clinical condition. On the basis of these
results, we think the urinary dosage of NAG and lysozyme is, in the subjects with
liver cirrhosis, a bloodless method to show an early renal damage.

PMID: 7913212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 1994 Mar;18(3):161-6.

A new technique for biopsy of human abdominal fat under local anaesthesia with
Lidocaine.

Kolaczynski JW(1), Morales LM, Moore JH Jr, Considine RV, Pietrzkowski Z, Noto
PF, Colberg J, Caro JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107.

The objectives of this study were to develop a new technique to safety, reliably,
and in a cosmetically acceptable way, obtain more than 5.0 g of abdominal
subcutaneous fat in out-patients, and to investigate whether inhibitory effects
of a local anaesthetic on adipose tissue function in vitro are sufficient
argument against the use of infiltrative local anaesthesia during fat biopsy to
obtain samples for metabolic studies. Measurements were obtained to compare
glucose transport and lipolysis response to insulin in adipocytes isolated from
subcutaneous abdominal fat obtained: (i) during elective surgery in eight women
and four men (BMI 25.8 +/- 3.1 kg/m2); and (ii) from five male and three female
out-patients (BMI 25.8 +/- 3.1 kg/m2) by the described novel technique performed 
under local anaesthesia with Lidocaine. The effects of acute and 11-day exposure 
to Lidocaine in vitro on adipocyte lipolysis and glucose transport response to
insulin, and the growth potential were determined. In vivo exposure of the tissue
samples to local anaesthetic by the novel technique had no apparent effect on
isolated adipocyte responses to insulin by stimulation of glucose transport or by
inhibitor- or adrenaline-stimulated lipolysis; the results were not different to 
those for adipocytes isolated from fat obtained during elective abdominal
surgeries. Lidocaine added in vitro potently inhibited glucose transport and
lipolysis in adipocytes, and cell attachment and growth in primary 'ceiling'
culture; this effect persisted only as long as Lidocaine was present. After
washing, adipocytes fully regained their function and growth regardless of the
exposure period, as short as 30 min or as long as 11 days.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 
250 WORDS)

PMID: 8186813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Clin Ter. 1994 Mar;144(3):223-9.

[Metabolic aspects of intestinal urinary diversion. Comparison with ileo-cecal
bladder substitution and ileal conduct].

[Article in Italian]

Biasioli S(1), Noto L, Schiavon R, Bonciarelli M, Petrosino L, Cavallini L,
Zambello A, Olivo G.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Nefrologia e Dialisi, ULSS n. 28, Ospedale di Legnago.

The aim of this study was the metabolic evaluation of 10 patients with 2
different types of urinary diversions, after cystectomy for infiltrating
carcinoma. The patients were divided into two groups, homogeneous for age and
follow up, according to the type of urinary diversion: group A (5 patients with
ileo-cecal bladder) and group B (5 patients with ileal conduit). The follow up
duration was 16.8 +/- 7.3 months in group A and 25.4 +/- 7.8 months, in group B. 
Even though the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) in both groups was within the
normal limits, however - on closer evaluation - patients of A group revealed a
slight functional damage, shown by reduced creatinine secretion, lower
bicarbonatemia and lower urinary acid secretion when compared with ileal conduit 
patients. According to this study, the ileal conduit seems to be associated with 
a fairly good metabolic status while the ileo-cecal bladder could require closer 
clinical-metabolic follow up and bicarbonate supplementation.

PMID: 8181218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Anticancer Res. 1994 Mar-Apr;14(2B):721-3.

Sex differences in clinicopathological features of peripheral T1 adenocarcinoma
of the lung.

Lima CE(1), Mizushima Y, Kashii T, Matsui K, Noto H, Miwa A, Kobayashi M,
Kitagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Toyama Medical and
Pharmaceutical University, Japan.

Clinicopathological features of surgically-treated peripheral T1 adenocarcinoma
of the lung were compared between 30 females and 26 males, and the following sex 
differences were observed; 1) Females were younger than males, 2) There was a
higher percentage of smokers among males, 3) The acinar histologic subtype was
less frequently found in females, 4) Well differentiated tumors were more
frequently found in females, 5) K-ras gene mutations were observed only in males,
6) Prognosis was slightly better in females. As to other factors such as
N-factor, tumor ploidy or central fibrosis, there was no statistical difference
between the two groups. Although we were not able to explain the causes for the
above sex differences, it was speculated that smoking was mainly responsible for 
them.

PMID: 8010732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Biochem. 1994 Feb;115(2):356-61.

A study on the metabolism of spermidine in mammals: purification and
identification of a newly identified metabolite, 2-oxo-1-pyrrolidinepropionic
acid, in rat urine.

Kawase H(1), Hasegawa T, Hashimoto H, Noto T, Nakajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine.

In order to study the metabolism of spermidine in mammals, radioactive spermidine
was injected intraperitoneally into a rat and urine was collected for analysis.
Incorporation of radioactivity into putreanine, isoputreanine, spermidic acid,
and N-aminopropylpyrrolidin-2-one was confirmed by ion-exchange chromatography,
thin layer chromatography, and paper electrophoresis, the highest radioactivity
being observed in the non-polar and acidic fraction of the collected urine. A
radioactive compound was purified from the non-polar and acidic fraction, and
identified as 2-oxo-1-pyrrolidinepropionic acid by comparison of its behavior on 
ion-exchange chromatography and thin layer chromatography with that of authentic 
2-oxo-1-pyrrolidinepropionic acid, and recrystallization with the authentic
compound. Acid hydrolysis of the radioactive compound produced radioactive
spermidic acid, confirming the identification. To examine the interconversion
between isoputreanine and N-aminopropylpyrrolidin-2-one, these compounds were
deuterated and then intraperitoneally injected into a rat. Analysis of 24-h urine
by gas-chromatography-mass-spectrometry indicated no interconversion between the 
two metabolites of spermidine under these conditions. An intracerebroventricular 
injection of radioactive spermidine into a rat showed that radioactivity was also
incorporated into the metabolites of spermidine in the brain, and oxidative
deamination of the aminopropyl moiety of spermidine was thought to be dominant in
the central nervous system and vice versa in peripheral organs.

PMID: 8206886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Dermatol Sci. 1994 Feb;7(1):14-23.

Increased SS bonds in chronic solar elastosis: a study with
N-(7-dimethylamino-4-methyl-3-coumarinyl) maleimide (DACM) stain.

Pravatà G(1), Noto G, Aricò M.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Dermatologia Sperimentale, University of Palermo, Policlinico P.
Giaccone, Italy.

We have studied the distribution of SH groups and SS linkages in solar elastosis,
in comparison with that in aged and juvenile sun-unexposed skin, using
N-(7-dimethylamino-4-methyl-3-coumarinyl) maleimide (DACM) stain. In heavy solar 
elastosis we found increased fluorescence for SS bonds in the upper and middle
reticular dermis in the elastotic masses; these were separated from the epidermis
by a network of actinically-damaged, SS-positive elastic fibers, showing
irregularly and variously interwoven oxytalan and elaunic fibers. These latter,
unlike the elastotic masses, revealed also SH groups. In moderate and weak
elastosis, where the thick irregular masses were absent, the fluorescence for SH 
and SS linkages was present in equal proportions in the altered elastic fibers;
collagen bundles revealed only fluorescence for SS bonds. Aged and juvenile
sun-unexposed skin showed the same proportions of SH and SS linkages in the
changed elastic fibers. Collagen bundles of aged and juvenile skin showed
fluorescence for SS bonds; SH groups were present on a few collagen fibers only
in aged skin. Our results are consistent with opinion supporting an elastic
origin of elastotic degeneration, which could be the consequence of a defect, due
to chronic solar exposure, in one of the steps--degradation or synthesis--of
metabolic turnover of elastic fibers, resulting in abnormal and excessive
polypeptide chains extremely rich in disulfide bonds.

PMID: 8193080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Zoolog Sci. 1994 Feb;11(1):153-6.

Nucleotide sequence of the proton ATPase beta-subunit homologue of the sea urchin
Hemicentrotus pulcherrimus.

Satoh Y(1), Shimizu T, Sendai Y, Kinoh H, Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan.

A cDNA with 2.3 kb encoding F1-F0 ATP synthase (proton ATPase) beta-subunit
homologue was isolated from a testis cDNA library of the sea urchin,
Hemicentrotus pulcherrimus. The deduced amino acid sequence consisted of 523
residues which contained a 19-residue amino-terminal signal peptide and a
8-residue glycine-rich consensus sequences. Analysis of poly(A) +RNA and/or total
RNA from H. pulcherrimus testis, ovary, unfertilized eggs, and embryos by
Northern blot revealed a 2.4 kb RNA.

PMID: 7765182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Clin Nucl Med. 1994 Jan;19(1):6-8.

Tc-99m MDP uptake in osteopoikilosis.

Mungovan JA(1), Tung GA, Lambiase RE, Noto RB, Davis RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Rhode Island Hospital, Brown University
School of Medicine, Providence.

A Tc-99m bone scan of a patient with classic roentgenographic findings of
osteopoikilosis revealed multiple foci of increased activity that corresponded to
many of the sclerotic foci on the roentgenograms. The authors presume that the
abnormal bone scan in this patient reflects active osseous remodeling, similar to
what has been observed in bone islands. Previous reports have emphasized the
critical role of the radionuclide bone scan for distinguishing osteopoikilosis
from osteoblastic bone metastases in patients with a known or suspected primary
malignancy. In a young patient, an abnormal bone scan does not exclude the
diagnosis of osteopoikilosis if the roentgenographic findings are characteristic 
of that entity.

PMID: 8137588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Urol. 1994 Jan;151(1):43-6.

P-glycoprotein expression in bladder cancer.

Park J(1), Shinohara N, Liebert M, Noto L, Flint A, Grossman HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Multi-drug resistance is a phenomenon by which tumor cells express resistance to 
a variety of chemically unrelated chemotherapeutic drugs. The classical form of
multi-drug resistance is mediated through the expression of P-glycoprotein, which
acts as an energy dependent drug efflux pump. P-glycoprotein expression was
evaluated in 29 cystectomy specimens from patients with bladder cancer with no
prior exposure to chemotherapeutic drugs, and in bladder biopsies from 9 subjects
before treatment with intravesical doxorubicin. Furthermore, the strategy of
circumvention of P-glycoprotein-mediated resistance using the combination of
doxorubicin and verapamil intravesically was tested in 5 patients. P-glycoprotein
was expressed in 75% of the cystectomy specimens. In the doxorubicin treated
patients no correlation was noted between P-glycoprotein expression on the
initial tumors and subsequent response to doxorubicin. The pilot trial of
verapamil and doxorubicin was well tolerated but did not suggest increased
efficacy of this combination. P-glycoprotein can be expressed on bladder cancer
cells without prior chemotherapy. The role of P-glycoprotein mediated multi-drug 
resistance in bladder cancer treatment failure remains to be defined.

PMID: 7902877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Dev Ophthalmol. 1994;26:25-33.

Population-based case-control study of cortical cataract in the Noto area, Japan.

Shibata T(1), Sasaki K, Katoh N, Hatano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa, Japan.

PMID: 7895878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Leukemia. 1994;8 Suppl 2:S71-6.

Expression and ATRA-driven modulation of adhesion molecules in acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Di Noto R(1), Schiavone EM, Ferrara F, Manzo C, Lo Pardo C, Del Vecchio L.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Oncologia Sperimentale C, Immunologia, Istituto Nazionale dei
Tumori di Napoli, Italy.

On fresh leukemic cells taken from 30 patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia 
(APL) the membrane expression of a series of adhesion molecules including beta 2 
integrins (CD11a/LFA-1, CD11b/Mac-1), selectin ligands (CD15/Le(x), CD15s/sLex)
and tyrosine-phosphatase isoforms (CD45RA, CD45R0) was analyzed. The expression
of these molecules was also studied in nine of these patients following the APL
cells' culture with and without all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). The fresh APL
promyelocytes expressed CD45RA and CD15s on their surface, while CD11a, CD11b,
CD15, and CD45R0 were constantly absent. In vitro treatment with ATRA
consistently increased the expression of CD15, CD11b, and CD45R0 on leukemic
promyelocytes; these changes were paralleled by a decrease of CD45RA display. The
expression of sialylated antigen CD15s was fully independent from CD15 suggesting
a differential enzymatic regulation within this selectin ligand system. ATRA was,
however, incapable of promoting the up-regulation of CD11a in APL. As a result,
asynchronous phenotype (CD11a-, CD11b+, CD15+, CD15s+/-, CD45RA-, CD45R0+) was
generated that is normally undetectable on maturing myeloid cells. In order to
provide a further control a case of acute agranulocytosis was also investigated, 
in which > 75% bone marrow cells were arrested at the promyelocyte stage; these
bone marrow cells showed a surface phenotype identical to non-leukemic
promyelocytes (CD11a+, CD11b+, CD15+, CD45R0+, CD45RA-) with a spontaneous
ability to differentiate in vivo towards the more mature stages of myeloid
differentiation. We therefore suggest that in fresh and ATRA-induced APL cells
distinct, regular phenotypic changes are identifiable that are probably
associated with t(15;17) and not seen in normal and activated bone marrow.

PMID: 7815843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Doc Ophthalmol. 1994-1995;88(3-4):277-83.

Population based cataract epidemiological surveys utilising a photodocumentation 
system.

Sasaki K(1), Kojima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa, Japan.

For the past 10 years, the authors have performed cataract epidemiological
surveys in several places. All of them were principally population based and
applied new types of photodocumentation systems which were developed by our
department. The survey places in Japan were Noto, our main survey field located
in the centre of the main island of Japan, one village in the subtropical island 
of Okinawa, a village in the northern island of Hokkaido and one village
(Bukittinggi) in West-Sumatra, Indonesia, very close to the equator. The survey
methods applied including an interview and ophthalmological examinations, were
almost identical in each place and the authors believe that the quality of the
examinations was at high level. The cataract classification and grading systems
applied were those established by the Japanese Co-operative Cataract Epidemiology
Study Group. At present, no significant prominent difference of cataract
prevalence and distribution of cataract types have been found in the three Japan 
survey places. The distribution of cataract types in the Indonesian subjects
however, was different from the Japanese subjects. The lens transparency ratio in
the Noto survey was quite similar to that of a Dutch study. From photographic
images of both opaque and transparent lenses much objective information which be 
cannot detected through naked eye observation is obtainable. Furthermore, data
obtained from the images are comparable because of their objectivity. Although
the methodology seems to be rather sophisticated and is costly, the above
advantages make it an important asset in this type of cataract research. For
example, lens transparency changes with ageing can be indicated quantitatively
from image analysis data.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7634996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Clin Exp Dermatol. 1994 Jan;19(1):36-42.

Transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease--report of two further cases
with an immunohistochemical analysis.

Aricò M(1), Noto G, Pravatà G, Bongiorno MR, Mirto S, Malizia G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Dermatologia Sperimentale, University of Palermo, Italy.

Transfusion-associated graft-vs.-host disease (tGVHD) is a severe disease usually
affecting immunocompromised hosts with haematological neoplasia. Two patients
with acute leukaemia are reported, who developed fatal tGVHD after blood
transfusions. Intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), vascular cell adhesion 
molecule 1 (VCAM-1) and endothelial leucocyte adhesion molecule 1 (ELAM-1)
expression and the CD4/CD8 ratio were assessed in lesional skin. ICAM-1 was
strongly expressed on epidermal keratinocytes and endothelial cells (EC) and
correlated with HLA-DR staining. VCAM-1 was strongly expressed on EC in the
superficial dermal vessels. ELAM-1 stained weakly on EC in some of the
superficial vessels. CD8+ lymphocytes showed prominent epidermotropism; the
CD4/CD8 ratio was 0.8 in case 1 and 1.2 in case 2. Infiltrating cells were
positive for CD3, CD11a, and CD18. Langerhans' cells were almost completely
absent. The dermatologist must be aware of the importance of such a rare,
unexpected and almost always fatal complication of blood transfusion, in order to
make an early diagnosis. Irradiation of blood products is the only effective way 
to prevent tGVHD in all subjects at risk.

PMID: 7508833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Kyobu Geka. 1993 Dec;46(13):1141-3.

[A successful repair of traumatic thoracic aortic injury and descending colon
perforation at acute phase].

[Article in Japanese]

Uwabe K(1), Fujimura M, Nishiya Y, Toshima M, Nagashima M, Miyazawa A, Noto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Toyama Prefectual Central
Hospital, Japan.

A 41-year-old man suffered from traffic accident was referred to us because of
chest and back pain. The CT examination showed periaortic hematoma and
aortography revealed aneurysmal formation at the distal site to the left
subclavian artery. We repaired the aortic injury with prosthetic graft at the
acute phase successfully. As the results of the conservative treatment of the
traumatic aortic injury are poor, we recommend operation at the acute phase.

PMID: 8258922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Pathol Res Pract. 1993 Dec;189(10):1149-53.

Analysis of prognostic factors in patients with resected peripheral T1
adenocarcinoma of the lung.

Lima C(1), Matsui K, Kitagawa M, Mizushima Y, Noto H, Miwa A.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pathology, Toyama Prefectural Central Hospital, Toyama,
Japan.

Prognostic factors in patients with surgically-treated peripheral T1 (< or = 3 cm
in greatest diameter) adenocarcinoma of the lung were analyzed in 45 cases.
Statistical difference in survival was observed between stages I + II and III +
IV (p < 0.05). However, neither sex, age, location of tumor, histological
subtype, histological grade, tumor ploidy, nor presence of central fibrosis was
of prognostic determinance. Our results suggest that only clinical stage is of
prognostic importance in surgically-treated peripheral T1 adenocarcinoma of the
lung.

PMID: 8183735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Hum Reprod. 1993 Dec;8(12):2115-8.

Mitochondrial distribution after fast embryo freezing.

Noto V(1), Campo R, Roziers P, Swinnen K, Vercruyssen M, Gordts S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Centre for Fertility Diagnostics and In Vitro Fertilization and Embryo
Transfer, Leuven, Belgium.

Mitochondrial distribution pattern after ultrarapid freezing in
dimethylsulphoxide was assessed in human multipronucleate zygotes, 2-cell and
4-cell stage embryos using rhodamine 123. The mitochondrial distribution pattern 
was evaluated at 37 degrees C after a 30 min incubation in rhodamine 123
solution, 4 h and 24 h after thawing. Non-frozen human unfertilized oocytes,
2-cell and 4-cell embryos used as a control showed a homogeneous distribution of 
mitochondria throughout the cytoplasm, while there was sequestration of
mitochondria from the cortex to the region surrounding the pronuclei in
multipronucleate zygotes. Morphologically intact multipronucleate zygotes, 2-cell
and 4-cell stage embryos after quick freeze-thawing showed the same mitochondrial
distribution pattern found in the unfrozen controls. Mitochondria exhibited a
typical severe aggregation (clumping) throughout the cytoplasm when non-viable
single blastomeres or embryos at thawing were exposed to rhodamine 123. Our study
indicates that quick freezing does not affect subcellular structures. The
well-organized and specific mitochondrial distribution appeared still to be
present after frozen storage, and subcellular structures seemed to be rather
resistant targets for cryo-injury.

PMID: 8150913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1993 Nov;29(5 Pt 1):778-80.

Skin involvement in giant lymph node hyperplasia (Castleman's disease).

Kubota Y(1), Noto S, Takakuwa T, Tadokoro M, Mizoguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, St. Marianna University School of Medicine,
Kanagawa, Japan.

PMID: 8227551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 1993 Nov;29A(11):862-6.

Inhibition of cell growth by bafilomycin A1, a selective inhibitor of vacuolar
H(+)-ATPase.

Ohkuma S(1), Shimizu S, Noto M, Sai Y, Kinoshita K, Tamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kanazawa
University, Ishikawa, Japan.

Bafilomycin A1, a potent selective inhibitor of vacuolar H(+)-ATPase, inhibited
the growth of a variety of cultured cells dose-dependently, including golden
hamster embryo and NIH-3T3 fibroblasts, whether or not they were transformed, and
PC12 and HeLa cells. The concentration of bafilomycin A1 for 50% inhibition of
cell growth ranged from 10 to 50 nM. The dose response was nearly parallel with
that of the bafilomycin A1-induced lysosomal pH increase. The degree of pH
increase for growth inhibition produced by bafilomycin A1 was similar to that
produced by NH4Cl in which little difference was recognized in effect among cell 
types.

PMID: 8167902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Anticancer Res. 1993 Nov-Dec;13(6B):2377-81.

Tumor-associated angiogenesis in prostate cancer.

Fregene TA(1), Khanuja PS, Noto AC, Gehani SK, Van Egmont EM, Luz DA, Pienta KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Meyer L. Prentis Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201.

All solid tumors require the induction of new blood vessels to grow. To begin to 
study this phenomenon in prostate cancer, we investigated the intensity of tumor 
associated angiogenesis in prostate non malignant and malignant tissue.
Angiogenesis was measured by quantitating microvessels in a total of 67 patients:
23 non malignant biopsy specimens, and 34 malignant specimens from patients who
had undergone prostatectomy. Angiogenic activity in prostatic cancer
(prostatectomy) tissue (utilizing Factor VIII staining) was then correlated with 
pathological staging (Whitmore-Jewitt). Overall there appeared to be a trend of
increasing microvessel count (MVC) from benign through the advancing stages of
prostate cancer. Based on mean microvessel counts we were able to distinguish
stage D from all other pathological stages (p = 0.004 between stages C and D).
There was, however, no statistically significant difference between stage B and
C. We conclude that tumor associated angiogenesis in prostate cancer may have
both clinical and pathological significance in prostate cancer.

PMID: 7510938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Cancer Res. 1993 Jul 15;53(14):3394-8.

Nuclear matrix proteins in normal and breast cancer cells.

Khanuja PS(1), Lehr JE, Soule HD, Gehani SK, Noto AC, Choudhury S, Chen R, Pienta
KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Meyer L. Prentis Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201.

The progression from normal breast epithelium to a malignant phenotype may depend
on changes in genetic events as well as failure of host mechanisms. Intermediate 
biomarkers are needed to more effectively identify malignant progression as well 
as to develop the potential for more specific treatments and prevention
strategies. The nuclear matrix is the RNA-protein network which forms the
skeleton of the nucleus and participates in DNA organization as well as multiple 
cellular functions. Nuclear matrix proteins have been demonstrated to be tissue
and cell type specific as well as to reflect the state of cell differentiation
and/or transformation. We prepared nuclear matrices from normal and cancer breast
tissue from 10 patients with infiltrating ductal carcinoma of the breast as well 
as the MCF-10 mortal, immortal, and transfected breast cell lines. Nuclear
matrices derived from normal human breast tissue and tumor tissue share common
nuclear matrix proteins as well as demonstrate specific changes which appear to
occur with the acquisition of the cancer phenotype. The MCF-10 cell lines
demonstrate a phenotype that is intermediate between the normal and cancer
tissue. These data suggest that the nuclear matrix may be an important biomarker 
in the pathogenesis of breast cancer.

PMID: 8324750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. ASAIO J. 1993 Jul-Sep;39(3):M242-6.

Immunologic considerations in the use of cultured porcine hepatocytes as a hybrid
artificial liver. Anti-porcine hepatocyte human serum.

Takahashi M(1), Ishikura H, Takahashi C, Nakajima Y, Matsushita M, Matsue H, Sato
K, Sato K, Noto H, Taguchi K, et al.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo, 
Japan.

Cultured porcine hepatocytes with reasonable metabolic functions are a promising 
bioreactor for a hybrid artificial liver in the treatment of liver failure. A
cytotoxic human serum (t-serum) against cultured porcine hepatocytes was
accidentally discovered during preliminary experiments, however, which prompted
the authors to study the mechanism of the cytotoxicity and the frequency of
occurrence of the cytotoxic sera. Among 103 individual sera examined, seven
(6.8%) sera showed cytotoxicity to cultured porcine hepatocytes. T-serum heated
at 56 degrees C for 30 min completely lost its cytotoxic activity, but the
inactivated cytotoxicity was restored by the addition of rabbit complement to the
inactivated t-serum. IgM-depleted t-serum produced by 2-mercaptoethanol treatment
abolished the cytotoxicity to porcine hepatocytes. The cytotoxic reactions were
therefore thought to be mediated by IgM capable of complement activation.
Although IgM binding to porcine hepatocytes was also seen in nontoxic sera, the
IgM did not activate complement. This implies differences in hepatocyte surface
antigens recognized by IgM from t- and nontoxic sera. Before clinical application
of a hybrid artificial liver using cultured porcine hepatocytes, detection of
cytotoxic human IgM against porcine hepatocytes is necessary, and the means of
eliminating the cytotoxic IgM from the hybrid artificial liver system, or of
inactivating complement in the system, will be desirable in cases positive for
cytotoxic IgM.

PMID: 8268536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Methods Inf Med. 1993 Apr;32(3):192-4.

Checkup interval and cancers in automated multiphasic health testing and
services.

Hinohara S(1), Takahashi T, Uemura H, Noto T, Shinozuka T, Kinoshita H, Matsuyama
M, Suzuki S, Osamura Y, Oogushi Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Tokai University, Kanagawa, Japan.

The purpose of this study was to disclose which types of cancer and how many
persons with cancer were detected among the AMHTS examinees of our AMHTS center
by using the hospital information retrieval system, and to study the relationship
between cancer and the number of examinees, checkup intervals, and frequency in
AMHTS. The examinees who had checkups more than twice were divided into three
groups based on their checkup intervals: within one year, one to two years, and
over two years. The relationship between cancer ratios and checkup intervals was 
evaluated in each group of examinees. In those having checkups within one year
and from one to two years the cancer rate was 2.9 patients per 1,000 persons.
However, in those having checkups after a two-year period or longer, the cancer
rate was 4.3, clearly greater than the rate of the other two groups.

PMID: 8341146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Br J Urol. 1993 Feb;71(2):172-5.

Metabolic complications of the urinary intestinal diversion: ileo-caecal bladder 
compared with ileal conduit.

Olivo G(1), Biasioli S, Bonciarelli M, Noto L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, Legnago General Hospital, Italy.

Five patients with an ileal conduit and 5 with an ileo-caecal bladder substitute 
have been studied metabolically. All had undergone cystectomy for infiltrating
carcinoma and they formed 2 homogeneous groups in terms of age and follow-up.
Function in both groups was within normal limits but closer examination of
patients with an ileo-caecal bladder revealed mild functional damage as shown by 
reduced creatinine secretion, a lower level of bicarbonate and lower urinary acid
valency secretion. It was concluded that the ileal conduit is more satisfactory
from a metabolic point of view than the ileo-caecal bladder, which requires
closer follow-up and treatment with bicarbonates if necessary.

PMID: 8384913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Skin Pharmacol. 1993;6(1):52-5.

Lack of antiandrogenic effects of topical bifonazole on sebaceous glands and
hairs in the hamster flank organ.

Aricò M(1), Noto G, Pravatà G, Bongiorno MR.

Author information: 
(1)Sezione di Dermatologia Sperimentale, Policlinico P. Giaccone, Università di
Palermo, Italia.

The activity of topically applied bifonazole was evaluated in vivo in the three
androgen-dependent structures of the hamster flank organ, i.e. the pigmented
spot, sebaceous glands and hairs. Topical bifonazole in our experience did not
demonstrate any morphological effect on sebaceous gland and hair even when
applied in the dosage of 3 mg/cm2/day. On the basis of our morphometric results
we can conclude that topically applied bifonazole does not interfere with
cutaneous androgen metabolic transformations in the pilosebaceous unit of the
flank organ.

PMID: 8489775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1993 Jan;41(1):111-4.

[Case report of congenital bronchial cyst in the subsuperior segment of the right
lung].

[Article in Japanese]

Uchita S(1), Noto H, Nagashima M, Toshima M, Fujimura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Cardiovascular Surgery, Toyama Prefectual Central
Hospital, Japan.

A fifty-five-year-old man revealed abnormal shadow on chest X-P. Congenital
Bronchial Cyst (CBC) is believed to be caused by the abnormal budding process
during the early development of the foregut and after born result in formation of
noninfected cysts in the lung. In this case, CBC was lined by columnarciliated
epithelium and contained cartilages and bronchial mucous glands in their wall.
They were located along the tracheobronchial tree and cystgraphy presented
dumbbell-like change of cysts that were seen during the development stage. These 
findings support the past reports radiographically that CBC may result from
occlusion of the proximal side of bronchus during the early development by
unknown mechanism.

PMID: 8459129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Padiatr Padol. 1993;28(3):77-80.

[N-acetyl-beta-glucosaminidase (beta-NAG) in urine: a parameter for early
detection of diabetogenic nephropathy in childhood].

[Article in German]

Maisant A(1), Sitzmann FC, Ströhlein S.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Universität des Saarlandes,
Homburg/Saar, Bundesrepublik Deutschland.

N-Acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase (NAG) can be found in kidney in high activity. By
determination of this enzyme activity in urine nephropathies can be recognized
reliably. We have measured this lysosomal enzyme in the urine (Colorimetric
method by Noto) of 206 children suffering from diabetes mellitus to find out
whether diabetic nephropathy can be detected as soon as possible. Additional beta
2-microglobulin (ELISA) was measured in urine, which is reabsorbed nearly
complete in the tubulus. The several proteins in urine were identified by
SDS-PAGE. A high excretion of beta-NAG was found in children and adolescents with
a poor metabolic control (elevated HbA1c). There was no correlation between NAG
activity, duration of the diabetes and the age of the children. An elevated
excretion of beta-2-microglobuline could be found only in seven children with a
duration of the diabetes about six years; their HbA1c levels were high. The
SDS-PAGE showed a pattern of glomerular protein excretion according to the
duration of the diabetes. However there was no significant correlation to the
metabolic control. Only in four children we ascertained mixed proteinuria. The
increasing levels of urinary NAG may represent the increasing severity of
nephrotic damage by diabetes. The estimation of NAG levels in urine would seem to
be reliable in the early detection of diabetic angiopathy also and may serve as
an index of diabetic control independent of blood sugar levels.

PMID: 8367178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Int Urol Nephrol. 1993;25(3):279-83.

Bladder outflow after radical prostatectomy.

Montorsi F(1), Bergamaschi F, Guazzoni G, Noto O, Fenice O, Rigatti P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Institute S. Raffaele, University of Milan 
School of Medicine, Italy.

Postoperative bladder outflow was assessed in 150 patients subjected to radical
retropubic prostatectomy for clinically localized prostate cancer. The overall
mean (+/- S.E.M.) postoperative peak flow rates and residual urine volumes were
16.9 +/- 1.3 ml/s and 11.4 +/- 2.1 ml. According to flow nomograms, 22% of the
patients were still obstructed postoperatively due to stricture of either the
anastomosis or the urethra (12%), or to partial bladder denervation (10%).
Scoring of subjective symptoms was not reliable in detecting postoperative
outflow obstruction, while uroflowmetry with flow nomograms identified all
obstructed cases. Radical retropubic prostatectomy can induce both mechanical and
functional alterations of the distal urinary tract and a strict assessment of
postoperative bladder outflow is recommended.

PMID: 8225829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1992 Dec;168(4):621-2.

Effect of methylene blue on the vesicourethral function in the rats.

Nishizawa O(1), Kawahara T, Shimoda N, Suzuki K, Fujieda N, Kudo T, Suzuki T,
Noto H, Harada T, Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine.

The bladder and urethral activities during the rhythmic bladder contractions were
evaluated before and after the intraarterial administration of methylene blue,
which prevents the activation of soluble guanylate cyclase. The methylene blue
produced an increase in the bladder activity and a decrease in the urethral
smooth muscle relaxant response induced with bladder contraction. The
L-arginine/nitric oxide pathway seems to modulate the vesicourethral function.

PMID: 1306609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Nihon Rinsho. 1992 Nov;50(11):2816-23.

[Structures and functions of adhesion molecules--involvement of adhesion
molecules in the pathogenesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Takahashi K(1), Noto K, Okumura K, Kira S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University School of Medicine.

Previous studies have revealed that adhesion molecules are involved in immune
responses, such as the interaction between T cells and antigen presenting cells. 
Recent investigations demonstrated that one of these molecules, integrins, which 
was concerned with cell-cell adhesion and cell-extracellular matrix proteins, was
prominently expressed on lymphocytes and neutrophils in inflammatory diseases. In
addition, administration of monoclonal antibodies against integrins in vivo
abrogated the inflammatory responses completely in rats. These findings suggest
that adhesion molecules are involved in not only immune responses but also in the
pathogenesis of inflammatory diseases. As shown here, integrins also play an
important role in the metastasis of small cell lung cancers.

PMID: 1287255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Endocrinol Jpn. 1992 Oct;39(5):421-9.

Characterization of the insulin resistance in liver cirrhosis: a comparison with 
non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus.

Miyamoto I(1), Miyakoshi H, Nagai Y, Ohsawa K, Nishimura Y, Noto Y, Kobayashi K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Kanazawa
University, Japan.

To characterize the mechanisms of insulin resistance in liver cirrhosis (LC), we 
estimated the peripheral tissue sensitivity and responsiveness to insulin using
the euglycemic clamp technique and determined the insulin binding to erythrocytes
in patients with compensated LC as well as in patients with non-insulin dependent
diabetes mellitus (NIDDM). The insulin dose-response curves of the glucose
metabolic clearance rates (MCR) were shifted to the right and downward both in
patients with LC and NIDDM, indicating a reduced sensitivity and responsiveness
to insulin. In the cirrhotics, MCR at the maximally effective insulin level, an
index of insulin responsiveness, was correlated with fasting insulin levels (r = 
-0.57, P < 0.01) and sigma BG in 75 gOGTT (r = -0.43, P < 0.05), but no
correlations were found between them and the diabetics. Although specific insulin
bindings to erythrocytes were significantly lower in patients both with LC and
NIDDM, Scatchard analysis revealed a significant decrease in the number of
insulin receptors in the cirrhotics, and a decrease in the empty-site affinity in
the diabetics. These findings suggest that insulin resistance in LC consists of a
combination of binding and postbinding defects. The latter defect may be caused
by basal hyperinsulinemia and contribute to the development of glucose
intolerance. Although binding and postbinding abnormalities are also found in
NIDDM, the mechanisms of insulin resistance in LC and NIDDM may be different.

PMID: 1478183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. G Chir. 1992 Oct;13(10):489-92.

[Conservative elective surgery in kidney neoplasms].

[Article in Italian]

Ronchi F(1), Noto O, Stagni S, Innocenti L, D'Aquino N, Paganelli M.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di Anatomia Chirurgica, Università degli Studi Milano.

After the good results of "necessary" conservative surgery in the treatment of
kidney neoplasms (bilateral neoplasms, congenital, acquired or functional
solitary kidney), conservative surgery itself has been employed as elective
treatment in selected cases presenting without the overmentioned problems. The
authors report two cases of elective conservative surgery in kidney neoplasm with
good results after 18 and 24 months.

PMID: 1467149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Tokai J Exp Clin Med. 1992 Oct;17(3-4):139-44.

Two cases of adenolipoma of the breast.

Yasuda S(1), Kubota M, Noto T, Mukai M, Tokuda Y, Hanaue H, Tajima T, Mitomi T,
Ueyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Surgery, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa,
Japan.

Adenolipoma of the breast is a rare tumor. Two cases are described here and the
literature is reviewed. Case 1 was a 52-year-old woman who had a 3-cm-long
elastic hard tumor in the left breast. Case 2 was a 40-year-old woman who had a
3-cm-long elastic soft tumor in the left breast. In each case, mammography
revealed well demarcated soft tissue density. Ultrasonography demonstrated well
defined tumors composed of echogenic and sonolucent areas. These tumors were
easily enucleated at surgery. Histologically, the tumors consisted of mammary
ducts, fibrous stroma and adipose tissue, findings which are characteristic of
mammary adenolipoma. An adenolipoma may still be misdiagnosed as a fibroadenoma
or a fibrocystic disease. Characteristic findings of mammography and
ultrasonography are emphasized.

PMID: 1300672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Minerva Pediatr. 1992 Oct;44(10):507-9.

[Macleod's syndrome as a cause of recurrent pneumonia in a child].

[Article in Italian]

Di Gesù F(1), Orsini S, Di Noto V.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Fisiopatologia Respiratoria, USL 58-Ospedale Civico, Palermo.

Macleod's syndrome is a rare cause of recurrent pneumonia in children. A case
report is described and the diagnostic utility of chest roentgenogram and CAT is 
emphasized.

PMID: 1287436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Clin Exp Dermatol. 1992 Sep;17(5):339-41.

Localized crusted scabies in the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.

Aricò M(1), Noto G, La Rocca E, Pravatà G, Bivona A.

Author information: 
(1)Sezione di Dermatologia Sperimentale, University of Palermo, Italy.

Crusted scabies (CrS) is an uncommon occurrence among patients with AIDS. Indeed 
to date only five cases have been described, all with widespread lesions. A case 
of localized CrS appearing as a yellowish and crusted plaque on the second right 
toe is reported in a woman with AIDS. Scraping off the verrucous surface, as well
as punch-biopsy revealed many mites within the horny layer. The infestation is
related to the cutaneous immune response and thus CrS should be considered an
opportunistic infestation in AIDS. The importance of the early diagnosis of CrS
in order to prevent disseminated lesions and involvement of other health-care
workers is underlined.

PMID: 1458639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1992 Sep;43(1):215-21.

Effects of L-threo- and erythro-3,4-dihydroxyphenylserine on learning performance
and concentrations of brain noradrenaline and its metabolites in rats.

Harada H(1), Noto T, Tsuji M, Taga C, Hashimoto H, Nakajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
Japan.

Effects of L-threo and L-erythro-3,4-dihydroxyphenylserine [DOPS, precursor amino
acids for noradrenaline (NA)] on the learning performance in a maze paradigm
designed to model on the water maze paradigm using a multicomputerized behavioral
analysis system were studied. A marked facilitation of learning performance was
observed in rats after an intraventricular injection of 5 micrograms L-threo-DOPS
(the s-NA precursor), and this effect was inhibited by a simultaneous
administration of 1 or 2 micrograms propranolol (a beta-adrenergic antagonist).
As concentrations of brain NA, 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol, and
normethanephrine were increased by the injection of 5 micrograms L-threo-DOPS,
the effect seemed to be derived from activation of beta-adrenoceptors in the CNS 
by the formed s-NA. On the other hand, an intraventricular injection of 5
micrograms L-erythro-DOPS (the r-NA precursor) attenuated the learning
performance, and this effect was probably caused by the formed r-NA from
L-erythro-DOPS.

PMID: 1409807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Jpn Heart J. 1992 Sep;33(5):679-91.

Effect of anoxic preperfusion on ischemic myocardial injury in isolated rat
hearts.

Noto T(1), Miura T, Urabe K, Endoh A, Tsuchida A, Iimura O.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical College, Japan.

Anoxic perfusion prior to sustained ischemia (anoxic preperfusion), reportedly
improves postischemic functional recovery of the heart, but its mechanism has not
been well understood. The present study aimed to characterize the
cardioprotective effects of anoxic preperfusion and its relationship to
extracellular Ca++ levels. Following 10 min of aerobic perfusion, isolated rat
hearts were assigned to a 10 min aerobic perfusion or to a 10 min anoxic
perfusion. The hearts were then subjected to 30 min of global ischemia and 30 min
of aerobic reperfusion. When the perfusate-free Ca++ concentration was 2.0 mM,
postischemic recovery of left ventricular developed pressure was significantly
improved by anoxic preperfusion (91.9 +/- 2.9% of baseline value vs. 50.5 +/-
12.9% after 30 min reperfusion in the controls). However, the improvement of
postischemic ventricular function by anoxic preperfusion was abolished when
perfusate Ca++ was reduced to 1.0 mM and the contractile function was rather
suppressed during early reperfusion by anoxic preperfusion when the Ca++ level
was 0.7 mM (87.5 +/- 11.8% vs. 115.6 +/- 13.9% after 10 min of reperfusion). On
the other hand, lactate accumulation during the global ischemia was significantly
less in anoxic preperfused hearts compared with untreated hearts both when
perfusate Ca++ was 0.7 mM (61.3 +/- 5.1 vs. 85.9 +/- 6.8 mumol/g dry) and when it
was 2.0 mM (43.8 +/- 2.0 vs. 140.3 +/- 14.1 mumol/g dry). The amount of myoglobin
released after global ischemia was not different between untreated and anoxic
preperfused hearts regardless of the perfusate Ca++ level. The results suggest
that anoxic preperfusion does not reduce ischemic myocardial necrosis, but it
attenuates myocardial stunning. That effect of anoxic preperfusion on the
stunning is dependent on the extracellular Ca++ level and is not totally
explained by suppression of ischemia-induced lactate accumulation.

PMID: 1289598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 1992 Aug;19(10 Suppl):1557-9.

[Perfusion patterns of 99mTc-MAA injected into subcutaneously implanted
port--evaluation with SPECT].

[Article in Japanese]

Yasuda S(1), Noto T, Ikeda M, Mukai M, Ishida H, Nakazaki H, Tajima T, Mitomi T, 
Ootaki M, Kobayashi S, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Second Dept. of Surgery, Tokai University School of Medicine.

Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) was performed in conjunction
with 99mTc-macroaggregated albumin (Tc-MAA) hepatic arterial perfusion
scintigraphy, and Tc-MAA activity was measured quantitatively. Three patients
with colorectal liver metastasis were examined. In the first patient, the ratio
of radioactivity in the area of the tumor was 3 times that in the surrounding
liver. In the second patient, the right hepatic artery was ligated and Tc-MAA was
injected into the left hepatic artery. Radioactivity in the right lobe was as
much as in the left lobe. In the third patient, the left hepatic artery was
ligated and Tc-MAA was injected into the right hepatic artery. Radioactivity was 
higher in the left lobe than in the right lobe. Previous reports suggested that
Tc-MAA distribution accurately reflects the drug distribution injected into a
regional blood supply. SPECT is useful in quantitative evaluation of Tc-MAA
distribution.

PMID: 1530307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Comp Biochem Physiol B. 1992 Aug;102(4):691-700.

Sperm-activating peptide type-V (SAP-V), a fifth member of the sperm-activating
peptide family, purified from the egg-conditioned media of the heart urchin
Brissus agassizii.

Yoshino K(1), Takao T, Shimonishi Y, Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan.

1. A novel type of sperm-activating peptide named sperm-activating peptide type-V
(SAP-V) was isolated from the egg-conditioned media (egg jelly) of the heart
urchin Brissus agassizii and the primary structure of the peptide was determined 
by fast atom bombardment mass spectrometry as follows:
Gly-Cys-Glu-Gly-Leu-Phe-His-Gly-Met-Gly-Asn-Cys. 2. SAP-V and [Met(O)9]SAP-V
stimulated the respiration of B. agassizii spermatozoa with half-maximal
concentrations of 0.5 and 0.3 nM, respectively. However, half-maximal stimulation
of the sperm respiration required 40 nM of S-carboxymethylated SAP-V. 3. SAP-V
induced significant increases in the cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP levels in B.
agassizii spermatozoa in a concentration-dependent manner. 4. The addition of
SAP-V to B. agassizii spermatozoa resulted in a mobility shift of a major sperm
protein (mol. wt from 133,000 to 129,000) on sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gels.

PMID: 1395504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Comp Biochem Physiol B. 1992 Aug;102(4):679-90.

The relationship between amino acid sequences of sperm-activating peptides and
the taxonomy of echinoids.

Suzuki N(1), Yoshino K.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan.

PMID: 1395503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Smooth Muscle Res. 1992 Aug;28(4):139-51.

The effect of alpha-2 agonists and antagonists on the upper urinary tract of the 
rat.

Harada T(1), Kigure T, Yoshida K, Nishizawa O, Noto H, Tsuchida S, Watarai J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine, Japan.

We examined the effect of the selective alpha-2 agonist dexmedetomidine and
antagonist atipamizole on the upper urinary tract, renal pelvic pressure and
ureteral peristalsis. Experiments were performed on twelve Sprague-Dawley female 
rats weighing 275-323 grams, with administration of urethane (1.2 micrograms/kg).
Ventilatory support was provided through a tracheotomy. A continuous normal
saline infusion was maintained through the left iliac vein at a rate of 2.5
ml/hr. Arterial pressure was measured at the left iliac artery, which was
cannulated with a PE-100 tube connected to a pressure transducer. A mid-line
incision was then made from the xyphoid to the symphysis to expose the left
kidney, both ureters, and the bladder. The bladder was intubated and drained to
avoid bladder pressure increase. Measurements of urine output rate were made from
the right ureter and renal pelvic or ureteral pressure was measured using a
nephrostomy placed into the pelvis. A ureterostomy was produced by introducing
another catheter, into the upper segment of the left ureter for ureteral pressure
measurements. The rats were divided into two groups as follows: 1)
dexmedetomidine group (n = 6); injected intravenously with 2 micrograms/kg of
dexmedetomidine dissolved in 0.5 ml saline. 2) atipamizole group (n = 6);
injected intravenously with 2 micrograms/kg of atipamizole dissolved in 0.5 ml
saline. Ureteral peristaltic frequency, baseline pressure, and contraction
amplitude were compared before, after, and between the bolus injections of 2
micrograms/kg dexmedetomidine (n = 6) or 2 micrograms/kg atipamizole (n = 6) in
0.5 ml saline. The results showed that dexmedetomidine at 2 micrograms/kg
produced a significant decrease in arterial pressure and an increase in urine
output from 1.2 + 0.8 to 3.6 + 1.2 ml/min. There was no effect on the baseline
pelvic pressure of 6.8 + 1.2 cmH2O or amplitude of the renal pelvic contractions:
3.5 + 0.6 cmH2O. The frequency of pelvic contractions was reduced from 0.37 +
0.03 to 0.27 + 0.02 Hz. Atipamizole at 2 micrograms/kg produced a significant
reduction in urine flow rate of 1.1 + 0.8 to 0.6 + 0.2 ml/min. Atipamizole also
showed no significant effects on baseline pelvic pressure or frequency, but
increased the amplitude of pelvic contractions from control values of 3.0 + 0.9
to 3.4 + 0.9 cmH2O. Dexmedetomidine reduced both the baseline ureteral pressure
of 8.5 + 2.4 and peristaltic contraction pressure of 11.5 + 2.3 cmH2O in 4/6
rats. Atipamizole reduced base-line ureteral pressure and increased peristaltic
rate.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 1363630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 1992 Jul;19(7):970-4.

[Combined therapy with 5-FU and levamisole].

[Article in Japanese]

Mitomi T(1), Noto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Japan.

Levamisole, which had been used as an insecticide for more than 20 years, was
reported to have anticancer effects as an immunopotentiator. Among many clinical 
trials with this agent, Moertel and his colleagues reported excellent results in 
Dukes-C colon cancer patients treated with 5-FU and levamisole in 1990. In this
paper, results of our animal experiments would be reported in conjunction with
the review of the recent clinical trials.

PMID: 1626953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Hinyokika Kiyo. 1992 Jul;38(7):767-73.

[Comparative study on nephrotoxicity of ionic and non-ionic contrast agents for
drip infused urography].

[Article in Japanese]

Sugaya K(1), Nishizawa O, Noto H, Suzuki T, Shimoda N, Miyagata S, Harada T,
Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine.

The effects on renal function of an ionic and hyperosmolaric contrast agent
(diatrizoate) and a non-ionic and slightly hypertonic agent (iohexol) for drip
infused urography were compared on 60 patients with normal renal function. Urine 
samples were collected before and 30 minutes after drip infusion of contrast
agent, and analyzed for albumin (ALB), gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (gamma-GTP),
N-acetyl-beta-glucosaminidase (NAG), beta 2 microglobulin (beta 2MG) and
creatinine (CRE). The urinary excretion of proteins and enzymes was compared with
urinary CRE. gamma-GTP, NAG and beta 2MG increased significantly after infusion
of diatrizoate. gamma-GTP and beta 2MG increased significantly after infusion of 
iohexol. Excretion of ALB, gamma-GTP, NAG and beta 2MG was significantly higher
after infusion of diatrizoate than after iohexol. The urinary concentration of
CRE was significantly lower after infusion of diatrizoate than after iohexol. The
degree of renal damage after urography was no related to the appearance of
allergy to the contrast agent or age of patient. Therefore, the non-ionic and
slightly hyperosmolaric iohexol may be less toxic to the kidneys than the ionic
and hypertonic diatrizoate. This nephrotoxicity after drip infused urography is
thought to be related mainly to the osmolarity of contrast agent.

PMID: 1524001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1992 Jul;83(7):1094-100.

[Vesical ultrasonography and internal examination of female patients with
urethral syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Sugaya K(1), Nishizawa O, Noto H, Tsukada T, Kohama T, Shimoda N, Wakayama Y,
Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine.

Transabdominal ultrasonography of the bladder and internal examination were
performed in 80 female patients without pyuria. They were divided into 3 groups: 
urethral syndrome with trigonitis (49 cases), asymptomatic trigonitis (16 cases) 
and normal bladder (15 cases) by cystoscopy. Ultrasonography of trigonitis with
or without symptoms showed focal dilation of the submucosal low echo zone and
mucosal irregularity around the bladder neck. On the sagittal view, the
thicknesses from the surface of mucosa to that of muscle layer within 2 cm from
the bladder neck were 4 +/- 1 mm (mean +/- standard deviation) in the group with 
urethral syndrome and in that with asymptomatic trigonitis, and 3 +/- 1 mm in the
normal bladder group. Mucosa of the trigonitis with or without symptom is
patients with significantly thicker than that of those with normal bladder (p
less than 0.01). On internal examination, tenderness at the upper frontal wall of
the vagina was present in 10 of 11 cases (91%) with urethral syndrome, in 2 of 8 
cases (25%) with asymptomatic trigonitis and in one of 9 cases (11%) with normal 
bladder. There was a significant difference (p less than 0.005) between the
degree of inflammation and the number of cases with tenderness at the frontal
wall of the vagina. From these results, transabdominal ultrasonographic
measurement of mucosal thickness around the bladder neck and internal examination
for tenderness at the frontal wall of vagina are thought to be useful methods for
diagnosis and follow-up of urethral syndrome.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1507726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. ASAIO J. 1992 Jul-Sep;38(3):M468-72.

Does a porcine hepatocyte hybrid artificial liver prolong the survival time of
anhepatic rabbits?

Takahashi M(1), Matsue H, Matsushita M, Sato K, Nishikawa M, Koike M, Noto H,
Nakajima Y, Uchino J, Komai T, et al.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo, 
Japan.

To examine cultured porcine hepatocytes as a bioreactor of a hybrid artificial
liver (HAL) in rabbits, a small version of a multiplated HAL was manufactured. In
vitro and ex vivo studies were performed to evaluate the small HAL. The HAL
consisted of 50 glass plates (10 x 5 x 0.04 cm each) on which porcine hepatocytes
were cultured in a monolayer at confluent cell density. After 2 days of standard 
cultivation, the glass plates with hepatocytes were placed in the module and were
used for studies. The module contains about 5 grams of hepatocytes (1/10 of 2
kg.bw rabbit liver). After undergoing perfusion culture for 5 days, the HAL
showed satisfactory hepatic function. Glucose and urea were synthesized at the
rate of 4.06 +/- 0.7 mg/module/hr and 0.62 +/- 0.09 mg/module/hr, respectively,
and loaded ammonia was metabolized at the rate of 1.29 +/- 0.26 mg/module/hr. Ex 
vivo extracorporeal plasma perfusion studies revealed that the module with
cultured porcine hepatocytes, which were heterogeneous to rabbits, showed a
tendency to prolong the survival time of anhepatic rabbits. These results
indicate that the HAL system, using multiplated porcine hepatocyte monolayers, is
a promising artificial liver support system for clinical cases.

PMID: 1457904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Eur J Biochem. 1992 Jun 15;206(3):887-93.

Two classes of receptor specific for sperm-activating peptide III in sand-dollar 
spermatozoa.

Yoshino K(1), Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan.

We characterized receptors specific for sperm-activating peptide III (SAP-III:
DSDSAQNLIQ) in spermatozoa of the sand dollar, Clypeaster japonicus, using both
binding and cross-linking techniques. Analyses of the data obtained from the
equilibrium binding of a radiolabeled SAP-III analogueto C. japonicus
spermatozoa, using Klotz, Scatchard and Hill plots, showed the presence of two
classes of receptors specific for SAP-III in the spermatozoa. One of the
receptors (high-affinity) had a Kd of 3.4 nM and 3.4 x 10(4) binding
sites/spermatozoon. The other receptor (low-affinity) had a Kd of 48 nM, with 6.1
x 10(4) binding sites/spermatozoon. The Kd of the high-affinity receptor was
comparable to the median effective concentration of the
intracellular-pH-increasing activity of SAP-III and that of the low-affinity
receptor was comparable to the median effective concentration of the
cellular-cGMP-elevating activity of the peptide. In addition, Scatchard and Hill 
plots of the data suggested the existence of positive cooperativity between the
high-affinity members. Similar results were also obtained from a binding
experiment using a sperm-membrane fraction prepared from C. japonicus
spermatozoa. The incubation of intact spermatozoa or sperm plasma membranes with 
the radioiodinated SAP-III analogue and a chemical cross-linking reagent,
disuccinimidyl suberate, resulted in the radiolabeling of three proteins with
molecular masses of 126, 87 and 64 kDa, estimated by SDS/PAGE under reducing
conditions.

PMID: 1318839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Nihon Naika Gakkai Zasshi. 1992 Jun 10;81(6):908-10.

[A case of common bile duct neoplasm with carcinosarcoma of the gallbladder].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakazawa T, Sotoyama K, Tsuchiya N, Naito Y, Honma J, Noto M, Nakazawa H, Takada 
I, Kaneyama M, Nasu Y.

PMID: 1402245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Hinyokika Kiyo. 1992 Jun;38(6):731-5.

[Effects of Tsumura Chorei-to and Tsumura Chorei-to-go-shimotsu-to on patients
with urethral syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Sugaya K(1), Nishizawa O, Noto H, Sato K, Sato K, Shimoda N, Otomo R, Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine.

Tsumura Chorei-to or Tsumura Chorei-to-go-shimotsu-to, was administered to 71
female patients with urethral syndrome 2.5 g three times a day for four weeks.
Total efficacy rate of Tsumura Chorei-to in 34 cases was 71%. Tsumura Chorei-to
was effective against pollakisuria, miction pain or discomfort, sense of residual
urine and lower abdominal discomfort. Total efficacy rate of Tsumura
Chorei-to-go-shimotsu-to in 37 cases was 57%. Tsumura Chorei-to-go-shimotsu-to
was effective against dysuria, sense of residual urine and lower abdominal
discomfort. Uutoward effect rates of Tsumura Chorei-to and Tsumura
Chorei-to-go-shimotsu-to were 6% and 14%, respectively. Many of the untoward
effects of these two drugs were epigastral discomfort. These two drugs are
thought to be effective on patients with urethral syndrome.

PMID: 1632333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1992 Jun;83(6):808-11.

[Micturition control].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto H.

PMID: 1501387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 1992 Jun;2(3):162-4.

A rare complication due to sulfuric acid ingestion.

Tamisani AM(1), Di Noto C, Di Rovasenda E.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Emergency and Pediatric Surgery Department, Giannina Gaslini
Institute, Genoa, Italy.

The authors present a case of pyloric and duodenal obstruction in an 8-year-old
child, resulting from accidental ingestion of sulfuric acid. A marked pyloric and
duodenal cicatrizing stenosis resulting from ingestion of sulfuric acid is seen
infrequently, especially in pediatric age. Sulfuric acid produces a coagulation
necrosis of the gastric mucosa and submucosa, and the process may involve the
entire thickness of the gastric wall, with subsequent ulceration and fibrosis.
This dynamic pathophysiologic event imposes postponement of surgical intervention
because of various time length between ingestion of acid and onset of gastric
outlet obstruction (17 days to 5 years). Clinical features included postprandial 
epigastric distress, repeated non-bilious vomiting, and marked weight loss. The
authors also discuss the various surgical procedures that were employed to
relieve the obstruction. Notwithstanding a potential risk of malignant evolution,
a gastro-jejunostomy is the treatment of choice because of the age of the
patient, and good postoperative results are confirmed by barium studies.

PMID: 1498108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Arch Ital Urol Nefrol Androl. 1992 Jun;64 Suppl 2:41-3.

[Use of ultrasonography in morphofunctional evaluation of orthotopic
neo-bladder].

[Article in Italian]

Consonni P(1), Guazzoni G, Nava L, Montorsi F, Bergamaschi F, Centemero A,
Bellinzoni P, Noto O, Conti F, Pompa P, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Urologia, H.S. Raffaele, Milano.

Seventeen patients submitted to radical cystectomy and orthotopic bladder
replacement according to Reddy's technique were studied at the 1, 3, 6 and
12-month, then annually follow-up by physical examination, intravenous pyelogram,
cystourethrography, suprapubic and transrectal ultrasonography and complete
urodynamics. Sixteen patients (94%) reported day-time urinary continence and
twelve patients (70%) day-time and nocturnal continence. Cysto-manometry showed a
mean bladder capacity of 450 cc with a maximal endocavitary pressure of 40 cm.
H2O and satisfactory peak flow rate. Vesico-ureteral reflux was never detected at
roentgenography. Ultrasonography may be useful in the study of a possible reflux 
or stenosis of the neovesico-ureteral junction by detecting renal scars or
dilatation of the renal cavities. Sovrapubic ultrasonography can quantify the
capacity of the neo-bladder (300-600 cc), study its shape, walls and contractions
that do not cause the involuntary opening of the neo-bladder neck. Transrectal
ultrasonography studies the bladder neck shape and its dynamic function. Residual
urine volume never exceeded 50 cc. Ultrasonography demonstrated its effectiveness
and reliability and limited the application of more invasive roentgenographic
procedures.

PMID: 1411595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Nihon Rinsho. 1992 May;50 Suppl:218-24.

[The treatment of hypertension with hyperuricemia].

[Article in Japanese]

Hirata M(1), Noto M, Tofuku Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Komatsu Municipal Hospital.

PMID: 1512960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1992 May;83(5):672-81.

[An approach to stoma-less continent urinary diversion by
uretero-ileoceco-proctostomy (ileocecorectal bladder)].

[Article in Japanese]

Kato T(1), Sato K, Yamaguchi T, Tsukada T, Otomo R, Noto H, Moriyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine.

The current practice of continent urinary diversion still places the patients
under the restraint of the stoma and intermittent catheterization. To overcome
these problems, we developed a new technique of urinary diversion of which
continent is controlled by the anal sphincter. The isolated ileocecal segment is 
intussuscepted and interposed between the ureters and the rectum. The conjoined
ureters are anastomosed to the stump of the ileal limb, and the antimesenteric
portion of the cecal limb is joined to the anterior wall of the rectum. The
surgical procedure is simpler than that of the continent reservoirs currently
employed. The intussuscepted ileocecal segment prevents fecal reflux to the upper
urinary tract and may also inhibit carcinogenesis at the uretero-intestinal
junction. Additionally, the rectal capacity is augmented by the side to side
anastomosis between the cecal limb and the rectum. Our preliminary experience in 
10 cases were satisfactory with respect to voiding function, antireflux mechanism
of the intussuscepted ileocecal segment and quality of life. The results will
justify further trials with this stomaless continent urinary diversion for those 
in whom the urethra cannot be used.

PMID: 1495204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Nihon Jibiinkoka Gakkai Kaiho. 1992 Apr;95(4):576-84.

[Electron microscopic observations of the porcine middle ear--inflammatory
changes].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Niigata University School of Medicine.

In previous studies, the morphology of the mucoepithelial cells of the middle ear
of normal pigs has been found to be similar to that of humans. In this study,
otitis media was induced in 18 ears by transcanal injection of glycerin into the 
middle ear cleft and morphological changes were investigated by scanning and
transmission electron microscopy. The mucoepithelial cells of the inflamed
porcine middle ear consisted of ciliated cells, non-ciliated cells, secretory
cells and basal cells, and the distribution of these cells was similar to that of
normal cases. In the inflamed Eustachian tube and middle ear cleft, the
epithelial cells were detached, the intracellular junctions ruptured and there
was subepithelial thickening in some places. In addition, the cilia were detached
or deformed irregularly. On the other hand, ciliated cells, bulging non-ciliated 
cells, secretory cells and columnar cells were increased in numbers. These
features suggested that the muco-ciliary system of the inflamed ears had been
stimulated. In the air cell system, however, there were signs of mucoepithelial
cell injury, but no evidence suggesting that the muco-ciliary system had been
stimulated as in the Eustachian tube or middle ear cleft. The inflammatory
changes in the mucoepithelial cells in the Eustachian tube and middle ear cleft
gradually returned to normal but in the air cell system, the changes were
persistent. Moreover, the signs of mucoepithelial cell injury remained longer
when inflammation occurred at a younger age.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1602359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Nihon Jibiinkoka Gakkai Kaiho. 1992 Apr;95(4):567-75.

[Electron microscopic observations of the porcine middle ear--normal cases].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Niigata University School of Medicine.

Pigs are frequently used in basic studies of the middle ear because they have a
middle ear air cell system which resembles the human mastoid air cell system.
However, the morphology of epithelial cells of the middle ear of pigs has not
been thoroughly studied. In this study, the morphological features of the mucosal
epithelium of the normal porcine middle ear from juveniles to adults were
investigated by scanning and transmission electron microscopy. The features were 
compared with the mucosal epithelium of the human middle ear. Macroscopic
observation of the resected middle ears showed all normal. The mucoepithelial
cells of the normal porcine middle ear consisted of ciliated cells, non-ciliated 
cells, secretory cells and basal cells. Ciliated cells were distributed most
densely in the Eustachian tube and tube orifice of the middle ear cleft,
decreasing in number towards the air cell system, where no ciliated cells were
found. The distribution of secretory cells was similar to that of ciliated cells,
while non-ciliated cells distributed conversely. Ciliated cells of juvenile pigs 
had 40 to 100 cilia 5 to 6 mu in length and 0.2 to 0.3 mu in thickness and
microvilli on the cell surface. On the other hand, pigs 4 weeks old or older, had
ciliated cells with 80 to 100 cilia 5 to 8 mu in length and 0.3 to 0.4 mu in
thickness. Younger pigs had a smaller range of ciliated cell distribution. The
range increased with growth, and rapidly expanded by 2 weeks after birth; then
the expansion slowed down to 4 weeks, when the distribution was similar that in
maturity.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1602358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1992 Apr;83(4):542-5.

[A case report: occurrence of bladder carcinoma in the defunctionalised bladder
in a patient after operation of left ureteral carcinoma].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto K(1), Tomita K, Fujishiro T, Uekane K, Kawamura T, Teshima S, Fukushima N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Fraternity Memorial Hospital.

An eighty year-old woman was diagnosed as left ureteral carcinoma and right
dysfunctional kidney in 1984. Left partial ureterectomy, partial cystectomy, and 
left ureterocutaneostomy were performed and her bladder was left behind after the
operation. In 1990 (72 months after the operation), she was aware of bleeding
from the urethra. A bladder wash was performed, demonstrating malignant cells on 
cytological examination, and cystoscopy revealed a papillary tumor in the
defunctionalized bladder. Total cystectomy was performed and the histological
findings of the surgical specimen showed transitional cell carcinoma, grade 2,
pTaNoMo. This case shows the need for periodic examinations of the
defunctionalized bladder, because renal pelvic and ureteral carcinoma tends to
recur in the bladder within two years after operation and because tumors rarely
developed in the defunctionalized bladder.

PMID: 1593834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Smooth Muscle Res. 1992 Apr;28(2):55-62.

[Effect of terazosin on lower urinary tract function in the male decerebrate
dog].

[Article in Japanese]

Nishizawa O(1), Sugaya K, Takahashi T, Shimoda N, Satoh K, Otomo R, Noto H,
Harada T, Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine, Japan.

The effect of terazosin on the lower urinary tract function was studied by
combined recording of bladder and urethral pressures and external sphincter
electromyogram in 8 male decerebrate dogs. Reflex micturitions were induced by
bladder filling before and after terazosin. The statistical analysis was carried 
out on the urodynamic parameters. During the collecting phase, terazosin at doses
of 10, 30 and 100 micrograms/kg produced a significant decrease in maximum
urethral pressure in the dose dependent manner. Threshold pressure was
significantly shown to decrease at doses of 30 and 100 micrograms/kg. In the
urodynamic parameters of the emptying phase there was a significant decrease in
maximum contraction pressure at 10 and 30 micrograms/kg, and in voided volume at 
100 micrograms/kg. Terazosin seems to facilitate an initiation of the bladder
contraction with a decrease in threshold pressure. In concludes that alpha 1
adrenergic activity seems to take an important role for the maintenance of the
urethral pressure and to control the initiation of bladder contraction in
modulation with threshold pressure.

PMID: 1392130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Recenti Prog Med. 1992 Mar;83(3):127-30.

[Plasma lipids and apoproteins. The effect of cigarette smoking].

[Article in Italian]

Barbagallo CM(1), Averna MR, Cavera G, Noto D, Di Marco T, La Placa FP, Lanigra
M, Cefalù AB, Notarbartolo A.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di Patologia medica II, Università, Palermo.

Cigarette smoking produces lipo-apoprotein modifications, which makes it more
atherogenic. In this study we have evaluated lipids and apoproteins in 178
normolipidemic, healthy subjects, in relation to their smoking habits. In smokers
we have found lower levels of HDL-cholesterol and apo A-I and higher levels of
triglyceride and apo B. Number of cigarette smoked in a day directly correlated
with triglycerides and apo B (r = 0.321 and 0.313 respectively) and inversely
with HDL-cholesterol (r = -0.274). These alterations seem to be due to an
inhibition that smoking could cause on lipolytic processes. Further studies need 
to establish influences that smoking-related alterations have in the
atherosclerotic lesions of smokers.

PMID: 1585028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Am J Physiol. 1992 Mar;262(3 Pt 2):R478-84.

Modulation of the spinobulbospinal micturition reflex pathway in cats.

Kruse MN(1), Mallory BS, Noto H, Roppolo JR, de Groat WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261.

Micturition, which is mediated by a spinobulbospinal reflex pathway, can be
modulated by various spinal and supraspinal mechanisms. This study examined
modulation of the micturition reflex in decerebrate unanesthetized cats.
Electrical stimulation of the pontine micturition center (PMC) elicited two types
of bladder responses: small-amplitude short-duration responses due to direct
activation of the bulbospinal pathway (PS-direct contractions) and
large-amplitude long-duration reflex responses induced by PS-direct contractions 
but maintained by afferent feedback (PS-reflex contractions). Rectal and
vaginal-cervical stimulation inhibited the PS-direct contractions, indicating
inhibition of the descending or efferent limb of the micturition pathway.
Stimulation of the central end of a transected S2 ventral root elicited recurrent
inhibition of PS-reflex contractions but not of PS-direct contractions,
indicating that recurrent inhibition does not directly affect the descending
pathway. Continuous electrical stimulation (20 Hz) of the PMC decreased (53 +/-
21%) bladder capacity, presumably by affecting transmission in the pons or
ascending input to the pons. Thus the micturition reflex could be modulated at
several sites: the pons, the ascending or descending pathways, or spinal
interneuronal sites.

PMID: 1558219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Chemother. 1992 Feb;4(1):56-8.

Cyclophosphamide plus vincristine and prednisone in the treatment of severe
pemphigus vulgaris refractory to conventional therapy.

Citarrella P(1), Gebbia V, Di Marco P, Tambone Reyes M, Noto G, Aricò M.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Haematology, University of Palermo, Italy.

Five patients with severe pemphigus vulgaris refractory to conventional therapy
with azathioprine and corticosteroids were treated with cyclophosphamide,
vincristine and prednisone. One patient was not evaluable, while the remaining
four patients showed a complete response. Duration of response was in the range
of 13-94 months. Toxicity was mainly represented by alopecia, myelosuppression
and gastrointestinal side-effects such as nausea/vomiting. Although
cyclophosphamide and vincristine may induce severe side-effects, this association
may be useful in controlling severe disease resistant to previous conventional
therapies.

PMID: 1403072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Seikagaku. 1992 Feb;64(2):115-9.

[Sea urchin sperm-activating peptide: structure, biosynthesis and action
mechanism].

[Article in Japanese]

Suzuki N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa.

PMID: 1350609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Hypertens. 1992 Feb;10(2):161-5.

High levels of plasma atrial natriuretic factor and impaired left ventricular
diastolic function in hypertensives without left ventricular hypertrophy.

Dessì-Fulgheri P(1), Palermo R, Di Noto G, Conti V, Baldinelli A, Pupita G,
Agostinelli M, Rappelli A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Patologia Medica, University of Ancona, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To seek possible correlations between plasma atrial natriuretic factor
(ANF) and left ventricular diastolic function (LVDF) in hypertensive patients.
DESIGN: Since LVDF abnormalities can be detected in patients with normal left
ventricular mass, we studied a group of hypertensive patients without left
ventricular hypertrophy.
METHODS: Untreated hypertensive patients (n = 23) and normotensive control
subjects (n = 19) were studied. LVDF indices were obtained by M-mode and pulsed
Doppler echocardiography. Blood samples for plasma ANF were taken in the
recumbent position from subjects on normal-sodium intake.
RESULTS: Plasma ANF levels were significantly higher in hypertensive patients
than in normotensive subjects. All indices for systolic function were normal in
both normotensive subjects and hypertensive patients. Left atrial diameter was
significantly higher for hypertensive patients than for normotensive subjects.
Considering LVDF, all indices for ventricular filling were found to be altered,
on average, in hypertensive patients, the only exception being peak early
velocity. In addition, significant correlations were found between plasma ANF and
the pulsed Doppler parameters of left ventricular filling, peak atrial velocity
and the peak early:peak atrial velocity ratio. Overall correlations between
plasma ANF and left atrial diameter, and between left atrial diameter and left
ventricular mass index were also observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The high levels of plasma ANF observed in our hypertensive patients 
and their correlation with the LVDF indices (which mainly reflect the atrial
contribution to ventricular filling) could be the result of an increased atrial
stretch due to diastolic ventricular dysfunction. This may exist in hypertensive 
patients before the development of ventricular hypertrophy.

PMID: 1313479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Burns. 1992;18 Suppl 1:S16-9.

Permanent coverage of full skin thickness burns with autologous cultured
epidermis and reepithelialization of partial skin thickness lesions induced by
allogeneic cultured epidermis: a multicentre study in the treatment of children.

De Luca M(1), Bondanza S, Cancedda R, Tamisani AM, Di Noto C, Muller L, Dioguardi
D, Brienza E, Calvario A, Zermani R, et al.

Author information: 
(1)IST, Instituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genoa, Italy.

Comment in
    Burns. 1992;18 Suppl 1:S26-31.

PMID: 1554418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Int J Cardiol. 1992 Jan;34(1):85-95.

Quantification of antimyosin uptake and infarct size at various stages of
myocardial infarction.

Nakata T(1), Gotoh M, Noto T, Tanaka S, Shoji T, Kubota M, Tsuda T, Iimura O.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical College, Japan.

We studied with quantitative techniques the clinical efficacy of indium-111
antimyosin at a later stage of myocardial infarction in 18 patients at various
stages after infarction. Antimyosin accumulation was detected irrespective of
infarct age and size and quantified as an infarct weight with a tomographic
technique. Higher intensities in a planar image were observed in anterior Q wave 
infarct group (36 +/- 5 g) but not in inferior and non-Q wave anterior infarct
groups because of the smaller infarct weights (8 +/- 3 g, 13 +/- 6 g,
respectively). Infarct area calculated from thallium-201 tomography significantly
correlated with left ventricular ejection fraction in both recent (less than 2
weeks) and older (2-week- to 6-month-old) infarct groups (r = -0.969, P less than
0.001; r = -0.860, P less than 0.001, respectively), whereas there was a
significant negative correlation between infarct weight and left ventricular
ejection fraction in the recent infarct group (r = -0.731, P less than 0.05) but 
not in the older infarct group. Thus, antimyosin tomography can detect myocardial
necrosis with a high sensitivity regardless of infarct age, size, and location.
However, the accumulation might be affected by infarct age and correspond to
necrotic mass but not necessarily to infarct volume itself at a later stage
probably because of the presence of necrosed and scarred tissues in infarcted
myocardium.

PMID: 1548113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Jpn J Pharmacol. 1992;58 Suppl 2:368P.

Pacemaker activity of pelvicalyceal site recorded by intracellular glass
microelectrode.

Suzuki T(1), Nishizawa O, Noto H, Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Akita University School of Medicine, Department of Urology, Japan.

PMID: 1507608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Physiol. 1992;453:367-84.

The inhibitory action of cyclic AMP on responses to carbachol dependent on
calcium stores in rat gastric smooth muscle.

Ohta T(1), Ito S, Noto T, Tachibana R, Nakazato Y, Ohga A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

1. The effects of cyclic AMP on contraction and Ca(2+)-activated K+ currents
induced by carbachol (CCh), caffeine and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (InsP3)
were examined in intact and skinned smooth muscle fibres and in whole-cell
voltage-clamped smooth muscle cells of the rat stomach. Intracellular Ca2+ level,
[Ca2+]i, was monitored in intact muscle fibres loaded with Fura-2. 2. In intact
muscle fibres, dibutyryl cyclic AMP, 8-bromo-cyclic AMP and forskolin inhibited a
phasic contraction induced by CCh (100 microM) much more extensively than that
induced by caffeine (30 mM) in Ca(2+)-free solution containing 2 mM-EGTA. A rise 
in [Ca2+]i evoked by CCh was also reduced by dibutyryl cyclic AMP. 3. In skinned 
muscle fibres, InsP3 (40 microM) produced a contraction of amplitude similar to
that evoked by caffeine (30 mM) in Ca(2+)-free solution containing 0.05 mM-EGTA. 
Cyclic AMP suppressed the InsP3-induced contraction to a much greater extent than
that induced by caffeine. 4. In cells voltage-clamped at 0 mV, CCh (100 microM)
evoked a transient Ca(2+)-activated outward K+ current in 61% of cells tested.
After wash-out of CCh, caffeine (10 mM) evoked a similar K+ current in all cells.
In cells loaded with cyclic AMP (100 microM), the percentage of cells responding 
to CCh was reduced to 26% and the magnitude of current response tended to
decrease. Cyclic AMP caused a small increase in the caffeine-induced K+ current. 
5. An outward current was elicited immediately after the patch membrane was
ruptured at a holding potential of 0 mV, using a patch pipette containing InsP3
(40 microM), in 76% of cells tested. In cells treated with dibutyryl cyclic AMP, 
the percentage of cells responding to InsP3 was reduced to 50% and the magnitude 
of current response tended to decrease. 6. In intact muscle fibres loaded with
Fura-2, the relationship between [Ca2+]i and tension development shifted to the
right in the presence of dibutyryl cyclic AMP. In skinned muscle fibres, cyclic
AMP shifted the pCa-tension relation to the right, suggesting that cyclic AMP
inhibits the contractile machinery directly. 7. These results suggest that the
inhibitory effect of cyclic AMP on muscarinic receptors mediating both the
contraction and the Ca(2+)-activated K+ current, is partly due to the inhibition 
of InsP3-induced Ca2+ release from intracellular stores in rat gastric smooth
muscle cells.

PMCID: PMC1175562
PMID: 1334513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. FEBS Lett. 1991 Dec 9;294(3):179-82.

Determination of the amino acid sequence of an intramolecular disulfide
linkage-containing sperm-activating peptide by tandem mass spectrometry.

Yoshino K(1), Takao T, Shimonishi Y, Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan.

A sperm-activating peptide (SAP) was isolated from the egg jelly of the sea
urchin Stomopneustes variolaris. The presence of an intramolecular disulfide
linkage in the peptide was demonstrated by fast atom bombardment (FAB) mass
spectrometry with the intact and reduced peptides. The amino acid sequence of the
reduced peptide was determined to be Lys-Phe-Cys-Pro-Glu-Gly-Lys-Cys-Val by
tandem mass spectrometry from the spectrum produced by a collision-induced
decomposition method. Furthermore, it was also demonstrated that SAPs obtained
from sea urchins Arbacia punctulata and Glyptocidaris crenularis are cyclic
peptides containing one cystine residue by FAB mass spectrometry.

PMID: 1756858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Hinyokika Kiyo. 1991 Dec;37(12):1639-44.

[Identification of effective region of the pons in response to inaperisone which 
facilitates urine storage].

[Article in Japanese]

Sugaya K(1), Nishizawa O, Noto H, Tsukada T, Kohama T, Shimoda N, Harada T,
Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine.

To identify the effective region of the pons in response to inaperisone which
facilitates urine storage, inaperisone (100 mM, 0.2 microliters) was injected
into the nucleus locus coeruleus alpha (LCa, the pontine micturition center), the
nucleus locus subcoeruleus (LSC, the pontine urine storage center) and the
nucleus reticularis pontis oralis (PoO, micturition inhibitory region) of the
decerebrate cats. On reflex micturition, inaperisone injection into the LSC
decreased voiding volume, and increased residual volume and bladder capacity,
significantly. However, there was no difference in the maximum bladder pressure
before and after inaperisone injection into the LSC. Inaperisone injection into
the LCa or the PoO had no influence on reflex micturition. These results suggest 
that effective region of the pons in response to inaperisone is the LSC, and that
inaperisone facilitates the urine storage neural mechanism in the LSC.

PMID: 1785387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Diabete Metab. 1991 Nov-Dec;17(6):512-9.

Lipid and apoprotein behaviour after oral fat load in hypertriglyceridaemia.

Barbagallo CM(1), Averna MR, Amato S, Davì G, Pagano D, Noto D, Notarbartolo A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Medicina Interna e Geriatria, Università di Palermo, Italia.

Post-prandial profiles of plasma lipids and apoproteins have been studied in 13
hypertriglyceridaemic patients and in 24 normolipidaemic subjects who acted as
controls. Triglyceride curves were different in the two groups: type IV patients 
reached the peak later than the controls (7-h vs 4 1/2-h) and cleared plasma
triglycerides more slowly. The magnitude of post-prandial response was found to
be higher in hypertriglyceridaemic patients. Positive correlations were also
found between triglycerides response and fasting levels of triglycerides, apo B, 
apo C-II, apo C-III and apo E levels and negative correlations (not significant) 
with HDL-C levels in both hypertriglyceridemics and controls. In normolipidaemic 
subjects the triglyceride increase area was also correlated with age, BMI and
total cholesterol, while in type IV patients with apo A-I and apo A-II levels.
These data confirm that the magnitude of post-prandial phase is influenced by
fasting levels of triglycerides-rich lipoproteins and that HDL are important
determinants in the control of the post-prandial response. The most relevant
finding in this study was the difference of the post-prandial profile of
apoproteins C-II, C-III and E. These apoproteins significantly decreased nine
hours after meal in the controls, while in hypertriglyceridaemics these
apoproteins showed a rise over time. On the contrary apo A-I, apo A-II and apo B 
curves presented a similar profile in both groups. Possible mechanisms have been 
discussed, but further studies are necessary to understand the metabolic defects 
responsible for this behaviour in hypertriglyceridaemia.

PMID: 1809596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Pediatr Med Chir. 1991 Nov-Dec;13(6):585-8.

[A multicenter epidemiological study of burns of the head in childhood in the
period of 1986-1990].

[Article in Italian]

Grisolia GA(1), Pelli P, Pinzauti E, Elia A, Canavese F, Moro G, Bevilacqua A,
Tiotto R, Tamisani AM, Di Noto C.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Chirurgia Pediatrica, Ospedale A. Meyer, Firenze, Italia.

A retrospective study was performed over the children admitted to three regional 
pediatric burn units, over a 5-year period (1986-1990). Out of 695 pediatric
patients, 270 (38.8%) were admitted with burns of the head and neck. This whole
childhood age group (up to 14 years of age) was examined epidemiologically. The
age group presenting the highest incidence was within 0-3 years (71%); scalds
were involved in high percentage (68%) and many injuries occurred at home (93%). 
Epidemiological aspects of the report are discussed with particular consideration
of preventive programs.

PMID: 1806916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Int J Dermatol. 1991 Nov;30(11):810-3.

Topical canrenoic acid. Quantification of the antiandrogenic activity in the
hamster flank organ.

Noto G(1), Pravatá G, Bongiorno MR, Bosco M, Aricó M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Palermo, Italy.

The topical antiandrogenic activity of potassium canrenoate (CAK), compared with 
that of spironolactone (SP), was assayed in vivo in female golden Syrian hamsters
whose flank organs were stimulated by subcutaneous administration of testosterone
propionate. Sebaceous glands and hair were measured by a computerized image
analyzer. Pigmented spots, sebaceous gland areas, and the diameter of hairs of
the treated flank organs were smaller in the groups that received CAK (1.6
mg/day) and SP (0.4 mg/day). The authors' results showed that CAK may act as a
topical antiandrogen on the hamster flank organ when applied in concentrations
four times greater than the minimal active dosage of SP. Potassium canrenoate may
be a useful weak topical antiandrogen, and it could be used in androgen-related
skin disorders involving both sebaceous glands and hair, especially in men. These
concentrations could be verified by additional clinical investigations.

PMID: 1757185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Cathet Cardiovasc Diagn. 1991 Oct;24(2):75-83.

Cardiac catheterization 1990: a report of the Registry of the Society for Cardiac
Angiography and Interventions (SCA&I).

Noto TJ Jr(1), Johnson LW, Krone R, Weaver WF, Clark DA, Kramer JR Jr, Vetrovec
GW.

Author information: 
(1)Society for Cardiac Angiography and Interventions, Breckenridge, Colorado
80424.

This report presents the first year's experience of a totally computerized
cardiac catheterization laboratory reporting system, including the results and
complications of invasive and interventional procedures. Sixty-three laboratories
reported a total of 71,916 patients studied between January 1 through December
31, 1990. Two previous registry reports have been published. Compared with data
acquired by previous methods, in spite of an older and sicker population, the
mortality for diagnostic procedures has remained remarkably constant (0.11%). The
computerized format facilitates data collection and analysis, helps resolve new
issues as they arise and serves as a method of monitoring quality of laboratories
and individuals.

PMID: 1742788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Minerva Anestesiol. 1991 Oct;57(10):889.

[Continuous venovenous hemofiltration in the critical patient].

[Article in Italian]

Noto A(1), Bordone G, Mascheroni D, Radrizzani D, Rotelli S, Iapichino G.

Author information: 
(1)Reparto di Rianimazione E. Vecla, Ospedale Maggiore IRCCS, Milano.

PMID: 1961538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Minerva Anestesiol. 1991 Oct;57(10):1058.

[Monitoring of vital parameters of the critical patient during medical
transportation].

[Article in Italian]

Pelizzola A(1), Noto A, Croci M, Solca M, Gavazzeni V, Bordone G.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Anestesia e Rianimazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore, Milano.

PMID: 1961473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1991 Oct;40(2):359-66.

Formation of GABOB from 2-hydroxyputrescine and its anticonvulsant effect.

Nakao J(1), Hasegawa T, Hashimoto H, Noto T, Nakajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
Japan.

To investigate the formation of gamma-amino-beta-hydroxybutyric acid from
2-hydroxyputrescine in mammalian organs, the radioactive diamine was synthesized 
and was injected into rats intraperitoneally or intraventricularly. After
intraperitoneal injection, the radioactive amino acid was detected in various
organs, but formation of the stereoisomer of the amino acid
(gamma-amino-alpha-hydroxybutyric acid) was not demonstrated. Intraventricular
injection of the radioactive diamine also resulted in the formation of
gamma-amino-beta-hydroxybutyric acid in the rat brain. In vivo experiments using 
monoamine oxidase or diamine oxidase inhibitors suggested the participation of
both enzymes in the formation of the amino acid from the diamine in rat organs
other than the brain, where diamine oxidase appeared to play the major role. To
investigate the anticonvulsant effect of 2-hydroxyputrescine, the threshold of
pentylenetetrazol-induced generalized convulsions was measured in rats after the 
intraventricular injection of 2-hydroxyputrescine. Both R(-)- and
S(+)-2-hydroxyputrescine had an anticonvulsant effect, with a greater elevation
of the threshold being observed after injection of the R(-) form. Time course
experiments suggested that this anticonvulsant effect depended on the formation
of gamma-amino-beta-hydroxybutyric acid from 2-hydroxyputrescine in the rat
brain. The anticonvulsant action of gamma-amino-beta-hydroxybutyric acid was also
examined, and the stimulation of Cl- influx plus the inhibition of GABA uptake
into brain membrane vesicles were indicated to be involved.

PMID: 1805240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Radiol Med. 1991 Oct;82(4):545-7.

[Unusual echographic features of the infantile polycystic kidney].

[Article in Italian]

Zimbaro G(1), Ascenti G, Freni O, Lo Surdo F, Noto G, Gemelli M, Grosso M.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Scienze Radiologische, Università degli Studi di Messina.

PMID: 1767070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Can J Cardiol. 1991 Oct;7(8):350-6.

Normalized left ventricular filling indexes to detect diastolic dysfunction in
hypertension and in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Nakata T(1), Noto T, Uno K, Tanaka S, Tsuda T, Kubota M, Iimura O.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical College, Japan.

In order to establish a normalizing method for left ventricular filling indexes, 
peak filling rate (PFR) and time to peak filling rate (TPFR), derived from
resting radionuclide ventriculography using Fourier analysis with third-order
harmonics, were analyzed in 45 normal subjects, 40 hypertensive patients, and 29 
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. PFR was significantly negatively
correlated with age (r = -0.62) and significantly positively correlated with peak
ejection rate (PER) (r = 0.58) in normals. TPFR normalized for heart rate
(N-TPFR) was correlated positively with age in normals (r = 0.60) and
hypertensives (r = 0.49) but not in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
N-TPFR was not significantly correlated with systolic parameters. A significant
relationship between PFR normalized to PER (PFR/PER) and age was observed in
normals (r = -0.58) but not in patients with hypertension or hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. To cancel the ageing effect, individual data of PFR/PER and
N-TPFR were expressed as a percentage of the predicted regression value in normal
subjects (%PFR/PER and %N-TPFR, respectively). Per cent PFR/PER was significantly
lower and %N-TPFR was significantly greater in patients with hypertension and
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy compared to normals. When normal limits of these
indexes were defined as %PFR/PER greater than 80% and %N-TPFR less than 120%, the
sensitivity, specificity and diagnostic accuracy of differentiating normals from 
patients with hypertension or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were 41 of 45 (91%), 44
of 68 (65%), and 85 of 113 (75%), respectively. These findings indicate that
%PFR/PER and %N-TPFR might be more reasonably normalized parameters for
describing diastolic filling and its abnormality.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250
WORDS)

PMID: 1742669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Brain Res. 1991 Aug 9;556(1):6-12.

Properties of the descending limb of the spinobulbospinal micturition reflex
pathway in the cat.

Kruse MN(1), Mallory BS, Noto H, Roppolo JR, de Groat WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15261.

The micturition reflex is thought to be mediated by a spinobulbospinal reflex
pathway passing through the rostral pons. This study examined the properties of
the descending limb of the reflex pathway by monitoring the responses of the
lower urinary tract to stimulation of the pons in the decerebrate cat. Electrical
stimulation (300 microseconds pulses at 50 Hz intratrain frequencies, 300-500 ms 
trains, 0.5-15 V) in the region of the locus coeruleus (P 0.5-3.1/L 2-4/H to
-2.75) was used to activate the descending excitatory pathway to the sacral
parasympathetic nucleus. Low intensity stimulation induced small amplitude, short
duration (14 +/- 11 cm H2O, 10 +/- 3 s) bladder contractions in a partially full 
bladder, whereas higher intensity stimulation induced large amplitude, long
duration (69 +/- 29 cm H2O, 70 +/- 44 s) contractions which were similar to
distension-induced reflex micturition contractions. The evoked bladder
contractions coincided with a reduction in external urethral sphincter (EUS) EMG 
activity. Following bilateral L7-S3 dorsal root transection, electrical
stimulation of the pons still elicited the small amplitude bladder contractions, 
but the larger amplitude, long duration micturition contractions were abolished. 
During these small evoked bladder contractions, a suppression of EUS activity
still occurred following deafferentation, indicating a pontine mediated
bladder/EUS synergy. It is concluded that the pons can initiate bladder
contractions and coordinated bladder-sphincter activity, but that afferent
feedback (via the dorsal roots) is needed to maintain the large amplitude
micturition contractions.

PMID: 1933354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 1991 Aug;18(11):1940-3.

[Significance of radionuclide examination in hepatic arterial infusion
chemotherapy using implantable reservoir].

[Article in Japanese]

Yasuda S(1), Noto T, Ikeda M, Mukai M, Horie O, Ishida H, Kubo H, Nakazaki H,
Tajima T, Mitomi T, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Second Dept. of Surgery, Tokai University School of Medicine.

Technetium 99m macroaggregated albumin (Tc-MAA) perfusion scintigraphy has been
performed during hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy using implantable
reservoir. A total of 40 radionuclide (RI) studies were performed on 25 patients 
with liver metastasis of colorectal origin. Of 40 RI studies, 12 (30%) showed
impaired liver perfusion. Three studies showed no perfusion of the liver, 3
increased radiotracer accumulations at liver hilus, 2 extrahepatic distributions,
2 catheter occlusions, 1 extravasation and 1 unilobar distribution. The
accumulation of Tc-MAA in the tumor was graded from Grade I (tumor uptake
decreased or similar relative to liver) to Grade III (tumor uptake remarkably
increased). The response to chemotherapy was evaluable in 14 cases. A case with
Grade I resulted in NC. Of 6 cases with Grade II, 1 resulted in MR, 3 in NC and 1
in PD. Of 8 cases with Grade III, 2 resulted in PR, 1 in MR and 5 in NC. Tumor
response was observed in cases showing increased uptake of Tc-MAA. SPECT was
performed in 7 cases, and revealed that hepatic tumors were hypervascular. We
concluded that RI examination reveals not only hepatic perfusion, but also tumor 
microcirculation.

PMID: 1877836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Nihon Kyobu Shikkan Gakkai Zasshi. 1991 Aug;29(8):1042-6.

[Leiomyosarcoma of the esophagus associated with pulmonary edema by the
compression of the left atrium].

[Article in Japanese]

Nishi K(1), Yamada M, Morishita D, Nakamura Y, Murata Y, Fujioka M, Muramoto S,
Murakami S, Seki M, Yasui M, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Internal Medicine, Noto General Hospital, Nanao.

Leiomyosarcoma of the esophagus is a rare neoplasm. We reported a very rare case 
of esophageal leiomyosarcoma associated with pulmonary edema by the compression
of the left atrium. A 67-year-old man was admitted with a 3-month history of
chest pain, exertional dyspnea and dysphagia. Chest X-ray computed tomography
showed posterior mediastinal tumor. Esophageogastroscopy and fiberoptic
bronchofiberscopy showed no direct invasion of the tumor. By echocardiography,
the left atrium was found to be compressed by the tumor and pulmonary
hypertension (58/25 mmHg) and increased pulmonary wedge pressure (25 mmHg) was
present. Open biopsy specimen demonstrated elongated cells suggestive of sarcoma.
At autopsy, the tumor was confirmed to be leiomyosarcoma and to be originated
from the lower esophagus.

PMID: 1753520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Nihon Kyobu Shikkan Gakkai Zasshi. 1991 Jul;29(7):904-8.

[A case of pulmonary aspergillosis presenting pulmonary bulla and eosinophilic
pneumonia].

[Article in Japanese]

Nishi K(1), Yamada M, Morishita D, Nakamura Y, Murata Y, Fujioka M, Muramoto S,
Murakami S, Sasaki K, Yasui M, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Noto General Hospital, Nanao.

A rare case of a 25-year-old man with pulmonary aspergillosis is reported.
Pulmonary bulla and eosinophilic pneumonia in the right upper lobe were diagnosed
by chest roentgenogram and transbronchial lung biopsy. Because the patient
developed infective bullae during steroid therapy, we performed transcutaneous
thoracic drainage and right upper lobectomy. The resected lung tissue contained
numerous hyphae of Aspergillus. Around the hyphae of Aspergillus, granulomatous
reaction and eosinophilic infiltration were observed. Antibodies against
Aspergillus were detected in the serum of the patient. The number of peripheral
blood eosinophils decreased after right upper lobectomy. These findings suggest
that pulmonary bullae and eosinophilic pneumonia may be a rare manifestation of
pulmonary aspergillosis.

PMID: 1920990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1991 Jul;82(7):1133-41.

[Experimental and clinical studies of urethral anesthesia on etiology and
treatment of detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia].

[Article in Japanese]

Sugaya K(1), Nishizawa O, Noto H, Suzuki T, Tsukada T, Kohama T, Shimoda N,
Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine.

We studied whether detrusor-sphincter synergia during micturition was obtained by
means of urethral anesthesia with lidocaine hydrochloride in five thoracic spinal
cats and eight clinical cases with detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia. In thoracic
spinal cats with detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia, urethral anesthesia produced
detrusor-sphincter synergia, an increase in the maximum bladder pressure and a
decrease in the residual volume. In clinical cases with detrusor-sphincter
dyssynergia, urethral anesthesia produced detrusor-sphincter synergia or a
decrease in the external urethral sphincter activities during micturition, and a 
decrease in the maximum urethral closure pressure and the residual volume. There 
were no remarkable changes of the external urethral sphincter activities during
urine storage phase before and after urethral anesthesia in both spinal cats and 
clinical cases. These results suggest that urethral anesthesia blocks the
urethro-urethral contraction reflex and secondarily activates vesico-urethral
relaxation reflex. The block of urethral sensory nerves is thought to effectively
treat detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia.

PMID: 1895627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Orthop Clin North Am. 1991 Jul;22(3):523-30.

Diagnosis and management of the infected total joint arthroplasty.

Cuckler JM(1), Star AM, Alavi A, Noto RB.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.

The preoperative diagnosis of the infected orthopedic implant is complicated by
lack of a single precise test to forewarn patient and surgeon of the presence of 
microorganisms. Given the overall limitation of accuracy of preoperative
diagnosis to approximately 80% when 111In scanning, preoperative aspiration, and 
ESR are considered, it would seem prudent to approach each revision surgery with 
the possibility in mind of subclinical sepsis as the cause for failure of the
implant. The essentials of surgical technique including thorough debridement of
the wound and removal of all existing foreign bodies, especially including PMMA
bone cement, are critical to minimizing the risk for occurrence or persistence of
sepsis. Although the use of antibiotic impregnated bone cement may enhance the
treatment of orthopedic sepsis, the data available to date lead to the conclusion
that two-stage revision surgery in the face of known sepsis remains the
cornerstone of surgical therapy for the infected implant, along with aggressive
and rational antibiotic treatment. The surgeon is offered the following
guidelines in the management of the septic total hip arthroplasty. 1.
Preoperative evaluation including ESR, 111In WBC scan, and aspiration for culture
and sensitivity (fluoroscopically guided for the hip) will produce on average
approximately 80% accuracy. 2. Intraoperative cultures at the time of revision
surgery should be obtained prior to administration of systemic antibiotics; three
tissue specimens (hip capsule, femoral membrane, acetabular membrane) should be
submitted for culture and sensitivity determination. 3. Careful debridement of
the surgical site of granulation tissue and all foreign bodies (e.g., PMMA)
should be performed within the limits of patient safety to maximize the
likelihood of success.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1852428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Biochemistry. 1991 Jun 25;30(25):6203-9.

Identification of a novel amino acid, o-bromo-L-phenylalanine, in egg-associated 
peptides that activate spermatozoa.

Yoshino K(1), Takao T, Suhara M, Kitai T, Hori H, Nomura K, Yamaguchi M,
Shimonishi Y, Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan.

Eight sperm-activating peptides containing a novel amino acid were isolated from 
the egg jelly of the sea urchin Tripneustes gratilla. Accurate mass measurement
of the peptide in FAB mass spectrometry showed that the mass of the novel amino
acid residue was 224.978. On the basis of the isotopic ion distribution and the
degree of unsaturation, the mass value indicated that the elemental composition
of the amino acid residue was C9H8O1N1Br1, suggesting that the novel amino acid
was bromophenylalanine. Proton NMR spectroscopy, amino acid analysis, and RP-HPLC
with three synthetic isomers of bromophenylalanine demonstrated that
o-bromophenylalanine was the novel amino acid. Derivatization of the amino acid
with Marfey's reagent, (1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrophen-5-yl)-L-alanine amide (FDAA),
further indicated that the amino acid was the L-isomer. In other sperm-activating
peptides isolated from the egg jelly of the sea urchin, both m- and
p-bromophenylalanines were discovered. The presence of m-bromophenylalanine has
not been previously reported in natural products, while p-bromophenylalanine is
found in theonellamide F, an antifungal bicyclic peptide from a marine sponge.

PMID: 2059627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1991 Jun;(267):122-7.

Tibial cortical bone peg fixation in osteochondritis dissecans of the knee.

Slough JA(1), Noto AM, Schmidt TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Missouri, Kansas City Medical
Center.

Ten knees in nine patients with large, symptomatic osteochondritis dissecans
lesions of the knee were treated by cortical bone peg fixation. The follow-up
time averaged 2.9 years (range, 0.9-6.6 years). The average age was 19.5 years
(range, 15-33 years). The knees were evaluated and rated clinically and
roentgenographically. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of nine knees was obtained 
at the follow-up examination to evaluate lesion and bone peg incorporation,
evidence of lesion loosening, and the articular cartilage. Eight good to
excellent, one fair, and one poor result were obtained clinically. MR imaging
showed 33% of knees had poor lesion cartilage and 44% had partial or poor lesion 
incorporation possibly consistent with loosening. Complications included four
partial defect healings, one tibial donor graft-site fracture, and one bone peg
loosening. Four symptomatic knees had follow-up arthroscopy at an average of 1.8 
years postsurgery and findings included four loose bodies, one loose peg, one
meniscal tear, and one symptomatic hypertrophic synovium. MR imaging was a useful
tool in evaluating lesion stability, articular cartilage quality, lesion and bone
peg incorporation, the menisci, and cruciate ligaments. Bone peg fixation of
large osteochondritis dissecans defects of the knee offers a physiologic approach
to treatment of this lesion in nearly skeletally mature or skeletally mature
patients.

PMID: 2044262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Fertil Steril. 1991 Jun;55(6):1171-5.

Fluorescein diacetate assessment of embryo viability after ultrarapid freezing of
human multipronucleate embryos.

Noto V(1), Campo R, Roziers P, Gordts S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Center for Fertility Diagnostics and In Vitro Fertilization and Embryo
Transfer, Leuven, Belgium.

OBJECTIVE: To assess embryo viability after ultrarapid freezing-thawing.
DESIGN: We studied the fluorescence pattern of 35 ultrarapidly frozen-thawed
multipronucleate human embryos exposed to fluorescein diacetate.
SETTING: All the embryos were obtained from the Medical Center for Fertility
Diagnostics and In Vitro Fertilization and Embryo Transfer at Leuven (Belgium), a
private care center.
PATIENTS, PARTICIPANTS: None.
INTERVENTIONS: None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: The fluorescence pattern was evaluated at room temperature 
after a 1-minute incubation in fluorescein diacetate solution, 4 hours and 24
hours after thawing.
RESULTS: Healthy human multipronucleate embryos, when exposed to fluorescein
diacetate, accumulated intracellular fluorescein and fluoresced brightly under
ultraviolet light. On the other hand, embryos presenting submicroscopic cell
membranes damage caused by different processes (e.g., high or low temperatures)
lost the ability to accumulate intracellular fluorescein. All the ultrarapidly
frozen embryos with normal looking blastomeres fluoresced brightly after a short 
exposure to fluorescein diacetate.
CONCLUSIONS: Our experiments indicate an intact cell membrane permeability and an
integrity of the intracytoplasmatic esterase enzyme activity of human embryos
ultrarapidly frozen.

PMID: 2037110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Kansenshogaku Zasshi. 1991 Jun;65(6):749-53.

[A case of tsutsugamushi disease in the urban area of Komatsu City].

[Article in Japanese]

Kajinami K(1), Fujita H, Hirata M, Ueda K, Kameda S, Noto M, Kaseda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Komatsu Municipal Hospital.

Most of patients with tsutsugamushi disease are diagnosed by their clinical
histories suggesting the opportunities of Rickettsia infection in a rural region.
We reported a 76-year-old female patient, who was considered to be infected in
her house in the urban area of Komatsu City. She has shown typical clinical
manifestations of tsutsugamushi disease, and was remitted successfully by oral
administration of minocycline. Although specific antibodies to Rickettsia
tsutsugamushi could not be detected in her serum by the complement fixation (CF) 
method during her clinical course, their significant elevation was confirmed by
the indirect immunofluorescence (IF) method.

PMID: 1919106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Brain Res. 1991 May 17;549(1):95-105.

Electrophysiological analysis of the ascending and descending components of the
micturition reflex pathway in the rat.

Noto H(1), Roppolo JR, Steers WD, de Groat WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology Center for Neuroscience, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, PA 15261.

Electrophysiological techniques were used to examine the organization of the
spinobulbospinal micturition reflex pathway in the rat. Electrical stimulation of
afferent axons in the pelvic nerve evoked a long latency (136 +/- 41 ms) response
on bladder postganglionic nerves, whereas stimulation in the dorsal pontine
tegmentum elicited shorter latency firing (72 +/- 25 ms) on these nerves.
Transection of the pelvic nerve eliminated these responses. Firing on the bladder
postganglionic nerves was evoked by stimulation in a relatively limited area of
the pons within and close to the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus (LDT) and
adjacent ventral periaqueductal gray. Stimulation at sites ventral to this
excitatory area inhibited at latencies of 107 +/- 11 ms the asynchronous firing
on the bladder postganglionic nerves elicited by bladder distension. Electrical
stimulation of afferents in the pelvic nerve evoked short latency (13 +/- 3 ms)
negative field potentials in the dorsal part of the periaqueductal gray as well
as long latency (42 +/- 7 ms) field potentials in and adjacent to the LDT. The
responses were not altered by neuromuscular blockade. Similar responses were
elicited by stimulation of afferent axons in the bladder nerves. The sum of the
latencies of the ascending and descending pathways between the LDT and the pelvic
nerve (i.e. 72 ms plus 42 ms = 114 ms) is comparable although somewhat shorter
(22 ms) than the latency of the entire micturition reflex. These results provide 
further evidence that the micturition reflex in the rat is mediated by a
spinobulbospinal pathway which passes through the dorsal pontine tegmentum, and
that neurons in the periaqueductal gray as well as the LDT may play as important 
role in the regulation of the micturition.

PMID: 1893257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Nihon Rinsho. 1991 May;49(5):1156-61.

[The management of hyperuricemic patients associated with hypertension].

[Article in Japanese]

Hirata M(1), Noto M, Tofuku Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Komatsu Municipal Hospital.

PMID: 2067109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. G Chir. 1991 May;12(5):323-7.

[Pyeloureteral junction syndrome caused by "anomalous vessel"].

[Article in Italian]

Ronchi F(1), Innocenti L, Noto O, Stagni S, Mukenge S.

Author information: 
(1)VII Clinica Chirurgica Generale e Terapia Chirurgica, Università degli Studi
di Milano.

In presenting and describing the pathogenesis of the pyeloureteral junction
syndrome, the Authors report their recent experience with four cases due to an
"abnormal vessel". Symptoms, diagnosis, and surgical techniques are discussed.

PMID: 1931525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Hinyokika Kiyo. 1991 May;37(5):485-9.

[Non-invasive imaging diagnosis of left renal vein compression causing hematuria.
Part 2. CT].

[Article in Japanese]

Sugaya K(1), Kohama T, Tsukada T, Shimoda N, Noto H, Nishizawa O, Harada T,
Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine.

Left renal veins of 77 patients were examined by computed tomography (CT) to
evaluate its usefulness in determining the left renal vein compression which is
causing renal bleeding. From CT image, left renal vein compression was observed
in 6 (86%) of the 7 cases which had been classified as idiopathic renal bleeding,
in 9 (21%) of the 42 cases which had urinary tract diseases causing hematuria,
and in 3 (11%) of the 28 cases which did not have hematuria. In 15 of the 18
cases of left renal vein compression, left renal vein was compressed between the 
superior mesenteric artery and the abdominal aorta, showing so-called nutcracker 
phenomenon. In the remaining 3 cases, however, the superior mesenteric artery
provided sharp delineation from the abdominal aorta. The superior mesenteric
artery and the abdominal aorta made the mean angle of 35.5 degree in patients
with normal left renal vein, the mean angle of 45.4 degrees in those with left
renal vein compression without nutcracker phenomenon, and the mean angle of 11.9 
degrees in those with nutcracker phenomenon. CT was superior to ultrasonography, 
in revealing left renal vein compression.

PMID: 1858583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Hinyokika Kiyo. 1991 May;37(5):481-4.

[Non-invasive imaging diagnosis of left renal vein compression causing hematuria.
Part 1. Ultrasonography].

[Article in Japanese]

Sugaya K(1), Nishizawa O, Noto H, Kohama T, Hongoh R, Matsuzaki A, Harada T,
Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine.

Left renal veins of 100 out-patients were examined by transabdominal
ultrasonography to evaluate its usefulness in determining left renal vein
compression which is causing renal bleeding. Ultrasonography revealed the left
renal vein in 86 patients. In 61 of the 86 cases, the internal cavity of left
renal vein was opened at least in diastolic phase, but in 23 cases, the internal 
cavity was closed between the abdominal aorta and the superior mesenteric artery 
in both systolic and diastolic phases. In the remaining 2 cases, left renal vein 
was compressed at a point where it intersected the right renal artery. Left renal
vein compression was observed in 18 (69%) of the 26 cases which had been
classified as idiopathic renal bleeding and in 7 (26%) of the 27 cases which had 
urinary tract diseases causing hematuria. In 33 cases which did not have
hematuria, left renal vein compression was not observed. These results suggest
that diagnosis of left renal vein compression causing renal bleeding is possible 
by transabdominal ultrasonography.

PMID: 1858582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Nucl Med. 1991 May;32(5):865-7.

Myocardial distribution of indium-111-antimyosin Fab in acute inferior and right 
ventricular infarction: comparison with technetium-99m-pyrophosphate imaging and 
histologic examination.

Nakata T(1), Sakakibara T, Noto T, Shoji T, Tsuda T, Kubota M, Hattori A, Iimura 
O.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical College, Japan.

Comment in
    J Nucl Med. 1991 May;32(5):867-70.

In a postmortem study of a 69-yr-old female patient who had suffered 2 yr
previously a non-Q-wave anterior infarction and who had sustained just seven days
earlier a left inferior and right ventricular infarction, the distribution of
111In-antimyosin Fab was compared to the results of 99mTc-pyrophosphate imaging
and histologic examination. Indium-111-antimyosin Fab imaging could not be
performed because of cardiogenic shock. However, postmortem gamma scintillation
counting revealed increased activities of antimyosin Fab in the inferoapical and 
right ventricular infarcted regions in which 99mTc-pyrophosphate positive
imagings were observed; in contrast, a histologically confirmed old
subendocardial anterior infarction had no definite activity. Thus, the myocardial
distribution of 111In-antimyosin Fab corresponded well to the results of 99mTc
scintigrams and histologic examinations in a human heart, suggesting that this
technique could be useful in vivo for detecting several-day-old myocardial
infarction of the right ventricle as well as the left ventricle. Tissue from the 
2-yr-old infarction was not identified by this technique.

PMID: 1850785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Int J Dermatol. 1991 May;30(5):367-9.

Fabry disease. Classic hemizygote and residual alpha-galactosidase A activity.

Pravata G(1), Noto G, Arico M.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Dermatology Section, Universita of Palermo, Italy.

PMID: 1648549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Kokyu To Junkan. 1991 Apr;39(4):367-72.

[An operative case of solitary interruption of the aortic arch in adult].

[Article in Japanese]

Kanoh T(1), Yamanaka O, Kobayashi S, Noto N, Osaka T, Ozaki H, Nambu M, Watanabe 
M, Tanaka J, Hosoda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Juntendo Urayasu Hospital, Juntendo
University.

A 43-year-old lady was hospitalized due to easy fatiguability in the legs during 
exercise, and for evaluation of an abnormal shadow in the chest X-ray, and
hypertension. Her blood pressure was 200/80 mmHg in the right arm, 140/70 mmHg in
the left, and 110/70 mmHg in both lower extremities. Systolic vascular bruit
radiating to her neck and back was audible in the Erb's area. DSA and aortogram
disclosed extremely dilated vessels around the origin of the left common carotid 
artery. The left subclavian artery was opacified retrogradely as a subclavian
blood steal via the left vertebral artery, and mild stenosis was seen at its
origin. There was no evidence of associated congenital anomaly such as VSD, PDA, 
or ASD. The final diagnosis, solitary interruption of the aortic arch (S-IAA,
type B), was made by MRI. The patient had an extra-anatomical bypass operation by
using Cooley woven dacron graft from the ascending to the abdominal aorta. The
result was good. S-IAA is a very rare congenital anomaly. As far as we know, only
21 patients with S-IAA including this case have been reported. A physician should
be aware that a patient with S-IAA tends to have a difference of blood pressure
not only between the upper and lower extremities but also between both arms, and 
pressure in the right arm is usually higher than that in the left. These are good
signs to suspect S-IAA. And they also can be helpful to differentiate S-IAA from 
coarctation of the aorta.

PMID: 2068391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Diabet Complications. 1991 Apr-Sep;5(2-3):82-3.

Pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy in non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.

Kida H(1), Yoshimura M, Ikeda K, Saitou Y, Noto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kanazawa National Hospital, Ishikawa, Japan.

To elucidate the characteristics of diabetic nodular lesions and the process of
progression of diabetic glomerulosclerosis, kidney specimens obtained from 185
patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) were observed using
light, electron, and immunofluorescence microscopes. The results suggest the
following. First, there are two distinct subtypes of nodular lesions: One is
formed by the progression and expansion of diffuse lesions; the other, showing a 
concentrically layered structure, is probably formed in the process of
reconstruction of mesangiolysis. Second, there are three phases in the process of
progression of diabetic glomerulosclerosis: In the first phase,
arteriolosclerosis and diffuse lesions appear; in the second phase, mesangiolysis
and nodular lesions develop in association with moderately advanced
arteriolosclerosis; and in the third phase, exudative lesions and hyalinized
glomeruli appear in association with advanced arteriolosclerosis together with
advanced interstitial lesions. In the progression of the phases and in the
development of mesangiolysis and layered nodular lesions, disturbed blood flow
into glomeruli in consequence of diabetic arteriolosclerosis could be essential.

PMID: 1770060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Lancet. 1991 Mar 23;337(8743):741.

Prevention of side-effects of interferon.

Visco G, Boumis E, Noto P, Comandini UV.

PMID: 1672212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Pediatr. 1991 Mar;118(3):479-84.

Progressive hypertension associated with hypokalemic alkalosis.

Brem AS(1), Oyer CE, Noto RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Nephrology), Rhode Island Hospital, Providence
02902.

PMID: 1999795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Circulation. 1991 Mar;83(3):1015-22.

Myocardial infarct size-limiting effect of ischemic preconditioning was not
attenuated by oxygen free-radical scavengers in the rabbit.

Iwamoto T(1), Miura T, Adachi T, Noto T, Ogawa T, Tsuchida A, Iimura O.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical College, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The limiting effect of ischemic preconditioning on infarct size has
been reported in canine hearts, which contain considerable amounts of xanthine
oxidase, a free radical-producing enzyme. Furthermore, a recent study suggested
that free radicals generated during preconditioning may contribute to the
cardioprotective effect of preconditioning. The present study examined 1) whether
preconditioning limits infarct size in rabbits, which, like humans, lack
myocardial xanthine oxidase and 2) whether the cardioprotective effect of PC is
mediated by free radicals.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A branch of the circumflex coronary artery in rabbits was
occluded for 30 minutes and then reperfused for 72 hours. Myocardial infarct size
and area at risk were determined by histology and fluorescent particles,
respectively. Five groups were studied: an untreated control group, a
preconditioned group (PC group), a high-dose superoxide dismutase (SOD)-treated
preconditioned group (high-dose SOD-PC group), a low-dose SOD-treated
preconditioned group (low-dose SOD-PC group), and a SOD-plus-catalase-treated
preconditioned group (SOD/CAT-PC group). Preconditioning was performed with four 
episodes of 5 minutes of ischemia and 5 minutes of reperfusion. The free radical 
scavengers (30,000 units/kg SOD for high-dose SOD-PC group, 15,000 units/kg SOD
for low-dose SOD-PC group, and 30,000 units/kg SOD plus 55,000 units/kg catalase 
for SOD/CAT-PC group) were infused intravenously over 60 minutes starting 20
minutes before preconditioning. Infarct size as the percentage of area at risk
was 45.1 +/- 3.5% (mean +/- SEM) in the control group (n = 11), 13.3 +/- 3.0% in 
the PC group (n = 12), 9.7 +/- 1.8% in the high-dose SOD-PC group (n = 8), 11.9
+/- 2.2% in the low-dose SOD-PC group (n = 6), and 9.6 +/- 2.3% in the SOD/CAT-PC
group (n = 6) (p less than 0.05 versus control for the last four values). The
differences in infarct size as the percent of area at risk among the PC,
high-dose SOD-PC, low-dose SOD-PC, and SOD/CAT-PC groups were not significant.
CONCLUSION: Ischemic preconditioning delays ischemic myocardial necrosis
regardless of myocardial xanthine oxidase content. Free radicals are unlikely to 
have a major role in the mechanism of the preconditioning in rabbits.

PMID: 1999006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1991 Mar;82(3):257-61.

Macrophage-T cell interaction is essential for the induction of p75 interleukin 2
(IL-2) receptor and IL-2 responsiveness in human CD4+ T cells.

Nakamura Y(1), Nishimura T, Tokuda Y, Kobayashi N, Watanabe K, Noto T, Mitomi T, 
Sugamura K, Habu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara.

Fresh human CD8+ T cells showed a strong proliferative response to a high
concentration of interleukin 2 (IL-2) in the absence of macrophages. In contrast,
CD4+ T cells revealed no significant IL-2 responsiveness in the absence of
macrophages. However, if CD4+ T cells were cocultured with macrophages, they
showed higher proliferative response to IL-2 than CD8+ T cells. In accordance
with the magnitude of IL-2 responsiveness, freshly isolated CD8+ T cells
expressed significant amounts of p75 IL-2 receptor, while fresh CD4+ T cells did 
not express p75 IL-2 receptor. The expression of p75 IL-2 receptor on CD4+ T
cells was induced by coculture with macrophages. The macrophage-induced p75 IL-2 
receptor acquisition was blocked by monoclonal antibody (mAb) against class II
antigen. Moreover, the addition of anti-CD4 mAb or anti-class II mAb to the
culture caused a great inhibition of IL-2 responsiveness of CD4+ T cells. These
results strongly suggest that macrophage-T cell interaction through CD4 and/or
class II molecules is essential for the expression of p75 IL-2 receptor and IL-2 
responsiveness in human CD4+, but not CD8+ T cells.

PMID: 1902447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Arch Ital Urol Nefrol Androl. 1991 Mar;63(1):77-84.

[Preliminary clinico-urodynamic study of diabetic uropathy of the bladder].

[Article in Italian]

Ronchi F(1), D'Aquino N, Noto O, Paganelli M, Stagni S.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Scientifico San Raffaele, Università di Milano.

Twenty-eight diabetic patients of type one have been evaluated in a preliminary
study starting from the conclusions of a previous work of the Authors, where the 
existence of four types of autonomic bladder neuropathies was demonstrated, in
opposition to the classic theory of diabetic cistopathy. The examined cases
confirm on the basis of clinical trials (HBA1C, cardiovascular autonomic
neuropathy tests) and urodynamic tests (urofluxometric test, cistomanometric
test, urethral pressure profile) the pleiomorphism of this syndrome and its
relations with diabetic disease. On the total amount of the examined cases, 16
patients (57%) showed high values of HBA1C and 17 (60.7%) positive tests for
autonomic neuropathy. Distribution of different types of cistopathy confirmed
furthermore, beside the higher incidence of the sensitive form (14 pts.), an
important percentage of sensitive motory types (4 pts.) and hyperreflexic ones (3
pts.). On the basis of the reported data, a correct and precocious differential
diagnostics is recommended in order to face in a better way the serious
consequences which may tardily affect the urinary apparatus.

PMID: 1830420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Am J Hypertens. 1991 Mar;4(3 Pt 1):214-8.

Relationship between plasma atrial natriuretic factor and urinary kallikrein
excretion in essential hypertensives.

Dessì-Fulgheri P(1), Di Noto G, Palermo R, Catalini R, Russo P, Rappelli A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Patologia Medica, University of Ancona, Italy.

In order to seek possible relationships between renal kallikrein and atrial
natriuretic factor (ANF), we measured urinary kallikrein (UK) and ANF in 84
normal subjects (NS) and in 104 uncomplicated essential hypertensives (HP).
Atrial natriuretic factor was significantly higher in HP than in NS (38.5 +/- 1.3
vs 29.0 +/- 1.3 pg/mL, P less than .01), whereas UK was significantly lower in HP
than in NS (11.1 +/- 0.9 v 15.3 +/- 0.6 nkatal/24 h, P less than .01).
Calculating the 95% of the percentile distribution of the single values of UK in 
the group of NS we were able to show that 24 out of 104 HP had a UK which fell
below the lowest limit (4.5 nkat/24 h) of the normal range. We therefore divided 
our HP into two subgroups: patients with normal kallikrein excretion (NK) (n =
80; mean UK 13.8 +/- 0.8 nkat/24 h) and patients with low kallikrein excretion
(LK) (n = 24; mean UK 2.3 +/- 0.3 nkat/24 h). Normal kallikrein patients had a
mean plasma ANF value of 31.9 +/- 1.2 pg/mL which was almost superimposable to
that found in NS; on the contrary, the mean plasma level of ANF in LK patients
(50.7 +/- 2.2 pg/mL) was significantly higher than that measured in NK patients
and in NS (P less than .01 v NK patients and NS, respectively). Since a low
urinary kallikrein excretion may represent a marker of an impaired production of 
renal kallikrein, the high levels of ANF found in the LK subgroup could be the
result of a compensatory response of the atrium attempting to maintain sodium and
volume homeostasis.

PMID: 1828349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Haematologica. 1991 Mar;76 Suppl 1:66-71.

Treatment of malignant lymphomas with very-high-dose CVB followed by
transplantation of autologous blood stem cells collected after mobilizing
chemotherapy.

Majolino I(1), Scimè R, Indovina A, Vasta S, Patti C, Gentile S, Santoro A, Di
Noto R, Fabbiano F, Guarnaccia C, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Ematologia, Ospedale V. Cervello, Palermo, Italy.

In 8 patients (age 25 +/- 46 years, mean 34.5), 4 with Hodgkin's disease (HD) and
4 with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), circulating stem cells (CSC) collected at
the time of rapid leukocyte and platelet recovery after intense chemotherapy were
employed for autologous hematological reconstitution after very-high-dose
chemotherapy (CVB combination). At the time of graft 2 patients were in 1st
remission and 2 in 2nd, while the remaining 4 had persistence or progression of
disease. Autografted patients received 3.4 +/- 8.3 (mean 5.2) x 10e8/Kg
mononuclear cells and 2.1 +/- 40.5 (mean 22.5) x 10e4/Kg CFU-GM. All patients had
prompt and sustained engraftment, though in one case platelets never reached
normal levels. Recovery time was respectively 10 +/- 17 days (mean 13.2) for
granulocytes 0.5 x 10e9/L, and 10 +/- 49 days (mean 20.3) for platelets greater
than 50.0 x 10e9/L, with an interval of less than 4 days from greater than 0.5 to
greater than 1.0 granulocytes in 7 out of the 8 patients. All patients are
currently alive at 57 +/- 645 (median 262) days, and 7 in remission at 61 +/- 645
(median 297) days from autologous blood stem cell transplantation (ABSCT). Our
study demonstrates that CSC collected after mobilizing chemotherapy are able to
promptly restore and sustain hemopoiesis after marrow ablative chemotherapy in
patients with malignant lymphoma. CSC reduce toxicity and hospitalization so
impressive, that in malignant lymphomas ABSCT could rapidly be considered for
first line strategy.

PMID: 1713875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Kaku Igaku. 1991 Mar;28(3):315-22.

[Semiquantification of technetium-99m pyrophosphate uptake in planar scintigraphy
in acute myocardial infarction--comparative studies of infarct sizing with serum 
enzyme release, cardiac function and SPECT].

[Article in Japanese]

Gotoh M(1), Nakata T, Noto T, Uno K, Tanaka S, Kubota M, Tsuda T, Shoji T, Iimura
O.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical College, Japan.

PMID: 1646347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Urol Int. 1991;47 Suppl 1:19-22.

Opioid modulation of the micturition reflex at the level of the pontine
micturition center.

Noto H(1), Roppolo JR, de Groat WC, Nishizawa O, Sugaya K, Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine, Japan.

In precollicular decerebrate cats and dogs the intravenous administration of
naloxone reduced urinary bladder capacity. Successive cystometrograms revealed
that naloxone in doses of 10-100 micrograms/kg i.v. reduced the volume necessary 
to evoke micturition by 21-67% (mean 48%) in cats and 15-81% (mean 43%) in dogs, 
respectively. Microinjection of fentanyl (0.4-10 nM) into the pontine micturition
center (PMC) increased the bladder capacity by 4-46% (mean 18%) in cats. Naloxone
injected into the same site reversed the effect of fentanyl. Microinjection of
naloxone (40-120 nM) into the PMC reduced the bladder capacity by 17-57% (mean
34%) in cats. These data indicate that endogenous opioid peptides may have a role
in controlling micturition in both decerebrate cat and dog, and that the
enkephalinergic inhibitory mechanisms are important in modulating the micturition
reflex at the level of the pontine micturition center.

PMID: 1949374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Ann Urol (Paris). 1991;25(4):172-8.

Uretero-ileocecocapsuloplasty. Preliminary reports.

Noto L(1), Bonciarelli M, Olivo G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, General Hospital of Legnago, Italy.

A uretero-ileocecocapsulaplasty and ileal patch operation was performed on seven 
patients following cystectomy. All the patients were carefully selected cases of 
unifocal T2, T3 vesical carcinoma localized at least 2-3 cm from the bladder
neck. Vesical mapping and intraoperative histological examination of resection
edges were negative. The operative technique is described together with early
clinical and urodynamic findings.

PMID: 1746924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Boll Ist Sieroter Milan. 1991-1992;70(1-2):475-81.

Epidemiological evaluation by rRNA-DNA hybridization of strains of Salmonella
enterica subsp. enterica serovar Abortusovis isolated in southern Italy in the
years 1981-1989.

Nastasi A(1), Mammina C, Villafrate MR, Caracappa S, Di Noto AM, Balbo R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Igiene e Microbiologia G. D'Allessandro, Università degli
Studi di Palermo.

Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Abortusovis is a major agent of
abortion of the sheep and is firmly established, although at low prevalence, in
Sicily. This paper describes the application rDNA gene restriction pattern
fingerprinting to investigate relatedness among 7 serovar Abortusovis strains
isolated at the "Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale" of Sicily and 29 isolates
identified at the Southern Italy Centre of Enterobacteriaceae between 1981 and
1989. Although Abortusovis serovar has exhibited a remarkable degree of
homogeneity, genomic DNA polymorphisms, that have emerged, suggest possible
importation of bacterial clones from different geographic areas.

PMID: 1727022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Brain Res. 1990 Nov 5;532(1-2):182-90.

Pontine control of the urinary bladder and external urethral sphincter in the
rat.

Kruse MN(1), Noto H, Roppolo JR, de Groat WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15261.

Neurons in the rostral pontine tegmentum are known to have an important role in
controlling micturition. The present experiments used urethane anesthetized rats 
to examine the effects of electrical stimulation at various sites in the pons on 
bladder and external urethral sphincter activity and on the volume threshold for 
inducing micturition. Stimulation with short trains of pulses (50 Hz, 1-3 s
trains, 1-15 V) in the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus (LDT), the periaqueductal
grey (PAG) or the lateral parabrachial nucleus (L-PBN) elicited contractions of a
partially filled, quiescent bladder. However stimulation during a bladder
contraction aborted the contraction indicating that these areas have inhibitory
as well as excitatory effects. Continuous stimulation (50 Hz) in the PAG or L-PBN
during a cystometrogram decreased bladder capacity (mean decrease 36%).
Conversely, continuous stimulation in the pontine reticular formation (in or near
the dorsal subcoeruleus nucleus and medial parabrachial nucleus) increased
bladder capacity (mean increase 50%). Stimulation at pontine sites (LDT, PAG and 
L-PBN) which elicited bladder contractions also elicited an increase in external 
urethral sphincter activity. A similar increase in urethral sphincter activity
occurred during reflex micturition induced by bladder distension. These data
suggest that bladder capacity and the coordination of bladder and external
urethral functions are controlled by various neuronal populations in the rostral 
pons of the rat.

PMID: 2282512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Radiol Med. 1990 Nov;80(5):754-6.

[A case of spontaneous and stabilized regression of lumbar disk herniation].

[Article in Italian]

Longo M(1), Ascenti G, Noto G, Pandolfo I, Gambardella G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Scienze Radiologiche Università, Messina.

PMID: 2267402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Radiol Med. 1990 Nov;80(5):750-2.

[Computerized tomography with surface reconstruction, in a case of posterior
choanal atresia].

[Article in Italian]

Pandolfo I(1), Scribano E, Ascenti G, Noto G, Girone G, Cascio F.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Scienze Radiologiche, Università, Messina.

PMID: 2267400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Acta Eur Fertil. 1990 Nov-Dec;21(6):293-6.

Ovulatory patterns in women with juvenile and late-onset/persistent acne
vulgaris.

Noto G(1), Pravatà G, Aricò M, Maneschi F, Palisi F.

Author information: 
(1)Sezione di Dermatologia Sperimentale, University of Palermo, Italy.

Erratum in
    Acta Eur Fertil 1991 Jul-Aug;22(4):204.

The ovulatory patterns in women with acne vulgaris were evaluated in order to
understand their relationship with androgenic levels. Ovulation disturbances were
found in 58.3% of patients with prevalence of anovulation in the juvenile acne
and of luteal insufficiency in the late-onset/persistent acne. Significant
negative correlation was found between T free and P in the late-onset/persistent 
group (r: -0.629; p = 0.016): This may be interpreted as a rather steady
endocrine status in which the raised androgenic levels, probably due to
peripheral conversion, are concomitant to absent or insufficient ovulations. In
the younger patients both the androgen excess and the ovulation disturbances
could be due to an abnormal or delayed maturation of the hypothalamus-pituitary
ovarian axis. The evaluation of the ovarian function in women with acne vulgaris 
may be useful to detect ovulatory disturbances in view of a possible resolution
of both the problems by specific endocrine management.

PMID: 2151898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 1990 Nov;17(11):769-79.

Does verapamil limit myocardial infarct size in a heart deficient in xanthine
oxidase?

Adachi T(1), Miura T, Noto T, Ooiwa H, Ogawa T, Tsuchida A, Iwamoto T, Goto M,
Iimura O.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical College, Japan.

1. The delay of ischaemic myocardial necrosis by verapamil has been reported in
the dog heart, which contains a high level of xanthine oxidase, a potential
source of cytotoxic free radicals. To test whether the retardation of ischaemic
myocyte death by verapamil is not an isolated phenomenon in the xanthine oxidase 
rich heart, we assessed the effect of verapamil in the rabbit heart, which lacks 
xanthine oxidase. 2. Verapamil (200 micrograms/kg, i.v. bolus plus 40
micrograms/kg per min) was administered in a group of rabbits (n = 5) to test the
haemodynamic response to this agent. The heart rate, blood pressure and left
ventricular dp/dt max were reduced by 11, 25 and 57%, respectively, and the
plasma concentration of verapamil was maintained at 300-400 ng/mL during the
infusion. 3. In other groups of rabbits, the effect of the same dosage of
verapamil on the size of myocardial infarct after 20 or 30 min ischaemia and 72 h
reperfusion was examined. The verapamil was administered for 45 min, starting 15 
min prior to ischaemia. The percentage of area at risk infarcted (%I/AAR) was
15.2 +/- 3.9% in the 20 min ischaemia control group and 15.4 +/- 4.5% in the 20
min ischaemia verapamil group, 49.1 +/- 3.4% in the 30 min ischaemia control
group and 41.2 +/- 3.3% in the 30 min ischaemia verapamil group. The %I/AAR was
significantly smaller in the 20 min ischaemia control groups and 15.4 +/- 4.5% in
the 20 min ischaemia there was no difference in %I/AAR between the control and
verapamil treated animals in either the 20 or the 30 min ischaemia groups. 4.
These results suggest that verapamil does not delay the transition from
reversible to irreversible myocardial injury during coronary occlusion in the
rabbit, which like the human, lacks myocardial xanthine oxidase.

PMID: 2078905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 1990 Nov;125(11):493-6.

[Solar keratosis: a histochemical study on the distribution of SH groups and SS
bonds].

[Article in Italian]

Aricò M(1), Pravatà G, Noto G, Pinto G.

Author information: 
(1)Sezione di Dermatologia Sperimentale, Università di Palermo.

The distribution of free SH groups and SS covalent linkages in hypertrophic,
atrophic, acantholytic, bowenoid, pigmented solar keratoses (SK) and squamous
cell carcinoma was evaluated. The sulphydryl groups were present in cytoplasms
with a granular pattern and nucleoli mainly in atrophic, hypertrophic and
bowenoid SK; the distribution of SS linkages appeared as a brilliant ovoid
fluorescence localized in living layers, due to individually keratinized cells in
SK. Similar results were found in squamous cell carcinoma. Our results agree with
the opinion which considers SK as in situ carcinomas.

PMID: 1708351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Minerva Anestesiol. 1990 Oct;56(10):1253-4.

[Experimental evaluation of a prototype of absolute antibacterial filter as a
moisture and heat exchanger].

[Article in Italian]

Elena A(1), Solca M, Croci M, Noto A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Anestesiologia e Rianimazione, Università degli Studi di Milano.

PMID: 2290557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Minerva Anestesiol. 1990 Oct;56(10):1247-8.

[Control of the expiratory pattern during mechanical ventilation].

[Article in Italian]

Croci M(1), Cadringher P, Mascheroni D, Noto A, Elena A, Damia G.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Anestesia e Rianimazione, IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore di Milano.

PMID: 2290554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Am Surg. 1990 Sep;56(9):533-4.

A case of pseudothrombophlebitis due to inguinal synovial cyst.

Endo M(1), Sato H, Murakami S, Kidani M, Noto T.

Author information: 
(1)Ishikawa Prefectural Central Hospital, Department of Thoracic and
Cardiovascular Surgery, Kanazawa, Japan.

A case of pseudothrombophlebitis of the whole right leg by an inguinal synovial
cyst that had a compressed femoral vein is presented. Differential diagnosis is
important in order to avoid hemorrhagic complications. The usefulness of
ultrasonography and necessity of phlebography are emphasized. Radical excision of
the cyst is recommended.

PMID: 2393192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 1990 Sep;125(9):401-3.

Angiocheratoma corporis diffusum with normal enzyme activities.

Pravatà G(1), Noto G, Aricò M.

Author information: 
(1)Sezione di Dermatologia Sperimentale, University of Palermo, Italy.

A female case of angiokeratoma corporis diffusum without systemic involvement,
with alpha-galactosidase A activity in the normal range, alpha-L-fucosidase in
the lower levels of the normal range, and a few amount of urinary sialic acid is 
reported. Some problem about differential diagnosis with inherited disorders as
Fabry's disease, fucosidosis, sialidosis is discussed. Although cases of
angiokeratoma corporis diffusum without any underlying enzyme defect have been
reported, we believe that angiokeratoma corporis diffusum is always related to
known or unknown enzymatic defect, which activities could result in the normal
range probably in relation to enzymatic polymorphism.

PMID: 2127769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Hinyokika Kiyo. 1990 Aug;36(8):915-9.

[A comparative study of the effects of propiverine, terodiline, oxybutynin on the
lower urinary tract function in the decerebrate dog].

[Article in Japanese]

Tsuchida S(1), Nishizawa O, Noto H, Kaneko S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine.

The effects of propiverine, terodiline, oxybutynin on the lower urinary tract
function was studied by cystometry in 44 decerebrate dogs. Micturition was
induced by bladder filling before and after the intravenous administration of
each drug. The statistical analysis was carried out on the urodynamic parameters.
Propiverine at a dose of 5, 10 mg/kg significantly increased the bladder volume. 
And, there was a substantial increase in the functional bladder volume at a dose 
of 10 mg/kg. Terodiline at a dose of 5 mg/kg also significantly increased the
bladder volume and residual volume. Oxybutynin at a dose of 0.5 or 1 mg/kg
produced a substantial increase in the bladder volume and residual volume, and
produced a significant decrease in contraction pressure. Furthermore, there was a
significant decrease in the functional bladder volume at a dose of 1 mg/kg. This 
study compared the three drugs under the same test conditions. Only propiverine
increased the functional bladder volume, thus suggesting promise for the relief
of pollakisuria in the clinical applications.

PMID: 2239592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Nippon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi. 1990 Aug;94(8):736-40.

[Rapid etiologic diagnosis of epidemic keratoconjunctivitis].

[Article in Japanese]

Aoki K(1), Noto K, Hasegawa I.

Author information: 
(1)Aoki Eye Clinic.

We evaluated enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (Adenoclone) in 253 cases of
epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (EKC), pharyngeal conjunctival fever (PCF) and
acute conjunctivitis. The clinical diagnosis due to adenoviral ocular infection
was 86/114 (75%) in EKC, 26/50 (52%) in PCF and 25/89 (28%) in acute
conjunctivitis, Adenoclone was positive only within 7 days after the disease
onset. The specificity (87%) and sensitivity (74%) of Adenoclone were confirmed
by isolate cell culture. Cases with corneal complication due to adenoviral
infection show higher a value than the OD value in Adenoclone and the bulbar
conjunctiva is a suitable site to detect adenoviral antigen. In this survey,
isolated adnovirus type 4 was recognized in 53%, Ad8 in 14%, Ad3 in 13%, Ad37 in 
5%, Ad19 in 2% and non typed Ad in 12%. Clinical findings due to Ad4 showed EKC
in 50%, PCF in 30% and acute conjunctivitis in 20% respectively.

PMID: 2239549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 1990 Aug;17(8 Pt 2):1815-9.

[Hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy using implantable reservoir in colorectal
liver metastasis].

[Article in Japanese]

Yasuda S(1), Noto T, Ikeda M, Mukai M, Mizutani K, Gotoh K, Tsukui M, Ohtani Y,
Tanaka Y, Nakazaki H, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Second Dept. of Surgery, Tokai University School of Medicine.

Hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy was performed in 47 cases with colorectal 
liver metastasis. Methods of hepatic arterial cannulation were as follows:
operative insertion of polyvinyl chloride catheter in 12 cases, angiographic
insertion of polyethylene catheter via the left high brachial artery in 20 cases 
and operative implantation of reservoir in 15 cases. Mean durations of
chemotherapy were 31 days, 25 days and 115 days, respectively. Chemotherapies
were discontinued because of complications and catheter troubles in 7 cases
(58%), 8 cases (40%) and 6 cases (40%), respectively. Regression of tumor size
was observed only in the group with reservoir. Prolonged therapy is achievable by
use of the reservoir. But catheter troubles, including obstruction, infection,
extravasation and pseudoaneurysm, are still observed in the course of
chemotherapy. Radionuclide study using 99m Tc macroaggregated albumin is useful
to detect catheter troubles. We stressed that the proper management of reservoirs
is important.

PMID: 2117906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Ann Ital Chir. 1990 Jul-Aug;61(4):355-8.

[The anesthesiological problems of the morbidly obese patient].

[Article in Italian]

Croci M(1), Elena A, Noto A, Ferrari G, Tarenzi L.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Anestesia e Rianimazione, Università degli Studi di Milano.

PMID: 2082770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Am J Dermatopathol. 1990 Jun;12(3):319-20.

"Shadow" cells in proliferating trichilemmal tumors.

Noto G, Pravatà G, Aricó M.

PMID: 2353747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. G Chir. 1990 Jun;11(6):342-6.

[Anatomical and surgical considerations on the internal spermatic venous system].

[Article in Italian]

Noto O(1), Paganelli MF, Mukenge S, Stagni S, Erenbourg L, Ronchi F.

Author information: 
(1)Ospedale San Raffaele, Università degli Studi di Milano.

The surgical anatomy of the spermatic venous system is described. Thereafter an
experimental evaluation performed on cadavers by the vascular mould technique
using plastic materials is reported. The resulting data point out the complex
variability of the spermatic venous circulation, stressing the value of
preoperative phlebography in the surgical approach to varicocele.

PMID: 2252858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Kokyu To Junkan. 1990 May;38(5):483-7.

[A case of acute myocardial infarction due to coronary embolism from left atrial 
thrombus with atrial fibrillation].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto N(1), Osaka T, Yamanaka O, Kobayashi S, Ozaki H, Kanoh T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Urayasu Hospital, Juntendo University.

A 55-year-old man, who has been on follow-up observation with chronic atrial
fibrillation, came in with a sudden onset of chest pain on July 31, 1986. He was 
diagnosed as having acute myocardial infarction indicated by abnormal ECG,
elevated serum enzyme and characteristic signs of echocardiography. Emergency
coronary angiography was performed 2 hours after the onset of chest pain, and it 
was reported as showing total obstruction of the distal left anterior descending 
artery. Percutaneous transluminal coronary recanalization using 1,200,000 units
of urokinase was unsuccessful. The repeated angiography performed 40 days later, 
showed normal coronary arteriogram, but left ventriculogram revealed akinesis of 
the apical segment. Furthermore, left atrium opacified in the levophase of
pulmonary arteriogram indicated left atrial thrombus. The cause of the myocardial
infarction was considered to be coronary embolism from the left atrial thrombus
with atrial fibrillation. It must be the first report documented by coronary
angiography, of coronary thrombo-embolism due to chronic atrial fibrillation
without any underlying disease.

PMID: 2371461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Nucl Med. 1990 May;31(5):573-9.

In vivo SPECT imaging of CNS D-2 dopamine receptors: initial studies with
iodine-123-IBZM in humans.

Kung HF(1), Alavi A, Chang W, Kung MP, Keyes JW Jr, Velchik MG, Billings J, Pan
S, Noto R, Rausch, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.

Iodobenzamide (IBZM) is a D-2 dopamine receptor antagonist. In this paper the
results of Phase I clinical studies of iodine-123-(123I)IBZM in humans are
reported. Preliminary imaging studies, both planar and single-photon emission
tomography (SPECT), of no-carrier added [123I]IBZM in humans show specific
localization in the basal ganglia of the brain. At 2 hr after an i.v. injection, 
the brain uptake was 3.72% of the dose, and at 20 hr later the uptake diminished 
to 0.7%. Radiation dosimetry calculation indicated that the radiation dose to the
brain was minimum, 0.039 rad/mCi, while the large intestine wall received the
highest dose, 0.28 mrad/mCi. The radiation dosimetry and pharmacology data
suggest that this agent is safe for human use.

PMID: 2140408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Riv Eur Sci Med Farmacol. 1990 Apr;12 Suppl 2:5-66.

[Evaluation of genetic predisposition and acquired risk factors in development of
essential hypertension and its acute complications].

[Article in Italian]

Noto R(1), Sfogliano L, Benigno R, Bonanno G, Cantelmo R.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Medicina Interna e Medicina d'Urgenza, Università di Catania.

The authors studied a population of 4.023 subjects from several rural and urban
communities selected on the basis of age, work tasks and social class. Genetic
predisposition to essential hypertension was evaluated by determining
intraerythrocyte sodium levels in all subjects with essential hypertension and
their families. The authors also verified the behaviour of some biohumoral
factors (PRA, aldosterone, ANP, intraerythrocyte, Na) as possible markers of
essential hypertension and the role of some acquired risk factors in the
development of the disease and its cerebrocardiovascular complications. The
hypertense subjects were divided into groups and treated with diet alone or diet 
associated with drugs depending on the prevalence of pathogenetic factors. The
results were evaluated after 1, 3, 6 and 12 months.

PMID: 2084809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Nihon Gan Chiryo Gakkai Shi. 1990 Mar 20;25(3):598-602.

[Application of a new compact and cell dense continuous culture system for LAK
cells generated from cryo-preserved lymphocytes].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakamura Y(1), Wakamatsu S, Kobayashi N, Watanabe K, Noto T, Tokuda Y, Tajima T, 
Mitomi T, Yamamura M, Nishijima K.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Transfusion Service Center, Tokai University Hospital.

Recently, the adoptive immunotherapy using lymphokine activated killer (LAK)
cells has been applied for various cancer patients. It is quite useful to
generate LAK cells from cryo-preserved lymphocytes in order to make a rational
treatment schedule. We made basic studies on the induction of LAK cells from
frozen lymphocytes using our high yield continuous cell culture system. It was
demonstrated that our culture bag can be used to proliferate frozen lymphocytes
cultured in interleukin-2 (IL-2) to thirty four-fold the initial cell number in
14 days with comparable cytotoxicity to that of fresh lymphocytes cultured in the
same system.

PMID: 2351852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Fertil Steril. 1990 Mar;53(3):469-72.

Survival and pregnancy outcome after ultrarapid freezing of human embryos.

Gordts S(1), Roziers P, Campo R, Noto V.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Center for Fertility Diagnostics and In Vitro Fertilization, Leuven,
Belgium.

Contrary to the belief that rapid cooling and thawing of mammalian embryos is
detrimental to survival, it has been shown that under certain conditions
mammalian embryos can survive rapid freezing-thawing. In this study, 237 human
fertilized oocytes (93 pronucleates, 20 multipronucleates, and 124 cleaved
embryos) were frozen for a period of 1 day to 7 months using the ultrarapid
freezing system. After thawing, 94% of the embryos in the pronucleate group and
89.5% in the multipronucleate group showed normal morphological features, and 79%
and 71%, respectively, started to cleave. Forty cleaved embryos were also
frozen-thawed, but only 15 (37.5%) survived at thawing. Thirty-four frozen-thawed
cleaved embryos were transferred to 20 patients during spontaneous cycles. Four
patients became pregnant.

PMID: 2307246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Utop Stud. 1990;1(2):115-22.

Cosimo Noto's The Ideal City (1903): New Orleans as medical utopia.

Kopp JJ.

PMID: 11618241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Electron Microsc (Tokyo). 1990;39(1):33-8.

Budding process and maturation of human immunodeficiency virus examined by means 
of pre- and post-embedding immunocolloidal gold electron microscopy.

Katsumoto T(1), Asanaka M, Kageyama S, Kurimura T, Nakajima K, Noto A, Tanaka H, 
Sato R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Tottori University School of Medicine, Yonago, Japan.

The techniques of pre- and post-embedding immunocolloidal gold electron
microscopy were tested for their usefulness for analyzing the morphogenesis of
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) strain LAV employing U-937 cells persistently 
infected with the virus (U-937/LAV). By both techniques the following results
were obtained. (1) Budding process was restricted to a localized area at the
membrane adjacent to the Golgi apparatus. (2) The distribution of viral envelope 
antigens was restricted to the electron-dense crescent structures on the cell
surface. (3) Virions released from the cells could be classified mainly into 2
categories: virions with doughnut-shaped cores or with conical cores at the
center of the particles. And p24 proteins localized on the thick electron-dense
cores of both types. These findings support the idea that pre- and post-embedding
immunogold electron microscopy is very useful for studying the morphogenesis of
viruses.

PMID: 2358770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Orthop Trauma. 1990;4(3):346-8.

Volumetric three-dimensional computed tomography for acute calcaneus fractures:
preliminary report.

Carr JB(1), Noto AM, Stevenson S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Orthopedic Surgery, Medical College of Virginia, Richmond 23298.

Volumetric three-dimensional (3-D) computed tomographic reconstructions were
performed on three cadaver specimens before and after fracture for 16 acute
calcaneal fractures. This "second-generation" 3-D reconstruction technique
produced accurate, detailed images of the extra-articular fracture anatomy. Use
of this method provided visualization of specific fracture component displacement
otherwise unappreciated prior to surgery. In two cases, vertical splits in the
superomedial fragment were demonstrated to best advantage by this 3-D technique.

PMID: 2231136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Acta Paediatr Scand. 1990 Jan;79(1):110-1.

Treatment of precocious puberty with continuous subcutaneous infusion of native
luteinizing hormone releasing hormone.

Noto R(1), Mitchell G, Crossan M, Rosati M, Lala V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York 10595.

PMID: 2180251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Comp Biochem Physiol B. 1990;95(2):423-9.

A species-specific sperm-activating peptide from the egg jelly of the sea urchin 
Diadema setosum.

Yoshino K(1), Kurita M, Yamaguchi M, Nomura K, Takao T, Shimonishi Y, Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan.

1. A species-specific sperm-activating peptide was isolated from the egg jelly of
the sea urchin Diadema setosum and the amino acid sequence was determined as
follows: (formula; see text). 2. The peptide caused significant increases of
respiration rates and cyclic nucleotide concentrations in D. setosum spermatozoa 
as low as 10(-9) M. 3. The addition of the peptide to D. setosum spermatozoa
resulted in the appearance of a newly stained protein (mol. wt 128,000) on sodium
dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels.

PMID: 2158412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Cardiol. 1990;20(4):787-95.

[Assessment of infarct-related coronary arteries using the bull's eye view method
and unfolded surface mapping in thallium-201 myocardial tomography].

[Article in Japanese]

Uno K(1), Tsuchihashi K, Nakata T, Wada A, Noto T, Hayase A, Hashimoto A, Tanaka 
S, Kubota M, Iimura O.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical College.

Infarct-related coronary lesions and collaterals were assessed by the bull's eye 
view and the unfolded surface map derived from thallium-201 myocardial tomography
(Tl-201 SPECT) in 25 patients with anterior myocardial infarction. The patients
were categorized in six groups according to their cine-angiographic findings:
locations of stenosis (proximal or distal portions of the first diagonal branch
or distal site of the first septal branch), and the presence or absence of
collaterals. The anterior half of the left ventricle on the bull's eye view map
was divided into eight regions from the anterior septum to the lateral wall and
from the apex to the cardiac base. Tl-201 SPECT images were expressed as
functional maps using maximum-count circumferential profile analysis: an "extent 
image" showing the extent of perfusion defect, and a "severity image"
demonstrating the degree of hypoperfusion. The following results were obtained:
1. Perfusion defect of the "extent image" at the basal portion of the anterior
septum reflected poor collaterals, with a sensitivity of 81.3%, a specificity of 
77.8%, and a diagnostic accuracy of 80.0%. 2. Coronary stenosis at segment 6 (AHA
classification) was differentiated from that at segment 7 by detecting
hypoperfusion at the basal septum on the "severity image", with a sensitivity of 
71.4%, a specificity of 77.8%, and a diagnostic accuracy of 75.0%. 3. Perfusion
defect at the basal section of the proximal portion of the anterior wall on the
"extent image" indicated stenosis at the proximal segment 6, with a sensitivity
of 57.1% and a specificity of 88.9%.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2133716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Perit Dial Int. 1990;10(1):102-3.

The use of radionuclide scintigraphy to identify the cause of genital edema in
three patients on CAPD.

Elnour M(1), Noto R, Chazan JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence 02903.

PMID: 2085567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Nihon Heikatsukin Gakkai Zasshi. 1989 Dec;25(6):366-8.

[Influence of tension on the intra-urethral pressure curve].

[Article in Japanese]

Sugaya K, Nishizawa S, Noto H, Suzuki T, Kohama T, Matsuzaki A, Harada T,
Tsuchita M.

PMID: 2702294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Nihon Heikatsukin Gakkai Zasshi. 1989 Dec;25(6):245-7.

[Pharmacologic effects of baclofen on functions of the lower urinary tract].

[Article in Japanese]

Nishizawa T, Suzuki T, Sugaya K, Kohama T, Fukuda T, Matsuzaki A, Tukada T, Noto 
H, Harada T, Tsuchida M.

PMID: 2702255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Hypertens Suppl. 1989 Dec;7(6):S300-1.

Blunting of atrial natriuretic factor response to volume expansion by benazepril 
in hypertensive patients.

Dessì-Fulgheri P(1), Motolese M, Di Noto G, Delfino D, Giacchetti G, Boria C,
Rappelli A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Patologia Medica, University of Ancona, Italy.

To verify the hypothesis that the angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) level may
affect the metabolism of circulating atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), the acute
and chronic effects of benazepril on plasma ANF levels were studied in
hypertensive patients under basal conditions and in response to acute volume
expansion. Ten essential hypertensives entered a double-blind crossover study,
and were randomly allocated either to placebo or to 10 mg benazepril orally once 
a day for 2 days; after a placebo washout period of 2 days the groups were
crossed over. On the second day of each crossover period, volume expansion was
induced by infusing 1 litre saline in 30 min, and blood samples for ANF
measurements were drawn at times -5, 0, 5, 15, 30, 35, 40, 50 and 60 min. Oral
benazepril at 10 mg/day was then given to all patients for 4 weeks, and the
volume expansion with saline was repeated. After the 2-day acute benazepril
treatment, blood pressure fell from 166.1 +/- 3.6/105.1 +/- 0.9 to 140.1 +/-
4.6/85.6 +/- 2.1 mmHg (P less than 0.01 for both systolic and diastolic blood
pressure), whereas ANF fell from 29.4 +/- 3.6 to 24.1 +/- 3.7 pg/ml (NS) after
the acute benazepril treatment and to 17.7 +/- 3.6 pg/ml (P less than 0.01) after
the chronic benazepril treatment. The volume expansion itself did not induce
significant changes in mean arterial pressure, either during the placebo
treatment or during the acute chronic benazepril treatment. The rise in ANF
values in response to saline infusion during placebo was prompt, beginning at min
15 and reaching a maximum at min 40.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2561144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Hypertens Suppl. 1989 Dec;7(6):S232-3.

Relationship between urinary kallikrein excretion and plasma atrial natriuretic
factor in essential hypertensives.

Dessì-Fulgheri P(1), Di Noto G, Palermo R, Catalini R, Russo P, Rappelli A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Patologia Medica, University of Ancona, Italy.

Relationships between renal kallikrein and plasma atrial natriuretic factor were 
investigated by measuring urinary kallikrein excretion (by spectrophotometric
assay) and plasma atrial natriuretic factor (by radio-immunoassay after
extraction from plasma) in 84 normal subjects and in 104 essential hypertensives 
with a normal renal function. The atrial natriuretic factor was significantly
higher in the essential hypertensives than in the normal subjects (38.5 +/- 1.3
versus 29.0 +/- 1.3 pg/ml, P less than 0.01), whereas urinary kallikrein
excretion was significantly lower in the hypertensives than in the normal
subjects (11.1 +/- 0.9 versus 15.3 +/- 0.6 nkat/24 h, P less than 0.01). Taking
the 95% confidence limits of urinary kallikrein excretion in the normal subjects 
(from 4.5 to 29.9 nkat/24 h), we divided our essential hypertensives into two
subgroups, patients with a normal kallikrein excretion (n = 80; mean urinary
kallikrein excretion 13.8 +/- 0.8 nkat/24 h) and patients with a low kallikrein
excretion (n = 24; mean urinary kallikrein excretion 2.3 +/- 0.3 nkat/24 h) The
patients with a normal kallikrein excretion had a mean plasma atrial natriuretic 
factor value of 31.9 +/- 1.2 pg/ml, which was similar to that found in normal
subjects. In contrast, the mean plasma level of atrial natriuretic factor in the 
patients with a low kallikrein excretion (50.7 +/- 2.2 pg/ml) was significantly
higher than that measured in the patients with a normal kallikrein excretion and 
in the normal subjects (P less than 0.01 versus patients with normal kallikrein
excretion and normal subjects, respectively).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2534406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Br J Dermatol. 1989 Dec;121(6):793-7.

Proliferating tricholemmal tumour with lymph node metastases.

Aricó M(1), La Rocca E, Noto G, Pravatá G, Rodolico V.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Dermatology Unit, University of Palermo, Policlinico Giaccone,
Italy.

A 42-year-old woman with a proliferating tricholemmal tumour (PTT) with regional 
lymph node metastases is reported. Histochemical studies showed evidence of
tricholemmal keratinization. There was recurrence following excision and
subsequently the patient developed lymph node metastases.

PMID: 2482062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Pathologica. 1989 Nov-Dec;81(1076):627-34.

[Pseudoachondrodysplasia (pseudoachondroplastic spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia).
Description of 2 non-familial cases].

[Article in Italian]

Giordano F, Corso D, Basile G, Noto D, Orsi E, Chiappara GM, Camera G.

Two non familial cases of pseudoachondroplasia are reported. The patients,
observed at 4 years and 6 months and 5 years respectively, show short-limb
dwarfism with disproportionated long trunk and with normal head and face.
Flattening of vertebral bodies with biconvex deformity and short tubular bones
with irregular epiphyses and metaphyses are the major radiographic features. In
these patients to state the type of genetic transmission is very arduous, as the 
genetic heterogeneity of the pseudoachondroplasia.

PMID: 2635292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 1989 Nov-Dec;124(11-12):505-9.

[Fabry's disease: kidney insufficiency in heterozygous patient].

[Article in Italian]

Pravatà G, Pinto G, Noto G, Aricò M.

We report a rare heterozygous status for Fabry's gene with severe kidney
involvement and normal alpha-galactosidase A activity, together with the
intrafamilial variations in the clinical expression of the disease. The random X 
inactivation hypothesis seems to explain such a variable expression of the
alpha-galactosidase gene in our cases.

PMID: 2561653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Minerva Anestesiol. 1989 Oct;55(10):409-11.

[Buprenorphine in balanced anesthesia].

[Article in Italian]

Di Noto M, Morgana G, Piccolo G, Proietti L.

Buprenorphine was administered for the balanced general anaesthesia in 300
patients during several operations. The results obtained, the good features of
analgesia, morphine-like, the absence of cardiovascular and respiratory side
effects are presented.

PMID: 2633073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Mo Med. 1989 Sep;86(9):637-40.

Magnetic resonance imaging: failure to demonstrate spinal arteriovenous
malformations in four patients.

Shah DC, James R, Ashraf A, Noto AM, Shull SY.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), often useful for detecting spinal lesions, was 
unsuccessful in revealing spinal arteriovenous malformations in four patients, as
recorded here. Patients with persistent neurological symptoms after "normal" MRI 
scans should undergo additional imaging procedures.

PMID: 2779513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 1989 Sep;124(9):389-91.

[Usefulness and limitations of the evaluation of sex-hormone-binding globulin in 
women with a female pattern of androgen-induced baldness].

[Article in Italian]

Noto G, Maneschi F, Palisi F, Pravatà G, Aricò M.

Sex-hormone binding globulin (SHBG) and androgen serum levels have been evaluated
in a homogeneous group of women with female pattern of androgenetic alopecia
(AA), stage II, without any clinical or anamnestic evidence of acne, hirsutism,
irregular menses. Results did not show any significant difference between
patients and controls. Since SHBG levels are androgen-dependent, the discordant
results of previous published series regarding women with AA could be related to 
the presence of a variable number of patients with clinical and/or anamnestic
evidence of a "cryptic" hyperandrogenism in some series, and to their absence in 
others. Statistically significant low average SHBG values could have been
sustained by a mild, heterogeneous and not significant androgen excess. In our
opinion the genetically-determined response of the target organ to androgens
seems to play the major pathogenetic role in AA, at least when the woman does not
reveal any clinical or anamnestic evidence of cryptic or clear hyperandrogenism.

PMID: 2635140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Jpn Heart J. 1989 Sep;30(5):695-708.

Progression of myocardial infarction in a collateral flow deficient species.

Miura T(1), Downey JM, Ooiwa H, Ogawa S, Adachi T, Noto T, Shizukuda Y, Iimura O.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical College, Japan.

The effect of a varying period of ischemia on the development of myocardial
infarction was investigated in the rabbit. Radiomicrosphere measurements
confirmed that the collateral blood flow is almost zero (0.02 +/- 0.01 ml/min/g) 
and without a significant transmural gradient in the rabbit heart (n = 15). A
coronary branch of the left circumflex artery was occluded for 5, 10, 15, 30 or
60 min and then reperfused. The coronary branch was occluded permanently in
another group of rabbits. Three days after the coronary occlusion, the infarct
size was determined by hematoxylin-eosin and Mallory's staining and the ischemic 
zone size was determined by fluorescent particles. The results showed that the
percentage of the ischemic zone infarcted (% infarction) vs the log of duration
of ischemia yielded a sigmoid curve which could be linearized by probit analysis:
Probits of % infarction = 3.05 x log (ischemic duration in minutes) + 0.33, r =
0.83, p less than 0.01. The regression equation indicated that 50% of the
ischemic myocytes necrotized after 34 min of coronary artery occlusion. Unlike in
the dog heart, the infarct of the rabbit heart first appears in the midmyocardium
and then progresses towards both the endocardium and epicardium.

PMID: 2614932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Cardiologia. 1989 Sep;34(9):797-801.

[Cardiac arrhythmia in relation to the leaflet morphology in subjects with mitral
valve prolapse].

[Article in Italian]

Nardi E, Alaimo G, Noto G, Zingone F, Longo B, Gennaro C, Novo S, Strano A.

Aim of this study was to verify the prevalence of cardiac arrhythmias in subjects
with mitral valve prolapse (MVP) and redundant leaflets in comparison with
subjects with MVP without leaflets redundance. So, 60 subjects (aged 13 to 39
years), were subdivided in 3 groups on the basis of mitral leaflets shape at
2D-echocardiography; a continuous ECG monitoring (24 hours) was also performed.
Arrhythmias were more frequent and more severe in the Group III (subjects with
MVP and redundant leaflets), in comparison with both Group II (subjects with MVP 
without leaflets redundance) and Group I (control subjects). In particular,
analysing the mean values of the single arrhythmias in the 24 hours, ventricular 
ectopic beats (VEB), were more frequent in Group II (p less than 0.01) and Group 
III (p less than 0.05) in comparison with Group I; the couplets and the runs of
ventricular tachycardia were more frequent in Group III than in the other groups 
(p less than 0.001). The number of the subjects with a Lown class greater than 3 
was higher in Group III than in the other groups (p less than 0.01). In
conclusion, this study confirms that MVP is a disease presenting a large
variability arrhythmic risk, that seems to be real only for a subgroup of these
subjects.

PMID: 2605589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 1989 Aug;75(2):231-40.

Steroid production by amago salmon (Oncorhynchus rhodurus) testes at different
development stages.

Sakai N(1), Ueda H, Suzuki N, Nagahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan.

Developmental changes in the steroidogenic capacity of amago salmon (Oncorhynchus
rhodurus) testicular fragments at six different stages during spermatogenesis and
spermiation were examined using 18-hr incubations. Although both basal and chum
salmon gonadotropin (SGA)-induced production of 11-ketotestosterone (11-ketoT)
and 17 alpha,20 beta-dihydroxy-4-pregnen-3-one (17 alpha,20 beta-diOHprog)
remained relatively low in testicular fragments isolated in August (GSI 1.06;
primarily spermatocytes and spermatids in the testes) and September (GSI
2.33-4.85; many spermatids and spermatozoa in the testes), 11-ketoT production
was two to three times higher than 17 alpha,20 beta-diOHprog production. In mid
October (GSI 4.31; primarily spermatozoa in the testes, with a few spermatids
remaining), SGA greatly stimulated 11-ketoT production with no further
stimulation in late October (GSI 3.54; advanced spermiation). In contrast, SGA
dramatically increased 17 alpha,20 beta-diOHprog production in late October and
November (GSI 3.02), coincident with the period of active spermiation. A time
course study showed that SGA caused a marked increase in production of 17
alpha,20 beta-diOHprog within the first 3 hr. Testes collected in August and
September produced a considerable amount of 17 alpha,20 beta-diOHprog in the
presence of an exogenous precursor, 17 alpha-hydroxyprogesterone. These results
indicate that a shift in steroidogenesis from 11-ketoT to 17 alpha,20
beta-diOHprog occurs in the amago salmon testis immediately prior to or during
the spermiation period and further suggest that mechanisms of gonadotropin action
on 17 alpha,20 beta-diOHprog production in testes differ from those of ovaries
(Y. Nagahama, 1987, Dev. Growth Differ. 29, 1-12).

PMID: 2806873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Soins Psychiatr. 1989 Aug-Sep;(106-107):7-12.

[The mentally wounded. Pathological reactions and mental involvement in victims
of disasters].

[Article in French]

Ilel K, Ferreri M, Noto R.

PMID: 2603002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Brain Res. 1989 Jul 17;492(1-2):99-115.

Excitatory and inhibitory influences on bladder activity elicited by electrical
stimulation in the pontine micturition center in the rat.

Noto H(1), Roppolo JR, Steers WD, de Groat WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine, PA
15261.

Electrical stimulation at various sites in the dorsal pontine tegmentum in
urethane anesthetized rats modulated activity of the urinary bladder as well as
efferent firing on bladder postganglionic nerves. Electrical stimulation (0.2 ms 
50 Hz, 5-20 V or 30-150 microA, 2-5 s train duration) using a microelectrode (tip
diameter, 10-20 microns) in an excitatory area located rostral and medial to the 
locus coeruleus evoked short latency (less than 2 s) large amplitude (greater
than 20 cm H2O) bladder contractions and increased firing on the bladder
postganglionic nerves. Stimulation at sites adjacent to the excitatory area
inhibited bladder postganglionic nerve firing and bladder activity. Inhibitory
responses were evident as either a decrease in intravesical pressure, an
increased interval between bladder contractions, or an interruption or
elimination of bladder contractions. The threshold intensity for excitation using
a large electrode (2-4 V) was slightly higher than that for inhibition (1.5-2 V).
The optimum sites for evoking bladder contractions were located in and close to
the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus (LDT) and in the periaqueductal gray just
dorsal or dorsolateral to the LDT. The extent of the area that induced bladder
contractions was 0.5-1.2 mm in diameter in each rat when a microelectrode was
employed for electrical stimulation. Electrical stimulation in the optimum site
for evoking bladder contractions induced relatively little striated muscle
activity and produced no short-latency blood pressure changes. The longer latency
blood pressure changes associated with a spontaneous bladder contraction were
still present following a stimulation of the dorsolateral pons. These data are
consistent with the view that neurons in the dorsal pontine tegmentum play an
important role in the regulation of urine storage as well as urine release.

PMID: 2752312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Jpn Circ J. 1989 Jul;53(7):786-94.

Human superoxide dismutase failed to limit the size of myocardial infarct after
20-, 30-, or 60-minute ischemia and 72-hour reperfusion in the rabbit.

Miura T(1), Ogawa S, Ooiwa H, Adachi T, Noto T, Shizukuda Y, Iimura O.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical College, Japan.

The effect of superoxide dismutase (SOD) on the size of the myocardial infarct
resulting from various durations of ischemia and a 72-hour reperfusion was
examined in the rabbit. A coronary branch of the circumflex artery was occluded
for 20, 30, or 60 min and then reperfused. Seventy-two hours after the coronary
occlusion, the infarct size and the size of the area at risk (vascular bed of
occluded coronary artery) were determined by histology (hematoxylin-eosin and
Mallory's staining) and by fluorescent particles, respectively. Human SOD (45,000
units/kg) was injected intravenously as a bolus in SOD-treated rabbits, while
only saline was administered to control rabbits. The percentage of the area at
risk which actually infarcted (%I/AAR) was 25.5 +/- 12.9% (mean +/- S.D.) in the 
20-min ischemia control group (n = 9), 19.7 +/- 10.2% in the 20-min ischemia SOD 
group (n = 9), 44.8 +/- 9.0% in the 30-min ischemia control group (n = 9), 41.0
+/- 6.3% in the 30-min ischemia SOD group (n = 9), 74.2 +/- 13.8% in the 60-min
ischemia control group (n = 9), and 76.6 +/- 8.2% in the 60-min ischemia SOD
group (n = 7). The %I/AAR was not significantly different between the control and
SOD groups for any duration of ischemia. Heart rate, blood pressure, and the size
of area at risk were comparable in all six groups. These findings suggested that 
oxygen-free radicals produced during initial moments of reperfusion were unlikely
to contribute to myocardial necrosis regardless of the duration of ischemia in
the rabbit.

PMID: 2810689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1989 Jul;37(7):1371-5.

[A rare case of left atrial thrombus after left upper pulmonary lobectomy].

[Article in Japanese]

Seki M, Endo M, Kidani M, Kobayashi H, Sato H, Noto T.

A 75-year-old man was operated for left atrial thrombus. He had received left
upper pulmonary lobectomy for epidermoid carcinoma of the lung, 6 months
previously. Thrombus, 5.2 X 1.5 X 0.8 cm in size, was grown up from the inside of
the left upper pulmonary vein into the left atrial cavity. It was removed and
left upper pulmonary vein orifice was sutured and closed. There was no abnormal
findings in the endocardium of the left atrium and mitral valve. A case of the
left atrial thrombus after the pulmonary lobectomy is very rare and this may be
the first report in world literature.

PMID: 2794597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Biochem. 1989 Jul;106(1):158-62.

Dermatan sulfate formation in gastrulae of the sea urchin Clypeaster japonicus.

Yamaguchi M(1), Kinoshita S, Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory Kanazawa University, Ishikawa.

Gastrullation of sea urchin embryos is arrested in sulfate-free sea water. This
developmental arrest has been considered to be due to lack of sulfation of
glycosaminoglycans in the extracellular matrix of the embryos. In the present
study, we characterized a dermatan sulfate type component formed in
gastrula-stage embryos of the sea urchin Clypeaster japonicus and examined the
effects of sulfate deprivation on the formation. Glycosamino-glycans were
prepared from gastrula-stage embryos incubated with [3H]acetate in normal and
sulfate-free sea water. Enzymatic analyses indicated that embryos formed a
glycosaminoglycan of the dermatan sulfate type which contained an
N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfate-containing disaccharide as a major unit, plus a
minor unidentified component. Under sulfate-free conditions, embryos formed an
under-sulfated chondroitin/dermatan sulfate copolymer which mainly consisted of
non-sulfate, glucuronic acid-containing (chondroitin) disaccharide units. These
results suggest that sulfate deprivation diminishes not only the degree of
sulfation but also the formation of L-iduronic acid-containing (dermatan)
disaccharide units in dermatan sulfate in sea urchin embryos.

PMID: 2777747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Cancer Res. 1989 Jul 1;49(13):3662-9.

Mosaicism in the expression of tumor-associated carbohydrate antigens in human
colonic and gastric cancers.

Nakasaki H(1), Mitomi T, Noto T, Ogoshi K, Hanaue H, Tanaka Y, Makuuchi H,
Clausen H, Hakomori S.

Author information: 
(1)Biomembrane Institute, Seattle, Washington 98119.

Serial sequential sections from a single tumor were examined by
immunohistological staining with several monoclonal antibodies directed,
respectively, to different tumor-associated carbohydrate epitopes. Staining
patterns were compared with those of conventional staining with hematoxylin-eosin
or periodate/Schiff's reagent. Each tumor showed different areas of staining with
different antibodies, and the combined staining map shows a clear mosaicism of
antigen expression within the same tumor. For example, some areas of a given
tumor were stained by FH4 (defining dimeric Le(x)), while other complementary
areas were strongly stained, in a mutually exclusive manner, by SH1 (defining
Le(x)), AH6 (defining Le(y)), FH6 (defining sialosyl dimeric (Le(x)), or TKH2
(defining sialosyl-Tn). Some areas were stained by two or three of these
antibodies. Comparisons of the mosaic-staining patterns with cytohistological
properties of tumor cells within specific areas suggested that the pattern of
antigen expression is correlated with degree of differentiation; e.g.,
poorly-differentiated cells with severe dysplasia did not express high levels of 
Le(x) or Le(y) but did express sialyl-Le(x) or dimeric Le(x); on the other hand, 
moderately or well-differentiated tumor cells in some areas expressed high levels
of Le(x) or Le(y) but lower levels of sialyl-Le(x). Areas showing strong
expression of sialyl-Tn in their secretions were consistently correlated with
presence of well-differentiated tumor cells, whereas secretions from normal
mucosae were consistently characterized by lack of sialyl-Tn expression. It is
postulated that the original in situ tumors (which had homogeneous glycosylation 
patterns) evolved into several spatially discrete cell populations displaying
different degrees of glycosylation, reflecting stages of tumor cell
differentiation and progression.

PMID: 2659167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Acta Paediatr Jpn. 1989 Jun;31(3):349-51.

Immune responses to HB vaccine in siblings born to HB carrier mothers.

Nishida M, Igarashi Y, Noto H, Takahashi K, Kishimoto S, Kanai K.

PMID: 2529736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Nihon Juigaku Zasshi. 1989 Jun;51(3):646-8.

Specific changes in the partial pressure of arterial blood carbon dioxide
observed during high-frequency jet ventilation in dogs.

Orima H, Noto A, Koizumi T, Washizu M, Tagawa M, Shimizu M, Fujita M, Tezuka T.

PMID: 2503653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Cathet Cardiovasc Diagn. 1989 May;17(1):5-10.

Coronary arteriography 1984-1987: a report of the Registry of the Society for
Cardiac Angiography and Interventions. I. Results and complications.

Johnson LW(1), Lozner EC, Johnson S, Krone R, Pichard AD, Vetrovec GW, Noto TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Society for Cardiac Angiography and Interventions, San Francisco, CA 94110.

This prospective series of results and complications of coronary arteriography
from the Registry of the Society for Cardiac Angiography and Interventions is the
largest ever reported. Since the initial report published in 1982, the results of
coronary artery surgery and angioplasty have improved and therefore older and
more symptomatic patients are referred for coronary arteriography. More patients 
are now studied by the femoral approach, and the major complications of the
techniques are similar. Despite studying older and higher-risk patients, the
complications are remarkably similar to those reported in the older series.
Because of the sicker patients being studied, it is probably unlikely that the
complication rate will decrease further in the future. The Society for Cardiac
Angiography and Interventions will continue its Registry to follow complication
rates of both established and new procedure.

PMID: 2720767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Cathet Cardiovasc Diagn. 1989 May;17(1):11-4.

Coronary arteriography 1984-1987: a report of the Registry of the Society for
Cardiac Angiography and Interventions. II. An analysis of 218 deaths related to
coronary arteriography.

Lozner EC(1), Johnson LW, Johnson S, Krone R, Pichard AD, Vetrovec GW, Noto TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Society for Cardiac Angiography and Interventions, San Francisco, CA 94110.

In a 42-month period, 218 deaths occurred in 222,553 patients undergoing coronary
arteriography (0.098%). Age greater than 60 years, NYHA Class IV function,
presence of left main coronary disease, and ejection fraction less than 30% all
significantly increased the risk of the procedure. Sex and approach (brachial or 
femoral) used for the catheterization did not affect mortality. Since the SCAI
report in 1982, the death rate has dropped significantly in high-risk patients.
Low-risk patients (NYHA Class I or normal coronary arteries) who died generally
were elderly or had associated valvular heart disease.

PMID: 2720762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Emerg Med. 1989 May-Jun;7(3):233-6.

Hypoglycemic hemiplegia in an adolescent with insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus: a case report and a review of the literature.

Lala VR(1), Vedanarayana VV, Ganesh S, Fray C, Iosub S, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center, New York
Medical College, Bronx.

A case of hypoglycemic hemiparesis in a fifteen-year-old girl with insulin
dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) is described. The initial presentation
included left facial paresis and muscular weakness of the left upper and lower
extremities, associated with a blood glucose level of 31 mg/dL. The patient
recovered completely after a glucose infusion. Her neurological examination
became normal within 24 hours and remained so for a follow-up period of 6 months.
Hypoglycemic hemiparesis is rarely described in children and adolescents.

PMID: 2663969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 1989 May;124(5):203-5.

[Solar keratosis. Morphometric observations on atypia and polarity of
keratinocytes of the basal stratum].

[Article in Italian]

Noto G, Pravatà G, Pinto G, Aricò M.

Nuclear morphometric parameters and polarity of basal keratinocytes have been
evaluated by computerized image analysis in solar keratoses, comparing the
results with normal sun-exposed skin and squamous cell carcinoma 1st Broders
degree. The cellular index demonstrated higher levels in all keratoses. The
morphometric nuclear parameters revealed major values in atrophic, bowenoid,
acantholytic, hypertrophic and pigmented solar keratoses, respectively. The loss 
of polarity demonstrated higher levels in bowenoid, atrophic, hypertrophic,
pigmented and acantholytic histotypes, respectively. Solar keratoses could be
classified as in situ carcinomas rather than precancerous lesions.

PMID: 2620920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 1989 Apr;36(1):9-14.

Effects of prostaglandin E2 and D2 on the release of vasopressin and oxytocin.

Hashimoto H(1), Noto T, Nakajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
Japan.

The effects of prostaglandin (PG) E2 and D2 on the plasma levels of
arginine-vasopressin (AVP) and oxytocin (OXT) in rabbits, and on the release of
the both hormones from the isolated posterior pituitary of rats were examined. An
intraventricular administration of PGE2 to a rabbit raised the plasma levels of
the both hormones. An intraventricular injection of PGD2 also increased the
plasma level of OXT but not that of AVP. The release of AVP and OXT from
fragments of the posterior pituitary of a rat was not influenced by perfusion
with Eagle MEM medium containing 10(-6) or 10(-5) M PGE2 and D2.

PMID: 2740415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Riv Eur Sci Med Farmacol. 1989 Apr;11(2):113-22.

[Plasma lipids, insulin, C-peptide, and glucagon levels in cirrhosis: personal
observations].

[Article in Italian]

Luca M, Sfogliano L, Privitera P, Noto R.

The authors report preliminary data on the behavior of some lipid fractions in
cirrhosis of the liver and correlate them with the changes in the insulin,
glucagon and C-peptide levels. Elevated FFA (Free Fatty Acids) and normal
cholesterol, triglyceride and total lipid values indicate a prevalent insulin
induced effect and a reduction of liver metabolism of these fractions. This
hypothesis is supported by the fact that L-carnitine, which reestablishes the
carnitine-dependent intracellular transport system, reduces the levels of all the
lipid fractions studied. The normal C-peptide values in these patients with liver
cirrhosis show that hyperinsulinemia is caused by impaired metabolism of this
hormone and not by hyperincretion. This hyperinsulinemia seems to react
positively to the improvement of the intracellular transport systems. A fall in
the hyperglucagonemia follows the decreased hyperinsulinemia leading to a hormone
balance with lower values and a consequent reduction of the hormonal stimuli on
the lipid metabolism. The possibility of administering drugs, which can act on
the metabolic pathways responsible for the high FFA plasma levels, which seem to 
play a role in the physiopathology of encephalopathies and hepatic coma is
clinically interesting.

PMID: 2678305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 1989 Apr;16(4 Pt 2-3):1893-8.

[A new high-yield continuous cell culture system and its clinical application in 
adoptive immunotherapy with LAK cells].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto T(1), Tokuda Y, Tajima T, Mitomi T, Nakamura Y, Watanabe K, Yamamura M,
Ichinohe K.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery, Tokai University School of Medicine.

We developed a high-yield culture system, consisting of a culture bag on a
rotator. The culture bag has two compartments, an inner compartment separated
from an outer compartment by a semipermeable membrane. Cells in an appropriate
culture medium are placed in the inner compartment, and medium without serum is
placed in the outer compartment. The bag is rotated at an angle of 45 degrees
between 0.5 and 5 rpm in a 37 degrees C incubator. The medium is changed in the
outer compartment at intervals when needed. The outer compartment acts as the
feeder as well as allows catabolites to diffuse through the culture. In addition,
since the system is a closed-system, sterile conditions can easily be maintained.
Using this system, we demonstrated that up to 20 X 10(6) cells/ml of PBMC could
be cultured in IL-2 with sufficient recovery rate and cytotoxicity.

PMID: 2658834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 1989 Apr;16(4 Pt 2-1):1085-93.

[Autologous bone marrow transplantation as a measure against myelosuppression in 
cancer chemotherapy].

[Article in Japanese]

Tajima T(1), Tokuda Y, Ohta M, Okumura A, Norihisa Y, Kubota M, Noto T, Fujimoto 
T, Nakasaki H, Yokoyama S, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of General Surgery, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Japan.

One hundred seventy-three patients were treated 256 times with chemotherapy
supported by autologous bone marrow transplantation during the past 9 years. The 
two most commonly used protocols were (cyclophosphamide 1,600-2,400 mg/m2 +
adriamycin 80 mg/m2 + ACNU 3 mg/kg) and (cyclophosphamide 1,600-2,400 mg/m2 +
adriamycin 100 mg/m2 + CDDP 100-150 mg/m2). Among 115 patients in the therapeutic
setting in which two courses were usually given, 75 were evaluable and the
overall response rate was 42.7% with 12.0% CR rate. Breast and pediatric groups
responded well; the response rate in breast cancer was 67.9% with 21.4% CR rate. 
Two patients with breast cancer who had multiple distant metastases and 2
pediatric patients are now alive with NED after 5 years of the treatment and seem
to have been cured. The results in adjuvant settings have also been quite
promising, e.g., 79.4% 5-year survival probability among breast patients mainly
in stage III. Although drops of blood cell counts to the nadirs (WBC counts: less
than 100-300) could not be prevented, the periods of myelosuppression appeared to
have been effectively shortened so that the patients could be safely managed with
intensified general supportive measures. Platelet counts are usually less
affected, but the recovery is slower than for WBC counts. There were 13 patients 
who died within 10 weeks of the initiation of the treatment. Two of them
succumbed to sepsis, and progressive disease was the cause of death in 8 patients
whose terminal phases were undoubtedly affected by some infectious problems. We
have shown that there are inverse relationships between infused numbers of CFU-GM
and marrow recovery judged by the duration of neutropenia and the time required
for neutrophils to recover over 500. Our recent laboratory experiments testing
CFU-E, BFU-E and CFU-Mk in addition to MNC counts and CFU-GM showed that
vulnerabilities of marrow progenitors seem to differ from cell lineage to cell
lineage. This must therefore be taken into careful consideration in pursuing
marrow transplantation.

PMID: 2658812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Immunol Methods. 1989 Mar 10;118(1):31-5.

A new compact and cell dense continuous culture system.

Nakamura Y(1), Watanabe K, Noto T, Tajima T, Yamamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Transfusion Service Center, School of Medicine, Tokai University,
Kanagawa-ken, Japan.

A new compact and cell dense continuous culture system was developed. The system 
consisted of a culture bag, which had two compartments separated by a
semipermeable membrane, and an external rotator. Cells were cultured in the inner
compartment with medium containing serum or the necessary growth factors. The
outer compartment was filled with medium without serum or growth factors. The
concentration of cells in culture was normally in the order of 10(7). Due to the 
large number of cells, sufficient carbon dioxide was produced so that use of a
CO2 incubator was unnecessary. The medium in the outer part was frequently
changed, but no medium changes were necessary in the inner bag. Using this
system, a concentrated yield of antibody as well as a large number of cells could
be obtained.

PMID: 2926150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Cancer. 1989 Mar 1;63(5):901-6.

Effects of sodium ascorbate (vitamin C) and 2-methyl-1,4-naphthoquinone (vitamin 
K3) treatment on human tumor cell growth in vitro. I. Synergism of combined
vitamin C and K3 action.

Noto V(1), Taper HS, Jiang YH, Janssens J, Bonte J, De Loecker W.

Author information: 
(1)Afdelingen Biochemie, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium.

The effects of sodium ascorbate (vitamin C) and 2-methyl-1,4-naphthoquinone
(vitamin K3) administered separately or in combination on the in vitro cultured
human neoplastic cell lines MCF-7 (breast carcinoma), KB (oral epidermoid
carcinoma), and AN3-CA (endometrial adenocarcinoma) have been examined. When
given separately, vitamin C or K3 had a growth inhibiting action only at high
concentrations (5.10(3) mumol/1 and 10(5) nmol/l, respectively). Combined
administration of both vitamins demonstrated a synergistic inhibition of cell
growth at 10 to 50 times lower concentrations. At this level separately given
vitamins are not toxic. The sensitivity to this treatment was somewhat different 
in the three cell lines, being slightly higher for KB line. This tumor cell
growth inhibitory effect was completely suppressed by the addition of catalase to
the culture medium containing vitamins C and K3, suggesting an excessive
production of hydrogen peroxide as being implied in mechanisms responsible for
the above-mentioned effects.

PMID: 2914296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Kokyu To Junkan. 1989 Mar;37(3):335-9.

[A case of WPW syndrome with slow Kent documented by ATP injection].

[Article in Japanese]

Tsuchihashi K, Endo A, Hikita N, Noto T, Kamei F, Nakata T, Iwakura M, Yonekura
S, Hashimoto A, Tanaka S, et al.

A 46-year-old woman with chest tightness and palpitation at exercise was admitted
to Sapporo Medical College Hospital for the evaluation of the ST-T changes on
stress electrocardiogram. In this patient, PQ time was 0.14 second and
pre-exitation was not clearly documented on electrocardiogram at rest. Bolus
injection of 10 mg of adenosine-5'-triphosphate (ATP) demonstrated deltawave
through the elongation of antegrade conduction of atrio-ventricular (AV) node.
Electrophysiological study also showed left lateral accessory pathway with slow
antegrade conduction, slow Kent. Stress 201-T1 myocardial scintigraphy using
bicycle ergometer did not show the existence of ischemic region in spite of the
ST-T changes on electrocardiogram. In this case, it seemed that a false positive 
ST-T changes might be caused by ventricular pre-exitation through slow Kent
fiber. From these findings, it was suggested that the transient interruption on
conduction through AV node by ATP bolus injection may be a useful diagnostic
method in borderline pre-exitation syndrome.

PMID: 2734511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Ann Nucl Med. 1989 Mar;3(1):1-8.

Quantification of area and percentage of infarcted myocardium by single photon
emission computed tomography with thallium-201: a comparison with serial serum
CK-MB measurements.

Nakata T(1), Noto T, Uno K, Wada A, Hikita N, Tanaka S, Shoji T, Kubota M, Tsuda 
T, Morita K, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical College, Japan.

In order to quantify the size of the infarcted myocardium, two kinds of data
processing techniques were applied to single photon emission computed tomography 
(SPECT) with thallium-201 and its clinical reliability was evaluated by comparing
it with the infarct sizing procedure with the serial serum creatine kinase-MB
measurements in 14 patients with acute myocardial infarction. After maximum-count
circumferential profile analysis, short axis images were reformatted into an
unfolded surface map and a bull's eye view map. The SPECT-determined infarct size
was defined as the area or the percentage of hypoperfused myocardium of which the
profile count was less than the mean minus 2SD derived from 8 normal subjects.
The infarct area was calculated from the number of pixels with an abnormal count 
and expressed in an unfolded surface map. The percentage was calculated from the 
number of abnormal profile points and displayed in a bull's eye view map. A high 
linear correlation was observed between the enzymatically determined infarct size
and the infarct area or the percentage (r = .947, r = .872, respectively),
despite underestimations in 2 patients with accompanying right ventricular
infarction and overestimations in 2 patients with prior anterior infarction.
Moreover, a close negative correlation was found between the left ventricular
ejection fraction and the infarct area or the percentage (r = .836, r = .821,
respectively). Thus, the semiautomatic techniques for processing thallium-201
SPECT images might contribute to the quantitative estimation and display of
infarcted myocardium and have high clinical reliability.

PMID: 2641446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Ann Nucl Med. 1989 Mar;3(1):15-24.

Availability of 111In-labeled platelet scintigraphy in patients with
postinfarction left ventricular aneurysm.

Tsuda T(1), Kubota M, Iwakubo A, Akiba H, Shido M, Takahashi T, Nakata T, Noto T,
Tanaka S, Iimura O, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Sapporo Medical College, Japan.

Eighteen patients with postinfarction left ventricular aneurysms (LVAs) were
examined with Indium-111-labeled autologous platelet scintigraphy to identify
intracardiac thrombi and to investigate the effect of antithrombotic agents on
thrombogenesity within their LVAs. Left ventriculography (LVG), and
two-dimensional echocardiography were also carried out to assess the diagnostic
ability of the platelet imaging. Indium-111-platelet scintigraphy for the
detection of LVA mural thrombi had a sensitivity of 60% and a specificity of
100%. Four of six patients with false-negative scintigraphic studies had been
under antiplatelet therapy. Eight of the nine patients who had showed active
platelet deposition on initial examination had not received antiplatelet therapy.
Thereafter, five of these nine were treated with tichlopidine (300 mg/day) for
29.8 +/- 5.0 days. On the second platelet study, two had resolution and the other
three had interruption of intra-aneurysmal deposition, which remained positive.
In only one patient of the three, the third platelet study was performed after
warfarin therapy. It took two weeks after beginning the therapy to completely
interrupt platelet deposition within the LVA in this patient. ECG gated
radionuclide ventriculography and Thallium-201-myocardial scintigraphy were also 
performed to assess left ventricular wall motion of left ventricular ejection
fraction (LVEF) and myocardial blood perfusion. Thallium-201-SPECT showed apical 
or anteroapical perfusion defects and the radionuclide ventriculography correctly
identified all 18 apical and anteroseptal aneurysms which were confirmed by LVG
methods. The comparison between the thrombus positive group and the thrombus
negative group was carried out on both the LVEF and the period from the last
myocardial infarction to the initial platelet scanning study. There were no
statistical differences in the LVEF and the interval (34.5 +/- 12.5% vs 37.3 +/- 
14.6%, 39.6 +/- 52.6 days vs 89.6 +/- 108.3 days) between the two groups. These
results suggest that Indium-111-labeled platelet scintigraphy can be a reliable
method for the identification of active left ventricular mural thrombi and a
practical method of judging antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy.

PMID: 2518223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Adolesc Health Care. 1989 Mar;10(2):160-4.

Reversal of an abnormal free fatty acid response to emotional stress in a
diabetic adolescent using a portable insulin-infusion pump.

Noto RA(1), Kaplan S, Tames SM, Matthews M, Ginsberg L, Lifshitz F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, North Shore University Hospital, Cornell Medical
College, Valhalla, NY.

Repeated episodes of ketoacidosis in some juvenile diabetics has been associated 
with an abnormal rise in circulating free fatty acids (FFA) following emotional
stress. Reversal of this phenomenon occurred after treatment with a portable
insulin infusion pump (PIIP). Following initiation of PIIP treatment, this
abnormal rise in FFA secretion was eliminated, as were the patient's episodes of 
ketoacidosis. We believe that PIIP treatment should be considered in the poorly
controlled compliant diabetic patient.

PMID: 2494140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 1989 Mar;124(3):85-8.

[Scleromyxedema without paraproteinemia].

[Article in Italian]

Pravatà G, Noto G, Aricò M.

The identification of an abnormal paraproteinaemia has been considered as main
criterium for the diagnosis of scleromyxedema. We report a case of scleromyxedema
in a 51-year old man, without any immunochemical evidence of paraprotein. Our
case is a clinical support to the independence of this disease from gammopathy,
as underlined by other experimental and clinical data. Thus demonstration of
paraprotein should not be considered as a fundamental criterion for the diagnosis
of scleromyxedema.

PMID: 2478455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1989 Feb;37(2):383-5.

[A case of right aortic arch with the stenotic left subclavian artery at its
origin complaining of left nuchal pain].

[Article in Japanese]

Endo M, Seki M, Kobayashi H, Sato H, Kidani M, Noto T.

A 25 year-old male was transfered to our department with a complaint of left
nuchal pain. Angiography revealed a right aortic arch with the stenotic left
subclavian artery at its origin and poor left vertebral artery. The anomaly was
classified an intermediate type of Stewart type (2) and (3). It was very rare and
we have found only 3 same cases in literature. The complaint disappeared after
the ascending aorto-left subclavian artery bypass.

PMID: 2671189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Minerva Ginecol. 1989 Feb;41(2):99-103.

[Androgenic evaluation of women with late-onset or persistent acne].

[Article in Italian]

Maneschi F, Noto G, Pandolfo MC, Palisi F, Martorana A.

The authors have studied the androgenic patterns in 29 women with late-onset
persistent acne vulgaris. Clinical evaluation of acne, menstrual history and
serum determinations of SHBG, total-T, free-T, DHEAS, delta 4A have been carried 
out. A mild and heterogeneous hyperandrogenism was found in 70% of women, thus, a
greater steroid bioavailability for peripheral conversion and/or a direct
stimulation of the pilosebaceous unit can be postulated. Androgenic evaluation in
women with late-onset or persistent acne vulgaris is useful, mainly for hormonal 
management.

PMID: 2526307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Radiology. 1989 Jan;170(1 Pt 1):121-4.

MR imaging of the ankle: normal variants.

Noto AM(1), Cheung Y, Rosenberg ZS, Norman A, Leeds NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Hospital for Joint Diseases Orthopedic Institute, New
York.

Thirty asymptomatic ankles were studied with high-resolution surface coil
magnetic resonance (MR) imaging to identify normal structures. Several normal
variants were demonstrated, including (a) Cortical irregularity of the posterior 
tibiotalar joint (should not be mistaken for osteonecrosis) in 27 of 30 cases;
(b) normal posterior talofibular ligament with irregular and frayed superior edge
simulating a tear in 13 of 30 cases; (c) normal navicular insertion of the
posterior tibial tendon with heterogeneous signal intensity in 14 of 30 cases;
(d) deltoid ligament inhomogeneity in seven of ten cases; and (e) fluid in the
shared peroneal tendons sheath (may be confused with a longitudinal tendon tear) 
in three of 30 cases. Ankle imaging with the use of MR is still a relatively new 
procedure. Further investigation is needed to better define normal anatomy and
normal variants.

PMID: 2909084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Urol Int. 1989;44(3):152-6.

Effect of cerebellectomy on reflex micturition in the decerebrate dog as
determined by urodynamic evaluation.

Nishizawa O(1), Ebina K, Sugaya K, Noto H, Satoh K, Kohama T, Harada T, Tsuchida 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine, Japan.

The effect of cerebellectomy on reflex micturition in the decerebrate dog was
investigated by cystometric and striated urethral sphincter EMG studies. Before
and after cerebellectomy, reflex micturition consisting of bladder contraction
and spasmodic contraction of the striated urethral sphincter occurred when a
critical degree of filling was reached. Cerebellectomy showed no influence on the
striated urethral sphincter EMG activity. However, cerebellectomy produced a
significant decrease in threshold volume and threshold pressure during the
collecting phase, and also in the contraction pressure and voided volume of the
emptying phase. The present study suggests that the cerebellum plays an
inhibitory role in the collecting phase and a facilitatory role in the emptying
phase during the entire reflex micturition cycle of the decerebrate dog. Further 
study will have to be done concerning the neurotransmission mechanism that causes
these different effects in the collecting and emptying phases.

PMID: 2749929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Gastrointest Radiol. 1989 Summer;14(3):209-11.

Mediastinal pseudotumor due to passage of ascites through the esophageal hiatus.

Pandolfo I(1), Gaeta M, Scribano E, Certo A, Noto G, Blandino A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Radiologic Sciences, University of Messina Clinical Center,
Italy.

Ascites can extend from the peritoneal cavity into the posterior mediastinum
through the esophageal hiatus. This mediastinal fluid can simulate the appearance
of a mediastinal tumor. Demonstration of hiatal hernia and continuity between the
thoracic and abdominal fluid assist in establishing the correct diagnosis.

PMID: 2731692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 1989;30(1):1-4.

A new high-yield continuous cell-culture system for lymphokine-activated killer
cells.

Noto T(1), Tokuda Y, Nakamura Y, Suzuki A, Watanabe K, Yamamura M, Tajima T,
Mitomi T, Nishijima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.

We performed basic studies on a new high-yield culture system (concentrate rotary
tissue-culture system) for application to adoptive immunotherapy with
lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells. Using this system, we demonstrated that 
up to 2 x 10(7) peripheral blood mononuclear cells/ml could be cultured in
interleukin-2 with a sufficient recovery rate and cytotoxicity in short-term
cultures (6 days). This system can also be used to proliferate LAK cells to four 
times the initial cell number with sufficient cytotoxicity for 14 days of
culture. Thus, this system allows activation of sufficient numbers of cells to
conduct clinical trials on humans.

PMID: 2598170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Acta Derm Venereol. 1989;69(3):259-60.

Unusual localization of lichen amyloidosus. Topical treatment with
dimethylsulfoxide.

Pravatà G(1), Pinto G, Bosco M, Noto G, Aricò M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Dermatology, University School of Medicine,
Palermo, Italy.

An unusual localization of lichen amyloidosus in a patient with IgG k benign
monoclonal gammopathy is reported. After topical treatment with dimethylsulfoxide
the lesions improved, but histological examination still showed amyloid deposits.

PMID: 2566237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Int J Cardiol. 1989;25 Suppl 1:S25-8.

Increase of plasma atrial natriuretic peptide levels after sublingual
administration of nifedipine in essentially hypertensive patients.

Rappelli A(1), Dessì-Fulgheri P, Bandiera F, Di Noto G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Patologia Medica, Ancona University, Italy.

To see whether the acute natriuretic effect of nifedipine is accompanied by
changes in atrial natriuretic peptide levels, a group of eight hypertensive
patients were studied. After at least a week of constant sodium intake, placebo
or nifedipine (10 mg s.I.) were administered and blood pressure, heart rate,
plasma renin activity, plasma aldosterone and atrial natriuretic peptide plasma
levels, urinary sodium, urinary volume and creatinine clearance were monitored
for 2 hours. While placebo did not induce changes in any of the above parameters,
nifedipine administration was followed by a significant decrease in blood
pressure and an increase in urinary sodium, urinary volume and creatinine
clearance; these changes were accompanied by a significant rise in atrial
natriuretic peptide levels from 19.4 +/- 2.8 pg/ml to a maximum of 23.9 +/- 2.5
pg/ml and 24.1 +/- 2.2 pg/ml (P less than 0.05) at 60 and 90 minutes,
respectively. In conclusion, our data do not rule out the possibility that atrial
natriuretic peptide participates in the nifedipine-induced increase in sodium and
water excretion.

PMID: 2533582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Hum Ergol (Tokyo). 1988 Dec;17(2):139-50.

Decrease of households in a rural community of Japan in relation to demographic
and occupational change.

Suda K, Ohtsuka R, Nishida T.

PIP: The depopulation of rural communities in Japan during the twentieth century 
is examined using the example of Kitakawachi in the Noto peninsula. The authors
note that whereas a shortage of available land was the main cause of
out-migration in the early 1900s, rural-urban migration to find salaried
employment has become widespread since the 1960s. The consequence of
out-migration is that only 8 of the 37 households in the community now contain a 
married couple of reproductive age.
PMID: 3268603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Neuropeptides. 1988 Nov-Dec;12(4):199-206.

A study on the release mechanism of vasopressin and oxytocin.

Hashimoto H(1), Noto T, Nakajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
Japan.

The changes in plasma levels of arginine-vasopressin (AVP) and oxytocin (OXT) of 
rabbits by intraventricular administration of various drugs and their effects on 
the release of both hormones from the isolated posterior pituitary of rats were
examined. An intraventricular injection of hypertonic saline, carbachol,
angiotensin II, prostaglandin E2 or histamine to a rabbit increased the
concentrations of plasma AVP and OXT, whereas serotonin decreased their plasma
levels. Noradrenaline increased the concentration of OXT, but not that of AVP.
Dopamine did not significantly affect the plasma level of either hormone. The
release of AVP and OXT from the posterior pituitary fragments of rats was
stimulated by changing the osmolality of the perfusion medium in vitro. Perfusion
with medium containing dopamine suppressed the release of both hormones. However,
the other bioactive amines and the drugs mentioned above did not affect the
release of AVP and OXT.

PMID: 3237319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1988 Nov;36(11):2478-83.

[Modified Fontan operation in a case of single right ventricle with common atrium
and mitral atresia].

[Article in Japanese]

Seki M, Kidani M, Endo M, Sato H, Kobayashi H, Noto T.

PMID: 3209901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Ultrasound Med. 1988 Nov;7(11):597-603.

Sonography of autonomous follicular ovarian cysts in precocious pseudopuberty.

Fakhry J(1), Khoury A, Kotval PS, Noto RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, New York Medical College, Valhalla 10595.

Isolated follicular cysts of the ovary without elevated gonadotropin levels can
occur as the primary source of early pubertal changes in young girls. To date,
cyst excision or oophorectomy have been the treatments of choice. We studied
three girls aged 5 to 8 7/12 years who presented with sexual precocity and
revealed autonomous functioning ovarian cysts (2.2 to 5.5 cm). Clinical signs
subsided following resection of the cyst in one case and after regression of the 
cyst documented by ultrasonography in the other two cases. On the basis of these 
three cases, we believe ultrasonography can be valuable in the workup of sexual
precocity caused by primary ovarian cysts. Given that the spontaneous resolution 
of such cysts is possible, close clinical follow-up of unequivocally
benign-appearing large ovarian cysts in young girls with pubertal changes
deserves consideration.

PMID: 3062186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Radiology. 1988 Oct;169(1):229-35.

Rupture of posterior tibial tendon: CT and MR imaging with surgical correlation.

Rosenberg ZS(1), Cheung Y, Jahss MH, Noto AM, Norman A, Leeds NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Hospital for Joint Diseases/Orthopedic Institute, New
York, NY 10003.

Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging were performed in 32
cases of clinically suspected chronic tears of the posterior tibial tendon.
Surgery was performed in 22 patients (69%). Each case was classified
radiographically and surgically as normal or a type 1, type 2, or type 3 rupture.
The sensitivity and specificity of CT were 90% and 100%, respectively, while
those of MR imaging were 95% and 100%. The accuracy in detecting ruptures was 91%
for CT and 96% for MR imaging. The overall accuracy, which reflected the
percentage of cases correctly diagnosed as well as those correctly classified,
was 59% for CT and 73% for MR imaging. Although the differences between the CT
and MR imaging parameters were not statistically significant (possibly due to the
small population), the results suggest that MR imaging is the method of choice
for detecting ruptures of the posterior tibial tendon. MR imaging provided
greater definition of tendon outline, vertical splits, synovial fluid, edema, and
degenerated tissue. CT was superior to MR imaging in showing associated bone
abnormalities such as periostitis, subtalar osteoarthritis, and subtalar
dislocation.

PMID: 3420263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Urol. 1988 Oct;140(4):872-4.

Pontine micturition center in the dog.

Nishizawa O(1), Sugaya K, Noto H, Harada T, Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine, Japan.

The function and location of the pontine micturition center was studied in ten
decerebrate dogs by physiological experiments in which micturition induced by
electrical stimulation of the pontine micturition center was compared with reflex
micturition in response to bladder filling with physiological saline and by
histological studies of the electrolytic lesions made at the stimulated areas.
The micturition induced by electrical stimulation of the pontine micturition
center showed the same pattern of detrusor contraction, simultaneous urethral
relaxation and the elevation of the tail as reflex micturition in response to
bladder filling. The peak contraction pressures in both micturitions showed no
obvious differences. The electrolytic lesions were histologically identified at
the locus coeruleus alpha in six out of 10 dogs, at the locus coeruleus in three 
and at the peri locus coeruleus alpha in one dog. The coordinated activities of
bladder and urethra in the micturition induced by electrical stimulation of locus
coeruleus or its subparts suggest that these areas perform an important role in
the urine emptying function.

PMID: 3418825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Stomatol Mediterr. 1988 Oct-Dec;8(4):321-32.

[Recent advances in diagnosis of Sjogren's syndrome].

[Article in Italian]

Gallina G, Cumbo V, Noto F, Messina P.

In this paper the authors review the classification and the clinical features of 
primary and secondary Sjogren's syndrome. Particular attention in focused on
differential diagnosis, on clinical examination of the patients with chronic
xerostomia and on its functional and pathological sequelae: rampant dental caries
and oral candidiasis. Advanced in diagnostic procedures are described: salivary
flow rate, salivary gland scintigraphy, parotid and submandibular scialography,
Schirmer's test, Rose Bengal staining, minor salivary gland biopsy and serum
immunological examinations. The relationships between scintigraphic and
histologic result are discussed. The clinical features and the course of the
disease provide further insight into the immunological pathogenesis of this
syndrome.

PMID: 3274169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1988 Oct;85(10):2155-60.

[LAK activity in gastrointestinal cancer patients and a new system of high
yielding continuous cell culture].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto T, Ohta M, Tajima T, Mitomi T, Watanabe K, Nakamura Y, Yamamura M.

PMID: 3264857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Am Coll Nutr. 1988 Oct;7(5):361-6.

Prolactin and thyroid status in prepubertal children with mild to moderate
obesity.

Lala VR(1), Ray A, Jamias P, Te D, Orteza N, Fiscina B, Noto R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Lincoln Hospital, New York Medical College, Bronx
10451.

Prolactin (PRL) response to thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH) in 21 prepubertal
children with mild to moderate obesity was compared with that in 21 normal
prepubertal children (controls). Basal PRL levels were normal but the mean peak
PRL response and mean increment in PRL levels following TRH administration were
significantly lower in prepubertal obese children (p less than 0.001). The mean
PRL responses to TRH were significantly impaired at all time intervals in
prepubertal obese boys and girls compared to the control subjects. Linear
regression and correlation coefficient analysis did not reveal any significant
relation between the percent overweight and PRL response. Basal T4, T3 levels and
T3 and TSH response to TRH were similar in both groups. The findings suggest that
neuroendocrine regulation of prolactin is impaired in prepubertal children even
with mild to moderate obesity. This could be secondary to altered
neurotransmitter status at the hypothalamic level. Further studies are needed to 
determine whether the defect is innate or acquired, primary or secondary.

PMID: 3141493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Hum Hypertens. 1988 Oct;2(3):177-82.

Plasma levels of atrial natriuretic factor in mild to moderate hypertensives
without signs of left ventricular hypertrophy: correlation with the known
duration of hypertension.

Dessì-Fulgheri P(1), Palermo R, Di Noto G, Conti V, Rinaldi L, Tesei G, Russo P, 
Rappelli A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto di Patologia Medica, Ancona University, Italy.

The relationship between plasma atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), blood pressure
(BP), age, plasma renin activity (PRA) and urinary sodium excretion was studied
in 64 normal subjects (mean age 48.7 +/- 2.1 yrs; BP: 126.5 +/- 1.6/79.5 +/- 0.9 
mmHg) and in 104 untreated uncomplicated essential hypertensives (50.8 +/- 1.1
yrs; BP: 164.7 +/- 1.6/105.2 +/- 0.6 mmHg). ANF was measured by radioimmunoassay 
after extraction on C18 columns. ANF was significantly higher in the
hypertensives than in the normal subjects (37.1 +/- 1.2 vs 29.7 +/- 1.5 pg/ml, P 
less than 0.01). In normals plasma ANF was significantly correlated with age (r =
0.72, P less than 0.001), Na excretion (r = 0.42, P less than 0.001) and PRA (r =
-0.71, P less than 0.001) whereas in the hypertensives ANF plasma levels
correlated only with systolic (r = 0.46, P less than 0.001) and diastolic (r =
0.51, P less than 0.001) BP. In addition in hypertensive patients, by
multivariate linear regression analysis, a significant correlation was found
between age, known duration of hypertension and plasma ANF. The partial
correlation coefficient between duration of hypertension and plasma ANF was
highly significant (r = 0.80, P less than 0.001). These findings suggest that in 
essential hypertension the level of arterial BP is a main determinant of the ANF 
plasma values offsetting the ability of other physiological factors to regulate
plasma ANF levels.

PMID: 2976835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Z Kinderchir. 1988 Sep;43 Suppl 1:62-3.

Congenital strictures of anterior urethra in childhood.

Podestà E(1), Di Rovasenda E, Di Noto C, Ferretti S, Buffa P, Taccone A.

Author information: 
(1)G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy.

PMID: 3269133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Neurochem. 1988 Aug;51(2):548-51.

Formation of gamma-amino-beta-hydroxybutyric acid from 2-hydroxyputrescine in rat
brain.

Noto T(1), Hasegawa T, Nakao J, Kamimura H, Harada H, Nakajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Japan.

gamma-Amino-beta-[3H]hydroxybutyric acid ([3H]-GABOB) was formed in rat brain
from 2-[3H]-hydroxyputrescine that had been chemically synthesized from
2-oxoputrescine and [3H]sodium borohydride. After the injection of
2-[3H]hydroxyputrescine into the lateral ventricle of a rat brain, the rat was
killed and then the brain was removed. [3H]GABOB in the brain was identified by a
combination of ion-exchange chromatography, high-voltage paper electrophoresis,
and recrystallization of the radioactive compound with authentic GABOB.

PMID: 3392545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Diabetes. 1988 Aug;37(8):1064-7.

Effects of insulin on vasoconstrictive responses to norepinephrine and
angiotensin II in rabbit femoral artery and vein.

Yagi S(1), Takata S, Kiyokawa H, Yamamoto M, Noto Y, Ikeda T, Hattori N.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Kanazawa University, Japan.

To determine whether insulin has a vasodilator action on the artery and vein, the
effects of insulin at varying concentrations (120 microU/ml, 1.2 mU/ml, 12 mU/ml,
and 120 mU/ml) on vasoconstriction by norepinephrine (NE) and angiotensin II (ANG
II) were studied in the isolated rabbit femoral artery and vein. Helical strips
were suspended in an organ bath filled with modified Krebs solution (pH 7.4),
were gassed with 95% O2/5% CO2 at 36 degrees C, and isotonic contractions were
measured. Insulin significantly and dose dependently inhibited the
vasoconstriction induced by NE (10(-8) M for the artery and 10(-7) M for the
vein) at greater than or equal to 1.2 mU/ml for both the artery and vein and the 
vasoconstriction induced by ANG II (3 x 10(-10) M for the artery and 3 x 10(-9) M
for the vein) at greater than or equal to 1.2 mU/ml for the artery and greater
than or equal to 12 mU/ml for the vein. The results indicate that insulin has an 
inhibitory effect on NE- and ANG II-induced contraction in both the artery and
vein, and this appeared to be a contributory factor in the hypotensive effect
observed in diabetic patients treated with insulin.

PMID: 3292327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Kokyu To Junkan. 1988 Aug;36(8):893-7.

[A case of psittacosis presenting as adult respiratory distress syndrome and
successfully treated with steroid pulse therapy].

[Article in Japanese]

Hirata M, Noto M, Oda K, Tofuku Y, Takeda R, Kitagawa S.

PMID: 2465561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Jpn Circ J. 1988 Jul;52(7):589-96.

Morphological assessment of left ventricular wall and ventricular aneurysm by
thallium-201 myocardial emission computed tomography.

Nakata T(1), Tanaka S, Murakami H, Uno K, Noto T, Tsuda T, Kubota M, Morita K,
Iimura O.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical College, Japan.

To evaluate the influence of left ventricular (LV) aneurysm on non-infarcted
ventricular wall, the shape of the left ventricular wall was assessed by
thallium-201 single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT). From the
morphology of the ventricular wall close to the apex, the rest images along the
transaxis, horizontal long axis and vertical long axis were classified into 4
types: convergent, parallel, divergent and completely defective. LV aneurysm was 
detected by 2-dimensional echocardiography and/or contrast left ventriculography 
in 39 of 80 patients with previous myocardial infarction. Although convergence in
the normal configuration of ventricular walls close to the apex, 4 of 39 patients
with LV aneurysm showed this pattern. The divergent type was very specific (100%)
and the most sensitive (56.4%) of the 4 for identifying LV aneurysm. Moreover,
the parallel configuration indicated aneurysm in cases of inferoposterior
infarction and all the completely defective cases exhibited this abnormality.
Thus, thallium-201 SPECT is suitable for observing the morphology of the
ventricular wall and can provide highly reliable information for detecting
postinfarction ventricular aneurysm with a sensitivity of 89.7%, a specificity of
87.8% and a diagnostic accuracy of 88.8%.

PMID: 3263516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Anticancer Res. 1988 Jul-Aug;8(4):781-4.

Cytotoxic effects of müllerian inhibiting substance (MIS)?

Janssens JP(1), Noto V, van Tendeloo G, Bonte J, de Loecker W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecological Oncology, University of Leuven, Belgium.

To determine whether Müllerian Inhibiting Substance (MIS) is the factor
responsible for the cytotoxic effects of testicular preparations on gynecological
cancers, homogenates of bovine fetal testes were fractionated by Sephadex G 200
chromatography and their cytotoxic effects tested on a Müllerian-derived
endometrial cancer cell line (AN3-CA), an ovarian carcinoma cell line (CAOV 3)
and on a breast cancer cell line (MCF 7). No difference in cytotoxicity was found
between Müllerian and non-Müllerian derived human cancer cells. Cytotoxicity and 
MIS activity were found in different fractions on Sephadex G 200 gel
chromatography.

PMID: 3178166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Chir Dent Fr. 1988 Jun 2;58(429):53-5.

[Management of emergencies in the dental office].

[Article in French]

Noto R.

PMID: 3234063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Radiology. 1988 May;167(2):489-93.

Rupture of the posterior tibial tendon: CT and surgical findings.

Rosenberg ZS(1), Jahss MH, Noto AM, Shereff MJ, Cheung Y, Frey CC, Norman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Hospital for Joint Diseases/Orthopedic Institute, New
York, NY 10003.

Computed tomography (CT) was performed in 42 patients with 49 clinically
suspected tears of the posterior tibial tendon. Twenty-eight of the 49 suspected 
tears were subsequently surgically explored and repaired. Three patterns of
tendon abnormalities were recognized on CT scans: type I-intact, hypertrophied,
heterogeneous tendon; type II-attenuated tendon; and type III-absence of a
portion of a tendon. Types I and II correlated with partial rupture seen during
surgery, and type III correlated with complete rupture of the tendon. CT findings
were accurate in 96% of the patients who underwent surgery. In four cases (14%), 
tendon rupture was seen on CT scans, but the extent of the injury was
underestimated and the rupture was misclassified. Reactive periostitis of the
distal tibia was seen in 71% of diseased tendons and may represent an important
factor in the diagnosis of tendon rupture.

PMID: 3357960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Hinyokika Kiyo. 1988 May;34(5):811-3.

[Single day treatment in acute cystitis].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamaguchi K(1), Kawaguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Noto General Hospital.

The effect of a single day treatment with 600 mg norfloxacin 600 mg ofloxacin or 
1,920 mg trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazol was determined on 114 patients with acute
cystitis. The overall clinical efficacy was excellent in 101 patients (89%),
moderate in 9 patients (8%) and poor in 4 patients (3%). Recurrence was observed 
in 8 cases (8%) within 6 weeks after the treatment. The effectiveness rate and
the recurrence rate were inferior in those caused by S. epidermidis compared with
those caused by E. coli.

PMID: 3051939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Rev Prat. 1988 Apr 14;38(11):677-83.

[Collective poisoning by inhalation].

[Article in French]

Larcan A, Noto R.

PMID: 3387872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Rev Prat. 1988 Apr 14;38(11):648-56.

[Advance medical planning and disaster situations].

[Article in French]

Huguenard P, Larcan A, Noto R.

PMID: 3387869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Endocrinol Jpn. 1988 Apr;35(2):249-54.

Diurnal changes in vasopressin and oxytocin levels in cerebrospinal fluid of
post-operative patients with intracranial aneurysms.

Kuboyama T(1), Hashimoto H, Ueguchi T, Yamaki T, Hirakawa K, Noto T, Nakajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Saiseikai-Shiga Hospital, Japan.

Diurnal changes in vasopressin and oxytocin levels in cerebrospinal fluid were
investigated under normal diurnal conditions. The patients examined had ruptured 
intracranial aneurysms, and underwent neck-clipping operations and continuous
drainage from the basal cistern. All of the patients recovered consciousness
without signs of neurological deficit. The investigations were conducted for 2
days starting 5-9 days after the neck-clipping operations were performed. The
oxytocin concentration decreased as night fell, remained low during this period
and then increased during the day. The vasopressin level demonstrated no definite
rhythmic tendency. No correlation was revealed between the changes in the
concentrations of either vasopressin or oxytocin in the cerebrospinal fluid and
the osmolality.

PMID: 3208703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Am J Clin Nutr. 1988 Mar;47(3):481-3.

Riboflavin metabolism in the hypothyroid newborn.

Cimino JA(1), Noto RA, Fusco CL, Cooperman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community and Preventive Medicine, New York Medical College,
Valhalla 10595.

In the hypothyroid rat the flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) content of the liver
is similar to that observed in rats maintained on a riboflavin-deficient diet.
Thyroxine regulates the enzyme flavin kinase. Human adults with hypothyroidism
have levels of erythrocyte glutathione reductase (EGR), an FAD-containing enzyme,
in the range indicative of riboflavin deficiency, which can be corrected with
thyroxine therapy. In the present study six newborns with severe congenital
hypothyroidism because of athyrosis, ectopic thyroidism, or congenital
hypothyroidism with Down's syndrome had normal levels of EGR, and treatment with 
thyroxine had no effect on these levels.

PMID: 3348160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Bull Acad Natl Med. 1988 Mar;172(3):315-22.

[The medical chain during medical assistance in catastrophes].

[Article in French]

Noto R.

PMID: 3048541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cancer. 1988 Feb 15;61(4):788-91.

Hypercalcemia in childhood renal tumors.

Jayabose S(1), Iqbal K, Newman L, San Filippo JA, Davidian MM, Noto R, Sagel I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, New York Medical College, Valhalla 10595.

Hypercalcemia is an uncommon complication of childhood renal tumors. It is
exclusively seen in infants 6 months of age or younger with malignant rhabdoid
tumor of the kidney (MRTK) or congenital mesoblastic nephroma (CMN). Secretion of
parathormone or prostaglandin E2 by the tumor cells is responsible for the
hypercalcemia in most of these patients. Bone metastasis has been notably absent 
in these patients, and the hypercalcemia completely resolves with the removal of 
the tumor. Hypercalcemia in itself probably does not have any prognostic
significance; however, it may serve as a tumor marker in some patients. Early
recognition and effective management of this complication may prevent the acute
life-threatening as well as the longstanding complications of this serious
metabolic disorder.

PMID: 2827881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Neurochem. 1988 Feb;50(2):464-7.

Assay of 2-hydroxyputrescine in various regions of rat brain by gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry.

Noto T(1), Hasegawa T, Hashimoto H, Nakajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Japan.

2-Hydroxyputrescine in seven regions of single rat brains was measured with a
sensitive, specific assay by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. The regions
were the cerebral cortex, cerebellum, medulla oblongata, hypothalamus, striatum, 
hippocampus, and midbrain. The level of 2-hydroxyputrescine was very high in the 
cerebral cortex and cerebellum, high in the medulla oblongata, hypothalamus, and 
hippocampus, and low in the striatum and midbrain. The level of
2-hydroxyputrescine in the cerebellum was significantly higher than in the
striatum and midbrain.

PMID: 3335858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Comp Biochem Physiol B. 1988;89(4):687-93.

Some more speract derivatives associated with eggs of sea urchins,
Pseudocentrotus depressus, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, Hemicentrotus
pulcherrimus and Anthocidaris crassispina.

Suzuki N(1), Kajiura H, Nomura K, Garbers DL, Yoshino K, Kurita M, Tanaka H,
Yamaguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan.

1. Fourteen peptides were isolated from the egg jelly of sea urchins,
Pseudocentrotus depressus, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, Hemicentrotus
pulcherrimus and Anthocidaris crassispina and their amino acid sequences were
determined. 2. The peptides stimulated H. pulcherrimus sperm respiration one
half-maximally at about 8-60 pM. 3. Addition of speract to intact spermatozoa of 
P. depressus, H. pulcherrimus and A. crassispina resulted in the appearance of a 
newly stained protein (Mr 128,000 for P. depressus, Mr 128,000 for H.
pulcherrimus and Mr 131,000 for A. crassispina) on sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gels.

PMID: 3378407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Anticancer Res. 1988 Jan-Feb;8(1):209-15.

Influence of practice on the biochemical analysis of steroid receptors in human
breast cancer.

Janssens J(1), Wittevrognel C, Roelens J, Noto V, Bonte J, Lauwerijns J, De
Loecker W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University Hospitals of Leuven, Belgium.

The value of experience and practice in the routine biochemical analysis of
steroid receptors was studied in 2576 different primary breast cancer specimens
over five consecutive years. The positivity rate (beyond 3 fm/protein) and the
measured concentrations of the steroid receptors increase. The positivity rate
and average steroid receptor concentration of the samples immediately frozen is
significantly higher compared to the overall sample population. It is concluded
that the handling of the specimen before freezing and the experience of the
technician play an important role in the routine biochemical analysis of steroid 
receptors.

PMID: 3358637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Kyobu Geka. 1988 Jan;41(1):65-8.

[A case of left atrial massive ball thrombus growing in a short period].

[Article in Japanese]

Seki M, Endo M, Sato H, Kidani M, Noto T, Horita H, Kanaya H, Ohka T.

PMID: 3357275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Comp Biochem Physiol C. 1988;90(2):305-11.

A novel group of sperm activating peptides from the sea urchin Glyptocidaris
crenularis.

Suzuki N(1), Yoshino K, Kurita M, Nomura K, Yamaguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Noto Marine Laboratory, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan.

1. Six new sperm activating peptides were purified from the egg jelly of the sea 
urchin Glyptocidaris crenularis and their amino acid sequences were determined as
follows: Ser-Ala-Lys-Leu-Cys-Pro-Gly-Gly-Asn-Cys-Val,
Lys-Leu-Cys-Pro-Gly-Gly-Asn-Cys-Val, Leu-Cys-Pro-Gly-Gly-Asn-Cys-Val,
Ser-Phe-Lys-Leu-Cys-Pro-Gly-Gly-Gln-Cys-Val, Lys-Leu-Cys-Pro-Gly-Gly-Gln-Cys-Val 
and Leu-Cys-Pro-Gly-Gly-Gln-Cys-Val. 2. The peptides were specific for G.
crenularis spermatozoa and caused significant increases of sperm respiration
rates and sperm cyclic nucleotide concentrations at concentrations as low as
10(-10) M. 3. The addition of the peptides to intact spermatozoa resulted in the 
change of the apparent mol. wt of a sperm protein from 195,000 to 200,000.

PMID: 2902991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Hinyokika Kiyo. 1987 Nov;33(11):1806-11.

[Effect of bunazosin on lower urinary tract function in the decerebrated dog].

[Article in Japanese]

Nishizawa O(1), Noto H, Ebina K, Nakamura H, Fukuda T, Suzuki K, Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine.

The effect of bunazosin on the lower urinary tract function was studied by
combined recording of cystometry and sphincter electromyogram (EMG) in 8
decerebrated dogs. Micturitions were induced by bladder filling and
microelectrical stimulation of the pons before and after the administration of
bunazosin. Bunazosin (0.03 mg/kg, i.v.) produced overflow incontinence in 7 of
the 8 dogs and a significant decrease in the contractile response pressure to
microelectrical stimulation of the pons in 6 dogs. Bunazosin appears to produce a
decrease in urethral resistance and to be useful for the treatment of the failure
of bladder emptying due to high urethral resistance.

PMID: 3445863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Urol. 1987 Oct;138(4):771-4.

Transcystoscopic intracavitary irradiation for carcinoma of the bladder:
technique and preliminary clinical results.

Harada T(1), Tsuchida S, Nishizawa O, Kigure T, Noto H, Kumazaki T, Kato T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine, Japan.

A remote controlled transcystoscopic intracavitary after-loading unit is
introduced for irradiation therapy of bladder carcinoma. With intense radiation
therapy a significant dose can be delivered to the tumor during a short interval.
We treated 12 patients with transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder using
transcystoscopic intracavitary irradiation. Of the patients 9 initially had a
complete response, although within several months 3 subsequently had recurrence
in a different part of the bladder. Technical difficulties and severe
complications were not encountered. The preliminary results and technique of
transcystoscopic intracavitary irradiation are reported.

PMID: 3656530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Radiology. 1987 Oct;165(1):153-7.

Rheumatoid arthritis: MR imaging manifestations.

Beltran J, Caudill JL, Herman LA, Kantor SM, Hudson PN, Noto AM, Baran AS.

Radiologic assessment of the stage and treatment response of rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) is based on the presence of bone erosions, joint-space narrowing, and
osteoporosis. Most radiologic methods for staging RA lack interobserver
correlation and are time consuming. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging provides
excellent depiction of soft-tissue abnormalities of the joints affected by RA,
which allows detection of early changes. Nineteen joints of 17 patients with RA
were studied with surface-coil MR imaging. Measurable abnormalities demonstrated 
by MR imaging but not clearly seen on plain radiographs included bone erosions,
joint effusion, synovial sheath effusion, and cartilage irregularity and
thinning. Seven patients of this group underwent MR imaging before and after 6
months of gold therapy. Four patients had significant interval changes on MR
images that were not seen on plain radiographs. MR imaging may become a sensitive
and objective method for quantitative assessment of the joint changes of RA.

PMID: 3628762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cortex. 1987 Sep;23(3):381-98.

Differential accuracy of aimed movements to visual and somatic targets in young
children.

Brown JV(1), Sepehr MM, Ettlinger G, Skreczek W.

Author information: 
(1)University of Bielefeld, Federal Republic of Germany.

Children, aged 2.5-8 years, were required to touch accurately a target located
either on their bodies or on the chair in which they sat. Movements were made
when visual information was: 1. complete (target lit for 3 s, room illuminated); 
2. partial (target lit for 3 s, room dark); 3. reduced (target lit for 0.7 s,
room dark); and finally, when the target was somatically specified. Movements to 
visible targets did not differ in any important way as a function of target
location with respect to on/off body. Accuracy improved with age to visually but 
noto somatically specified targets, decreased with decreasing availability of
visual information, and was poorest to somatically specified targets. We conclude
that during development, the sense-modality through which the target is specified
and the visibility of the arm/hand during the movement, but not the
personal/extra personal visible space in which the target is located, are
important determinants of reaching performance.

PMID: 3677728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1987 Sep;153(1):77-8.

Pontine urine storage center in the dog.

Nishizawa O(1), Sugaya K, Noto H, Harada T, Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Akita University School of Medicine, Japan.

Electrical stimulation of the presumptive pontine urine storage center, areas
ventral to and/or lateral to the pontine micturition center, elicited an increase
in threshold volume at which reflex micturition occurred in response to bladder
filling with physiological saline, suggesting a facilitatory effect on the urine 
storage function. The electrolytic lesions made in the stimulated areas were
histologically identified to distribute at the nucleus reticularis pontis oralis,
Kölliker-Fuse nucleus and subcoeruleus. These nucleus seemed to work as a pontine
urine storage center and to perform a reciprocal action with the pontine
micturition center.

PMID: 3672506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1987 Sep;78(9):1529-38.

[Localization of lumbosacral spinal neurons innervating the external urethral and
anal sphincters].

[Article in Japanese]

Sugaya K, Noto H, Morita T, Nishizawa O, Tsuchida S.

PMID: 3327989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Radiology. 1987 Aug;164(2):449-54.

Infections of the musculoskeletal system: high-field-strength MR imaging.

Beltran J, Noto AM, McGhee RB, Freedy RM, McCalla MS.

Twenty-two patients with clinical findings consistent with osteomyelitis,
soft-tissue infection, or both were studied with magnetic resonance (MR) imaging 
at 1.5 T. Another 15 patients with joint effusion but no clinical or laboratory
signs of infection served as controls. Soft-tissue abscesses, osteomyelitis,
joint and tendon sheath effusion, and cellulitis were well depicted on MR
imaging, allowing the correct diagnosis of presence and extent of infection in
all but two cases. MR imaging was as sensitive as technetium-99m methylene
diphosphonate bone scintigraphy in demonstrating osteomyelitis and was more
specific and more sensitive than other scintigraphic techniques in demonstrating 
soft-tissue infections, primarily because of its superior spatial resolution.
Computed tomography, performed in seven cases, was as accurate as MR imaging in
demonstrating bone and soft-tissue infections. Infected and noninfected synovial 
effusions had the same signal intensity, but associated findings such as
soft-tissue fluid collections or osteomyelitis made the distinction possible.

PMID: 3602386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Urol. 1987 Aug;138(2):442-5.

Role of the pelvic nerve in the dynamics of micturition in the decerebrate dog as
determined by suprapubic endoscopical and urodynamic evaluation.

Nishizawa O, Matsuzaki A, Kohama T, Noto H, Nakamura H, Harada T, Tsuchida S.

The role of the pelvic nerves on the dynamics of micturition was evaluated in 13 
decerebrate dogs, four male and nine female, by direct observation of bladder
movement, by suprapubic cystoscopic observation of urethral behavior, and by
pressure flow EMG studies. Experiments were performed before and after unilateral
pelvic nerve transection. In control conditions and after unilateral pelvic nerve
transection, the bladder neck was not tightly closed during the collecting phase,
the membranous portion of the urethra opened and closed spasmodically during the 
emptying phase, and reflex micturition developed. Direct observation showed that 
after unilateral pelvic nerve transection, the ipsilateral bladder did not
contract. A pressure flow EMG study showed that unilateral pelvic nerve
transection produced a significant increase in threshold volume, threshold
pressure, bladder compliance and residual volume, and a significant decrease in
contraction pressure and flow rate. The present study shows that unilateral
pelvic nerve transection has no demonstrable effect on urethral function, but has
effects on bladder function during the collecting and emptying phases and that
bladder innervation is unilateral in the dog.

PMID: 3599274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Kyobu Geka. 1987 Jul;40(8):654-7.

[A study of postoperative chylothorax in children].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Sato H, Seki M, Endo M, Noto T.

PMID: 3656834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1987 Jul;78(7):1161-7.

[Evaluation of prostatic weight by transabdominal ultrasonography (2nd
report)-normal prostate].

[Article in Japanese]

Sugaya K, Noto H, Mori H, Kizu N, Nishizawa O, Tsuchida S.

PMID: 3316779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1987 Jul;78(7):1168-74.

[Urological diseases in severely mental and physical handicapped].

[Article in Japanese]

Sugaya K, Noto H, Mori H, Harada T, Tsuchida S.

PMID: 2960846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Acta Pathol Jpn. 1987 Jul;37(7):1157-64.

Primary mucin-producing adenosquamous carcinoma of the thyroid gland.

Mizukami Y(1), Matsubara F, Hashimoto T, Terahata S, Noto H, Noguchi M,
Michigishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Central Clinical Laboratory, Kanazawa University Hospital, Japan.

A rare case of mucin-producing adenosquamous carcinoma of the thyroid gland is
reported in a 57-year-old woman. Light microscopically, much of the tumor showed 
a feature of mucin-producing adenosquamous carcinoma; squamous cells and mucous
signet ring cells. In the lower portion of the tumor, a calcified area containing
small foci of follicular carcinoma and its squamous cell metaplasia was
accompanied. Histochemically, neutral, non-sulphated and sulphated acid mucins
were found in the mucous cells, and no thyroglobulin or calcitonin was detected
in the tumor cells. Electron microscopically, some tonofibrils and mucin
production were observed concomitantly in the tumor cells. These findings
suggested the possibility that this mucin-producing adenosquamous carcinoma
originated from squamous cell metaplasia of pre-existing follicular carcinoma.

PMID: 2821736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1987 Jun;35(6):886-91.

[Unilateral hypoperfusion of the lung due to bronchial leiomyoma--a report of a
case].

[Article in Japanese]

Kusazima Y, Hirono T, Nakamura H, Mizukami Y, Noto H, Fujita H.

PMID: 3655454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cardiologia. 1987 Jun;32(6):553-6.

[Theoretical determination of the volume of atrial myxomas by means of
two-dimensional echocardiography].

[Article in Italian]

Pellegrini F, Ansuini G, Candela M, Centanni M, Di Noto G, Moretti S, Rimatori C,
Russo P.

PMID: 3621265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Jpn J Psychiatry Neurol. 1987 Jun;41(2):301-10.

Effects of L-erythro-3, 4-dihydroxyphenylserine on sleep-wakefulness patterns and
concentrations of brain catecholamines and serotonin in rats.

Mori M(1), Hashimoto H, Fukui K, Mori T, Noto T, Nakajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
Japan.

The effects of 3,4-dihydroxyphenylserine (DOPS), a nonnatural precursor of
noradrenaline, on the sleep-wakefulness patterns of rats were studied. When the
animals received an intraperitoneal injection of L-erythro-DOPS (200 mg/kg), a
significant increase in slow wave sleep and a tendency to decrease wakefulness
were observed during the first 2 hours after the injection. Paradoxical sleep
increased 4-8 hours after the treatment. A simultaneous injection of benserazide 
(20 mg/kg) enhanced these effects. L-threo-DOPS (200 mg/kg, i.p.) had no effect
on the sleep-wakefulness patterns. The effects of DOPS on the concentrations of
brain catecholamines and serotonin in rats were also examined. An intraperitoneal
injection of L-erythro-DOPS markedly increased the concentration of noradrenaline
(probably the d-form) and decreased that of serotonin and dopamine. L-threo-DOPS 
had no effect on the brain monoamine levels of the rats in the present
experimental condition. The effects of L-erythro-DOPS on the neurons containing
noradrenaline in the rats were examined by fluorescence histochemistry.
Fluorescence in the neuronal perikarya and fibers containing noradrenaline
markedly increased in the n. coeruleus, n. paraventricularis and cerebral cortex 
after an intraperitoneal injection of amino acid. Fibers containing the
fluorescence also increased in the second two areas.

PMID: 3125374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1987 Jun;78(6):1071-6.

[Evaluation of prostatic weight by transabdominal ultrasonography (1st
report)--comparison of calculated weight by ultrasound with actual weight of
operative specimen].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto H, Kizu N, Sugaya K, Nishizawa O, Harada T, Tsuchida S.

PMID: 2446040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 1987 May;35(5):1903-9.

Semisynthetic beta-lactam antibiotics. IV. Synthesis and antibacterial activity
of new ureidocephalosporin and ureidocephamycin derivatives containing a catechol
moiety or its acetate.

Ohi N, Aoki B, Shinozaki T, Moro K, Kuroki T, Noto T, Nehashi T, Matsumoto M,
Okazaki H, Matsunaga I.

PMID: 3664799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Kyobu Geka. 1987 May;40(6):503-6.

[A case of left atrial ball thrombus associated with mitral stenosis].

[Article in Japanese]

Seki M, Endo M, Sato H, Kidani M, Noto T, Kanaya H.

PMID: 3613327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Kyobu Geka. 1987 May;40(6):474-7.

[Investigation of cases exhibiting "ICU syndrome" after open heart surgery].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Seki M, Endo M, Sato H, Noto T.

PMID: 3613321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Radiology. 1987 Mar;162(3):735-40.

Tendons: high-field-strength, surface coil MR imaging.

Beltran J, Noto AM, Herman LJ, Lubbers LM.

High-resolution magnetic resonance (MR) images of the tendons of the hands,
wrists, feet, and ankles of six healthy volunteers and six cadavers were obtained
using receive-only surface coils and reduced-field-of-view imaging. Normal
anatomy was identified and compared with gross anatomic sections of the six
cadavers. Experimentally produced tears of the calcaneal (Achilles) tendon in
domestic swine were identified on MR images. The hands and feet of 11 patients
were examined, and a variety of pathologic lesions were identified, including
acute posttraumatic rupture, acute tenosynovitis, chronic tendonitis, and
postsurgical complications. MR imaging provides inherently greater soft-tissue
contrast than any other currently available imaging modality. With the use of
surface coils and reduced-field-of-view imaging to enhance spatial resolution, MR
imaging has become a valuable tool for imaging tendons. Advantages over other
available modalities include excellent depiction of anatomic detail, superior
contrast resolution, and the potential for multiplanar imaging.

PMID: 3809487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Neurochem. 1987 Mar;48(3):684-8.

Distribution of putrescine in rat brain measured by gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry.

Noto T, Hasegawa T, Hashimoto H, Nakajima T.

We measured putrescine levels in minute sites of single rat brains using a
sensitive, specific assay involving gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. The
putrescine level was measured in 20 sites of single rat brains: three sites in
the cerebral cortex, six sites in the hypothalamus, three sites in the basal
ganglia, three sites in the thalamus, three sites in the limbic system, and two
sites in the cerebellum. The level of putrescine was very high in the
hypothalamus, high in the basal ganglia and limbic system, and low in the
thalamus, cerebellum, and two of the three sites in the cerebral cortex. The
highest levels were in the anterior hypothalamic area and the lateral
hypothalamic area, and the lowest levels were in the vermis and the lobe of the
cerebellum.

PMID: 3806100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Clin Nucl Med. 1987 Feb;12(2):103-5.

Right ventricular aneurysm due to ischemic disease. Diagnosis by radionuclide
angiography with localization of the site of PVC origin by phase analysis.

Shaffer PB, Bashore TM, Noto AM, Diblasio G, Olsen JO, Schall SF.

A case of right ventricular aneurysm due to coronary artery disease in a
69-year-old male with no prior history of surgery or chest trauma is reported.
The presence of the aneurysm was diagnosed by gated radionuclide angiography and 
confirmed by contrast angiography. This is the first description of an isolated
right ventricular aneurysm on the basis of ischemic disease. In addition, the
patient had recurrent ventricular tachycardia and frequent premature ventricular 
contractions (PVC's). Using radionuclide angiographic phase analysis of the
PVC's, their apparent origin was localized to the margin of the right ventricular
aneurysm.

PMID: 3829530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Clin Psychiatry. 1987 Feb;48(2):77-8.

Hypothermia caused by antipsychotic drugs in a schizophrenic patient.

Noto T, Hashimoto H, Sugae S, Okamoto K, Nakao J, Kamimura H, Nakajima T.

In a schizophrenic patient, hypothermia was caused by combined treatment with
zotepine, biperiden, and fluphenazine, although combined treatment with zotepine 
and biperiden had caused no side effects. Other side effects closely resembled
those in neuroleptic malignant syndrome.

PMID: 3804993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Radiology. 1987 Feb;162(2):565-9.

Tumors of the osseous spine: staging with MR imaging versus CT.

Beltran J, Noto AM, Chakeres DW, Christoforidis AJ.

Twelve patients with tumors involving the osseous spine were evaluated with
magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and computed tomography (CT), six with and six
without intrathecal injection of contrast material. MR imaging was found to be
superior to CT without contrast material and equal to CT with contrast material
in delineating the anatomic relationships of the tumors, including bone
involvement, spinal canal invasion, paraspinal soft-tissue extension, and
vascular involvement. Since MR imaging can provide most of the anatomic
information necessary for treatment planning, intrathecal injection of contrast
material can be avoided in most instances when evaluating tumor involvement of
the osseous spine. However, CT without contrast medium was superior to MR imaging
in showing critical cortical bone destruction and calcified tumor matrix.

PMID: 3797673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Anal Biochem. 1987 Feb 1;160(2):371-5.

Determination of putrescine in brain tissue using gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry.

Noto T, Hasegawa T, Kamimura H, Nakao J, Hashimoto H, Nakajima T.

We used gas chromatography-mass spectrometry to assay putrescine in minute
regions of single rat brains. Acid extraction, partial purification on Amberlite 
CG 120, and derivatization with pentafluoropropionic anhydride preceded the gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry. A moving-needle solventless system and a direct
inlet system were also used to increase sensitivity. Putrescine was measured
accurately at the picomole level; the mean concentration of this polyamine in
five regions of rat brain found by this method was 2.7-3.8 times higher than
reported by other researchers.

PMID: 3578766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Lancet. 1987 Jan 24;1(8526):228-9.

Achievement of thrombolysis at home in cases of acute myocardial infarction.

Villemant D, Barriot P, Riou B, Bodenan P, Brunet F, Noto R, Monsallier JF.

PMID: 2880062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Dev Ophthalmol. 1987;15:1-106.

Cataract epidemiology. International Cataract Epidemiology Meeting. October 4,
1986, Noto, Japan.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 3691915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Urol Int. 1987;42(2):127-31.

Microwave surgical treatment of the prostate: clinical application of microwave
surgery as a tool for improved prostatic electroresection.

Harada T, Tsuchida S, Nishizawa O, Kigure T, Noto H, Etori K, Kumazaki T, Koh D, 
Shimoda J.

Microwave surgery as a tool for improved prostatic electroresection is
introduced. Prior to electroresection the prostate was coagulated with 2,450 MHz 
of microwave which was emitted from the bipolar electrode of a specially designed
probe. We conducted a comparative study of 35 patients with bladder neck
obstruction. There was a microwave coagulation group treated with subsequent
transurethral resection (TUR) and a conventional TUR group. Both groups were
analyzed for the amount of blood loss, irrigant absorption and the frequency of
complications. Both during and following surgery, the former group had a
significant reduction in blood loss and had no complications. We conclude that
the combination procedure of microwave coagulation and TUR can minimize the
disadvantage of formal TUR and may be of value in the treatment of patients with 
both prostatic obstruction and of hemorrhagic diathesis as well as in high risk
patients.

PMID: 3617240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1987 Jan;78(1):124-32.

[Ultrasonographic assessment of residual urine in patients with neurogenic
bladder dysfunction].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto H, Harada T, Nishizawa O, Kizu N, Hongoh R, Tsuchida S.

PMID: 3298766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Radiology. 1986 Oct;161(1):203-9.

Ankle: surface coil MR imaging at 1.5 T.

Beltran J, Noto AM, Mosure JC, Shamam OM, Weiss KL, Zuelzer WA.

High-field surface coil magnetic resonance (MR) images were obtained of 12
ankles: two from healthy volunteers, seven from patients, and three from fresh
cadavers. The cadaver ankles were sectioned in the coronal, sagittal, and axial
planes for direct comparison with the MR images. Plain film confirmation of
pathologic conditions was obtained in all patients, and five underwent
arthroscopy or surgery, or both. MR imaging provided excellent delineation of
ligaments and cartilaginous structures in all cases.

PMID: 3763868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Rev Infirm. 1986 Oct;36(15):49-53.

[Burns and emergency care].

[Article in French]

Manillier MH, Noto.

PMID: 3641356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Jpn Circ J. 1986 Oct;50(10):943-8.

Effects of insulin on pressor responsiveness and baroreflex function in diabetes 
mellitus.

Yamamoto M, Takata S, Yagi S, Iwase N, Kiyokawa H, Noto Y, Ikeda T, Hattori N.

The effects of insulin on pressor responsiveness to alpha agonist (phenylephrine)
and angiotensin II, and baroreflex function were studied in fifteen diabetic
patients without autonomic neuropathy. The dose of phenylephrine required to
increase systolic pressure by 25 mmHg (PD25) was significantly increased from 38 
+/- 7 to 62 +/- 9 micrograms (p less than 0.05) after IV injection of 4 U of
Actrapid monocomponent insulin. The dose of angiotensin II required to increase
systolic pressure by 30 mmHg (AD30) was also increased from 0.29 +/- 0.07 to 0.48
+/- 0.10 micrograms (p less than 0.01). Following insulin administration, the
dose-response curves for phenylephrine and angiotensin II were shifted to the
right. The baroreflex sensitivity was not affected by insulin. In contrast, there
was no significant change in PD25, AD30 or baroreflex sensitivity after the
injection of saline. These results suggest that insulin attenuates the pressor
responsiveness to alpha agonist and angiotensin II, which may be one of the
significant mechanisms in insulin-induced vasodilation.

PMID: 3543427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 1986 Sep;13(9):2861-3.

[A case of advanced esophageal cancer resected curatively by preoperative
chemotherapy with cisplatin].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohyama S, Noto H, Fujita H, Miyazaki I.

A case of highly advanced esophageal cancer with bilateral multiple cervical
lymph-node metastasis is reported. The largest size of lymph node was 5.0 cm in
diameter, and intramural metastasis to the cardia of the stomach and provable
invasion to the aorta were also seen. After treatment, with 100 mg/m2 cisplatin
on two occasions these lesions were resected curatively. This preoperative
chemotherapy would be expected to increase the resectability rate and possibly
the survival rate.

PMID: 3753030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1986 Aug;25(2):411-4.

The effect of L-erythro-dihydroxyphenylserine injected into the lateral ventricle
and the hypothalamus on the locomotor activity.

Noto T, Hashimoto H, Nakao J, Kamimura H, Mori T, Nakajima T.

The effect of dihydroxyphenylserine (DOPS) on locomotor activity was studied
using the Animex activity meter. One microgram of L-erythro-DOPS, a precursor of 
d-noradrenaline, was injected into the lateral ventricle once a day for one week 
or into the anterior hypothalamic area (AHA) once. After the intraventricular
injection, the total locomotor activity (from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.) of the rats
injected with DOPS was significantly less than that of the rats injected with an 
artificial cerebrospinal fluid (5-ion). Analysis of the locomotor activity in
consecutive 2-hr periods showed that the activity of the DOPS group during the
time intervals of 10 p.m.-12 a.m., 12 a.m.-2 a.m. and 2 a.m.-4 a.m. was
significantly less than that of the control group. After injection of DOPS or
5-ion into AHA, the total activity of the DOPS group was significantly less than 
that of the control. Analysis of the activity of the DOPS group for each 2-hr
period between 10 p.m.-4 a.m. was also significantly less than that of the
control. On the basis of these findings, the effect of DOPS in the brain
noradrenergic system are discussed.

PMID: 3094040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1986 Aug;34(4):273-4.

Chronic obstruction of the inferior vena cava with recurrent endometrial stromal 
sarcoma.

Saito H, Kidani M, Shinagawa M, Sato H, Noto T.

A 64-year-old woman presented with endometrial stromal sarcoma of the inferior
vena cava. The tumor was removed along the venous wall, and the vena cava and the
right renal vein were reconstructed with a ringed polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) 
graft. The patient remains well 9 months after the operation despite graft
occlusion. Fifteen years earlier the patient had undergone a hysterectomy for
endometrial stromal sarcoma. Histologically, the second tumor was identical with 
the endometrial stromal sarcoma removed with the uterus at the primary operation.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a case of obstruction
of the inferior vena cava by such a tumor.

PMID: 2429400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Radiology. 1986 Jun;159(3):747-51.

The knee: surface-coil MR imaging at 1.5 T1.

Beltran J, Noto AM, Mosure JC, Weiss KL, Zuelzer W, Christoforidis AJ.

Seven normal knees (in five volunteers) and seven injured knees (in seven
patients) were examined by high-resolution magnetic resonance (MR) imaging at 1.5
T with a surface coil. Seven medial meniscal tears, three anterior cruciate
ligament tears, one posterior cruciate ligament avulsion, an old osteochondral
fracture, femoral condylar chondromalacia, and one case of semimembranous tendon 
reinsertion were identified. MR images correlated well with recent
double-contrast arthrograms or results of surgery. All tears were identified in
both the sagittal and coronal planes. Because of its ability to demonstrate small
meniscal lesions and ligamentous injuries readily, MR imaging with a surface coil
may eventually replace the more invasive arthrography.

PMID: 3704154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Neurochem. 1986 Jun;46(6):1877-80.

Spontaneous release of gamma-aminobutyric acid formed from putrescine and its
enhanced Ca2+-dependent release by high K+ stimulation in the brains of freely
moving rats.

Noto T, Hashimoto H, Nakao J, Kamimura H, Nakajima T.

The spontaneous release of [3H] gamma-aminobutyric acid ([3H]GABA) in various
areas of rat brain injected with [3H]putrescine was examined using a push-pull
perfusion technique. The release in a 25-min perfusate was highest in the
caudate-putamen. The effect of high K+ stimulation on the release of [3H]GABA
formed from [3H]putrescine was examined in the caudate-putamen. The release was
enhanced by high K+ solution in a Ca2+-dependent manner.

PMID: 3701335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Radiology. 1986 Mar;158(3):691-3.

Meniscal tears: MR demonstration of experimentally produced injuries.

Beltran J, Noto AM, Mosure JC, Bools JC, Zuelzer W, Christoforidis AJ.

Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging was performed using a 1.5-T magnet on eight
immature swine knees with surgically produced vertical and horizontal meniscal
tears. Three radiologists, interpreting the images independently, detected all
tears. Tears in the middle portion of the meniscus were best seen on sagittal
views, while lesions of the anterior and posterior horns of the meniscus were
best seen on coronal views. MR has several advantages over arthrography, the
current diagnostic method for knee injuries: it is noninvasive, uses no ionizing 
radiation, and provides excellent soft-tissue contrast resolution.

PMID: 3945740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 1986 Mar;13(3 Pt 1):612-5.

[PMU therapy of recurrent gastric cancer. A case report].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohyama S, Yonemura Y, Matsuki N, Miyata R, Noto H, Sakuma H, Yagi M, Sawa T,
Ogino S, Miyazaka I.

A 56-year-old woman with recurrent gastric cancer treated with PMU therapy,
combined CDDP 75 mg/m2 i.v. MMC 10 mg/body i.v. and UFT 400mg/body/2 alpha/day
p.o., was reported. She was admitted because of cervical lymph node swelling and 
abdominal tumor (para-aorta lymph node swelling). She was treated two times with 
this therapy and induced into complete remission. The serum CEA level, more than 
500 ng/ml before the treatment, was reduced to 6.7 ng/ml after treatment. She has
currently been free of disease for more than four weeks. We conclude that this
PMU therapy is extremely effective for indurable gastric cancer.

PMID: 3006596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Transfusion. 1986 Mar-Apr;26(2):186-93.

Automatic special case consultations in transfusion medicine.

Tomasulo PA, Lenes BA, Noto TA, Klein HG, Menitove JE.

In the past, consultations in immunohematology were usually delivered only when
there was a blood or component shortage, or when the time required for
compatibility testing was prolonged due to the presence of a difficult recipient 
antibody problem. More recently, transfusion medicine physicians have increased
their role as clinical consultants concerned about the appropriate indications
for blood transfusion. This communication presents a way to begin a sound program
of clinical transfusion medicine consultation. The program can fit with
community-wide teaching efforts, community or hospital transfusion audits, and
specific physician education programs. Automatic or unsolicited consultations
appear to have been both accepted well and beneficial in large hospitals and in
communities where they have been provided for more than 7 years.

PMID: 3006299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 1986 Feb;39(2):242-50.

Semisynthetic beta-lactam antibiotics. II. Effect on antibacterial activity of
ureido N-substituents in the 6-[(R)-2-[3-(3,4-dihydroxybenzoyl)-1-
ureido]-2-phenylacetamido]penicillanic acids.

Ohi N, Aoki B, Moro K, Kuroki T, Sugimura N, Noto T, Nehashi T, Matsumoto M,
Okazaki H, Matsunaga I.

The synthesis and the relationship between in vitro and in vivo activities of
6-[(R)-2-[3-(3,4-dihydroxybenzoyl)-3-R1-1-ureido]-2- phenylacetamido]penicillanic
acids having C2 approximately 8 alkyl or substituted alkyl groups as the
substituents (R1) are described. In this series,
6-[(R)-2-[3-(3,4-dihydroxybenzoyl)-3-(3-hydroxypropyl)-1-ureido]
-2-phenylacetamido]penicillanic acid (1b, AO-1100) showed the most potent
protective effect on mice in experimental Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections,
although it did not have the strongest in vitro activity among the penicillins we
synthesized.

PMID: 3957789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 1986 Feb;39(2):230-41.

Semisynthetic beta-lactam antibiotics. I. Synthesis and antibacterial activity of
new ureidopenicillin derivatives having catechol moieties.

Ohi N, Aoki B, Shinozaki T, Moro K, Noto T, Nehashi T, Okazaki H, Matsunaga I.

The synthesis and antibacterial activity of new ureidopenicillin derivatives
having catechol moieties in the 6-acyl side chain are described. These compounds 
showed remarkably strong activities against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Especially,
6-[(R)-2-[3-(3,4-dihydroxybenzoyl)-3-methyl-1-ureido]-2-
phenylacetamido]penicillanic acid (7a) had the most potent activity in vitro
against Gram-negative bacteria, its activity being 30 approximately 60-fold
greater than that of piperacillin against most strains of P. aeruginosa.

PMID: 3082839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Radiology. 1986 Jan;158(1):133-7.

Joint effusions: MR imaging.

Beltran J, Noto AM, Herman LJ, Mosure JC, Burk JM, Christoforidis AJ.

Magnetic resonance (MR) images of the hips and knees of three healthy volunteers 
were reviewed and compared with images obtained from the hips of three patients
with effusions. Comparison was also made with MR images obtained from two swine
knees following the injections of saline in one and blood in the other. The
anatomy of the knees and hips was well defined. The hip effusions were all easily
recognized. MR images of the swine knees clearly demonstrated the experimentally 
produced joint effusions. The hip effusions and the experimentally introduced
blood and saline all had long T1 and T2 values allowing easy differentiation from
articular cartilage. We were unable to distinguish fresh blood from saline in the
knee joints.

PMID: 3940370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol. 1986;409(3):365-73.

Human chorionic gonadotropin in primary liver carcinoma in adults. An
immunohistochemical study.

Nakanuma Y, Unoura M, Noto H, Ohta G.

Production of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) by extragonadal tumours is not a
rare phenomenon. In the liver, similar results have been reported in
hepatoblastomas. The present study was attempted to survey hCG level in serum and
hCG-immunoreactivity in primary liver carcinoma in adults. Although hCG was
elevated in serum in 2 (22.2%) of 9 autopsied cases with hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), the hCG-reactivity of carcinoma cells was found in 2 (2.1%) of 95 HCC
cases. Carcinoma cells positive for immunoreactive hCG was found in 2 (15.4%) of 
13 cases with cholangiocarcinoma (CC). The patients with hCG-immunoreactivity in 
carcinoma and/or elevated serum level of hCG failed to reveal distinct clinical
and endocrinological disturbance due to excess hCG. The hCG-positive cells were
focal within the carcinoma and showed poor histological differentiation in both
HCC and CC, and there were no trophoblastic cells. It is suggested that hCG is
one of the hormones produced by primary liver carcinoma in adults and can be
localised immunohistochemically in a small number of poorly differentiated
carcinoma cells.

PMID: 3014718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Respiration. 1986;50 Suppl 2:236-9.

Double-blind study with Duovent and placebo in 20 asthmatic children.

Pulejo R, Romano L, Noto M.

Duovent activity was compared with placebo in a double-blind study carried out in
20 children, aged between 5 and 14 years, suffering from bronchial asthma. The
experiment lasted 2 weeks. The patients were divided into two groups. In the 1st 
week, group I was treated with Duovent and group II with placebo, in the 2nd week
vice versa. There was no reduction in cough or dyspnea in subjects treated with
placebo, and only a slight increase (not significant) in peak expiratory flow
(PEF). In the subjects treated with Duovent, there was a clear reduction in cough
and dyspnea and a significant increase in PEF. The effect of the drug was still
evident after 8 h, and it was well tolerated without side effects. The high
number of additional sprays required during the placebo period was further
evidence of the therapeutic efficacy of Duovent, which in almost all cases met
the daily therapeutic requirements of the small patients. Duovent appears to be
an effective drug in the treatment of bronchial asthma in children, both
clinically and functionally.

PMID: 2951813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Recenti Prog Med. 1986 Jan;77(1):46-9.

[5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) cardiotoxicity. Evaluation by dynamic ECG].

[Article in Italian]

Pellegrini F, Di Noto G, Ansuini G, Pisani E, Russo P, Luzi Fedeli S, Torresi U, 
Guidi F, Cellerino R.

PMID: 2422710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Acta Pathol Jpn. 1986 Jan;36(1):151-9.

Carcinosarcoma of the esophagus. An immunohistochemical and electron microscopic 
study.

Ooi A, Kawahara E, Okada Y, Mizukami Y, Sugawara S, Noto Y, Fujita H.

Immunohistochemical and electron microscopic examinations were made of a
carcinosarcoma of the esophagus in an 80-year-old man. An immunohistochemical
examination showed that sarcomatous spindle cells were vimentin-positive, whereas
squamous carcinoma cells were keratin-positive. No coexistence of vimentin and
keratin in a single tumor cell was found. Electron microscopically, the
sarcomatous spindle cells were characterized by well-developed rough endoplasmic 
reticulum, abundant intermediate filaments, and the occasional presence of
peripheral aggregates of microfilaments. No definite desmosomes were identified
among these cells. These results appear to indicate that most of the
spindle-shaped tumor cells assume fibroblastic cellular features and synthesize
the intermediate filament protein usually expressed in mesenchymal cells, even
though such tumor cells could be epithelial in origin.

PMID: 2421529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Urology. 1985 Dec;26(6):572-6.

Microwave surgical treatment of diseases of prostate.

Harada T, Etori K, Kumazaki T, Nishizawa O, Noto H, Tsuchida S.

A new transurethral probe for microwave radiation of the prostate has been
developed. As a preliminary experiment, sliced ham was radiated with microwaves
using this probe in order to evaluate the extent of thermal effect. Using mongrel
male dogs, microwave coagulation of the prostate was examined. These animal
experiments showed marked destruction of the prostate gland. Furthermore, the
safety of this method was confirmed on the basis of results from the experiments.
Prostatic bladder neck obstruction also has been treated in 6 patients with
benign prostatic hypertrophy or carcinoma of the prostate by this technique.
There has been no mortality and also no complications. The results of this
preliminary clinical trial have been excellent.

PMID: 3907095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Nihon Heikatsukin Gakkai Zasshi. 1985 Dec;21(6):455-66.

The estimation of urine bolus volume for patients with congenital hydronephrosis.

Harada T, Noto H, Etori K, Kumasaki T, Kigure T, Nishizawa O, Tsuchida S.

A new examination (bolusmetry) to evaluate the urine transport function of the
ureteropelvic system was performed in 7 adult patients with congenital unilateral
hydronephrosis. Whistle-tipped Fr. 5 catheters were introduced to each ureter
about 5 cm proximal from the ureteral orifice by transurethral endoscopic
technique. Bolus volume and frequency, and changes in them caused by furosemide
injection, were estimated by using a drop counter which was connected to the
terminal end of the ureteral catheter. Bolusmetry was performed comparing the
hydronephrotic side and the healthy side, pre and postoperatively, and these
results were then compared with a conventional examination. We obtained the
following results: Bolus volume of the hydronephrotic side was 0.05 +/- 0.02
(mean +/- S.D.) ml at oliguric state, and it was significantly lower than the
value of the healthy side which was 0.19 +/- 0.07 ml. Injection of diuretics
increased the bolus volume of the healthy side ten times or more. On the other
hand, the bolus volume of the hydronephrotic side was increased only slightly by 
the injection of furosemide, it being approximately one-fourth of the value of
the healthy side. The value of bolus frequency was similar to peristaltic
frequency which was measured by the electromyogram. The tendency of a decrease
was noticed in bolus frequency of the hydronephrotic side but it was not
significant. Of patients with severe hydronephrosis, the bolus volume of the
hydronephrotic side was decreased and the response to the diuretics was not so
significant. By bolusmetry, functional or organic obstruction of the
ureteropelvic junction was detected. Of 3 patients who had nephrectomy or
nephrostomy, the kidney function had deteriorated severely. The bolus volume was 
lower than 0.25 ml at the diuretic state. Bolus volume was increased
postoperatively in 3 of 4 patients who had received pelvioplasty. One patient did
not show the formation of bolus by the injection of diuretics, and the cause of
the hydronephrosis was functional obstruction of the pelvioureteric junction. We 
concluded that bolusmetry is a valuable method for evaluation of the function of 
urine transport in the ureteropelvic system. Especially in hydronephrosis,
bolusmetry is a useful in the choice of operative procedure, and for
postoperative evaluation.

PMID: 3837829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1985 Dec;147(4):421-5.

Noninvasive screening procedure for evaluation of bladder emptying function.

Nishizawa O, Matsuzaki A, Kohama T, Suzuki T, Noto H.

Bladder emptying function has been initially evaluated by uroflowmetry and post
void residual urine measurement. Post void residual urine volume was commonly
measured by a transurethral catheter which was not desirable to some patients. In
the present study 7 patents with a complaint of dysuria were subjected to
combined uroflowmetry and detection of post void residual urine using sector
transabdominal ultrasound scanning. The volume estimation with assumption of
bladder as an ellipsoid was not so accurate, nevertheless detection of post void 
residual urine itself was possible in all cases. Thus, the combined method
appears to be very useful for evaluating bladder emptying function.

PMID: 2938306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Nihon Naika Gakkai Zasshi. 1985 Oct;74(10):1414-9.

[Thyrotoxicosis preceded by hypothyroidism in a case of chronic thyroiditis with 
Graves' ophthalmopathy].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamamoto T, Ohsawa K, Nishimura Y, Sanada A, Miyakoshi H, Noto Y, Hattori N.

PMID: 3841550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1985 Sep;76(9):1341-8.

[Urethral compliance and cross sectional area measurement--clinical study of male
patients with lower urinary tract dysfunction].

[Article in Japanese]

Harada T, Fukuda T, Etori K, Nishizawa O, Noto H, Kumasaki T, Kigure K.

PMID: 4087627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Endocrinol Jpn. 1985 Aug;32(4):489-96.

Effect of ethanol and acetaldehyde on the release of arginine-vasopressin and
oxytocin from the isolated hypothalamo-hypophyseal system of rats.

Hashimoto H, Noto T, Nakajima T, Kato N.

Effects of ethanol and acetaldehyde on the release of arginine-vasopressin (AVP) 
and oxytocin (OXT) were examined using a superfusion system of the isolated
hypothalamo-hypophyseal complex of rats. The release of both hormones was
significantly suppressed by exposing the tissue samples to Eagle MEM medium
containing 1.75 and 2.5% ethanol (the maximal suppression: AVP, 30% and 70%; OXT,
30% and 70%, respectively). However, perfusion with medium containing 3.75 and
5.0% ethanol enhanced the release of OXT during exposure to ethanol (the maximal 
increase, 1,000%) and the release of AVP was increased markedly just after
exposure to ethanol was stopped (the maximal increase, 800%). Perfusion with
medium containing 50, 100 and 250 microM acetaldehyde did not affect the release.

PMID: 4085411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Nihon Heikatsukin Gakkai Zasshi. 1985 Aug;21(4):288-90.

[Evaluation of urethral pressure on stimulation of the pudendal nerve and lower
abdominal nerve by Stereo-UPP].

[Article in Japanese]

Kinami N, Morita T, Noto H, Sugaya K, Toda M.

PMID: 2936915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Rinsho Ketsueki. 1985 Jul;26(7):1140-4.

[A case of pulmonary nocardiosis in malignant lymphoma under VEMP therapy].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto N, Sugaya N, Wakabayashi Y, Hirose S.

PMID: 4057595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Comput Assist Tomogr. 1985 Jul-Aug;9(4):832-3.

CT demonstration of a ureteroinguinal hernia causing hydronephrosis.

Noto AM, Ragosin RJ, Beltran J.

PMID: 4019852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Pediatr. 1985 Jul;107(1):100-2.

Improved management of brittle-psychosocial diabetes by use of a portable insulin
infusion pump.

Noto RA, Ginsberg L, Lifshitz F, Pelcovitz D, Kaplan S.

PMID: 3891944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1985 Jun;33(6):938-41.

[A large aneurysm of the previously ligated patent ductus arteriosus].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Saito H, Sato H, Noto T.

PMID: 4056511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1985 Jun;22(6):979-83.

Effect of DL-erythro-dihydroxyphenylserine on the locomotor activity of the
mouse.

Mori T, Nakajima T, Hashimoto H, Noto T, Kato N.

Effect of dihydroxyphenylserine (DOPS) on the locomotor activity of mice
pretreated with beta-phenylisopropylhydrazine was studied using an Animex
activity meter. An intraperitoneal injection of DL-erythro-DOPS (200 mg/kg)
suppressed significantly the locomotor stimulation by the MAO inhibitor, while
DL-threo-DOPS (200 mg/kg) had no effect. Only slight suppression was observed
after the administration of 100 mg/kg of DL-erythro-DOPS. Effect of DOPS on the
concentrations of brain catecholamines and serotonin of mice pretreated with the 
MAO inhibitor was also analysed. The administration of DL-erythro-DOPS
significantly increased the concentration of noradrenaline, while DL-threo-DOPS
did not affect the contents of brain amines in the experimental condition. The
suppressive effect of DL-erythro-DOPS on the locomotor stimulation by the MAO
inhibitor was confirmed by a simultaneous administration of the amino acid and
d-phenylisopropylmethylamine to mice. Based on these findings, the neural
mechanisms of the locomotor activity and a clinical application of
DL-erythro-DOPS to the manic syndrome were discussed.

PMID: 2862644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1985 May;76(5):700-5.

[Transabdominal electronic sector scanning of the prostate].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto H, Harada T, Sugaya K, Kizu N, Sasaki S, Morita T, Nishizawa O, Tsuchida S.

PMID: 3903306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Gan No Rinsho. 1985 Mar;31(3):293-8.

[Serum levels and clinical evaluation of CA 19-9 in various diseases].

[Article in Japanese]

Toyama K, Noto M, Sakaguchi T, Adachi K, Mitomi H, Okada N, Ootaka H, Nakazawa H,
Hara E.

We evaluated the clinical significance of serum CA 19-9 in various cancers,
benign diseases and healthy controls. The percentage of positive cases for CA
19-9 (higher than 37 U/ml) was 83% in pancreas cancer, 78% in biliary tract
cancer and 75% in urinary tract cancer. Benign diseases showed a low frequency of
positive cases for CA 19-9, and their serum levels of CA 19-9 were low. Benign
diseases with high serum levels of CA 19-9 were rarely seen, but they were easy
to differentiate from malignant tumors by simultaneous examination of other tumor
markers. In cancer patients with high serum levels of CA 19-9, CA 19-9 showed a
weak positive correlation to CEA and ferritin.

PMID: 2582158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Endocrinol Jpn. 1985 Feb;32(1):89-97.

Distribution of vasopressin and oxytocin in rat brain.

Hashimoto H, Fukui K, Noto T, Nakajima T, Kato N.

Arginine-vasopressin and oxytocin in various portions of rat brain were
determined by radioimmunoassays. The hormones were extracted from tissue samples 
into 0.1 N HCl and then purified partially with acetone-petroleum ether
extraction. The non-equilibration method was used for the assays. In this method 
recovery rates of arginine-vasopressin and oxytocin were 73.0 +/- 4.4% and 75.0
+/- 3.8%, respectively. Sensitivities of the assays were 1 pg of
arginine-vasopressin and 0.75 pg (0.3 microU) of oxytocin per assay tube. The
higher concentrations of arginine-vasopressin and oxytocin were confirmed in the 
hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal system, where these hormones are synthesized,
transported and stored. Relatively high concentrations of these hormones,
especially oxytocin, were detected in spinal cord. Amygdala, hippocampus, limbic 
forebrain and pineal body contained a certain amount of arginine-vasopressin
(2-20 pg/mg protein). Oxytocin (1-7 pg/mg protein) was also detected in amygdala,
pons and medulla oblongata, pineal body and midbrain. The low concentrations of
these hormones were also found in cerebral cortex and cerebellum.

PMID: 4017977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Kyobu Geka. 1985 Feb;38(2):147-9.

[Transpulmonary artery closure of PDA in the adult patient with decreased
pulmonary function].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Iida S, Sato H, Noto T.

PMID: 3990063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Angiology. 1985 Feb;36(2):110-5.

Peripheral circulatory effects of insulin in diabetes.

Takata S, Yamamoto M, Yagi S, Noto Y, Ikeda T, Hattori N.

Peripheral circulatory effects of insulin were studied in the diabetic patients
with and without autonomic neuropathy. Forearm blood flow, calf venous volume and
calf venous distensibility were measured by strain gauge plethysmography. In the 
diabetic patients with autonomic neuropathy, mean blood pressure fell from 96 +/-
5 to 88 +/- 5 mmHg after an intravenous injection of 4 U of monocomponent insulin
(p less than 0.001). Forearm vascular resistance decreased from 53.99 +/- 8.29 to
45.88 +/- 7.76 mmHg X ml-1 X 100ml-1 X min-1 after insulin (p less than 0.01).
Insulin increased calf venous volume from 1.20 +/- 0.19 to 2.23 +/- 0.44 ml/100ml
(p less than 0.05) and calf venous distensibility from 0.039 +/- 0.004 to 0.082
+/- 0.016 ml/mmHg (p less than 0.05). In contrast, in the diabetic patients
without autonomic neuropathy, there were no significant changes in the mean blood
pressure, forearm vascular resistance, calf venous volume and calf venous
distensibility. Symptoms of hypoglycaemia did not occur in any patient. These
results suggest that insulin has a vasodilator action on both resistance and
capacitance vessels, which may be one of the main factors in insulin-induced
hypotension.

PMID: 3896037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Infect Dis. 1985 Feb;151(2):287-90.

Prevention of perinatal transmission of hepatitis B virus (HBV) to children of e 
antigen-positive HBV carrier mothers by hepatitis B immune globulin and HBV
vaccine.

Kanai K, Takehiro A, Noto H, Nishida M, Takahashi K, Kawashima Y, Igarashi Y,
Matsushita K, Shimizu M.

The efficacy of hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) with two hepatitis B virus
(HBV) vaccines was investigated for prevention of vertical transmission of HBV to
infants born to e antigen-positive HBV carrier mothers. Infants received 150 mg
of the F(ab')2 fraction of HBIG intravenously within 2 hr of delivery, and serum 
titers of antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs) were kept greater
than 1:4 (passive hemagglutination) by subcutaneous injection of HBIG thereafter.
HBV vaccine was started three or six months after delivery. Of 50 infants older
than nine months, 49 were actively immunized against hepatitis B surface antigen.
Vaccine containing alum adjuvant immunized the infants in a shorter period than
did vaccine without adjuvant. Serum titers of anti-HBs of actively immunized
infants were well maintained afterward. None of the infants treated with HBIG and
HBV vaccine was positive for serum antibody to hepatitis B core antigen at 12
months of age. No side effects were observed.

PMID: 3155779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1985 Feb;82(2):330-4.

[A glucagon-secreting alpha-cell carcinoma of the pancreas].

[Article in Japanese]

Matsumoto J, Noto N, Kikuchi Y, Kitazima S, Kaimori M, Sasaki G, Ohto T, Nakamura
K.

PMID: 2987580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Agressologie. 1984 Dec;25(12):1311-4.

[Does repetition change the performance of Fukuda's test?].

[Article in French]

Weber B, Gagey PM, Noto R.

PMID: 6528896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1984 Dec;75(12):1921-6.

[A study of the mechanisms of the vesicoureteral reflux through ultrasonographic 
investigation of the intravesical ureter].

[Article in Japanese]

Tsuchida S, Harada T, Nishizawa O, Noto H, Takada H.

PMID: 6398839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Nihon Heikatsukin Gakkai Zasshi. 1984 Dec;20(6):445-53.

[Evaluation of the pelvioureteral function through an impedance urine
bolus-metry].

[Article in Japanese]

Harada T, Miyagata S, Etori K, Kumasaki T, Noto H.

New equipment based on field gradient principle for measurement of cross
sectional area of ureteral urine bolus has been developed. Inside the probe
consisted of a Fr.4 ureteral catheter, there are 4 ring impedance electrodes and 
a bipolar ring ureteromyographic electrode. Ex vivo experiments has proved high
values in reliability and reproducibility of obtained cross sectional area of
urine bolus through an impedance method. Following results have been obtained
through animal and clinical experiments. As urine bolus passed through the
impedance electrodes, impedance represented the cross sectional area of urine
bolus. The ureteral activity corresponded to the increase of urine flow changed
as follows, ureteral peristaltic frequency increased, cross sectional area of
urine bolus increased, length of urine bolus increased, during maximum diuresis, 
peristaltic activity diminished and continuous flow presented through ureteral
column. It will be useful method for experimental or clinical evaluation of
ureteral function.

PMID: 6242121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Neurochem Res. 1984 Nov;9(11):1653-65.

In vivo alteration in hypothalamic amino acid synthesis during perfusion of
ethanol and morphine in unrestrained rat.

Noto T, Myers RD.

In the freely moving rat [U-14C]glucose was microinjected through a guide tube to
label a discrete site in the hypothalamus. After 10 min, a push-pull cannula was 
used to perfuse an artificial CSF within the site at a rate of 25
microliters/min. During the fourth 5 min perfusion of each series, one of three
concentrations of either ethanol (94-471 mM) or morphine SO4 (0.13-1.3 mM) was
added to the perfusate. Each sample of perfusate was assayed for its content of
GABA, glutamate, alanine, aspartate, glycine and glutamine by two-dimensional,
thin-layer chromatography. The results show that within a circumscribed region of
the dorsal hypothalamus, the synthesis of [14C]glycine and [14C]glutamine was
enhanced by ethanol and morphine, respectively. Ethanol generally augmented also 
the synthesis of GABA, glutamate, and glutamine at sites reactive to the
compound. Within the same sites, morphine increased the synthesis of glycine.
Other amino acids were not significantly different from the control. Thus,
anatomically specific and selective changes in amino acid activity are produced
within the rat's hypothalamus in response to the localized presence of ethanol or
morphine, suggesting the involvement of certain amino acids in the action of
these addictive compounds within the hypothalamus.

PMID: 6151627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1984 Oct;75(10):1631-6.

[A new modified catheter for transurethral insertion of a needle electrode into
the external urethral sphincter].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto H, Harada T, Sugaya K, Morita T, Nishizawa O, Tsuchida S, Miyagawa I.

PMID: 6527462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Kyobu Geka. 1984 Oct;37(11):891-4.

[Chylothorax following open heart surgery for tetralogy of Fallot].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Endo M, Sato H, Noto T.

PMID: 6521108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Neuroscience. 1984 Oct;13(2):355-65.

Changes in Ca2+ ion activity within unrestrained rat's hippocampus perfused with 
alcohol or acetaldehyde.

Myers RD, Hepler JR, Schwartzwelder HS, Noto T, Denbow DM.

In the freely moving rat, the kinetics of Ca2+ ion activity were determined at
circumscribed sites in the hippocampus, which was perfused with ethanol,
tertiary-butyl alcohol or acetaldehyde. Initially, a region in CA1 or other cell 
field of the dorsal hippocampus was prelabelled by microinjection of 45Ca2+
through a permanently implanted guide tube. Then the tip of a concentric
push-pull cannula assembly was lowered through the guide tube to the labelled
site, and an isotonic artificial cerebrospinal fluid was repeatedly perfused at a
rate of 25 microliter/min. Each perfusion was timed for 5.0 min with a 5.0 min
interval between each. Once the washout curve of 45Ca2+ activity had begun to
approach its asymptote, ordinarily in the midpoint of a series of perfusions, an 
isotonic solution of ethanol (188-942 mM), tertiary-butyl alcohol (12-580 mM) or 
acetaldehyde (10-98 mM) was added to the fourth perfusate. Thereafter, the
hippocampal site was again perfused with the normal cerebrospinal fluid for the
remainder of the experiment. Although the lowest concentration of ethanol exerted
no effect on 45Ca2+ ion activity, an intermediate concentration caused mixed
effects in either enhancing or suppressing the efflux into the perfusate of this 
cation. The highest concentration of ethanol produced in most experiments an
initial suppression in Ca2+ ion efflux which was followed frequently by an
elevation in the release of 45Ca2+. Similar changes in Ca2+ ion activity were
produced by tertiary-butyl alcohol, but the magnitude of its effect was generally
less than that of ethanol, suggesting that its effect on brain tissue differs
from that of ethanol. Acetaldehyde evoked an intense and concentration-dependent 
enhancement of Ca2+ ion efflux from the perfused tissue at all of the sites in
the hippocampus examined. These results suggest that in the unrestrained rat
ethanol could unbind Ca2+ ions from hippocampal membranes or retard their uptake 
into cells of the hippocampus. The dual excitatory and inhibitory effect of
ethanol on Ca2+ ion activity corresponds to the electrophysiological effects of
this alcohol and could alter neurotransmitter release from neurons in this
subcortical structure. The mechanism of action of acetaldehyde is envisaged to be
due to its affinity to membrane sulfhydryl groups which alters protein
conformation and thus interferes with both Ca2+ channels and Ca2+ binding
properties.

PMID: 6514184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Neuroscience. 1984 Oct;13(2):367-76.

Profile of amino acid synthesis in rat hippocampus during push-pull perfusion of 
ethanol or morphine.

Noto T, Hepler JR, Myers RD.

In the unanesthetized rat, the effect of ethanol or morphine on the new synthesis
of six amino acids, gamma-aminobutyrate, glutamate, alanine, aspartate, glycine
and glutamine, was determined at circumscribed sites in the hippocampus. In the
fasted animal, 5.0 microCi of [U-14C]glucose was microinjected in a volume of 1.0
microliter into a discrete region of the hippocampus through a permanently
implanted guide tube. After 10-15 min, the tip of a concentric push-pull cannula 
assembly was lowered through the guide tube to the labelled site, and an isotonic
artificial cerebrospinal fluid was continuously perfused at a rate of 25
microliters/min. Samples of perfusate were collected every 5.0 min in a total
volume of 125 microliters. During the fourth perfusion, either ethanol (94 or 471
mM) or morphine (0.1 or 1.0 microgram/microliter) was added to the push-pull
perfusate. Amino acids and glucose contained in each sample of perfusate were
separated by means of a two-dimensional, thin-layer chromatographic procedure.
The results show that the 94 mM dose of ethanol acted only to significantly
suppress the new synthesis of alanine. Conversely, the higher 471 mM dose of
ethanol significantly increased the new synthesis of both glycine and glutamine
from the glucose precursor. The effect of the 0.1 microgram/microliter morphine
dose on amino acid synthesis paralleled that of the lower dose of ethanol since
it evoked a similar decrease in the synthesis of alanine; however, the higher
dose of 1.0 microgram/microliter morphine produced no effect. None of the other
amino acids in the hippocampus were affected by either of the CNS depressants.
Thus, whereas ethanol seems to exert significant stimulating activity on
hippocampal synthesis of glycine and glutamine, morphine and ethanol possess the 
same inhibitory effect on alanine synthesis in this subcortical structure.

PMID: 6151146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Agressologie. 1984 Sep;25(8):919-21.

Effects of fructose-1,6-diphosphate on the red cell deformability in diabetic
patients.

Marsilii A, Petruzzi E, Di Noto C, Marini P.

PMID: 6507765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Nihon Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1984 Sep;85(9):990-4.

[Nutritional management after massive resection of the pancreas].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujita H, Katayama K, Kusajima Y, Higashino Y, Yonemura Y, Izumi R, Noto H,
Takashima S, Takeshita Y, Konishi K, et al.

Eleven patients after total pancreatectomy and 68 patients after
pancreatoduodenectomy were reviewed for evaluating the importance of nutritional 
management after massive resection of the pancreas. Nutritional supply by IVH
resulted in maintaining and improving the hepatic function under obstructive
jaundice in clinical and experimental studies. Administration of elemental diet
after the operation shortened the period of IVH, and had a effect to spare the
requirement of exogenous insulin. One of the most important problems after
pancreatectomy with extensive dissection of the lymph nodes and the nerves around
superior mesenteric artery was a malnutrition which appeared frequently after
long term follow-up. The malnutrition should be treated by IVH as soon as
possible for preventing further aggravation of digestive and absorptive function 
of the alimentary tract. Oral or nasogastric tube administration of elemental
diet is useful for weaning the patient from IVH, and it serves to prevent
subsequent development of malnutrition. In six totally pancreatectomized patients
studied, postabsorptive plasma concentration of Arg., Lys., Thr., Ala., Gly.,
Ser. and Pro. were greatly elevated compared to normal value, however these
abnormalities were normalized by 1 to 3 mg of glucagon administration. Glucagon
administration resulted in no significant change in daily nitrogen balance.

PMID: 6438488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Kyobu Geka. 1984 Aug;37(9 Suppl):689-92.

[A case of congenital coronary artery fistula (left coronary arterio-right atrial
fistula)].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Endo M, Shimizu J, Sato H, Noto T.

PMID: 6503102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Gan No Rinsho. 1984 Aug;30(10):1331-6.

[Pancreatic cancer in father and daughter].

[Article in Japanese]

Toyama K, Noto M, Sakaguchi T, Okada N, Otaka H, Ishida H.

A 77-year-old male patient was admitted because of jaundice and general malaise. 
Exploratory laparotomy disclosed pancreatic head cancer with invasion to the
intrapancreatic bile duct. Three months later, his daughter, aged 51, was
admitted for evaluation because of body weight loss and back pain. CT scan
disclosed 3 low-density areas in the pancreas with irregular margins and multiple
low-density areas in the liver. Pancreatic cancer with liver metastasis was
confirmed by autopsy. In familial pancreatic cancer, it is essential that genetic
in addition to environmental factors be examined in pancreatic carcinogenesis.

PMID: 6481970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Gan No Rinsho. 1984 Aug;30(10):1299-302.

[Clinical evaluation of tissue polypeptide antigen in patients with esophageal,
stomach and colon cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Ogoshi K, Kondo Y, Akiba Y, Sugihara T, Ko S, Noto T, Makuuchi H, Tajima T,
Mitomi T.

Serum tissue polypeptide antigen (TPA) levels were measured in 33 patients with
esophageal cancer, 39 with stomach cancer and 50 with colon cancer. At the same
time five glycoproteins, namely immunosuppressive acidic glycoprotein (IAP),
alpha 1-antichymotripsin (alpha 1-ACT), acid soluble glycoproteins (ASP), sialic 
acid and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), were measured for comparison. The mean
TPA values were 59.0 +/- 15.4 U/l in 61 normal subjects, 103.6 +/- 104.2 U/l
(positive rate, 24.2%) in esophageal cancer patients, 111.9 +/- 49.8 U/l (71.8%) 
in stomach cancer patients and 124.8 +/- 195.5 U/l (40%) in colon cancer
patients. The serum TPA levels in patients with stomach cancer rose with an
increased number of involved lymph nodes and with a higher degree of infiltrative
growth and increased with the advancement of tumor growth postoperatively. Serum 
TPA levels correlated well with those of alpha 1-ACT, IAP and ASP in stomach
cancer patients and with those of CEA, ASP and sialic acid in colon cancer, but
not in esophageal cancer patients. It is suggested that the serum TPA might
represent one of the reactant proteins and/or tumor-associated antigens that
appear to be dependent upon the cancer status.

PMID: 6481966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Clin Gastroenterol. 1984 Aug;6(4):337-42.

Impaired plasma cyclic AMP response to exogenous glucagon in acute liver injury.

Miyakoshi H, Noda Y, Uchida S, Tanaka N, Noto Y, Kato Y, Kawai K, Hayakawa H,
Kobayashi K, Hattori N.

The response of plasma cyclic AMP to glucagon was investigated in 18 patients
with acute liver injury to determine its value as a marker for the severity of
the hepatic damage. We also investigated the interrelationship between plasma
cyclic AMP response and the hyperglucagonemia often seen in this disease. Plasma 
cyclic AMP response to glucagon was reduced significantly in patients with acute 
hepatitis, particularly in severe cases with bridging hepatic necrosis. There was
a significant negative correlation between log (peak % cAMP) and prothrombin time
(r = -0.715, p less than 0.01), and also total bilirubin (r = -0.819, p less than
0.01). In fatal cases, the early phase of plasma cyclic AMP response after
glucagon stimulation was blunted. In patients with acute liver injury, basal IRG 
levels were significantly high and a significant negative correlation was found
between log (peak % cAMP) and basal IRG levels (r = -0.816, p less than 0.01).
Our results suggest that the response of plasma cyclic AMP to exogenous glucagon 
could be useful in evaluating the severity of acute liver injury. The lower
cyclic AMP response may be attributed to reduced hepatic reserve and endogenous
hyperglucagonemia.

PMID: 6090530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1984 Jul;32(7):1114-7.

[Chylothorax following median sternotomy for congenital heart disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Endo M, Sato H, Noto T.

PMID: 6501958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Gan No Rinsho. 1984 Jul;30(8):975-9.

[An autopsy case of squamous cell carcinoma of the lung presenting with small and
large bowel metastasis].

[Article in Japanese]

Toyama K, Sakaguchi T, Noto M, Okada N, Otaka H, Segi K.

A 81-year-old male with primary squamous cell carcinoma of the lung was admitted 
because of melena. Upon autopsy, bleeding sites were found in the small and large
bowel; they were lesions from the lung carcinoma. Gastrointestinal metastases
from primary lung carcinoma are clinically rare, although they are seen in
autopsy cases. Review of autopsy data on 1181 cases of primary lung carcinoma
showed that 218 (18.5%) manifested gastrointestinal metastases.

PMID: 6471402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1984 May 15;149(2):201-8.

Neurological control of fetal heart rate in 20 cases of anencephalic fetuses.

Terao T, Kawashima Y, Noto H, Inamoto Y, Lin TY, Sumimoto K, Maeda M.

Fetal heart rate (FHR) is influenced by the central nervous system, cardiac
automatism, biochemical factors, etc. Changes in FHR were correlated with the
anatomic defect in autopsy material from 20 anencephalic infants, and, on this
basis, the following hypotheses were formed, subject to later experimental proof.
(1) The FHR baseline level is controlled by the medulla oblongata and vagus
nerve. (2) The biphasic sleep-awake pattern is controlled by the cerebral cortex.
(3) The midbrain is involved in the occurrence of acceleration. (4) A relative
high level of short-term variability is shown when small lesions of the lesser
central nervous system are present, but we cannot conclude that the cortex is
critical for short-term variability. On the other hand, long-term variability
seems to be correlated to the presence of the medulla oblongata and midbrain, and
might be amplified by the cerebral cortex. (5) U-shaped decelerations are
connected with the medulla oblongata, but V-shaped decelerations depend on
intracardiac reflexes and myocardial stretch.

PMID: 6720800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Pediatr Med Chir. 1984 May-Jun;6(3):459-61.

[A case of lateral cleft lip. Embryology and surgical technic].

[Article in Italian]

Tamisani A, Di Noto C, Müller L, Giorgini F.

Lateral labial cleft is exceptionally rare. This malformation gives the
opportunity to evaluate its origin (following the embryology of facial segments) 
and its association with other deformities. Surgical treatment must reconstruct
an anatomic and functional situation which must give a good aestetic result.

PMID: 6533594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Kyobu Geka. 1984 Apr;37(4):316-9.

[High dose furosemide for treatment of acute renal failure following radical
operation of tetralogy of Fallot].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Endo M, Shimizu J, Sato H, Noto T.

PMID: 6748416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Am J Clin Pathol. 1984 Apr;81(4):514-7.

Positive direct antiglobulin tests with antilymphocyte globulin.

Lapinid IM, Steib MD, Noto TA.

Patients receiving antilymphocyte globulin (ALG) of equine origin, for
prophylactic immunosuppression following renal transplantation or for rejection
episodes, develop a positive direct antiglobulin test (DAT), mainly of the IgG
type. This finding may be observed as early as the first day following the
administration of ALG. The cause for the positive DAT is due to the presence of
antihorse globulin in the reagent antiglobulin serum reacting with ALG antigenic 
material coating the patients' red blood cells. The serum of some of these
patients also may result in incompatible cross-matches. These serums and all of
the eluates react with donor and reagent red blood cells demonstrating no
particular blood group specificity.

PMID: 6702755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1984 Apr;75(4):624-32.

[Three-dimensional urethral pressure profile. IV. Stereographic Urethral Pressure
Profile (Stereo-UPP)].

[Article in Japanese]

Morita T, Noto H, Miyagawa I.

PMID: 6482113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Pediatr. 1984 Mar;104(3):443-6.

Exchange transfusion using washed red blood cells reconstituted with fresh-frozen
plasma for treatment of severe hyperkalemia in the neonate.

Setzer ES, Ahmed F, Goldberg RN, Hellman RL, Moscoso P, Ferrer PL, Noto TA.

PMID: 6707800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Urol. 1984 Mar;131(3):591-5.

Pelvic nerve innervation of the external sphincter of urethra as suggested by
urodynamic and horse-radish peroxidase studies.

Morita T, Nishizawa O, Noto H, Tsuchida S.

In view of the fact that the detrusor vesicae and external urethral sphincter
perform closely synergic functions in micturition, experiments were conducted to 
explore the action of the pelvic efferent neurons on the external urethral
sphincter. The pelvic efferent neurons are generally recognized, by urodynamic
assessments and histochemical study with the technique of retrograde axonal
transport of horse-radish peroxidase, to innervate the vesical detrusor. In 7 of 
15 adult dogs studied, the external urethral sphincter continued to show a normal
synergic electromyogram pattern with enhanced electrical activity on vesical
distention and disappearance of discharges on vesical contraction even after
bilateral transection of the pudendal nerves. The electrical discharges ceased in
the sphincter only after subsequent bilateral pelvic neurotomy. Horse-radish
peroxidase-positive cells were demonstrated in the intermediolateral and
intermediomedial nuclei and in the Onuf nucleus of the sacral cord in
approximately half the dogs whose pelvic nerve was injected with the plant
peroxidase. The results suggest that the pelvic nerve may contain somatic fibers 
innervating the external urethral sphincter.

PMID: 6700010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Minerva Med. 1984 Feb 28;75(8):385-90.

[Use of vancomycin in the treatment of severe Staphylococcus aureus infection.
Description of 3 cases].

[Article in Italian]

Campelli A, Mantero E, Fabbri A, Nahum M, Ferraris R, Di Noto C.

In recent years, the diffusion of antibiotic multiresistant staphylococcus
strains in hospitals (especially aureus and epidermis) has created serious
drawbacks as regards the treatment of severe septic forms and the systemic spread
of these bacteria. The results of endovenous vancomycin treatment in three cases 
of sepsis with secondary localisations (endocarditis, osteomyelitis, pneumonia)
caused by gram positive staphylococcus aureus are examined. The pharmaceutical
was found to be effective in all cases and free from significant side effects.

PMID: 6709217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1984 Jan;32(1):110-4.

[Primary malignant melanoma of the esophagus].

[Article in Japanese]

Domeki K, Noto N, Kikuchi Y, Kitajima S, Jin M, Kaimori M, Takaya H.

PMID: 6726018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1984 Jan;75(1):104-17.

[Urethral behaviors during micturition reflex on the decerebrated female dog].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto H.

PMID: 6330414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Peptides. 1983 Nov-Dec;4(6):875-8.

Biorhythm of arginine- vasopressin in the paraventricular, supraoptic and
suprachiasmatic nuclei of rats.

Noto T, Hashimoto H, Doi Y, Nakajima T, Kato N.

The diurnal variations in content of arginine-vasopressin in the supraoptic
nucleus, the paraventricular nucleus and the suprachiasmatic nucleus of rats were
determined using radioimmunoassay. In the supraoptic nucleus and the
paraventricular nucleus the arginine-vasopressin level was relatively constant
during the light phase (the inactive phase). When it became dark, the level of
arginine-vasopressin lowered during the early and middle dark phase and then
increased to the highest level during the late dark phase. In the suprachiasmatic
nucleus the level was stable during the light phase, while in the early and the
late dark phase it was significantly higher than that in the middle dark phase.

PMID: 6687011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1983 Oct;74(10):1772-7.

[Three dimensional urethral pressure profile. II. Basic consideration of the
catheter with only one eye and comparison with the catheter with the tip
transducer by Millar].

[Article in Japanese]

Morita T, Nishimoto T, Noto H.

PMID: 6676557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Clin Chem. 1983 Oct;29(10):1713-6.

Simple, rapid spectrophotometry of urinary N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase, with 
use of a new chromogenic substrate.

Noto A, Ogawa Y, Mori S, Yoshioka M, Kitakaze T, Hori T, Nakamura M, Miyake T.

We have developed a new spectrophotometric assay for urinary
N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase (NAGase) with use of sodio
m-cresolsulfonphthaleinyl N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminide (MCP-NAG). MCP-NAG was
synthesized from acetochloro-glucosamine and m-cresolsulfonphthalein (MCP) in
four steps. MCP-NAG reacts well with NAGase (Km = 0.41 mmol/L) and is highly
water soluble. The absorption maximum and molar absorptivity of the aglycone MCP 
are 580 nm and 40 670, respectively. Spectral overlap of interfering substances
at 580 nm is almost negligible, so that the urine blank can be omitted from the
assay procedure. The high molar absorptivity of MCP gives sufficient analytical
sensitivity at a reaction time of 15 min. The correlation between the MCP-NAG
method (y) and the fluorimetric method (x) involving 4-methylumbelliferyl
N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminide is represented by the equation y = 0.995x - 0.669
(r = 0.991). Thus, the present method provides practical advantages over
conventional methods, for use in the routine laboratory.

PMID: 6616814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1983 Sep;141(1):117-8.

Paired extraluminal strain gauge force transducers for measuring urethral
movements.

Tsuchida S, Nishizawa O, Koinuma N, Harada T, Moriya I, Satoh S, Ebina K, Noto H.

Paired extraluminal strain gauge force transducers were implanted in the urethra 
to measure separately and simultaneously both longitudinal and transverse
movements of the urethra. The advantage of our paired strain gauge force
transducers is that both longitudinal and transverse changes of urethral
movements can be detected.

PMID: 6685359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Rinsho Byori. 1983 Sep;Spec No 56:65-72.

[Urinary enzyme determination and its clinical significance. C. Enzyme derived
from the kidney tubular epithelium--N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase. 1.
Description of NAG activity determination].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto A, Mori S, Nakamura M, Kitakaze T.

PMID: 6663762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1983 Aug;74(8):1370-82.

[Urine transport function of the ureteropelvic system--evaluation of urine bolus 
volume in congenital hydronephrosis].

[Article in Japanese]

Harada T, Morita T, Nishizawa O, Noto H, Tsuchida S.

PMID: 6676571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1983 Aug;31(8):1202-7.

[Profound hypothermia, low volume perfusion technic and hypothermia combined with
cardiopulmonary bypass. Comparative studies based on the early postoperative
changes in CPK and LDH isoenzymes].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Iida S, Sato H, Noto T.

PMID: 6644123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1983 Jun;74(6):994-1002.

[Urological management and its results in patients with congenital neurogenic
bladder due to spina bifida--with special reference to the urodynamic evaluation 
of the lower urinary tract function].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto H, Harada T, Nishizawa O, Morita T, Tsuchida S, Kimura Y.

PMID: 6361348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1983 Jun;74(6):961-6.

[Study on the relation between the pelvic nerve and the sphincter of the external
urethra using a physiological micturition test and observation on retrograde
axial transport].

[Article in Japanese]

Morita T, Nishizawa O, Matsuo S, Morita I, Noto H, Oya A, Tsuchida S.

PMID: 6197551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Br J Urol. 1983 Apr;55(2):239.

Obstructive urethral leiomyoma in a female.

Noto L.

PMID: 6839103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1983 Apr;74(4):655-61.

[Congenital posterior urethral valve associated with paraureteral diverticulum
and dysplastic kidney. A case report].

[Article in Japanese]

Harada T, Noto H, Suzuki T, Nishizawa O.

PMID: 6413741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Urology. 1983 Mar;21(3):315-8.

Urodynamic studies on hemiplegic patients after cerebrovascular accident.

Tsuchida S, Noto H, Yamaguchi O, Itoh M.

Thirty-nine hemiplegic patients were evaluated by complete urodynamic study after
cerebrovascular accidents. Computerized tomography was performed to identify
localization of the brain lesion. The common urinary symptoms were frequency and 
urgency incontinence (26/39), while 13 patients complained of dysuria or urinary 
retention. Ten of the 11 patients who had frontal and internal capsular lesions
showed hyperactive bladder, and 6 showed uninhibited sphincter relaxation. Nine
of the 10 patients who had putaminal lesions showed hyperactive bladder. Normal
sphincter activity was demonstrated in 7 of these 10 patients. In the remaining
patients with the other types of lesions, no correlation was found between
urodynamic dysfunction and type of brain injury.

PMID: 6836813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Soins Chir. 1983 Mar;(25):11-6.

[Subway accidents. Organization of medical rescue].

[Article in French]

Noto R.

PMID: 6604317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Kyobu Geka. 1983 Feb;36(2):119-21.

[Case of hyperosmolar hyperglycemic nonketotic coma following mitral valve
replacement].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Iida S, Sato H, Noto T.

PMID: 6842915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Nihon Jinzo Gakkai Shi. 1983 Feb;25(2):199-204.

[Hyperprolactinemia and guanidinosuccinic acid in chronic renal failure].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujimura A, Kawato M, Nakabayashi H, Tofuku Y, Noto M, Akiyama T, Kido C, Kuroda 
M, Takeda R.

PMID: 6620688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Acta Diabetol Lat. 1983 Jan-Mar;20(1):81-5.

A study of cupremia in a group of elderly diabetics.

Noto R, Alicata R, Sfogliano L, Neri S, Bifarella M.

In diabetics, even in those without complications and/or alterations of lipid
metabolism, higher levels of cupremia were found than in the controls; these
increased levels were not correlated with the duration of the disease and the
cupremia was more evident in the older patients and in those with complications. 
However, the increases were not dissimilar from those found in non-diabetic
arteriosclerosis. Our findings favor the hypothesis that after some years and by 
affecting fatty acid metabolism, higher levels of cupremia enhance the appearance
of diabetic vasculopathy.

PMID: 6858545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Urol Int. 1983;38(5):300-6.

Urethral response to nerve stimulation measured by strain gauge force transducer.

Tsuchida S, Koinuma N, Nishizawa O, Moriya I, Satoh S, Noto H, Harada T, Satoh K.

This paper presents a study of urethral responses to efferent nerve stimulation
in dogs. The pelvic, hypogastric and pudendal nerves were stimulated using a
programmed instrument under three different in vivo conditions. The preparations 
consisted of: (A) bladder, urethra, and rectum; (B) urethra and rectum, and (C)
urethra only. Stimulation of the pelvic nerve in preparation A resulted in
elongation and constriction of the mid and proximal urethra with a resultant rise
in pressure. However, this response was reduced in preparations B and C. Similar 
observations were made with hypogastric nerve stimulation. The results of
pudendal nerve stimulation were significantly different, in that the pressure
rise occurred in the mild and distal urethra and varied in elongation response.

PMID: 6685365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Ric Clin Lab. 1983;13 Suppl 3:451-4.

[Use of pentoxifylline in diabetes with intermittent claudication].

[Article in Italian]

Petruzzi E, Bucalossi A, Corri S, Marsilii A, Di Noto C.

The authors have investigated the effect of pentoxifylline administration (400 mg
in three doses) in diabetic subjects with lower limb vasculopathy. The results
have shown a marked improvement in clinical symptoms and VRBC and a slight
improvement in fibrinogen and blood lipid levels.

PMID: 6673028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1982 Nov;138(3):289-98.

A new modified catheter for voiding cystourethrography.

Tsuchida S, Harada T, Nishizawa O, Koinuma N, Matsuo S, Noto H.

We made a new modified catheter for voiding cystourethrography to evaluate the
function of the external urethral sphincter. Using this catheter, we can evaluate
it precisely, excluding the influences of the posterior urethra. The findings of 
voiding cystourethrography observed by using this catheter were equal to the
findings of the simultaneous recording of cystourethrogram and external urethral 
sphincter electromyogram, and permitted us to assess the function of each portion
of the urethra separately, such as the sphincteric urethra (prostatic urethra)
and external urethral sphincter (membranous urethra). In addition, this
urodynamic procedure can be performed safely and easily.

PMID: 7157357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Trauma. 1982 Nov;22(11):971-2.

Use of blood and blood products.

Hellman RL, Noto TA, Watkins GM.

PMID: 7143505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Gan. 1982 Oct;73(5):742-7.

Analysis of the tissue and cellular localization of alpha-1-antichymotrypsin by
an immunohistochemical technique.

Takada S, Tsuda M, Mitomi T, Nakasaki H, Noto T, Ogoshi K, Katsunuma T.

The cellular localization of alpha-1-antichymotrypsin (alpha 1-ACT) was studied
immunohistochemically using rabbit HRP-labeled Fab' against human alpha 1-ACT.
alpha 1-ACT was found in cell nuclei of carcinomas of the stomach, liver, breast,
pancreas and leiomyosarcoma and in cell nuclei of lymphoid cells infiltrated into
the stomach carcinoma mass. alpha 1-ACT was not found in carcinoma cells of the
colon, uterus, rectum or esophagus, or in lymphoid cells infiltrated into the
rectal carcinoma mass or into inflammatory regions such as gastric ulcers or
appendicitis. Further, alpha 1-ACT was not found in normal cells around the
carcinoma mass or in normal tissues.

PMID: 6762318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Tokai J Exp Clin Med. 1982 Sep;7(5):615-22.

Evaluation of usefulness of serial AMHTS--from the viewpoint of inpatients in our
hospital.

Hinohara S, Nakadaira S, Takiwaki S, Takahashi T, Suzuki S, Shinozuka T, Hata J, 
Kawamura N, Noto T, Matsuyama M, Goto Y.

We studied the relation between admission after check-up and check-up frequencies
of AMHTS examinees in our hospital in order to evaluate the usefulness of serial 
check-ups. Follow-up studies were performed on a total of 16,630 examinees and
continued until March 1982. There were 558 inpatients, 3.4% of the total. The
main reason for their admission was cancer, followed by diabetes mellitus and
chronic hepatitis. It was shown that the admission rates of examinees decreased
as the check-up frequencies increased the examinees under 60 years old, but not
for those over 60 years of age. In addition, both admission and cancer rates of
AMHTS examinees decreased on the whole as their check-up frequencies increased.

PMID: 7182950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Urology. 1982 Sep;20(3):337.

Suprapubic double-lumen catheter for measuring bladder pressure and filling
bladder.

Nishizawa O, Moriya I, Harada T, Noto H, Tsuchida S.

PMID: 7123733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 1982 Jul;35(7):771-7.

Cyanocycline A, a new antibiotic. Taxonomy of the producing organism,
fermentation, isolation and characterization.

Hayashi T, Noto T, Nawata Y, Okazaki H, Sawada M, Ando K.

A new antibiotic, cyanocycline A, was isolated from the fermentation broth of
Streptomyces flavogriseus strain No. 49, a soil isolate. The molecular formula of
cyanocycline A was determined to be C22H26N4O5. The antibiotic has a cyano group 
and a N-heterocyclic quinone moiety in its structure. Cyanocycline A was found to
have broad spectrum antimicrobial and antitumor activity.

PMID: 7174530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Soins Chir Gen Spec. 1982 Jul-Aug;(17-18):55-63.

[Fire at the hospital].

[Article in French]

Noto R.

PMID: 6982528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Chir Dent Fr. 1982 May 27;52(160):51-3.

[Memorandum of principal errors in emergencies ... or what not to do].

[Article in French]

Noto R, Cavaillon JP, Girard P.

PMID: 6961991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 1982 Apr;35(4):411-9.

Thiolactomycin, a new antibiotic. IV. Biological properties and chemotherapeutic 
activity in mice.

Miyakawa S, Suzuki K, Noto T, Harada Y, Okazaki H.

The new thiolactone antibiotic, thiolactomycin, is rapidly absorbed in rats when 
administered either orally or by intramuscular injection. A peak in concentration
of the drug is reached in the blood and in various visceral organs within 15
minutes after administration. The concentration decreases rather rapidly and
about 51-69% of the drug is excreted in urine during the first 24 hours. Though
the in vitro effect of thiolactomycin is moderate, it effectively protected mice 
challenged intraperitoneally with several strains of S. marcescens and K.
pneumoniae and more effective than carbenicillin in treating experimental acute
urinary tracts infected with S. marcescens. Also, in mice whom immunodefense was 
decreased by treatment with cyclophosphamide, thiolactomycin was more effective
than carbenicillin against S. marcescens challenge.

PMID: 7096196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 1982 Apr;35(4):391-5.

Thiolactomycin, a new antibiotic. I. Taxonomy of the producing organism,
fermentation and biological properties.

Oishi H, Noto T, Sasaki H, Suzuki K, Hayashi T, Okazaki H, Ando K, Sawada M.

A strain of actinomycetes, isolated from a soil sample, has produced a novel
antibiotic (C11H14O2S) containing a unique thiolactone moiety in its molecule. On
the basis of taxonomic studies the producing organism was identified as belonging
to the genus Nocardia. The antibiotic, named thiolactomycin, exhibits a broad
antibacterial spectrum and particularly potent activity against Salmonella,
Serratia and Bacteroides. Furthermore, the acute toxicity is weak in experimental
animals. These results indicate that thiolactomycin is distinct from other known 
antibiotics and represents a new type of antibiotic.

PMID: 7096194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Nihon Sanka Fujinka Gakkai Zasshi. 1982 Apr;34(4):545-7.

Inactivation of oxytocin and angiotensin II by placental leucine aminopeptidase
(P-LAP).

Mizutani S, Sakura H, Inamoto Y, Noto H, Kawashima Y.

The inactivation of oxytocin and angiotensin II by retroplacental serum and
placental leucine aminopeptidase (P-LAP), which had been highly purified from
retroplacental serum, was demonstrated using biological methods.

PMID: 7069260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 1982 Apr;35(4):401-10.

Thiolactomycin, a new antibiotic. III. In vitro antibacterial activity.

Noto T, Miyakawa S, Oishi H, Endo H, Okazaki H.

Thiolactomycin is a new broad-spectrum antibiotic, active in vitro against many
species of Gram-positive cocci, Enterobacteriaceae, Haemophilus, acid-fast
bacteria and anaerobic bacteria. However, the activity is generally moderate and 
bacteriostatic in action. This antibiotic eludes cross resistance with any of the
known antibacterial drugs such as ampicillin, carbenicillin or cycloserine. The
effect on Gram-negative bacilli in vitro is little affected by the inoculum size,
the presence of horse serum, the pH of the medium or the type of medium. When
thiolactomycin was added to the assay medium, the minimum inhibitory
concentration of ampicillin against inducible beta-lactamase producing strains of
Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa was reduced. Thiolactomycin
inhibited the production of inducible beta-lactamase in several organisms.

PMID: 6980215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1982 Mar;136(3):349-50.

A new synchronous video urodynamics.

Nishizawa O, Harada T, Takada H, Sakamoto F, Noto H, Kizu N, Miyazaki Y, Tsuchida
S.

A new synchronous video urodynamics to evaluate the function of the lower urinary
tract is described. The urodynamic study together with the transrectal
longitudinal ultrasonotomography of the bladder and urethra can be seen on the
colour display monitor through the display controller. An image on the colour
display monitor is also stored on the video cassette recorder. This new technique
will be indispensable for evaluation of the lower urinary tract dysfunction.

PMID: 7200271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Med Biol Eng Comput. 1982 Mar;20(2):223-30.

Real-time analysis of foetal heart rate patterns using a computer system.

Inamoto Y, Sumimoto K, Noto H, Terao T, Kawashima Y.

PMID: 7098580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1982 Feb;136(2):231-2.

Combined urodynamic and ultrasonic techniques: a new diagnostic method for the
lower urinary tract.

Nishizawa O, Takada H, Sakamoto F, Matsuo S, Noto H, Kizu N, Harada T, Tsuchida
S.

PMID: 7200270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Endocrinol Jpn. 1982 Feb;29(1):121-4.

The levels of vasopressin in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with alcoholism.

Noto T, Kato N, Inoue K, Kitabayashi M, Nakajima T.

Concentrations of arginine-vasopressin (AVP) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of 
5 alcoholic patients and 6 healthy volunteers were determined by a
radioimmunoassay. The concentrations of AVP in the CSF of alcoholic patients were
2.93-6.17 pg/ml (the mean value, 4.80 +/- 1.34 pg/ml) and those of healthy
volunteers 3.80-12.59 pg/ml (the mean value, 9.87 +/- 3.19 pg/ml). The AVP level 
in the CSF of alcoholics was significantly lower than that of normals (P less
than 0.02).

PMID: 7106059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1982 Feb;79(2):287.

[Successful culture in TCGF added media and isolation of T-cells infiltrating
gastric and colonic carcinomas].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto T.

PMID: 6980308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Cathet Cardiovasc Diagn. 1982;8(4):323-40.

Mortality related to cardiac catheterization and angiography.

Kennedy JW, Baxley WA, Bunnel IL, Gensini GG, Messer JV, Mudd JG, Noto TJ, Paulin
S, Pichard AD, Sheldon WC, Cohen M.

During a 14-month period, 75 deaths occurring in relation to 53,581 cardiac
catheterizations were consecutively and prospectively reported to the Registry
Committee of the Society for Cardiac Angiography. Three of the patients died
several days after their catheterization from an unrelated cause and are excluded
from this analysis. There were 21 patients (group I) who arrived at the
laboratory in extremis and whose deaths were expected irrespective of the
catheterization. Most of these patients suffered from recent myocardial
infarctions and cardiogenic shock, or had complex congenital malformations. In 35
patients (group II), a cardiovascular complication occurring during the
catheterization resulted in death. In 16 patients (group III) catheterization
seemed uneventful, but death occurred suddenly 10 min to 10 h after the
procedure. Of these 16 patients, eight had left main coronary artery obstruction 
greater than or equal to 90%, five had three-vessel disease all with 90%
obstructions, one had 2-vessel disease both with 90% obstructions, and who had
critical aortic stenosis. The 51 unexpected deaths (groups II and III) were
considered to be causally related to the procedure, a mortality rate of 0.10%.
Subsets with an increased mortality rate (M), were patients with: a) left main
disease greater than 50% (M = 0.94%); b) ejection fraction less than 30% (M =
0.54%); c) NYHA class III or IV (m = 0.24%); d) age over 60 years (M = 0.23%); or
e) three-vessel disease (M = 0.13%). In conclusion, catheterization related
mortality occurs mostly in patients with far advanced cardiac disease. Nearly 1/3
of the unexpected deaths occurred suddenly after a seemingly uneventful
procedure. Close monitoring after catheterization of patients with similar
characteristics (left main disease greater than or equal to 90%, or three-vessel 
disease all greater than or equal to 90%) might disclose avenues for reducing
mortality occurring after catheterization.

PMID: 7127459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Kyobu Geka. 1982;35(1):74-7.

[Successful correction of interrupted aortic arch associated with ventricular
septal defect and patent ductus arteriosus (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Iida S, Magara T, Noto T, Okamura H.

PMID: 7062570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Fla Med Assoc. 1982 Jan;69(1):39-40.

The type and screen: it's here to stay.

Hellman RL, Noto TA.

PMID: 7054376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Nihon Rinsho. 1982;40(4):831-6.

[Theoretical background of insulin-glucagon therapy in liver failure].

[Article in Japanese]

Hattori N, Noda Y, Tanaka N, Miyagoshi H, Noto Y, Kato H, Kobayashi K.

PMID: 7047801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Microbiol Immunol. 1982;26(10):885-95.

Mechanisms of resistance in Escherichia coli to the sideromycin antibiotic no.
216: isolation and characterization of the resistant mutants.

Miyakawa S, Noto T, Okazaki H.

Escherichia coli easily developed resistance to a new antimicrobial agent of the 
sideromycin group, No. 216, by spontaneous mutation. Most of the No.
216-resistant mutants tested proved not to be cross-resistant to E. coli phages
T1, T5, and ø80. On the other hand, these phage-resistant mutants were cross
resistant to No. 216. The initial site for binding of No. 216 to the sensitive
cells was located, at the ton A gene product (Ton A-protein) of the outer
membrane. However, unlike the phage-resistant mutants, ton A protein
(78K-protein) in most No. 216-resistant mutants was intact and these mutants were
possessed a particular 87K protein in the outer membrane. It is suggested that
No. 216 is taken up by ton A protein and then penetrates into the cell by way of 
a particular transport system and that a highly mutable portion may exist in this
reaction system.

PMID: 6761556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Am J Surg. 1981 Sep;142(3):317-23.

Follow-up results of surgical treatment for chronic pancreatitis. Present status 
in Japan.

Sato T, Noto N, Matsuno S, Miyakawa K.

The results of surgical treatment for chronic pancreatitis at our clinic and in
the eight leading institutions of Japan were reviewed in a total of 328 cases.
Abdominal pain disappeared or was alleviated in about 90 percent of the patients 
who survived more than 6 months after operation. There was no significant
differences in the effect of pain among the three main types of operations:
pancreaticoduodenectomy, distal resection and pancreatic ductal drainage. In the 
collected cases, however, complete disappearance of pain was reported more often 
in patients subjected to Puestow's operation than in those who underwent Nardi's 
operation. The patients who underwent pancreatic ductal drainage had a greater
postoperative weight gain than those without drainage, in both our patients and
the collected cases. In the collected cases, Puestow's operation was
predominantly linked to postoperative weight gain. Evidence of pancreatic
functional improvement, either in endocrine or in exocrine, was very meager.

PMID: 7283020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. World J Surg. 1981 Sep;5(5):743-5.

Management of postoperative gastrointestinal fistula.

Fujita H, Shoji M, Noto H, Ueda H, Kusajima Y, Isobe Y, Miyazaki I.

PMID: 6800141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1981 Aug;72(8):967-72.

[A new modified catheter for voiding cystourethrography (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Tsuchida S, Harada T, Nishizawa O, Matsuo S, Noto H.

PMID: 7321353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1981 Jul;72(7):880-91.

[Lower urinary tract disturbance due to cerebrovascular accidents with special
reference to the findings by brain computed tomography (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Tsuchida S, Noto H, Yamaguchi O, Nishizawa O, Morita T, Nishimoto T.

PMID: 7321345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Minerva Pediatr. 1981 Jun 15;33(11):545-8.

[Diagnostic considerations on an unusual case of thoracic ectopia of the right
kidney].

[Article in Italian]

Taccone A, Di Noto C, Dodero P, Tomà P.

PMID: 7254158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 1981 Jun;105(6):336.

Astrocytoma arising in leptomeninges.

Goldman JE, Schechter R, Horoupian DS, Noto AC.

PMID: 6894531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1981 Mar;78(3):708-18.

[Effect of perfusion of hypertonic glucose, amino acids, oleic acid and
pancreatic enzymes into the upper jejunum on exocrine and endocrine function of
the pancreas (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Miyashita E, Matsuno S, Honda T, Noto N.

PMID: 7019512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1981 Feb;29(2):166-72.

[Dopamine and nitroglycerin combination therapy in low output syndrome after open
heart surgery (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohhira M, Magara T, Mukai K, Iwa T, Mori K, Noto T.

PMID: 6783709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Kyobu Geka. 1981;34(8):630-3.

[A case of left atrial myxoma: successfully removed with both atriotomy and
atrial septal resection (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Magara T, Iida S, Kidani M, Noto T.

PMID: 7289284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1981;69 Pt C:247-8.

Studies of mutability in MZ twins.

Gedda L, Brenci G, Di Fusco C, Noto A, Roselli E.

PMID: 7198247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Kango Kyoiku. 1980 Nov;21(11):698-704.

[Attitudes of students at a nursing college: at the Noto Public General Hospital 
School of Nursing].

[Article in Japanese]

Muramoto S.

PMID: 6904628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1980 Oct;77(10):1646-54.

[A study of the three-dimensional arborization pattern of pancreatic ductules in 
chronic pancreatitis (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Sabusawa K, Noto N, Matsuno S.

PMID: 7452952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1980 Oct;77(10):1596-603.

[The response of plasma cyclic AMP to exogenous glucagon as a marker for severity
in acute liver injury (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Miyakoshi H, Noda Y, Tanaka N, Noto Y, Kato Y, Hayakawa H, Kobayashi K, Hattori
N.

PMID: 6256563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1980 Jun;77(6):954-62.

[Clinicopathological study on the chronic pancreatitis (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Koseki S, Noto N, Matsuno S, Kano K.

PMID: 7411987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1980 Jun;131(2):119-26.

Studies on porcine pancreatic elastase activity. I. Radioimmunoassay of porcine
pancreatic elastase.

Nakajima Y, Matsuno S, Noto N, Saitoh Y, Sato T.

An improved method of radioimmunoassay was devised to offer a successful formula 
for determining blood concentration of elastase. With porcine pancreatic elastase
as the antigen, rabbits were immunized to obtain antiserum. Iodinated elastase
labeled by the chloramine-T procedure using 131I (or 125I) had a specific
activity of 200-300 mCi/mg. The double antibody method was used for BF
separation. While the usual method of radioimmunoassay was not always successful 
in obtaining accurate serum concentration of elastase, the use of diisopropyl
fluorophosphate (DFP) was able to eliminate the disturbing influence of
intra-serious inhibitors, alpha 1-AT and alpha 2-M, eventually producing
satisfactory results. With the use of DFP, the elastase standard curve and the
porcine serum dilution curve had a statistically significant correlation;
precision and recovery were both satisfactory; cross-reactivity of the antiserum 
with trypsin and chymotrypsin was less than 0.001%. The minimal detectable
concentration of elastase was 5 ng/ml, and the range of normal fasting porcine
serum level was 70-100 ng/ml.

PMID: 6902583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1980 Jun;131(2):127-34.

Studies on porcine pancreatic elastase activity. II. Immunoreactive elastase
level during acute hemorrhagic pancreatitis in pigs.

Nakajima Y, Matsuno S, Noto N, Saitoh Y, Sato T.

Acute hemorrhagic pancreatitis was produced in pig to study serum concentration
of elastase and its physiological role. Pancreatitis was induced in two groups of
young pigs by the injection of autologous bile. One group was injected with
autologous bile (0.5 ml/kg) at high pressure, and the second group was injected
as low pressure (100 cm H2O). Then femoral blood, portal blood and thoracic lymph
were sampled at scheduled time intervals. The control level of immunoreactive
elastase was around 90 ng/ml in each site, which significantly increased
beginning 15 min after bile injection; the level of immunoreactive elastase was
higher in the thoracic lymph duct than in the femoral and portal vein. The total 
and free elastase of both groups in pancreatic tissue were significantly
decreased in pancreatitis, and an abundance of immunoreactive elastase was found 
in the ascites. The increasing pattern of immunoreactive elastase and amylase
after bile injection was very similar. Therefore, the level of immunoreactive
elastase was considered to be inadequate to determine the grade of severity of
pancreatitis as well as the level of amylase which is already known.

PMID: 6157222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Nihon Sanka Fujinka Gakkai Zasshi. 1980 May;32(5):669-70.

Fetal heart rate analyzing system using microcomputer (Tocoputer).

Terao T, Sumimoto K, Inamoto Y, Noto H.

PMID: 7240852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 1980 Mar;28(3):893-9.

Effects of trivalent and hexavalent chromium on lipid peroxidation in rat liver
microsomes.

Yonaha M, Ohbayashi Y, Noto N, Itoh E, Uchiyama M.

PMID: 7389032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Kyobu Geka. 1980 Mar;33(3):229-34.

[Konno's operation for severe aortic stenosis (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohhira M, Noto T, Kidani M, Mori K, Iwa T, Magara T.

PMID: 7366051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1980 Feb;71(2):157-70.

[Clinical observations on chemoembolization for genitourinary cancer. I.
Chemoembolization of kidney cancer with microencapsulated anticancer drug
(author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Kato T, Nemoto R, Kumagai I, Mori H, Noto H, Ishida K, Chiba R, Kato H.

PMID: 7382229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Fegato. 1980;26(1):27-42.

IL TRAPIANTO ORTOTOPICO DEL FEGATO.

[Article in Italian]

Starzl TE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery of the School of Medicine, University of Colorado Health
Sciences Center and the Denver Veterans Administration Medical Center, Denver,
Colorado.

E'ormai noto che esiste la possibilità rivoluzionaria di utilizzare il fegato per
il trattamento della stadio terminale delle epatopatie.Nel gennaio 1980 si
celebra il decimo anna di sopravvivenza con fegato trapiantato (la più lunga
della letteratura) di un paziente da noi trattato. Si tratta di uno dei 12 malati
sottoposti a trapianto e seguiti per più di 5 anni.La nota positiva di questa
tipo di trattamento è rappresentata dall'eccellente tenore di vita che i pazienti
conducono e dalla riabilitazione sociale e professionale.La nota negativa è data,
invece, dal fatto che i buoni risultati non vengono raggiunti con regolarità e
non possono essere previsti con esattezza. In questa breve rassegna considereremo
la esperienza da noi fatta presso l'Università di Denver nel Colorado, mettendo
in risalto le cause dell'elevata mortalità precoce e le prospettive future di
questa mezzo terapeutico.

PMCID: PMC3092708
PMID: 21572898  [PubMed]


189. Agressologie. 1980;21(D):83-8.

[Adaptability of equilibrium mechanisms as a function of the level of
wakefulness: displacement of the center of gravity of the body according to the
stages of sleep].

[Article in French]

Sugawara M, Isik E, Tangapregassom MJ, Bessineton JC, Baron JB, Noto R.

PMID: 7294288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Physiol Chem Phys. 1980;12(5):401-10.

Isolation and identification of polyamine metabolites in urine of animals.

Nakajima T, Noto T, Kato N.

Fractionation of urinary metabolites of radioactive polyamines in rats yielded
four fractions containing (A) non-polar and acidic compounds, (B) acidic and
neutral ampholytes, (C) basic ampholytes, (D) polyamines, respectively. A large
amount of radioactivity was found in Fractions A and D from rats injected with
putrescine, and in Fractions C and D from rats injected with spermidine or
spermine. Analysis indicated that gamma-aminobutyric acid,
N-monoacetylputrescine, 2(3)-hydroxyputrescine, putreanine,
N-(3-aminopropyl)-4-aminobutyric acid (isoputreanine), spermic acid,
N-(3-aminopropyl), N'-(2-carboxyethyl)-1,4-diaminobutane, and
N-monoacetylspermidines A and B were excreted as urinary metabolites. The
possible significance of the findings is discussed.

PMID: 7208638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Nihon Rinsho. 1980;38(5):2237-43.

[Vasopressin and brain function].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakajima T, Noto T, Inaoka.

PMID: 6997561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Ann Anesthesiol Fr. 1980;21(6):711-3.

[Gassed lung--experience of the Paris fire brigade].

[Article in French]

Noto R.

PMID: 6111281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Clin Chim Acta. 1979 Dec 17;99(3):289-95.

A simple automatic kinetic enzyme immunoassay for digoxin.

Castro A, Seckinger D 3rd, Cid A, Buschbaum P, Noto T.

PMID: 391443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1979 Nov;129(3):257-72.

Effects of eight amino acids on the exocrine and endocrine pancreatic function.

Saitoh Y, Honda T, Matsuno S, Noto N, Miyashita E, Sato T.

Eight amino acids were intravenously administered in a dose of 2 mmoles/kg/hr to 
dogs with chronic pancreatic fistula, and the effect of each amino acid on
endocrine and exocrine pancreatic secretions was investigated. Asparagine,
arginine, isoleucine and phenylalanine administered under the stimulation of
secretin-pancreozymin significantly inhibited the secretion of pancreatic juice
by 23%, 15%, 13% and 13%, and the output of amylase by 53%, 37%, 27% and 18%,
respectively. Threonine, glycine or methionine brought about no significant
changes in pancreatic secretion, but valine significantly increased pancreatic
juice secretion by 13% and amylase output by 15%. Any of the eight amino acids
caused no noticeable change in the concentration of bicarbonate.

PMID: 392811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1979 Oct;27(10):1453-9.

[Hemodynamic evaluation of simplified right heart bypass operation in tricuspid
atresia with juxtaposition of the atrial appendages (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T, Okamura H.

PMID: 317084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1979 Sep;27(9):1312-8.

[Changes in serum CPK and LDH isoenzyme levels after cardiac surgery (author's
transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T.

PMID: 501176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Kyobu Geka. 1979 Aug;32(8):630-3.

[Surgical repair of tricuspid atresia with juxtaposition of the atrial
appendages, direct anastomosis of the right atrial appendage to the pulmonary
artery (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T, Okamura H.

PMID: 480757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Pediatria (Napoli). 1979 Jun 30;87(2):372-84.

[A case of distal tubular acidosis with hyperreninemia and hyperaldosteronism].

[Article in Italian]

Balsamo V, Di Cuonzo G, Noto M, Satariano A.

PMID: 398473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Nihon Gan Chiryo Gakkai Shi. 1979 Jun 20;14(3):282-90.

[Recurrence of trophoblastic tumors and its point at issue with special reference
to malignant transformation of destructive mole (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Kawashima Y, Noto H, Kobayashi T.

PMID: 225396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Quad Sclavo Diagn. 1979 Jun;15(2):260-3.

[Screening with latex IgM reagent on umbilical cord blood for demonstration of
intrauterine infections].

[Article in Italian]

Noto G, Bononi A, Paganini G.

The AA. have found IgM in cord sera of 903 newborns. In 13 (1.44%) there was an
increase of IgM and the control made on neonatal serum within the first 5 days
from birth has shown a positive result only in 1 case (7.69% of positives). The
AA. present, in the conclusions, some considerations that justify the results of 
their work.

PMID: 576025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Minerva Med. 1979 May 7;70(22):1591-6.

[Behavior of serum immunoglobulins and the C3 fraction (beta 1-A globulin) of
complement in diabetic subjects].

[Article in Italian]

Noto R, Reitano R, Trischitta C, Russo R, Cristaldi R.

PMID: 450298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Kyobu Geka. 1979 May;32(5):367-70.

[A successful repair of aortopulmonary window associated with ventricular septal 
defect, right aortic arch and persistent left superior vena cava (author's
transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T, Wakasa K.

PMID: 459171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Josanpu Zasshi. 1979 May;33(5):310-3.

[Active obstetrical care and natural childbirth. II. A model of the midwifery
profession--a study with Ms. Yoshiko Mitsumori who practices Lamaze method at
Tachikawa, Tokyo].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto Y, Mitsumori Y.

PMID: 259666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Kyobu Geka. 1979 Apr;32(4):299-302.

[A successful repair of double outlet right ventricle with pulmonary stenosis
(author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T, Wakasa K.

PMID: 571488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Endocrinol Jpn. 1979 Apr;26(2):239-44.

Effects of vasopressin and cyclic AMP on water transport at arachnoid villi of
cats.

Noto T, Nakajima T, Saji Y, Nagawa Y.

The effects of vasopressin and cyclic AMP on water transport at arachnoid villi
into the superior sagittal sinus were examined using the isolated meninges
preparations of cats. The meninges preparation, the superior sagittal sinus of
which was opened at the midline of the outer surface, was held between two
polyethylene tubes. The tubes were fixed vertically in the way that the opened
surface of the sinus was directed downward and arachnoid surface upward. Water
transport was determined by measuring the tritiated water dripping through the
membrane preparation. Vasopressin from less than 50 to 500 muU/ml accelerated the
water transport and this effect was dose-dependent. Cyclic AMP from 0.5 to 10 mM 
was proved to manifest the same effect as vasopressin. This effect of cyclic AMP 
appeared rapidly in comparison with that of vasopressin, suggesting that the
effect of vasopressin may be manifested through cyclic AMP. From these findings a
physiological role of vasopressin in cerebrospinal fluid was discussed regarding 
the regulation of intracranial pressure.

PMID: 225164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Clin Biochem. 1979 Apr;12(2):50-1.

A comparison of angiotensinase and placental leucine aminopeptidase during normal
pregnancy.

Mizutani S, Yoshino M, Oya M, Noto H, Inamoto Y, Sakura H, Kawashima Y.

1. Serum leucine aminopeptidase activity measured by its action on hydrolysis of 
L-leucyl-beta-naphthylamide was increased progressively as pregnancy advanced.
Angiotensinase activity determined by bioasaay showed parallel increase during
normal pregnancy. 2. The effects of heat treatment and L-methionine on the
activity of angiotensinase were compared with those on leucine aminopeptidase
activity in pregnancy serum.

PMID: 221135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Kyobu Geka. 1979;32(9):703-6.

[Ventricular septal defect associated with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
(author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohhira M, Noto T, Oki T, Kawamura Y.

PMID: 575175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Josai Shika Daigaku Kiyo. 1979;8(1):29-35.

[Pharmacological actions of radix panaci noto-ginseng. (II) Anti-inflammatory
activity (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Hiramatsu M, Hatakeyama K, Masumizu T, Sakamoto M, Minami N.

PMID: 297476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Endocrinol Jpn. 1978 Dec;25(6):591-6.

Effect of vasopressin on intracranial pressure of rabbit.

Noto T, Nakajima T, Saji Y, Nagawa Y.

Effect of vasopressin on intracranial pressure (ICP) was examined by an
intraventricular administration of the hormone to a rabbit. ICP was determined at
the cisterna magna with a manometer and recorded automatically with a recorder.
An injection of over 150 micro U of vasopressin lowered ICP, but there was no
clear dose-response relationship of the effect of vasopressin on ICP. When
vasopressin was injected intraventricularly after lowering ICP by an intravenous 
injection of acetazolamide which inhibits the production of cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF), an additive effect of the hormone on ICP was observed. The effect of
vasopressin on excretion of water in CSF was examined by the determination of
drainage of tritiated water injected into the lateral ventricle of a rabbit.
Drainage of radioactive water into vein was measured by collection of blood at
the internal jugular vein and radioactivity of the plasma was counted.
Vasopressin accelerated excretion of tritiated water into vein. These results
indicate that vasopressin facilitated drainage of CSF into vein to lower ICP.

PMID: 751805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Am J Surg. 1978 Nov;136(5):582-6.

Factors influencing the late results of operation for carcinoma of the pancreas.

Sato T, Saitoh Y, Noto N, Matsuno S.

In 151 patients with carcinoma of the pancreas presenting at the surgical clinic 
of Tohoku University Hospital, predominant factors affecting postoperative
prognosis were studied with relation to the stages of the disease. The presence
of lymph node metastasis and of cancer invasion to the pancreatic capsule,
particularly the latter, was apparently a significant factor most crucially
affecting the survival of the patients who underwent pancreatoduodenectomy. The
mean survival periods of resected patients were 16.4 months for those with
carcinoma of the head of the pancreas and 11.0 months for those with carcinoma of
the body and tail of the pancreas, distinctly longer than after palliative
operations. However, in patients with stage III disease, pancreatoduodenectomy
tended to lead to a shorter period of survival, suggesting that surgery at that
stage is generally unpromising for cure.

PMID: 707741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Kyobu Geka. 1978 Sep;31(9):699-702.

[Semicircular tricuspid annuloplasty (De Vega's technique) for the tricuspid
insufficiency complicated with severe pulmonary valvular stenosis].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T, Wakasa K.

PMID: 702996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Acta Diabetol Lat. 1978 Sep-Dec;15(5-6):273-82.

Inhibition by kynurenine metabolites of proinsulin synthesis in isolated
pancreatic islets.

Noto Y, Okamoto H.

The effect of kynurenine metabolites on insulin biosynthesis was investigated in 
isolated pancreatic islets of the rat. Both quinaldic acid and 8-hydroxyquinaldic
acid were found to produce significant inhibition of the proinsulin synthesis.
However, the conversion process of proinsulin to insulin in the islet was not
affected by these kynurenine metabolites. Furthermore, the inhibitory effect of
these end-metabolites of dynurenine was characterized by preferential inhibition 
of proinsulin synthesis as distinct from non-insulin protein synthesis in the
islet. In contrast to the significant inhibitory effect of quinaldic acid and
8-hydroxyquinaldic acid on proinsulin synthesis, xanthurenic acid and kynurenic
acid were far less effective, and L-tryptophan, L-kynurenine,
3-hydroxyanthranilic acid and quinolinic acid showed little ability to inhibit
proinsulin synthesis in islets.

PMID: 373355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1978 Aug;26(8):947-53.

[Changes in serum enzyme levels after cardiac surgery for children--comparison of
profound hypothermia with limited cardiopulmonary bypass and simple profound
hypothermia (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T.

PMID: 712145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Pediatria (Napoli). 1978 Jun 30;86(2):263-82.

[Case reports of I-cell disease].

[Article in Italian]

La Grutta A, Giuffré L, Accomando A, Noto M.

PMID: 704229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Minerva Anestesiol. 1978 Jun;44(6):447-52.

[Resuscitation in traumatic asphyxia].

[Article in Italian]

Cardaci SB, De Renzo A, Di Noto M.

PMID: 740254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Clin Chem. 1978 Jun;24(6):944-6.

A totally automated system for enzyme immunoassay of theophylline in serum.

Castro A, Ibanez J, Voight W, Noto T, Malkus H.

We describe a procedure for enzyme immunoassay of theophylline
(1,3-dimethylxanthine) in which all phases of the assay are totally automated in 
a Kinetic Analyzer (KA-150). This system permits assay of 75 10-mul samples per
hour, with results available at 30-s intervals after initial sample preparation
and preincubation. We compared results for 138 clinical samples by an ultraviolet
method (x) and the present method (y). The slope of the comparison curve was
0.902, the y-intercept 0.402, and the correlation coefficient 0.984. The
coefficient of variation for samples run in duplicate on the same day was 4.9%;
it was 8.1% for samples run on different days. Specificity, sensitivity,
simplicity, speed, and small reagent requirement all make this an attractive
alternative to chromatographic procedures.

PMID: 657486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1978 May;75(5):707-13.

[Studies on elastase. Part II. Immunoreactive elastase level during acute
hemorrhagic pancreatitis in pigs (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakajima Y, Saito Y, Noto N, Matsuno S, Nishizato K.

PMID: 691825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1978 May;75(5):698-706.

[Studies on elastase. Part I. Radioimmunoassay of porcine pancreatic elastase
(author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakajima Y, Saito Y, Noto N, Matsuno S, Nishizato K.

PMID: 691824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Minerva Med. 1978 Apr 14;69(18):1281-6.

[Hemochemical data in the function study of the senile kidney].

[Article in Italian]

Tàmmaro AE, Bonaccorso O, Gemmellaro P, Moncini S, Noto V.

A survey was made of 2426 serum creatinine (SC) values in subjects over 60 and
free from kidney diseases or other conditions capable of influencing the renal
function. SC values were higher in males than in females and showed a tendency to
increase with advancing age. The study of the correlation between endogenous
creatinine clearance and both urea and SC showed that the latter represents a
more reliable index of glomerular filtration rate than the former.

PMID: 662154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Biochem. 1978 Feb;83(2):543-52.

Urinary metabolites of polyamines in rats.

Noto T, Tanaka T, Nakajima T.

Urinary metabolites of polyamines in rats were studied systematically by the
intraperitoneal injection of radioactive polyamines. Urinary metabolites were
fractionated into 4 fractions containing non-polar and acidic compounds, acidic
and neutral ampholytes, basic ampholytes and polyamines. A large amount of
radioactivity was detected in the fractions containing non-polar and acidic
compounds and polyamines of urine of rats injected with radioactive putrescine,
while in the case of the injection of radioactive spermidine or spermine a
relatively large amount of radioactivity was found in the basic ampholyte
fraction as well as in the polyamine fraction. Analysis of these fractions
indicated that gamma-aminobutyric acid, N-monoacetylputrescine,
2(3)-hydroxyputrescine, putreanine, N-(3-aminopropyl)-4-aminobutyric acid
(isoputreanine), spermic acid, N-(3-aminopropyl),
N'-(2-carboxyethyl)-1,4-diaminobutane, and N-monoacetylspermidine A and B were
excreted as urinary metabolites of the polyamines in addition to putrescine,
spermidine and spermine.

PMID: 632236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol. 1978 Feb;19(2):281-93.

A direct enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for detection of antibodies
for rubella virus in human sera.

Cleary TJ, Cid A, Ellis B, Malkus H, Noto T, Halbert S, Castro A.

A direct enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA), based on the "sandwich" principle on 
an antigen-coated plastic disc, was used for the rapid detection of rubella
antibody. Results were obtained the same day, and the prior adsorption of sera to
remove non-specific inhibitors was not necessary. The ELISA was compared to the
hemagglutination-inhibition (HAI) test on 500 serum samples. There was general
agreement between the two methods; most discrepancies occurred with low-titered
HAI positive sera. There was excellent correlation between the tests with serum
samples negative for rubella antibodies and those samples with HAI titers greater
than or equal to 1:40.

PMID: 565527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1978 Feb;124(2):99-115.

Effects of hypertonic glucose and amino acid infusions on pancreatic exocrine
function.

Saito Y, Tokutake K, Matsuno S, Noto N, Honda T, Sato T.

Inhibiting effects of hypertonic glucose and amino-acids on pancreatic exocrine
function were studied using mongrel dogs with chronic gastric and pancreatic
fistulae. Under the basal stimulation with secretin and pancreoxymin, 20%
glucose, 30% glucose and 12% amino acids were given intravenously. Infusion of
these substances caused the maximal decreases in pancreatic juice volume and
amylase output, to 23% and 11%, respectively (20% glucose), 32% and 29% (30%
glucose), and 53% and 42% (12% amino acids). But no significant changes were
noted in bicarbonate concentration. When glucose was infused, the rise in levels 
of blood sugar and IRI was associated with the inhibition of pancreatic exocrine 
secretion. Aminoacid infusion produced the greatest inhibitory effect on the
pancreatic secretion and markedly elevated both the levels of IRI and IRG.
Intravenous infusion of glucagon suppressed notably the exocrine function of the 
pancreas.

PMID: 417425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Agressologie. 1978;19(B):91-3.

Comparative study of post-traumatic and psychogenic acrophobia (fear of height).

Takeya T, Baron JB, Ohno Y, Agathon M, Andersson JC, Ushio N, Bessineton JC,
Pacifici M, Lemaire V, Chavannes N, Noto R.

PMID: 727375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Agressologie. 1978;19(A):15-6.

[Autocontrol of displacements of gravity center of the body induced by the
galvanic stimulation of the labyrinth (stabilization destabilization)].

[Article in French]

Bizzo G, Baron JB, Bessineton JC, Noto R, Pacifici M, Baget R, Clement P.

PMID: 727338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Josai Shika Daigaku Kiyo. 1978;7(1):71-5.

[Pharmacological actions of Radix panaci noto-ginseng. (I) Hemostatic and
analgetic actions (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Hiramatsu M, Hatakeyama K, Masumizu T, Sakamoto M, Minami N.

PMID: 292485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Ann Surg. 1977 Nov;186(5):581-8.

Follow-up studies of radical resection for pancreaticoduodenal cancer.

Sato T, Saitoh Y, Noto N, Matsuno S.

In a study of 66 patients with pancreaticoduodenal cancer with
pancreaticoduodenectomy, there were five (7.5%) hospital deaths. Five-year
survival rates were 7.8% in 20 patients with carcinoma of the head of the
pancreas, 16.7% in 31 patients with carcinoma of the bile duct, and 38.5% in 15
patients with carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater. Fecal fat loss measured was 10 g
or less per day in nine of 12 patients. Of the 19 patients having glucose
tolerance tests, 13 showed abnormalities including the two who were diabetic.
Operative findings which were indicative of a poor prognosis included lymph node 
metastases, macroscopic invasion of the tumor into the pancreatic capsule in
patients with carcinoma of the head of the pancreas, the size of the tumor in
those with carcinoma of the common bile duct, and direct invasion of the lesion
into the pancreas in patients with carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater.

PMCID: PMC1396320
PMID: 921352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1977 Sep;25(9):1146-53.

[Changes in serum enzyme levels after cardiac surgery--comparison of profound
hypothermia with limited cardiopulmonary bypass and simple profound hypothermia
(author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T.

PMID: 599303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Nihon Naibunpi Gakkai Zasshi. 1977 Jun 20;53(6):785-96.

[An improved method for the simultaneous analysis of norepinephrine, epinephrine 
and dopamine at the picogram level by mass fragmentography (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Heki N, Noto M, Hosojima H.

Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry makes possible the simultaneous measurement 
of norepinephrine (NE), epinephrine (E) and dopamine (DA) at the picogram level. 
The equipment used was the Shimadzu LKB 9000 GC-MS (MID-MD. The TFA derivatives
of the compounds were analysed by the GC-MS system equipped with a 3ft X 3mm
column packed with 1.5%OV-1 and the temperature was programed from 135 degrees to
260 degrees C at 10 degrees C/min increments. The mass spectrum showed molecular 
ions at m/e 552, 566 and 440 which corresponds to the TFA derivatives of NE, E
and DA respectively. The base peaks of NE, E and DA were m/e 109, 140 and 328
respectively. The peaks at m/e 126 (NE and DA) and 140 (E) were applied to avail 
themselves of simultaneous multiple-ion analyses by mass fragmentography. As
little as 4pg of the compounds injected into the column could be measured with
good reproducibility, and the linearity of the response was maintained up to 120 
pg. The sensitivity was of the order of ng or pg which enable quantitation with
1ml of human serum and urine sample. The procedures were simpler and less time
consuming than previously reported methods. Recovery rates of NE, E and DA from
serum were 25.7%, 13.7% and 76.1%, whereas those from urine were 100%, 89.6% and 
100% respectively. The specificity of this method surpasses and cannot be
compared to any other existing quantitative methods.

PMID: 913711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Nihon Naibunpi Gakkai Zasshi. 1977 Jun 20;53(6):776-84.

[A simple method for the simultaneous analysis of urinary homovanillic acid,
vanilmandelic acid and 3, 4-dihydroxy mandeli acid by mass fragmentography
(author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Heki N, Noto M, Hosojima H.

Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry makes possible the simultaneous measurement 
of homovanillic acid (HVA), vanilmandelic acid (VMA) and 3, 4-dihydroxy mandelic 
acid (DOMA) in 2ml urine samples. The equipment used was the Shimadzu LKB 9000
GC-MS (MID-PM). The TMSi derivatives of the compounds were analysed by the GC-MS 
system equipped with a 3ft. X 3mm column packed with 1.5% OV-1 and the
temperature was programed from 130 degrees to 260 degrees C at 10 degrees C/min
increments. The mass spectrum showed molecular ions at m/e 326, 414, and 472
which correspond to the TMSi derivatives of HVA, VMA AND DOMA respectively. The
peaks at m/e 326 (HVA), 297 (VMA) and 355 (DOMA) were applied to avail themselves
of simultaneous multiple ion analyses by GC-MS. As little as 1pg of the compounds
injected into the column could be measured reproducibly. The sensitivity is of
the order of pg or ng, and the linearity of the response is maintained up to at
least 200ng. The procedure was simpler and less time consuming than previous
methods. It consists of extraction of the free acid into ether followed by
complete silylation of the phenolic, alcoholic and carboxylic acid group with bis
(trimethylsilyl) acetamide. Recoveried of HVA, VMA, DOMA added to urine were
93.8%, 71.2% and 23.6% respectively. The specificity of this method surpasses and
cannot be compared to any other existing quantitative methods.

PMID: 913710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Kyobu Geka. 1977 Jun;30(6):524-7.

[Radical surgery of congenital mitral insufficiency with patent ductus arteriosus
and two-chambered right ventricle].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T, Okamura H.

PMID: 328968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Nihon Naibunpi Gakkai Zasshi. 1977 May 20;53(5):690-702.

[Analysis of thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH) in serum and urine by mass
fragmentography using GC-MS (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Heki N, Noto M, Hosojima H.

PMID: 410673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Kyobu Geka. 1977 May;30(5):396-8.

[Successful management of congenital aortic stenosis with simple hypothermia].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T, Wakasa K.

PMID: 559849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Kyobu Geka. 1977 Apr;30(4):347-50.

[Successful management of total anomalous pulmonary venous connection by
(supracardiac type) by simple hypothermia].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T, Okamura H.

PMID: 559202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1977 Mar;121(3):247-52.

Parotid saliva tests in patients with pancreatic diseases before and after
surgery.

Kakizaki G, Saito T, Soeno T, Sasahara M, Fujiwara Y, Saito Y, Noto N.

Two patients with pancreatic cyst were treated by cystojejunostomy, two others
with pancreaticolithiasis by pancreaticojejunostomy (side to side), and
pancreato-duodenectomy was done in one patient with cancer of the duodenal
papilla and in one patient with cancer of the intrapancreatic bile duct. All
these patients made uneventful recovery. In all these cases, parotid gland
function was found depressed. After the operation, four patients showed normal
parotid gland function and in one patient it was abnormally elevated. Thus, as
previously reported in animal experiments, the parotid gland function was
presumed to return to normal or to be elevated in parallel with the improvement
of the pancreatic function or lesions.

PMID: 854917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Diabete Metab. 1977 Mar;3(1):7-10.

Plasma insulin and C-peptide levels in cirrhotic and uremic patients.

Kawai K, Hayakawa H, Yoshida K, Shimizu M, Noto Y.

Fifty grams of glucose were administered orally to twelve cirrhotics, twelve
uremics and ten normal controls and the plasma insulin and C-peptide responses
were measured and expressed as molar concentration. Glucose intolerance,
hyperinsulinemia and elevated C-peptide levels were found in cirrhotics after
glucose loading and in uremics during the later part of the glucose response. The
molar ratio of C-peptide to insulin was lower in cirrhotics and higher in uremics
than in controls. It is suggested that insulin is mainly degraded by the liver
and C-peptide by the kidneys, and that C-peptide is not affected by the liver
damage but is present in raised concentration in subjects with injured kidneys.
Elevated C-peptide level in cirrhotics is consistent with hyperfunction of
pancreatic B-cells.

PMID: 323089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Nihon Naibunpi Gakkai Zasshi. 1977 Feb 20;53(2):167-74.

[Analysis of estrone, estradiol and estriol in serum and urine by mass
fragmentography using GC-MS (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Heki N, Noto M, Hosojima H.

The first successful analysis of estrogens in serum and urine was performed by
mass fragmentography using a GC-MS combined system. The equipment used was
Shimadzu LKB 9000 GC-MS (MID-PM). The TMSi derivative of the compounds were
analyzed using the GC-MS system equipped with a 3 ft x 3mm column packed with
1.5% OV-1 and the temperature was programed from 200 degrees to 260 degrees C at 
10 degrees C/min increments. The mass spectrum showed molecular ions at m/e 342, 
416 and 504 which correspond to the TMSi derivatives of Estrone (E-1), Estradiol 
(E-2) and Estriol (E-3) respectively. Molecular ion peak of each compound was
applied to establish the precise quantitative evaluation of E-1, E-2 and E-3. 1) 
The minimum detectable limits of the compounds injected into the column were ca. 
2 pg for E-1, E-2 and 5 pg for E-3 respectively. 2) The sensitivity was of the
order of ng or pg which enables quantitation with 2 ml of human serum and urine
samples obtained from normally ovulating women. 3) This method was very
convenient for extracting the compounds from biological fluids, and the procedure
can be carried out easily in a short time. 4) Mass fragmentography makes possible
the simultaneous measurements of E-1, E-2 and E-3 in samples obtained from
pregnant women.

PMID: 913699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Agressologie. 1977;18 Spec No:57-62.

[Study of correlations between cerebral circulatory responses and postural
regulation in normal subjects and patients with a senile deficiency].

[Article in French]

Soulairac A, Rouquet Y, Noto R, Baron JB, Babic R.

PMID: 900362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Agressologie. 1977;18 Spec No:1-8.

[Effects of cigarette smoking on postural tonic activity. Toxicological,
rheological, and statokinesimetric aspects].

[Article in French]

Boudene C, Belegaud J, Baron JB, Rouquet Y, Noto R, Pacifici M, Bessineton JC.

PMID: 900355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 1976 Oct;29(10):1071-82.

Ceftezole, a new cephalosporin C derivative II. Distribution and excretion in
parenteral administration.

Harada Y, Matsubara S, Kakimoto M, Noto T, Nehashi T.

The distribution of ceftezole in blood and tissues and its excretion after
intramuscular or intravenous administration of single doses of 10 and 20 mg/kg
were compared with those of cefazolin, cephaloridine and cephalothin. Blood
levels of ceftezole in rats and rabbits were lower than those of cefazolin, and
higher than those of cephaloridine and cephalothin. Retention time of ceftezole
in the blood was somewhat shorter than that of cefazolin. However, blood levels
of ceftezole in dogs were nearly the same as those of cefazolin and
cephaloridine. The rate of urinary excretion of ceftezole in 24-hour urine after 
administration in rats and rabbits was found to be higher than those of the other
antibiotics tested. In dogs, however, the rate of urinary excretion of ceftezole 
was nearly the same as that of cefazolin and higher than those of cephaloridine
and cephalothin. The biliary excretion of ceftezole in rats and dogs was much
higher than those of cephaloridine and cephalothin, but lower than that of
cefazolin. Tissue distribution of ceftezole in rats was compared with that of the
other antibiotics by intramuscular and intravenous administration. The initial
level of ceftezole in the kidneys was found to be substantially higher than those
of the other antibiotics. The initial level of ceftezole in the liver and lungs
was also slightly higher than those of the other drugs when administered
intramuscularly. Tissue levels of ceftezole were somewhat lower than those of
cefazolin in rabbits after intravenous administration. Ceftezole attained a
higher maximum level in rat lymph by intramuscular administration than the other 
antibiotics tested. The maximum concentration of ceftezole present in the exudate
in the rat inflammatory pouch was higher than that of cefazolin. In rabbits with 
cerebrospinal meningitis induced by infection of Streptococcus pyogenes, the
level of ceftezole in the cerebrospinal fluid was several times higher than that 
in normal rabbits. The serum level and urinary excretion of ceftezole was
examined in 6 healthy male volunteers after intramuscular administration of a
single dose of 500 mg. Ceftezole attained a mean maximum serum level of 22.9
mug/ml 30 minutes after administration and disappeared from the blood in about 6 
hours. It was excreted rapidly in the urine. The concentration in 1-hour urine
was the highest (mean level: 2,667 mug/ml) and the total excretion rate was
92.6%. No metabolites with antimicrobial activity were observed in the urine. No 
changes in the pattern of plasma level and urinary excretion and no accumulation 
in the tissues were observed after repeated intramuscular administration of 20
mg/kg of ceftezole in rabbits, 26 times, for 14 days.

PMID: 994326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 1976 Oct;29(10):1058-70.

Ceftezole, a new cephalosporin C derivative I. In vitro and in vivo antimicrobial
activity.

Noto T, Nehashi T, Endo H, Saito M, Matsubara S.

Ceftezole, a new cephalosporin antibiotic similar to cefazolin, has the following
chemical structure:
(6R,7R)-8-oxo-7[2-(1H-tetrazol-1-yl)acetamido]-3-[(1,3,4-thiadiazol-2-ylthio)meth
yl]-5-thia-1-azabicyclo[4.2.0]oct-2-ene-carboxylic acid. Ceftezole was found to
be a broad-spectrum antibiotic, active in vitro against many species of
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria except Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Serratia 
marcescens and Proteus vulgaris. The activity of ceftezole against clinical
isolates of Escherichia coli and Klebsiella spp. appeared to be nearly equal to
that of cefazolin and higher than those of cephaloridine and cephalothin.
Cross-resistance was observed between ampicillin and cephaloridine, but not
between ampicillin and ceftezole, in susceptibility tests on clinical isolates of
P. mirabilis. The in vitro activity was little affected by the inoculum size, the
presence of human serum or the test medium. Ceftezole exhibited apparent
bactericidal activity at the concentrations above the minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC) against both S. aureus and E. coli. The development in vitro 
of resistance by S. aureus 209p and E. coli NIHJ to ceftezole after 16 transfers 
was similar to or somewhat slower than that to other drugs tested. Ceftezole was 
relatively stable in nutrient broth and minimally degraded in the serum or tissue
homogenates of rats. Ceftezole, in a single subcutaneous administration,
exhibited somewhat less efficacy in mice against intraperitoneal infections with 
Streptococcus pyogenes, S. pneumoniae, E. coli, K. pneumoniae or P. mirabilis
than either cephaloridine or cefazolin. However, ceftezole exhibited efficacy
similar to that of cephaloridine or cefazolin when administered in three doses.
Furthermore, ceftezole was as effective as cefazolin in the treatment of
experimental abscesses in mice caused by subcutaneous inoculation with S. aureus.

PMID: 994325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Horumon To Rinsho. 1976 Sep;24(9):943-9.

[Micro-analysis of biological catecholamines with gas chromatography and mass
spectrum analysis].

[Article in Japanese]

Hioki N, Noto Y, Hososhima H, Ueno Y, Yamashita M.

PMID: 1034530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Lipids. 1976 Jul;11(7):567-73.

Unusually high levels of C24-C30 fatty acids in sponges of the class
Demospongiae.

Litchfield C, Greenberg AJ, Noto G, Morales RW.

PMID: 948253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Yakugaku Zasshi. 1976 Mar;96(3):333-8.

[Pharmacological studies on supersensitization. III. Effect of potentiators on
isolated tracheal preparation of guinea pig (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Gomi Y, Kitao Y, Noto N.

PMID: 986447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Minerva Pediatr. 1976 Feb 25;28(6):335-40.

[Special uses of the thromboelastographic technic in the study and diagnosis of
coagulopathies].

[Article in Italian]

Balsamo V, Mancuso G, Noto M.

PMID: 943685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Nihon Naibunpi Gakkai Zasshi. 1976 Feb 20;52(2):149-57.

[Analysis of thyroid hormones in serum and urine by mass fragmentography using
GC-MS].

[Article in Japanese]

Heki N, Noto M, Hosojima H, Takahashi S, Murata T.

The first successful analysis of iodine compounds in serum and urine by mass
fragmentography using GC-MS combined system was performed. The equipment used was
Shimadzu LKB 9000 GC-MS (MID-PM). The TMSi derivatives of the compounds were
analyzed by GC-MS system equipped with a 3 ft X 3 mm column packed with 1% OV-1
and the temperature was programmed from 200 degrees to 320 degrees C at 10
degrees C/min. The mass specturm showed molecular ions at m/e 523, 649, 741, 867 
and 993 which correspond to the TMSi derivatives of MIT, DIT, T2, T3 and T4
respectively. The base peak at m/e 218 was applied to establish the precise
quantitative evaluation of T4 and related compounds by mass fragmentography. The 
following results were obtained: 1) The minimum detectable limits of the
compounds injected into the column were ca. 10 pg for MIT, DIT, 20pg for T2, 50pg
for T3, and 500 pg for T4 respectively. 2) The sensitivity was of the order of ng
or pg which enables quantitation with 1 ml of human serum and urine sample. 3)
West's method was very convenient for extracting the compounds from biological
fluids, and procedure can be carried out easily in a short time. The recovery
rates were ca. 16.0% for MIT, 26.6% for DIT, 61.5% for T2, 71.6% for T3, and
85.1% for T4 respectively. 4) The ability to simultaneously analyze various
iodoaminoacids is sure to be effectively utilized in studies to elucidate the
relative importance of these hormones and their metabolic changes in various
physioloigcal and pathological states of human beings.

PMID: 987938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Agressologie. 1976;17(C Spec No):67-70.

[Information retroaction in statokinesimetry. Possibility of treatment by visual 
route of proprioceptive information (temporo-spatial variations)].

[Article in French]

Weber B, Bizzo G, Baron JB, Noto R, Pacifici M, Bessineton JC, Baget R.

PMID: 1008144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Agressologie. 1976;17(C Spec No):53-7.

[Optokinetic testing and postural tone activity].

[Article in French]

Koitcheva V, Noto R, Baron JB.

PMID: 1008141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Kyobu Geka. 1976;29(7):519-22.

[Successful management of ventricular septal defect associated with severe
pulmonary hypertension and mirror image dextrocardia].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T.

PMID: 985977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Kyobu Geka. 1976;29(5):315-19.

[Use of phenoxybenzamine following surgery of ventricular septal defects
associated with pulmonary hypertension].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T.

PMID: 945392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Ann Anesthesiol Fr. 1976;17(8):968-70.

[Difficult intubations].

[Article in French]

Noto R.

The author reports twelve cases of difficult tracheal intubation, sometimes in
acrobatic conditions, in victims of railway accidents. The position of the
patient, the circumstances of the accident and the importance of the ventilatory 
distress, make tracheal intubation essential "in situ". The success of this act
depends on the qualification of the medical and para-medical personnel, the
technique proposed and the choice of material used.

PMID: 12704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Ann Anesthesiol Fr. 1976;17(6):751-4.

[Laryngo-tracheal injuries in hangings (apropos of 359 cases)].

[Article in French]

Noto R.

Hanging is a relatively frequent method of suicide, and strangulation (accidental
or volontary) may cause direct laryngeal or tracheal trauma and various lesions
which may express themselves clinically either: -early, was severe from the
start, e.g. fracture of the larynx, with major ventilatory distress, -or delayed,
simple trauma without fracture, becoming manifest only after a few hours with
severe dyspnea. In any case, early and late complications of these traumas
require, even when they are apparently benign, admission to hospital on a
specialised unit able to carry out rapidly respiratory intensive care.

PMID: 10819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Anesthesiology. 1975 Dec;43(6):689-92.

Anesthetic management of a parturient with myotonia atrophica.

Hook R, Anderson EF, Noto P.

PMID: 1081353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1975 Nov;23(11):1349-53.

[Aberrant right subclavian artery associated with ventricular septal defect,
patent ductus arteriosus and pulmonary hypertension].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T.

PMID: 1240898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 1975 Oct;15(10):743-51.

[Case of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) with giant cell arteritis of the
brain causing akinetic mutism and myclonus].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto M, Kato M, Takeda R, Izaki K, Kitagawa M.

PMID: 1241347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Am J Surg. 1975 Jun;129(6):621-8.

Appraisal of operative treatment for chronic pancreatitis. With special reference
to side to side pancreaticojejunostomy.

Sato T, Saitoh Y, Noto N, Matsuno K.

A total of sixty-one operations were performed in sixty of seventy-one patients
with chronic pancreatitis, with the following results. 1. The procedures used
were side to side pancreaticojejunostomy in twenty-four patients, caudal
pancreatectomy in ten, pancreaticoduodenectomy in six, total pancreatectomy in
one, removal of pancreatic calculi in four, cystojejunostomy in two, biliary
tract procedures in twelve, and drainage of pancreatic abscess in one. Operative 
fatality occurred in six patients, with fifty-four surviving operation. 2. Of
fifty-three patients surviving operation (excluding the one who underwent only
exploratory laparotomy), forty-seven (88 per cent) had relief of pain. With the
exception of two patients with complicating cancer of the pancreas at the time of
operation, of fifty-two patients surviving operation, thirty-nine (75 per cent)
had satisfactory results at follow-up study. 3. Sixteen of twenty-four patients
(66.7 per cent) undergoing side to side pancreaticojejunostomy had satisfactory
follow-up results. 4. Comparison of pre- and postoperative body weight levels in 
twenty-one patients undergoing side to side pancreaticojejunostomy showed a
postoperative loss of less than 10 per cent in seven, unchanged weight in two,
and a gain in eleven patients, including five with more than 10 per cent gain.
However, fat absorption examination in these patients showed no distinct
postoperative improvement in digestion and absorption. 5. Histologic evidence in 
one patient at autopsy four years and eleven months after side to side
pancreaticojejunostomy indicated improvement in fibrosis of the pancreas as
compared with the findings at operation.

PMID: 1130607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. FEBS Lett. 1975 Jun 1;54(1):103-5.

Inhibition by somatostatin of insulin release from isolated pancreatic islets.

Okamoto H, Noto Y, Miyamoto S, Mabuchi H, Takeda R.

PMID: 165970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Kyobu Geka. 1975 Apr;28(4):259-63.

[Surgical case of partial anomalous pulmonary venous connection associated with
patent ductus arteriosus and normal atrial septum].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T, Wakasa K.

PMID: 1171316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Pediatria (Napoli). 1975 Mar 31;83(1):20-30.

["Cat's eye" phenotype in a subject with normal karyotype].

[Article in Italian]

Balsamo V, Giuffré L, Liotta A, Noto M.

PMID: 817256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Clin Ter. 1975 Jan 15;72(1):55-65.

[Senile mental deterioration: therapeutic aspects].

[Article in Italian]

Tàmmaro AE, Noto M, Mulè M, Bonaccorso O.

PMID: 776497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Rinsho Hoshasen. 1975 Jan;20(1):39-43.

[Interruption of the aortic arch].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T.

PMID: 1169405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Nephron. 1975;15(2):124-30.

Pseudocyst of the pericardium developing during maintenance hemodialysis. Report 
of two cases.

Kuroda M, Tohyama T, Noto M, Tohfuku Y, Takeda R, Kitagawa M.

Two cases of pericardial pseudocyst which developed in the course of maintenance 
hemodialysis are reported. Both patients were usually free of complaints,
although there was evidence of the previous pericarditis with recent accumulation
of pericardial effusion. As a possible mechanism leading to pericardial
pseudocyst formation, distension of a weak area of the thickened pericardium due 
to an increase in intrapericardial pressure was assumed. Therefore, pericardial
pseudocyst is one of the likely complications of patients on maintenance
hemodialysis.

PMID: 1153047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl. 1975;330:72-6.

[Probability of the functional vestibulo-oculo-cervico-spinal ways affecting the 
placement and maintenance of the body's center of gravity in the support plane in
erect man. A statokinesimetric study].

[Article in French]

Baron JB, Ushio N, Gregoric M, Mano T, Noto J, Bizzo G, Gagey PM, Bessineton JC, 
Pacifici M.

PMID: 1081326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1974 Sep;22(9):951-5.

[Discrete type of congenital subaortic stenosis with patent ductus arteriosus].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Noto T.

PMID: 4475071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1974 Jun;113(2):97-111.

Clinicopathological studies on the relationship between cholelithiasis and
chronic pancreatitis.

Sato T, Saito Y, Noto N, Matsuno S, Tokutake K.

PMID: 4612874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Kyobu Geka. 1974 May;27(5):345-50.

[Traumatic chylothorax following radical repair of tetralogy of Fallot].

[Article in Japanese]

Kidani M, Nakagawa M, Asano S, Noto T, Wakasa K.

PMID: 4471942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Conn Med. 1974 Apr;38(4):156-8.

Heterotopic gastric mucosa of ileum causing acute intussusception.

Katsube V, Lebhar NH, Noto AC, Hughes W.

PMID: 4823127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Nihon Naibunpi Gakkai Zasshi. 1974 Feb 20;50(2):418.

[Proceedings: Steroid metabolism in patients with thyroid diseases. (3).
Conjugated cortisol-4-C 14 metabolite excretion patterns].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto Y, Miyamoto M, Saito Y, Takeda R.

PMID: 4476489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1974 Feb;71(2):127-34.

[Experimental study on the correlation between the pancreas and parotid gland. 6.
Electron microscopy of the parotid gland and pancreas in acute pancreatitis
(experiments using rats)].

[Article in Japanese]

Seno A, Ishidate T, Kakizaki G, Fujiwara Y, Noto N.

PMID: 4858976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1974 Feb;71(2):121-6.

[Experimental study on the correlation between the pancreas and parotid gland. 5.
Effects of common bile duct obstruction on the parotid gland and serum amylase
levels (experiments using rats)].

[Article in Japanese]

Kakizaki G, Noto N, Saito T, Soeno T, Fujiwara Y.

PMID: 4858975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. South Med J. 1974 Feb;67(2):193-7.

Immunologic abnormalities in heroin addiction.

Wetli CV, Noto TA, Fernandez-Carol A.

PMID: 4130051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Agressologie. 1974;15(6):395-400.

Oculo-nuco-vestibulospinal system regulating the tonic postural activity.
Statokinesimetric studies.

Baron JB, Ushio N, Noto R.

PMID: 4549780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Am J Gastroenterol. 1974 Jan;61(1):55-62.

Massive hemorrhage into the upper digestive tract due to rupture of splenic
artery aneurysm into the pancreas.

Soeno T, Kakizaki G, Fujiwara Y, Noto N, Saito T.

PMID: 4544768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Ann Anesthesiol Fr. 1974;15(3):187-92.

[Policy of antibiotherapy in a septic-aseptic department].

[Article in French]

Aubert M, Vilain R, Noto R, Weber B.

PMID: 4466388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Horumon To Rinsho. 1973 Dec;21(12):1259-64.

[Autopsy case of Cushing's syndrome caused by adrenocortical cancer with a marked
increase of plasma renin activity].

[Article in Japanese]

Hasaya K, Maeda M, Miyamori I, Noto Y, Nakabayashi H.

PMID: 4798492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Agressologie. 1973 Sep;14(Spec No C):57-63.

[Spectrum study of lateral and antero-posterior spontaneous motions of the center
of gravity in man in the standing position].

[Article in French]

Leroux J, Baron JB, Bizzo G, Bessineton JC, Gueguen C, Noto R, Pacifici M.

PMID: 4805849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Agressologie. 1973 Sep;14(Spec No C):65-72.

[Precision of the transferring function of labyrinthine sensorimotor system
regulating the displacement of the body's center of gravity by the erect man
after rectangular or sinusoid electric stimulations].

[Article in French]

Bizzo G, Baron JB, Bessineton JC, Noto R, Pacifici M, Gaget R.

PMID: 4794012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Nihon Rinsho. 1973 Jun;31(6):2095-104.

[Autopsy case of acromegaly with fatal subarachnoid hemorrhage].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakabayashi H, Manmi S, Matsui A, Noto M, Otani I.

PMID: 4738452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1973 Feb;109(2):121-33.

Laboratory diagnostic test for pancreatic disorders by examination of parotid
saliva.

Kakizaki G, Noto N, Saito T, Fujiwara Y, Oizumi T.

PMID: 4722719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Agressologie. 1973;14 Spec B(0):79-86.

[Correlations between functioning of labyrinthic and oculomotor sensorimotor
systems adjusting the gravity center displacements of the human body in
orthostatism].

[Article in French]

Baron JB, Bessineton JC, Bizzo G, Noto R, Tévanian G, Pacifici M.

PMID: 4802169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1972 Oct;108(2):155-64.

Histologic findings and amylase contents of the pancreas and parotid gland of
rats with experimental peritonitis or ileus.

Kakizaki G, Noto N, Fujiwara Y, Oizumi T, Soeno T.

PMID: 4675687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1972 Oct;69(10):1024-31.

[Examination of the parotid saliva for the diagnosis of pancreatic diseases].

[Article in Japanese]

Kakizaki G, Noto N, Fujiwara Y, Oizumi T, Soeno T.

PMID: 4675351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1972 Oct;108(2):165-77.

Histologic findings of the parotid gland and bicarbonate content in parotid
saliva of dogs with experimentally produced pancreatitis.

Kakizaki G, Noto N, Fujiwara Y, Kato E, Ishidate T.

PMID: 4651896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1972 Oct;108(2):141-53.

Histological findings and amylase content of the parotid gland of rats with
recovery from acute pancreatitis.

Kakizaki G, Noto N, Fujiwara Y, Oizumi T, Soeno T.

PMID: 4651895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Am J Clin Pathol. 1972 Sep;58(3):314-6.

A false positive immunologic pregnancy test with tubo-ovarian abscess.

Arkin C, Noto TA.

PMID: 4672657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1972 Sep;69(9):869-78.

[Effect of diet on the healing process in pancreatitis in rats].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto N.

PMID: 4281038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Am J Clin Pathol. 1972 Sep;58(3):329-34.

Hepatocellular carcinoma with Australia antigen and alpha-fetoglobulin in the
serum: report of two cases.

Specht HD, Noto TA.

PMID: 4116411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Horumon To Rinsho. 1972 Aug;20(8):605-11.

[Adrenocortical hormones and arteriosclerosis].

[Article in Japanese]

Takeda R, Noto Y.

PMID: 4346929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Cah Anesthesiol. 1972 Jul-Sep;20(5):559-64.

[Drugs used in anesthesia. Practical problems concerning their packaging and
their dilution].

[Article in French]

Noto R.

PMID: 4640429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1972 Apr;69(4):349-58.

[Experimental study on the correlation between the pancreas and parotid gland. 4.
Effect of acute pancreatitis on the parotid gland with special reference to
bicarbonate concentration in parotid saliva in dogs].

[Article in Japanese]

Kakizaki G, Noto N, Fujiwara Y, Kato E, Oizumi T.

PMID: 4676627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Clin Chim Acta. 1972 Jan;36(1):163-8.

Radiogas chromatographic analysis of sulfoconjugates of
C-21-corticosteroid-metabolites in human urine.

Takeda R, Noto M, Murakami M.

PMID: 5007697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1972 Jan;69(1):1-10.

[Experimental study on the correlation between pancreas and parotid gland. 2.
Effect of recovery process in pancreatitis on the parotid gland and serum amylase
level in rats].

[Article in Japanese]

Kakizaki G, Noto N, Fujiwara Y, Soeno T, Saito T.

PMID: 4676635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1972 Jan;69(1):11-8.

[Experimental study on the correlation between the pancreas and parotid gland. 3.
Effect of perforative peritonitis and intestinal obstruction on the parotid gland
and serum amylase level in rats].

[Article in Japanese]

Kakizaki G, Noto N, Fujiwara Y, Oizumi T, Saito T.

PMID: 4676634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Naika. 1971 Dec;28(6):1125-31.

[Endocrinological observation on 7 cases of Sheehan's syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Takeda R, Nishizawa C, Noto Y, Uchida K, Nakabayashi H.

PMID: 4336285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1971 Nov;105(3):223-31.

Experimental study on the correlation between the pancreas and parotid gland.

Kakizaki G, Noto N, Onuma T, Saito T, Izumi S.

PMID: 5158877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Chirurgie. 1971;97(4):264-72.

[A case of post-traumatic fat embolism cured with assisted respiration and
hyperbaric oxygenotherapy].

[Article in French]

Lavarde G, Noto R, Fournel JJ.

PMID: 5562848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Naika. 1970 Sep;26(3):535-40.

[Effect of long-term administration of spironolactone in massive dosage on the
postoperative plasma renin activity in primary aldosteronism].

[Article in Japanese]

Morimoto S, Noto Y, Nishizawa C, Uchida K, Nakabayashi H.

PMID: 5473961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Tohoku J Exp Med. 1970 Aug;101(4):351-62.

Evaluation of surgical treatment of chronic pancreatitis.

Sato T, Saito Y, Noto N, Suda Y.

PMID: 5482831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Horumon To Rinsho. 1970 Aug;18(8):629-39.

[Hypertension and adrenal cortical hormone].

[Article in Japanese]

Takeda K, Morimoto S, Kuroda M, Kobayashi N, Noto M.

PMID: 5466324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Horumon To Rinsho. 1970 May;18(5):401-5.

[Application of fluorometeric analysis of unconjugated urinary 11-OHCS as a
screening test].

[Article in Japanese]

Takeda R, Nishizawa C, Noto Y, Uchida K, Nakabayashi H.

PMID: 4317993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 1970 Feb;23(2):96-8.

A turbidimetric bioassay method for determination of mycophenolic acid.

Noto T, Harada Y, Koyama K.

PMID: 5416657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Agressologie. 1970;11(6):515-23.

[Emergency treatment and transportation of cases of acute imipramine derivative
poisoning (apropos of 70 cases)].

[Article in French]

Noto R, Robert J, Hanote P.

PMID: 5502793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Med Genet. 1969 Dec;6(4):388-93.

Immunological profile in a chromosome 18 deletion syndrome with IgA deficiency.

Finley SC, Cooper MD, Finley WH, Uchida IA, Noto TA, Roddam RF.

PMCID: PMC1468779
PMID: 5391901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Shujutsu. 1969 Dec;23(12):1559-67.

[Diabetes mellitus and surgery].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto N, Saito Y, Sato T.

PMID: 5370408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Shujutsu. 1969 Oct;23(10):1355-7.

[3 Cases of Bennett's fracture treated by the skeletal oblique traction method].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto S, Kurata K, Takeyama F, Ichihashi K.

PMID: 5356906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 1969 Apr;22(4):165-9.

Some biological properties of mycophenolic acid.

Noto T, Sawada M, Ando K, Koyama K.

PMID: 5800425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Nihon Shonika Gakkai Zasshi. 1969 Apr 1;73(4):485-90.

[Study on protein in the pericardiac fluid].

[Article in Japanese]

Teramura F, Masaki A, Kato A, Taniguchi K, Noto S.

PMID: 4185324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Saishin Igaku. 1969 Mar;24(3):638-43.

[Clinical valuation of a digestive enzyme preparation, "Berizym," using I-131
triolein combined with a radioactive innert-indicator].

[Article in Japanese]

Murakami M, Kuroda M, Noto M, Tofuku Y, Hoshiba I.

PMID: 4890895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Arch Surg. 1969 Jan;98(1):69-72.

Myocardial revascularization experiments using the epicardium.

Lary BG, Camelo A, Sherman RW, Noto TJ.

PMID: 5782882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Fracastoro. 1968 Nov-Dec;61(6):721-8.

[Perfusion of the isolated pig liver with human blood. (technical notes and
preliminary observations)].

[Article in Italian]

Robinson KP, Noto L.

PMID: 5738134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Seikei Geka. 1968 Sep;19(10):839-41.

[Case of pearl tumor of the spinal cord].

[Article in Japanese]

Kurata K, Noto S, Ichihashi I.

PMID: 5751170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Shujutsu. 1968 Sep;22(9):908-16.

[Operative results of pancreatic head-duodenal resection for periampullary
cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Maki T, Sato T, Saito Y, Koyama K, Noto N.

PMID: 5709310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Seishin Shinkeigaku Zasshi. 1968 Aug;70(8):723-36.

[Study on the pre-psychopathic character of manic-depressive psychosis and the
function of the diencephalon].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto C.

PMID: 5749984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Geka Chiryo. 1968 Jul;19(1):1-6.

[Traumatic injuries of the pancreas].

[Article in Japanese]

Sato T, Kakizaki G, Saito Y, Onuma T, Noto N.

PMID: 5755274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Ala J Med Sci. 1968 Jul;5(3):421-7.

Positive direct antiglobulin reactions and methyldopa.

Klapper MS, Noto TA.

PMID: 5315985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Lancet. 1968 May 18;1(7551):1095-6.

IgA absence associated with a ring-18 chromosome.

Finley SC, Finley WH, Noto TA, Uchida IA, Roddam RF.

PMID: 4171782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Shujutsu. 1968 May;22(5):491-7.

[Surgery of chronic pancreatitis with special reference to side to side
anastomosis of the pancreatic duct to the jejunum].

[Article in Japanese]

Sato T, Kakizaki G, Saito Y, Noto S, O N.

PMID: 5724236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Gan No Rinsho. 1968 Feb;14(2):96-100.

[Clinical findings in podophyllotoxin derivatives (SP-I-SP-G) in malignant
tumors].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohara H, Noto J, Kihara A, Noguchi H, Ishii Y.

PMID: 5244790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Fracastoro. 1967 Sep-Oct;60(5):506-13.

[Agranulocytosis caused by pyramidon with deep necrosis and anorectal
destruction].

[Article in Italian]

Noto L.

PMID: 5616371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Fracastoro. 1967 Jul-Aug;60(4):349-61.

[Massive resection of the small intestine for hemorrhagic infarction (surgical
and physiopathological considerations on a case controlled after 16 months)].

[Article in Italian]

Noto L.

PMID: 5304493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Seishin Shinkeigaku Zasshi. 1967 Jun;69(6):539-44.

[Xeroderma pigmentosum complicated with brain symptoms].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto C, Kamoya M, Hoshi J, Aoki K.

PMID: 5625388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Kyobu Geka. 1967 Jun;20(6):410-6.

[Effect of Alfence (metal splint) on deformity of the sternum after open heart
surgery in children].

[Article in Japanese]

Okamura H, Katakura K, Hisamichi K, Sato T, Noto T.

PMID: 5624956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Seikei Geka. 1967 May;18(6):550-2.

[Case of osteochondritis dissecans observed in Chopart's joint].

[Article in Japanese]

Kurata K, Noto S, Sasao M, Ichihashi I.

PMID: 6071087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Am Heart J. 1967 May;73(5):602-14.

Subadventitial fibroplasia of the renal artery, a disease of young women.

McCormack LJ, Noto TJ Jr, Meaney TF, Poutasse EF, Dustan HP.

PMID: 6024216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Boll Soc Ital Biol Sper. 1967 Apr 15;43(7):376-9.

[Importance of the liver in the increase of pseudo-insulin activity of the blood 
(ILA) in dogs exposed to glucose overloading. II. Study of the mechanism of
pancreatic stimulation].

[Article in Italian]

Balsano F, Musca A, Pitucco G, Di Noto V, Salerno L.

PMID: 6052526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Boll Soc Ital Biol Sper. 1967 Apr 15;43(7):374-6.

[Importance of the liver in the increase of pseudo-insulin activity of the blood 
(ILA) in dogs exposed to glucose overloading. I].

[Article in Italian]

Balsano F, Musca A, Pitucco G, Di Noto V, Salerno L.

PMID: 6052525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Ganka. 1967 Apr;9(4):247-51.

[Elicon implantation for the treatment of retinal detachment].

[Article in Japanese]

Noto K.

PMID: 6070100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Tech Bull Regist Med Technol. 1967 Apr;37(4):91-106.

Electronic data processing system for clinical laboratories. A system used for
all laboratory sections.

Straumfjord JV Jr, Spraberry MN, Biggs HG, Noto TA.

PMID: 6044183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Igaku To Seibutsugaku. 1967 Mar 10;74(3):155-7.

[Blood chemical standard values for mice].

[Article in Japanese]

Terahata K, Asai Y, Noto Y.

PMID: 6069817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Gastroenterologia. 1967;107(6):368-78.

Inflammatory pseudo-tumours of the caecum.

Garusi GF, Noto L.

PMID: 6052563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Fracastoro. 1966 Nov-Dec;59(6):768-76.

[Circumscribed elephantiasis of the penis. (Unusual case with preputialsite,
cause by a horse biet 36 years earlier].

[Article in Italian]

Noto L.

PMID: 6011949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Am J Clin Pathol. 1966 Oct;46(4):440-1.

Observations on the heat-modified rheumatoid arthritis test.

Noto AC, Barnett RN.

PMID: 5924011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Fracastoro. 1966 Sep-Oct;59(5):530-95.

[Changes and processes of a non-malignant nature of the ileo-cecal tract].

[Article in Italian]

Garusi G, Noto L.

PMID: 5991211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Am Heart J. 1966 Aug;72(2):188-98.

A pathologic-arteriographic correlation of renal arterial disease.

McCormack LJ, Poutasse EF, Meaney TF, Noto TJ Jr, Dustan HP.

PMID: 5915557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Fracastoro. 1966 Jul-Aug;59(4):391-407.

[Scintigraphic observations in renal dysplasias].

[Article in Italian]

Noto L, Marabini A, Ganassini GB.

PMID: 5981757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Arch Surg. 1966 Jun;92(6):901-4.

A new device for nonoperative repair of internal cardiac pacemakers.

Tyers FG, Noto JA, Danielson GK.

PMID: 5934229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Am J Surg. 1966 May;111(5):647-50.

Gastric polyps.

Rosato FE, Noto JA.

PMID: 5936193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Folia Med (Napoli). 1966 Mar;49(3):205-12.

[1st findings on correlations between serotonin and pneumoconiosis in patients
from Lipari].

[Article in Italian]

Noto V, Coglitore G, Rizzo G.

PMID: 5912516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Horumon To Rinsho. 1966 Mar;14(3):266-8.

[Clinical trial of dehydroisoandrosterone for terminal cases of malignant
tumors].

[Article in Japanese]

Uemura J, Okamura T, Noto S, Kida R.

PMID: 4225520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Folia Med (Napoli). 1966 Feb;49(2):150-4.

[Blood ascorbic acid in pneumoconiosis caused by Lipari pumice stone dust].

[Article in Italian]

Noto V, Megale B, Coglitore G, Rizzo G.

PMID: 5942026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Folia Med (Napoli). 1966 Feb;49(2):136-49.

[Generalized pulmonary emphysema in pneumoconiosis caused by Lipare pumice stone 
dust].

[Article in Italian]

Nunziante Cesàro A, Goglitore G, Noto V, De Leo F.

PMID: 5942025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Ann Ottalmol Clin Ocul. 1965 Dec;91(12):1394-400.

[On the pathogenesis of glaucoma due to corticosteroids].

[Article in Italian]

Genovesi E, Noto V.

PMID: 5887318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Folia Med (Napoli). 1965 Dec;48(12):121-51.

[Morphology and radiological development of massive pneumoconiosis caused by
Lipari pumice stone dust].

[Article in Italian]

Nunziante Cesàro A, Coglitore G, Noto V.

PMID: 5881599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Sapporo Igaku Zasshi. 1965 Oct-Nov;28(4):387-406.

Studies on the changes of serum beta-glucuronidase activity of the cancer hosts
and the mechanism of inhibiting effects of glucuronic acid and the related
substances upon the glucuronidase activities.

Noto A.

PMID: 5895990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Med Assoc State Ala. 1965 Oct;35(4):273-5.

The antibody screening test, a vital prenatal laboratory study.

Tucker CC, Noto TA.

PMID: 5890500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Rinsho Hoshasen. 1965 May;10(5):376-9.

[A case of aneurysmal bone cyst arising in the rib].

[Article in Japanese]

Okuhara M, Tatsuno I, Komura T, Kobayashi T, Noto T.

PMID: 5178109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Am J Clin Pathol. 1965 Apr;43:311-3.

THE STABILITY OF HUMAN CHORIONIC GONADOTROPIN IN URINE AND OF REAGENTS FOR THE
SLIDE IMMUNOLOGIC TEST FOR PREGNANCY.

NOTO TA, MIALE JB.

PMID: 14278641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Minerva Urol. 1965 Mar-Apr;17:64-76.

[HISTOPATHOLOGIC AND HISTOGENETIC FINDINGS ON ADENOMATOID TUMOR OF THE
EPIDIDYMIS].

[Article in Italian]

NOTO L, MELI S.

PMID: 14310503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1964 Dec 1;90:859-66.

QUANTITATION OF HUMAN CHORIONIC GONADOTROPON IN URINE USING THE SLIDE IMMUNOLOGIC
TEST FOR PREGNANCY.

NOTO TA, MIALE JB, RIEKERS H.

PMID: 14241508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1964 Apr;46:593-7.

UPPER-ARM BLOCK ANESTHESIA. A CRITICAL ANALYSIS.

LEAHEY EB, BUSCICCHI EJ, NOTO A, ROONEY JJ Jr.

PMID: 14131438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Am J Clin Pathol. 1964 Mar;41:273-8.

NEW IMMUNOLOGIC TEST FOR PREGNANCY. A TWO-MINUTE SLIDE TEST.

NOTO TA, MIALE JB.

PMID: 14130303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Minerva Med. 1963 Jul 28;54:2175-82.

[USE OF 2-DIMETHYLAMINOETHYL P-CHLOROPHENOXYACETATE (ANP 235) IN DISORDERS OF
CONSCIOUSNESS CAUSED BY CEREBRAL INJURIES].

[Article in Italian]

CAVALLO P, NOTO L, PINCHERLE M.

PMID: 14060513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Arch Ital Urol. 1962 Nov;35:342-55.

[On a case of follicular cystitis].

[Article in Italian]

NOTO L.

PMID: 13939043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Chir Ital. 1962 Apr;14:239-62.

[Diverticula of the stomach].

[Article in Italian]

NOTO L, MARCONI L.

PMID: 13939044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Arch Pathol. 1961 Aug;72:191-6.

Malignant metastasizing meningioma. Report of a case.

NOTO TA, GYORI E.

PMID: 13729677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Minerva Chir. 1961 Jul 31;16:861-74.

[On a drug combination in headaches in patients with cranial injuries.
Considerations on 200 cases].

[Article in Italian]

CAVALLO P, NOTO L, PINCHERLE M.

PMID: 13691736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Minerva Chir. 1959 Nov 30;14:1423-38.

[Lipomas of bone].

[Article in Italian]

VALENTINO A, NOTO L.

PMID: 13840831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1958 Oct;99(1):81-4.

Biliary excretion of Co60 labeled vitamin B12 in dogs.

WILLIGAN DA, CRONKITE EP, MEYER LM, NOTO SL.

PMID: 13601774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Riv Anat Patol Oncol. 1958 Mar;13(8):1019-48.

[Anatomical & clinical study of cystic ureteritis with special reference to its
etiopathogenetic orientations].

[Article in Italian]

NOTO L, REDOMI G.

PMID: 13592035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Riv Anat Patol Oncol. 1958 Feb;13(7):923-42.

[Giant cystadenoma of the kidney; illustration of a case and review of the
literature].

[Article in Italian]

NOTO L.

PMID: 13592031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Gan. 1957 Dec;48(4):479-80.

[On the protein of gastric juice in stomach cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

WADA T, OHARA H, HOSOKAWA S, UMETANI N, YOSHIKAWA H, MORIMOTO Y, TANAKA T,
TOGASHI J, IBAYASHI J, NOTO K, IWATA K.

PMID: 13524462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Acta Chir Patav. 1953;9(3-4):339-44.

[Granuloma of the rectum of eosinophilic type].

[Article in Undetermined Language]

STEGER C, NOTO L.

PMID: 13123735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Riv Patol Nerv Ment. 1953;74(1):171-2.

[Case of reflex epilepsy caused by a hand injury].

[Article in Undetermined Language]

NOTO GG.

PMID: 13101538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Riv Patol Nerv Ment. 1953;74(1):166-7.

[Arachnoiditis following myelography with iodized oil in lumbosacral disk
herniation].

[Article in Undetermined Language]

NOTO GG.

PMID: 13101536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Gan. 1951 Dec;42(2-4):277-8.

A case of co-existence of cancer, ulcer and polypus in one and the same stomach
[Japanese text].

NOTO T.

PMID: 14906565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Rass Studi Psichiatr. 1951 Aug-Sep;40(5):590-600.

[2 Cases of temporary hemiplegia following cerebral angiography with ioduron].

[Article in Undetermined Language]

NOTO GG.

PMID: 14883425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Riv Med Aeronaut. 1951 Jul-Sep;14(3):480-4.

[Kümmel-Verneuil syndrome apparently following an airplane accident].

[Article in Undetermined Language]

NOTO B, SORTINO G.

PMID: 14912920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Riv Clin Pediatr. 1950 Mar;48(3):141-6.

[Subdural hematoma in infants].

[Article in Undetermined Language]

NOTO GG.

PMID: 15424611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1949 Nov;1(4):491-502.

Electroencephalographic study of experimental cerebro-vascular occlusion.

Epstein JA, Lennox MA, Noto O.

It was possible to follow the changes in the electroencephalogram during a
protracted period in a group of 29 dogs in whom the middle cerebral artery had
been clipped to its origin. A slight variation in the location of the clip was
unavoidable but useful in that the size of the resulting infarcts differed.
Massive lesions included the cortex in the fronto-temporo-parietal region, the
striatum, the internal capsule and the anterior portions of the thalamus and,
rarely, the hypothalamus. The majority of lesions were confined to the internal
capsule and to the caudate nucleus. The clinical syndrome consisted of a
contralateral spastic hemiparesis with the loss of the placing reaction and of
position sense. Forced circling movements occurred towards the side fo the
lesion, persisting even after blindfolding the animal. The changes in the
electroencephalogram varied with the size of the lesion. In the scalp to ear
records, slow frequencies were most conspicuous over the involved hemisphere in
all types of recordings and were most prominent in recording to the contralateral
ear. In the scalp to scalp records, flattening was evident over the frontal and
temporal regions and slow frequencies were conspicuous posteriorly. Flattening
was found over the entire hemisphere only in the most massive lesions and then in
both types of recordings. The scalp to scalp records tended to become more
symmetrical after two to three weeks, the flat tracings being replaced at times
by high voltage slow frequencies. The abnormalities in the scalp to ear records
tended to persist for the duration of the experiment. Flat records were obtained 
in the electrocorticogram overlying the area of infarction, and high voltage slow
waves were found in the peripheral zone. Using the multipolar needle electrodes, 
an unusually low voltage to flat records was obtained from the depths of the
lesion. A fairly constant change was the loss of the high voltage 10-12 per sec. 
spindles from the fronto-central scalp electrodes and from electrodes placed on
the sigmoid gyri. The sleep records were far superior to the waking records as a 
diagnostic aid, the latter being of value only during the first post-operative
week.

PMID: 18421838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Clin Odontoiatr Rev Mens Oper Dent Chir Orale Ortod Protesi. 1949 Sep
30;4(9):284.

Crisiodontalgica da arsenossido.

[Article in Undetermined Language]

CARDUCCI-ARTENISIO C, NOTO P.

PMID: 18149065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


