
1. PeerJ. 2016 Jan 26;4:e1632. doi: 10.7717/peerj.1632. eCollection 2016.

The Tibetan medicine Zuotai influences clock gene expression in the liver of
mice.

Li H(1), Li WK(1), Lu YF(1), Wei LX(2), Liu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab for Basic Pharmacology of Ministry of Education, Zunyi Medical College
, Zunyi , China. (2)Northwest Plateau Institute of Bology, Chinese Academia of
Sciences , Xining, Qinghai , China.

Background. The circadian clock is involved in drug metabolism, efficacy and
toxicity. Drugs could in turn affect the biological clock as a mechanism of their
actions. Zuotai is an essential component of many popular Tibetan medicines for
sedation, tranquil and "detoxification," and is mainly composed of metacinnabar
(ß-HgS). The pharmacological and/or toxicological basis of its action is unknown.
This study aimed to examine the effect of Zuotai on biological clock gene
expression in the liver of mice. Materials and methods. Mice were orally given
Zuotai (10 mg/kg, 1.5-fold of clinical dose) daily for 7 days, and livers were
collected every 4 h during the 24 h period. Total RNA was extracted and subjected
to real-time RT-PCR analysis of circadian clock gene expression. Results. Zuotai 
decreased the oscillation amplitude of the clock core gene Clock, neuronal PAS
domain protein 2 (Npas2), Brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (Bmal1) at 10:00. 
For the clock feedback negative control genes, Zuotai had no effect on the
oscillation of the clock gene Cryptochrome (Cry1) and Period genes (Per1-3). For 
the clock-driven target genes, Zuotai increased the oscillation amplitude of the 
PAR-bZip family member D-box-binding protein (Dbp), decreased nuclear factor
interleukin 3 (Nfil3) at 10:00, but had no effect on thyrotroph embryonic factor 
(Tef); Zuotai increased the expression of nuclear receptor Rev-Erba (Nr1d1) at
18:00, but had little influence on the nuclear receptor Rev-Erbß (Nr1d2) and
RORa. Conclusion. The Tibetan medicine Zuotai could influence the expression of
clock genes, which could contribute to pharmacological and/or toxicological
effects of Zuotai.

PMCID: PMC4741069
PMID: 26855871  [PubMed]


2. Chronobiol Int. 2015 Aug;32(7):903-16. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2015.1050726.

Systematic analysis of circadian genes using genome-wide cDNA microarrays in the 
inflammatory bowel disease transcriptome.

Palmieri O(1), Mazzoccoli G, Bossa F, Maglietta R, Palumbo O, Ancona N, Corritore
G, Latiano T, Martino G, Rubino R, Biscaglia G, Scimeca D, Carella M, Annese V,
Andriulli A, Latiano A.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medical Sciences , Division of Gastroenterology and.

Simultaneous analysis of the transcripts of thousands of genes by cDNA
microarrays allows the identification of genetic regulatory mechanisms involved
in disease pathophysiology. The circadian clock circuitry controls essential cell
processes and the functioning of organ systems, which are characterized by
rhythmic variations with 24-hour periodicity. The derangement of these processes 
is involved in the basic mechanisms of inflammatory, metabolic, degenerative and 
neoplastic diseases. We evaluated by genome-wide cDNA microarray analysis the
transcriptome of endoscopic mucosal biopsies of patients with inflammatory bowel 
diseases (IBD) focusing on the expression of circadian genes in Crohn's disease
(CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). Twenty-nine IBD patients (15 with CD and 14
with UC) were enrolled and mucosal biopsies were sampled at either inflamed or
adjacent non-inflamed areas of the colon. A total of 150 circadian genes involved
in pathways controlling crucial cell processes and tissue functions were
investigated. In CD specimens 50 genes were differentially expressed, and 21
genes resulted up-regulated when compared to healthy colonic mucosa. In UC
specimens 50 genes were differentially expressed, and 27 genes resulted
up-regulated when compared to healthy colonic mucosa. Among the core clock genes 
ARNTL2 and RORA were up-regulated, while CSNK2B, NPAS2, PER1 and PER3 were
down-regulated in CD specimens. Conversely, ARNTL2, CRY1, CSNK1E, RORA and TIPIN 
were up-regulated, while NR1D2 and PER3 were down-regulated in UC. In conclusion,
in CD and UC patients there are differences in the expression of circadian genes 
between normal and diseased intestinal mucosa. The deregulated genes evidenced by
transcriptome analysis in the major IBDs may play a crucial role in the
pathophysiological mechanisms and may suggest novel therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 26172092  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Med Chem. 2015 Aug 13;58(15):5900-15. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b00511. Epub
2015 Jul 23.

Synthesis and in Vitro Anticancer Activity of the First Class of Dual Inhibitors 
of REV-ERBß and Autophagy.

Torrente E(1), Parodi C(1), Ercolani L(1), De Mei C(1), Ferrari A(1), Scarpelli
R(1), Grimaldi B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Discovery and Development, Fondazione Istituto Italiano di 
Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163, Genoa, Italy.

Autophagy inhibition is emerging as a promising anticancer strategy. We recently 
reported that the circadian nuclear receptor REV-ERBß plays an unexpected role in
sustaining cancer cell survival when the autophagy flux is compromised. We also
identified
4-[[[1-(2-fluorophenyl)cyclopentyl]amino]methyl]-2-[(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)methy
l]phenol, 1 (ARN5187), as a novel dual inhibitor of REV-ERBß and autophagy. 1 had
improved cytotoxicity against BT-474 breast cancer cells compared to chloroquine,
a clinically relevant autophagy inhibitor. Here, we present the results of
structure-activity studies, based around 1, that disclose the first class of dual
inhibitors of REV-ERBß and autophagy. This study led to identification of 18 and 
28, which were more effective REV-ERBß antagonists than 1 and were more cytotoxic
to BT-474. The combination of optimal chemical and structural moieties of these
analogs generated 30, which elicited 15-fold greater REV-ERBß inhibitory and
cytotoxic activities compared to 1. Furthermore, 30 induced death in a panel of
tumor cell lines at doses 5-50 times lower than an equitoxic amount of
chloroquine but did not affect the viability of normal mammary epithelial cells.

PMID: 26135471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Bioessays. 2015 May;37(5):544-56. doi: 10.1002/bies.201400193. Epub 2015 Mar 14.

Exploiting human and mouse transcriptomic data: Identification of circadian genes
and pathways influencing health.

Laing EE(1), Johnston JD, Möller-Levet CS, Bucca G, Smith CP, Dijk DJ, Archer SN.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences and Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences,
University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, UK.

The power of the application of bioinformatics across multiple publicly available
transcriptomic data sets was explored. Using 19 human and mouse circadian
transcriptomic data sets, we found that NR1D1 and NR1D2 which encode
heme-responsive nuclear receptors are the most rhythmic transcripts across sleep 
conditions and tissues suggesting that they are at the core of circadian rhythm
generation. Analyzes of human transcriptomic data show that a core set of
transcripts related to processes including immune function, glucocorticoid
signalling, and lipid metabolism is rhythmically expressed independently of the
sleep-wake cycle. We also identify key transcripts associated with transcription 
and translation that are disrupted by sleep manipulations, and through network
analysis identify putative mechanisms underlying the adverse health outcomes
associated with sleep disruption, such as diabetes and cancer. Comparative
bioinformatics applied to existing and future data sets will be a powerful tool
for the identification of core circadian- and sleep-dependent molecules.

© 2015 The Authors. Bioessays published by WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25772847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Sleep Res. 2015 Aug;24(4):458-65. doi: 10.1111/jsr.12287. Epub 2015 Feb 27.

Proteomic and gene expression analysis of zebrafish brain undergoing continuous
light/dark stress.

Purushothaman S(1), Saxena S(1), Meghah V(1), Meena Lakshmi MG(1), Singh SK(1),
Brahmendra Swamy CV(2), Idris MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)CSIR - Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), Hyderabad, India.
(2)Proteomics Facility, CSIR - Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), 
Hyderabad, India.

Several organisms irrespective of their complexity in structure and function have
an inbuilt circadian rhythm. Zebrafish could be used as an alternate model animal
in sleep research as it exhibits similar sleep-wake dynamics as mammals and
Drosophila. In this study, we have analysed the adult zebrafish brain for its
differential proteome and gene expression during perturbed light/dark cycle. A
total of 53 and 25 proteins including sncb, peroxiredoxins and TCR alpha were
identified based on two-dimensional gel electrophoresis Fourier transform mass
spectrometer/ion trap tandem mass spectrometer and differential in-gel
electrophoresis MALDI TOF MS/MS analysis, respectively, with at least 1.5-fold
changes between the control and experimental brains. Real time-polymerase chain
reaction revealed that many circadian pathway-associated genes, such as per1b,
bmal1b, cry1b, bmal2 and nr1d2, were differentially regulated during continuous
light/dark exposures. It is hypothesized that the differential regulation of
these genes might lead to the discovery of potential diagnostic markers for
gaining insight into the light/dark-associated stress in humans.

© 2015 European Sleep Research Society.

PMID: 25726855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nat Commun. 2014 Dec 23;5:5759. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6759.

Pharmacological targeting of the mammalian clock regulates sleep architecture and
emotional behaviour.

Banerjee S(1), Wang Y(2), Solt LA(1), Griffett K(2), Kazantzis M(1), Amador A(1),
El-Gendy BM(1), Huitron-Resendiz S(3), Roberts AJ(3), Shin Y(1), Kamenecka TM(1),
Burris TP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter,
Florida 33458, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacological and Physiological Science,
Saint Louis University School of Medicine, 1402 South Grand Boulevard, St Louis, 
Missouri 63104, USA. (3)Department of Molecular and Integrative Neurosciences,
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2015 Feb;14(2):92.

Synthetic drug-like molecules that directly modulate the activity of key clock
proteins offer the potential to directly modulate the endogenous circadian rhythm
and treat diseases associated with clock dysfunction. Here we demonstrate that
synthetic ligands targeting a key component of the mammalian clock, the nuclear
receptors REV-ERBa and ß, regulate sleep architecture and emotional behaviour in 
mice. REV-ERB agonists induce wakefulness and reduce REM and slow-wave sleep.
Interestingly, REV-ERB agonists also reduce anxiety-like behaviour. These data
are consistent with increased anxiety-like behaviour of REV-ERBß-null mice, in
which REV-ERB agonists have no effect. These results indicate that
pharmacological targeting of REV-ERB may lead to the development of novel
therapeutics to treat sleep disorders and anxiety.

PMCID: PMC4495958
PMID: 25536025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(20):3282-91. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.954454.

Loss of circadian clock gene expression is associated with tumor progression in
breast cancer.

Cadenas C(1), van de Sandt L, Edlund K, Lohr M, Hellwig B, Marchan R, Schmidt M, 
Rahnenführer J, Oster H, Hengstler JG.

Author information: 
(1)a Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment an Human Factors (ifADo) at 
the TU Dortmund University ; Dortmund , Germany.

Several studies suggest a link between circadian rhythm disturbances and
tumorigenesis. However, the association between circadian clock genes and
prognosis in breast cancer has not been systematically studied. Therefore, we
examined the expression of 17 clock components in tumors from 766 node-negative
breast cancer patients that were untreated in both neoadjuvant and adjuvant
settings. In addition, their association with metastasis-free survival (MFS) and 
correlation to clinicopathological parameters were investigated. Aiming to
estimate functionality of the clockwork, we studied clock gene expression
relationships by correlation analysis. Higher expression of several clock genes
(e.g., CLOCK, PER1, PER2, PER3, CRY2, NPAS2 and RORC) was found to be associated 
with longer MFS in univariate Cox regression analyses (HR<1 and FDR-adjusted P < 
0.05). Stratification according to molecular subtype revealed prognostic
relevance for PER1, PER3, CRY2 and NFIL3 in the ER+/HER2- subgroup, CLOCK and
NPAS2 in the ER-/HER2- subtype, and ARNTL2 in HER2+ breast cancer. In the
multivariate Cox model, only PER3 (HR = 0.66; P = 0.016) and RORC (HR = 0.42; P =
0.003) were found to be associated with survival outcome independent of
established clinicopathological parameters. Pairwise correlations between
functionally-related clock genes (e.g., PER2-PER3 and CRY2-PER3) were stronger in
ER+, HER2- and low-grade carcinomas; whereas, weaker correlation coefficients
were observed in ER- and HER2+ tumors, high-grade tumors and tumors that
progressed to metastatic disease. In conclusion, loss of clock genes is
associated with worse prognosis in breast cancer. Coordinated co-expression of
clock genes, indicative of a functional circadian clock, is maintained in ER+,
HER2-, low grade and non-metastasizing tumors but is compromised in more
aggressive carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC4613905
PMID: 25485508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Jun;23(6):781-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.200. Epub 2014 Oct 
1.

MBD5 haploinsufficiency is associated with sleep disturbance and disrupts
circadian pathways common to Smith-Magenis and fragile X syndromes.

Mullegama SV(1), Pugliesi L(2), Burns B(2), Shah Z(2), Tahir R(2), Gu Y(1),
Nelson DL(1), Elsea SH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia
Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA, USA. (3)1] Department
of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA [2]
Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University
School of Medicine, Richmond, VA, USA.

Individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) who have an identifiable
single-gene neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD), such as fragile X syndrome (FXS,
FMR1), Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS, RAI1), or 2q23.1 deletion syndrome (del
2q23.1, MBD5) share phenotypic features, including a high prevalence of sleep
disturbance. We describe the circadian deficits in del 2q23.1 through caregiver
surveys in which we identify several frequent sleep anomalies, including
night/early awakenings, coughing/snoring loudly, and difficulty falling asleep.
We couple these findings with studies on the molecular analysis of the circadian 
deficits associated with haploinsufficiency of MBD5 in which circadian gene mRNA 
levels of NR1D2, PER1, PER2, and PER3 were altered in del 2q23.1 lymphoblastoid
cell lines (LCLs), signifying that haploinsufficiency of MBD5 can result in
dysregulation of circadian rhythm gene expression. These findings were further
supported by expression microarrays of MBD5 siRNA knockdown cells that showed
significantly altered expression of additional circadian rhythm signaling pathway
genes. Based on the common sleep phenotypes observed in del 2q23.1, SMS, and FXS 
patients, we explored the possibility that MBD5, RAI1, and FMR1 function in
overlapping circadian rhythm pathways. Bioinformatic analysis identified
conserved putative E boxes in MBD5 and RAI1, and expression levels of NR1D2 and
CRY2 were significantly reduced in patient LCLs. Circadian and mTOR signaling
pathways, both associated with sleep disturbance, were altered in both MBD5 and
RAI1 knockdown microarray data, overlapping with findings associated with FMR1.
These data support phenotypic and molecular overlaps across these syndromes that 
may be exploited to provide therapeutic intervention for multiple disorders.

PMCID: PMC4795052 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25271084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Oncogene. 2015 May 14;34(20):2597-608. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.203. Epub 2014 Jul
14.

Dual inhibition of REV-ERBß and autophagy as a novel pharmacological approach to 
induce cytotoxicity in cancer cells.

De Mei C(1), Ercolani L(1), Parodi C(1), Veronesi M(1), Lo Vecchio C(1),
Bottegoni G(1), Torrente E(1), Scarpelli R(1), Marotta R(2), Ruffili R(2),
Mattioli M(3), Reggiani A(1), Wade M(3), Grimaldi B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Discovery and Development, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia,
Genoa, Italy. (2)EM Laboratory, Department of Nanochemistry, Istituto Italiano di
Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy. (3)Center for Genomic Science of IIT@SEMM, Istituto
Italiano di Tecnologia, Milan, Italy.

REV-ERBa and REV-ERBß nuclear receptors regulate several physiological processes,
including circadian rhythm and metabolism. A previous study reported the REV-ERBa
gene to be co-overexpressed with ERBB2 in breast cancer cell lines. Surprisingly,
we found that several tumor types, including a number of breast cancer cell
lines, predominantly express the REV-ERBß variant. This pattern was independent
of ERBB2 and ER status, and opposite to that of non-cancer mammary epithelial
HMEC cells, in which REV-ERBa was the major variant. Consistent with this
molecular profile, REV-ERB target genes in both circadian and metabolic pathways 
were derepressed upon silencing of REV-ERBß, but not REV-ERBa. Strikingly, we
found that REV-ERBß is a determinant of sensitivity to chloroquine, a clinically 
relevant lysosomotropic agent that suppresses autophagy. The cytoprotective
function of REV-ERBß appears to operate downstream of autophagy blockade. Through
compound screening, we identified ARN5187, a novel lysosomotropic REV-ERBß ligand
with a dual inhibitory activity toward REV-ERB-mediated transcriptional
regulation and autophagy. Remarkably, although ARN5187 and chloroquine share
similar lysosomotropic potency and have a similar effect on autophagy inhibition,
ARN5187 is significantly more cytotoxic. Collectively, our results reveal that
dual inhibition of REV-ERBß and autophagy is an effective strategy for eliciting 
cytotoxicity in cancer cells. Furthermore, our discovery of a novel inhibitor
compound of both REV-ERB and autophagy may provide a scaffold for the discovery
of new multifunctional anticancer agents.

PMCID: PMC4761647
PMID: 25023698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 18;289(29):20054-66. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.545111. Epub
2014 May 28.

Structure of REV-ERBß ligand-binding domain bound to a porphyrin antagonist.

Matta-Camacho E(1), Banerjee S(1), Hughes TS(1), Solt LA(1), Wang Y(2), Burris
TP(3), Kojetin DJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular Therapeutics, The Scripps Research Institute,
Jupiter, Florida 33418 and. (2)From the Department of Molecular Therapeutics, The
Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, Florida 33418 and the Department of
Pharmacological and Physiological Sciences, St. Louis University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63103. (3)From the Department of Molecular
Therapeutics, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, Florida 33418 and the
Department of Pharmacological and Physiological Sciences, St. Louis University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63103 burristp@slu.edu. (4)From the
Department of Molecular Therapeutics, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter,
Florida 33418 and dkojetin@scripps.edu.

REV-ERBa and REV-ERBß are members of the nuclear receptor (NR) superfamily of
ligand-regulated transcription factors that play important roles in the
regulation of circadian physiology, metabolism, and immune function. Although the
REV-ERBs were originally characterized as orphan receptors, recent studies have
demonstrated that they function as receptors for heme. Here, we demonstrate that 
cobalt protoporphyrin IX (CoPP) and zinc protoporphyrin IX (ZnPP) are ligands
that bind directly to the REV-ERBs. However, instead of mimicking the agonist
action of heme, CoPP and ZnPP function as antagonists of REV-ERB function. This
was unexpected because the only distinction between these ligands is the metal
ion that is coordinated. To understand the structural basis by which REV-ERBß can
differentiate between a porphyrin agonist and antagonist, we characterized the
interaction between REV-ERBß with heme, CoPP, and ZnPP using biochemical and
structural approaches, including x-ray crystallography and NMR. The crystal
structure of CoPP-bound REV-ERBß indicates only minor conformational changes
induced by CoPP compared with heme, including the porphyrin ring of CoPP, which
adopts a planar conformation as opposed to the puckered conformation observed in 
the heme-bound REV-ERBß crystal structure. Thus, subtle changes in the porphyrin 
metal center and ring conformation may influence the agonist versus antagonist
action of porphyrins and when considered with other studies suggest that gas
binding to the iron metal center heme may drive alterations in REV-ERB activity.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4106322
PMID: 24872411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cell. 2014 May 8;157(4):858-68. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.03.039.

Impact of circadian nuclear receptor REV-ERBa on midbrain dopamine production and
mood regulation.

Chung S(1), Lee EJ(1), Yun S(1), Choe HK(1), Park SB(2), Son HJ(3), Kim KS(4),
Dluzen DE(5), Lee I(2), Hwang O(3), Son GH(6), Kim K(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Brain Research Center for 21st Frontier 
Program in Neuroscience, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.
(2)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Korea. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul 138-736, Korea. (4)Molecular Neurobiology
Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry and Program in Neuroscience, Harvard Stem
Cell Institute, McLean Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Belmont, MA 02478, USA.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Northeastern Ohio Universities College
of Medicine, Rootstown, OH 44272, USA. (6)Department of Legal Medicine, College
of Medicine, Korea University, Seoul 136-705, Korea. Electronic address:
songh@korea.ac.kr. (7)Department of Biological Sciences and Brain Research Center
for 21st Frontier Program in Neuroscience, Seoul National University,
Seoul 151-742, Korea; Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Seoul National 
University, Seoul 151-742, Korea. Electronic address: kyungjin@snu.ac.kr.

The circadian nature of mood and its dysfunction in affective disorders is well
recognized, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are still unclear. Here, we
show that the circadian nuclear receptor REV-ERBa, which is associated with
bipolar disorder, impacts midbrain dopamine production and mood-related behavior 
in mice. Genetic deletion of the Rev-erba gene or pharmacological inhibition of
REV-ERBa activity in the ventral midbrain induced mania-like behavior in
association with a central hyperdopaminergic state. Also, REV-ERBa repressed
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) gene transcription via competition with nuclear
receptor-related 1 protein (NURR1), another nuclear receptor crucial for
dopaminergic neuronal function, thereby driving circadian TH expression through a
target-dependent antagonistic mechanism. In conclusion, we identified a molecular
connection between the circadian timing system and mood regulation, suggesting
that REV-ERBa could be targeting in the treatment of circadian rhythm-related
affective disorders.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24813609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS Biol. 2014 Apr 15;12(4):e1001840. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001840.
eCollection 2014.

Machine learning helps identify CHRONO as a circadian clock component.

Anafi RC(1), Lee Y(2), Sato TK(2), Venkataraman A(2), Ramanathan C(3), Kavakli
IH(4), Hughes ME(5), Baggs JE(6), Growe J(1), Liu AC(3), Kim J(7), Hogenesch
JB(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Sleep Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Center for Sleep and
Circadian Neurobiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (2)Department of
Pharmacology and the Institute for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Memphis,
Memphis, Tennessee, United States of America. (4)Department of Chemical and
Biological Engineering, Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey. (5)Department of
Biology, University of Missouri-St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of 
America. (6)Department of Pharmacology, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia, United States of America. (7)Department of Biology, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (8)Center for
Sleep and Circadian Neurobiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of Pharmacology 
and the Institute for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of
America.

Over the last decades, researchers have characterized a set of "clock genes" that
drive daily rhythms in physiology and behavior. This arduous work has yielded
results with far-reaching consequences in metabolic, psychiatric, and neoplastic 
disorders. Recent attempts to expand our understanding of circadian regulation
have moved beyond the mutagenesis screens that identified the first clock
components, employing higher throughput genomic and proteomic techniques. In
order to further accelerate clock gene discovery, we utilized a computer-assisted
approach to identify and prioritize candidate clock components. We used a simple 
form of probabilistic machine learning to integrate biologically relevant,
genome-scale data and ranked genes on their similarity to known clock components.
We then used a secondary experimental screen to characterize the top candidates. 
We found that several physically interact with known clock components in a
mammalian two-hybrid screen and modulate in vitro cellular rhythms in an
immortalized mouse fibroblast line (NIH 3T3). One candidate, Gene Model 129,
interacts with BMAL1 and functionally represses the key driver of molecular
rhythms, the BMAL1/CLOCK transcriptional complex. Given these results, we have
renamed the gene CHRONO (computationally highlighted repressor of the network
oscillator). Bi-molecular fluorescence complementation and co-immunoprecipitation
demonstrate that CHRONO represses by abrogating the binding of BMAL1 to its
transcriptional co-activator CBP. Most importantly, CHRONO knockout mice display 
a prolonged free-running circadian period similar to, or more drastic than, six
other clock components. We conclude that CHRONO is a functional clock component
providing a new layer of control on circadian molecular dynamics.

PMCID: PMC3988006
PMID: 24737000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jan 15;306(2):E210-24. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00188.2013. Epub 2013 Dec 3.

Weight cycling promotes fat gain and altered clock gene expression in adipose
tissue in C57BL/6J mice.

Dankel SN(1), Degerud EM, Borkowski K, Fjære E, Midtbø LK, Haugen C, Solsvik MH, 
Lavigne AM, Liaset B, Sagen JV, Kristiansen K, Mellgren G, Madsen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Science, K. G. Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research,
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway;

Repeated attempts to lose weight by temporary dieting may result in weight
cycling, eventually further gain of body fat, and possible metabolic adaptation. 
We tested this with a controlled experiment in C57BL/6J mice subjected to four
weight cycles (WC), continuous hypercaloric feeding (HF), or low-fat feeding
(LF). To search for genes involved in an adaptive mechanism to former weight
cycling and avoid acute effects of the last cycle, the last hypercaloric feeding 
period was prolonged by an additional 2 wk before euthanization. Total energy
intake was identical in WC and HF. However, compared with HF, the WC mice gained 
significantly more total body mass and fat mass and showed increased levels of
circulating leptin and lipids in liver. Both the HF and WC groups showed
increased adipocyte size and insulin resistance. Despite these effects, we also
observed an interesting maintenance of circulating adiponectin and free fatty
acid levels after WC, whereas changes in these parameters were observed in HF
mice. Global gene expression was analyzed by microarrays. Weight-cycled mice were
characterized by a downregulation of several clock genes (Dbp, Tef, Per1, Per2,
Per3, and Nr1d2) in adipose tissues, which was confirmed by quantitative PCR. In 
3T3-L1 cells, we found reduced expression of Dbp and Tef early in adipogenic
differentiation, which was mediated via cAMP-dependent signaling. Our data
suggest that clock genes in adipose tissue may play a role in metabolic
adaptation to weight cycling.

PMID: 24302006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Mar 19;110(12):E1132-41. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1217154110. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

Effects of insufficient sleep on circadian rhythmicity and expression amplitude
of the human blood transcriptome.

Möller-Levet CS(1), Archer SN, Bucca G, Laing EE, Slak A, Kabiljo R, Lo JC,
Santhi N, von Schantz M, Smith CP, Dijk DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford GU2
7XH, United Kingdom.

Insufficient sleep and circadian rhythm disruption are associated with negative
health outcomes, including obesity, cardiovascular disease, and cognitive
impairment, but the mechanisms involved remain largely unexplored. Twenty-six
participants were exposed to 1 wk of insufficient sleep (sleep-restriction
condition 5.70 h, SEM = 0.03 sleep per 24 h) and 1 wk of sufficient sleep
(control condition 8.50 h sleep, SEM = 0.11). Immediately following each
condition, 10 whole-blood RNA samples were collected from each participant, while
controlling for the effects of light, activity, and food, during a period of
total sleep deprivation. Transcriptome analysis revealed that 711 genes were up- 
or down-regulated by insufficient sleep. Insufficient sleep also reduced the
number of genes with a circadian expression profile from 1,855 to 1,481, reduced 
the circadian amplitude of these genes, and led to an increase in the number of
genes that responded to subsequent total sleep deprivation from 122 to 856. Genes
affected by insufficient sleep were associated with circadian rhythms (PER1,
PER2, PER3, CRY2, CLOCK, NR1D1, NR1D2, RORA, DEC1, CSNK1E), sleep homeostasis
(IL6, STAT3, KCNV2, CAMK2D), oxidative stress (PRDX2, PRDX5), and metabolism
(SLC2A3, SLC2A5, GHRL, ABCA1). Biological processes affected included chromatin
modification, gene-expression regulation, macromolecular metabolism, and
inflammatory, immune and stress responses. Thus, insufficient sleep affects the
human blood transcriptome, disrupts its circadian regulation, and intensifies the
effects of acute total sleep deprivation. The identified biological processes may
be involved with the negative effects of sleep loss on health, and highlight the 
interrelatedness of sleep homeostasis, circadian rhythmicity, and metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3607048
PMID: 23440187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 May 1;22(9):1755-70. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt022. Epub 2013 Jan
28.

Motor and sensory neuropathy due to myelin infolding and paranodal damage in a
transgenic mouse model of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1C.

Lee SM(1), Sha D, Mohammed AA, Asress S, Glass JD, Chin LS, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1C (CMT1C) is a dominantly inherited motor and
sensory neuropathy. Despite human genetic evidence linking missense mutations in 
SIMPLE to CMT1C, the in vivo role of CMT1C-linked SIMPLE mutations remains
undetermined. To investigate the molecular mechanism underlying CMT1C
pathogenesis, we generated transgenic mice expressing either wild-type or
CMT1C-linked W116G human SIMPLE. Mice expressing mutant, but not wild type,
SIMPLE develop a late-onset motor and sensory neuropathy that recapitulates key
clinical features of CMT1C disease. SIMPLE mutant mice exhibit motor and sensory 
behavioral impairments accompanied by decreased motor and sensory nerve
conduction velocity and reduced compound muscle action potential amplitude. This 
neuropathy phenotype is associated with focally infolded myelin loops that
protrude into the axons at paranodal regions and near Schmidt-Lanterman incisures
of peripheral nerves. We find that myelin infolding is often linked to
constricted axons with signs of impaired axonal transport and to paranodal
defects and abnormal organization of the node of Ranvier. Our findings support
that SIMPLE mutation disrupts myelin homeostasis and causes peripheral neuropathy
via a combination of toxic gain-of-function and dominant-negative mechanisms. The
results from this study suggest that myelin infolding and paranodal damage may
represent pathogenic precursors preceding demyelination and axonal degeneration
in CMT1C patients.

PMCID: PMC3613163
PMID: 23359569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. FEBS Lett. 2013 Jan 4;587(1):98-103. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.11.021. Epub
2012 Nov 28.

Role of Rev-erba domains for transactivation of the connexin43 promoter with Sp1.

Negoro H(1), Okinami T, Kanematsu A, Imamura M, Tabata Y, Ogawa O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Kyoto University, Graduate School of Medicine, Sakyo,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Rev-erba, a component of the circadian clock, has also been known as a nuclear
receptor that lacks activation function domain 2, functioning as a
ligand-dependent transcriptional repressor. However, we recently reported that
Rev-erba activates connexin43 transcription by forming a complex with Sp1. Here
we show that heme, a REV-ERB ligand, is dispensable for this novel mechanism and 
that Rev-erbß, having homologies with Rev-erba, does not activate connexin43, but
competes with the Rev-erba/Sp1. The A/B region of Rev-erba, which is not
conserved in Rev-erbß, is a crucial activating domain, while the ligand binding
domain, conserved in Rev-erbß, functions as a competitor.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23201262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2012 Sep;32(9):1180-7.

[Study on gene differential expressions of substance and energy metabolism in
chronic superficial gastritis patients of Pi deficiency syndrome and of pi-wei
hygropyrexia syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang ZM(1), Chen WW, Wang YF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Guangzhou 510405.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the metabolic levels of energy and substance in chronic
superficial gastritis (CSG) patients of Pi deficiency syndrome (PDS) and of
Pi-Wei hygropyrexia syndrome (PWHS), including lipid, protein, nucleic acid,
carbohydrate, trace element, and energy metabolism, and to study the pathogenesis
mechanism of PDS from substance and energy metabolisms.
METHODS: Recruited were 8 CSG patients who visited at First Affiliated Hospital
of Guangzhou University of Traditional Chinese Medicine and Guangdong Provincial 
Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine from June 2004 to March 2005, including 
4 patients of PDS and 4 of PWHS. Their gastric mucosae were used for experiments 
of DNA microarray. The dual-channel DNA microarray data were bioinformatically
analyzed by BRB ArrayTools and IPA Software.
RESULTS: Obtained were fifty-six differentially expressed genes involved in
substance and energy metabolisms with the expression fold more than 2, including 
11 genes up-regulated and 45 genes down-regulated. Of them, genes correlated to
lipid metabolism included CRLS1, LRP11, FUT9, GPCPD1, PIGL, SULT1A4, B3GNT1,
ST8SIA4, and ACADVL, mainly involved in the metabolic processes of fatty acid,
cholesterol, phospholipids, and glycolipid. Genes correlated to protein
metabolism included ASRGL1, AARSD1, EBNA1BP2, PUM2, MRPL52, C120RF65, PSMB8,
PSME2, UBA7, RNF11, FBXO44, ZFYVE26, CHMP2A, SSR4, SNX4, RAB3B, RABL2A, GOLGA2,
KDELR1, PHPT1, ACPP, PTPRF, CRKL, HDAC7, ADPRHL2, B3GNT1, ST8SIA4, DDOST, and
FUT9, mainly involved in the biosynthesis processes of protein, ubiquitination,
targeted transport and post-translation modification. Genes correlated to nucleic
acid metabolism included DFFB, FLJ35220, TOP2A, SF3A3, CREB3, CRTC2, NR1D2, MED6,
GTF2IRD1, C1ORF83, ZNF773, and ZMYND11, mainly involved in DNA replication and
repair, transcription regulation. Genes correlated to carbohydrate metabolism
included AGL, B3GNT1, FUT9, ST8SIA4, SULT1A4, DDOST, and PIGL, mainly involved in
glucogen degradation and glycoconjugate biosynthesis. Genes correlated to trace
element metabolism included COMMD1, SLC39A6, FTL, CHRFAM7A, SCGN, and S100A6,
mainly involved in ion metabolisms of copper, zinc, ferri, and calcium. Genes
correlated to energy metabolism included AK3 and COX7B, mainly involved in
mitochondria structure and oxidative phosphorylation processes.
CONCLUSION: The metabolic levels of energy and substance including lipid,
protein, nucleic acid, carbohydrate, and trace element were obviously reduced in 
patients of PDS, which might be an important pathogenesis mechanism for its
occurrence.

PMID: 23185754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Circadian Rhythms. 2012 Oct 5;10(1):7. doi: 10.1186/1740-3391-10-7.

Investigation of a non-invasive method of assessing the equine circadian clock
using hair follicle cells.

Watts LM(1), Browne JA, Murphy BA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture and Food Science, University College Dublin, Belfield,
Dublin 4, Ireland. barbara.murphy@ucd.ie.

BACKGROUND: A comprehensive understanding of the equine circadian clock involves 
the evaluation of circadian clock gene expression. A non-invasive and effective
method for detecting equine clock gene expression has yet to be established.
Currently, research surrounding this area has relied on collecting tissue
biopsies or blood samples that can often be costly, time consuming and
uncomfortable for the animal.
METHODS: Five mares were individually stabled under a light-dark (LD) cycle that 
mimicked the external environmental photoperiod during a time of year
corresponding with the vernal equinox. Hair follicles were collected every 4 h
over a 24-h period by plucking hairs from the mane. RNA was extracted and
quantitative (q) PCR assays were performed to determine temporal expression
patterns for the core clock genes; ARNTL, CRY1, PER1, PER2, NR1D2 and the clock
controlled gene, DBP.
RESULTS: Repeated measures ANOVA for the clock gene transcripts PER1 and PER2 and
the clock controlled gene, DBP, revealed significant variation in expression over
time (p<U+2009><<U+2009>.05, respectively). Cosinor analysis confirmed a significant 24-h
temporal component for PER1 (p = .002) and DBP (p = .0033) and also detected
rhythmicity for NR1D2 (p = .0331).
CONCLUSIONS: We show that the extraction of RNA from equine hair follicle cells
can identify the circadian 24 h oscillations of specific clock genes and a
clock-controlled gene and therefore provide a valuable non-invasive method for
evaluating the equine peripheral circadian clock. This method will serve as a
useful tool for future evaluations of equine circadian rhythms and their response
to environmental changes.

PMCID: PMC3514281
PMID: 23039139  [PubMed]


19. Med Sci (Paris). 2012 Aug-Sep;28(8-9):689-92. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2012288005.
Epub 2012 Aug 22.

[Nuclear receptors REVERBa and REVERBß set the clock].

[Article in French]

Teboul M, Delaunay F.

PMID: 22920865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Med Sci (Paris). 2012 Aug-Sep;28(8-9):687-9. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2012288004. Epub
2012 Aug 22.

[When our metabolic health depends on our internal clocks].

[Article in French]

Delezie J, Pévet P, Challet É.

PMID: 22920864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. N Engl J Med. 2012 Jul 12;367(2):175-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJMcibr1204644.

Obesity and pharmacologic control of the body clock.

Shea SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, USA.

PMID: 22784121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cell Res. 2012 Sep;22(9):1319-21. doi: 10.1038/cr.2012.81. Epub 2012 May 22.

REV-ERB-erating nuclear receptor functions in circadian metabolism and
physiology.

Ripperger JA(1), Albrecht U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Unit of Biochemistry, University of Fribourg, Chemin du
Musée 5, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland.

A hallmark of the mammalian circadian timing system is synchronization of
physiology and behavior, but when this synchronization is disturbed, chronic
diseases such as metabolic syndrome and depression may develop. Three new studies
show that nuclear receptors of the Rev-Erb family impact the circadian oscillator
and its metabolic output and this can be modified with specific agonists. Hence, 
resynchronization of metabolic pathways by manipulation of the circadian
oscillator using REV-ERB-specific agonists may represent a feasible therapeutic
concept to target diseases rooted in a misaligned circadian system.

PMCID: PMC3434349
PMID: 22613952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nature. 2012 May 2;485(7396):45-6. doi: 10.1038/485045a.

Drug discovery: Time in a bottle.

Bass J.

Comment on
    Nature. 2012 May 3;485(7396):123-7.
    Nature. 2012 May 3;485(7396):62-8.

PMID: 22552089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Genes Dev. 2012 Apr 1;26(7):657-67. doi: 10.1101/gad.186858.112.

Rev-erba and Rev-erbß coordinately protect the circadian clock and normal
metabolic function.

Bugge A(1), Feng D, Everett LJ, Briggs ER, Mullican SE, Wang F, Jager J, Lazar
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
Department of Genetics, The Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism,
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2012 Jun 6;15(6):791-3.

The nuclear receptor Rev-erba regulates circadian rhythm and metabolism, but its 
effects are modest and it has been considered to be a secondary regulator of the 
cell-autonomous clock. Here we report that depletion of Rev-erba together with
closely related Rev-erbß has dramatic effects on the cell-autonomous clock as
well as hepatic lipid metabolism. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts were rendered
arrhythmic by depletion of both Rev-erbs. In mouse livers, Rev-erbß mRNA and
protein levels oscillate with a diurnal pattern similar to that of Rev-erba, and 
both Rev-erbs are recruited to a remarkably similar set of binding sites across
the genome, enriched near metabolic genes. Depletion of both Rev-erbs in liver
synergistically derepresses several metabolic genes as well as genes that control
the positive limb of the molecular clock. Moreover, deficiency of both Rev-erbs
causes marked hepatic steatosis, in contrast to relatively subtle changes upon
loss of either subtype alone. These findings establish the two Rev-erbs as major 
regulators of both clock function and metabolism, displaying a level of subtype
collaboration that is unusual among nuclear receptors but common among core clock
proteins, protecting the organism from major perturbations in circadian and
metabolic physiology.

PMCID: PMC3323877
PMID: 22474260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Nature. 2012 Mar 29;485(7396):123-7. doi: 10.1038/nature11048.

Regulation of circadian behaviour and metabolism by REV-ERB-a and REV-ERB-ß.

Cho H(1), Zhao X, Hatori M, Yu RT, Barish GD, Lam MT, Chong LW, DiTacchio L,
Atkins AR, Glass CK, Liddle C, Auwerx J, Downes M, Panda S, Evans RM.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2012 May 3;485(7396):45-6.
    Cell Metab. 2012 Jun 6;15(6):791-3.

The circadian clock acts at the genomic level to coordinate internal behavioural 
and physiological rhythms via the CLOCK-BMAL1 transcriptional heterodimer.
Although the nuclear receptors REV-ERB-a and REV-ERB-ß have been proposed to form
an accessory feedback loop that contributes to clock function, their precise
roles and importance remain unresolved. To establish their regulatory potential, 
we determined the genome-wide cis-acting targets (cistromes) of both REV-ERB
isoforms in murine liver, which revealed shared recognition at over 50% of their 
total DNA binding sites and extensive overlap with the master circadian regulator
BMAL1. Although REV-ERB-a has been shown to regulate Bmal1 expression directly,
our cistromic analysis reveals a more profound connection between BMAL1 and the
REV-ERB-a and REV-ERB-ß genomic regulatory circuits than was previously
suspected. Genes within the intersection of the BMAL1, REV-ERB-a and REV-ERB-ß
cistromes are highly enriched for both clock and metabolic functions. As
predicted by the cistromic analysis, dual depletion of Rev-erb-a and Rev-erb-ß
function by creating double-knockout mice profoundly disrupted circadian
expression of core circadian clock and lipid homeostatic gene networks. As a
result, double-knockout mice show markedly altered circadian wheel-running
behaviour and deregulated lipid metabolism. These data now unite REV-ERB-a and
REV-ERB-ß with PER, CRY and other components of the principal feedback loop that 
drives circadian expression and indicate a more integral mechanism for the
coordination of circadian rhythm and metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3367514
PMID: 22460952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Nature. 2012 Mar 29;485(7396):62-8. doi: 10.1038/nature11030.

Regulation of circadian behaviour and metabolism by synthetic REV-ERB agonists.

Solt LA(1), Wang Y, Banerjee S, Hughes T, Kojetin DJ, Lundasen T, Shin Y, Liu J, 
Cameron MD, Noel R, Yoo SH, Takahashi JS, Butler AA, Kamenecka TM, Burris TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter,
Florida 33458, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2012 May 3;485(7396):45-6.

Synchronizing rhythms of behaviour and metabolic processes is important for
cardiovascular health and preventing metabolic diseases. The nuclear receptors
REV-ERB-a and REV-ERB-ß have an integral role in regulating the expression of
core clock proteins driving rhythms in activity and metabolism. Here we describe 
the identification of potent synthetic REV-ERB agonists with in vivo activity.
Administration of synthetic REV-ERB ligands alters circadian behaviour and the
circadian pattern of core clock gene expression in the hypothalami of mice. The
circadian pattern of expression of an array of metabolic genes in the liver,
skeletal muscle and adipose tissue was also altered, resulting in increased
energy expenditure. Treatment of diet-induced obese mice with a REV-ERB agonist
decreased obesity by reducing fat mass and markedly improving dyslipidaemia and
hyperglycaemia. These results indicate that synthetic REV-ERB ligands that
pharmacologically target the circadian rhythm may be beneficial in the treatment 
of sleep disorders as well as metabolic diseases.

PMCID: PMC3343186
PMID: 22460951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2012 Jan 1;302(1):R193-206. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00367.2011. Epub 2011 Oct 26.

Circadian expression of clock and putative clock-controlled genes in skeletal
muscle of the zebrafish.

Amaral IP(1), Johnston IA.

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Oceans Institute, School of Biology, University of St. Andrews, Fife,
Scotland, United Kingdom. ipgda@st-andrews.ac.uk

To identify circadian patterns of gene expression in skeletal muscle, adult male 
zebrafish were acclimated for 2 wk to a 12:12-h light-dark photoperiod and then
exposed to continuous darkness for 86 h with ad libitum feeding. The increase in 
gut food content associated with the subjective light period was much diminished 
by the third cycle, enabling feeding and circadian rhythms to be distinguished.
Expression of zebrafish paralogs of mammalian transcriptional activators of the
circadian mechanism (bmal1, clock1, and rora) followed a rhythmic pattern with a 
~24-h periodicity. Peak expression of rora paralogs occurred at the beginning of 
the subjective light period [Zeitgeber time (ZT)07 and ZT02 for roraa and rorab],
whereas the highest expression of bmal1 and clock paralogs occurred 12 h later
(ZT13-15 and ZT16 for bmal and clock paralogs). Expression of the transcriptional
repressors cry1a, per1a/1b, per2, per3, nr1d2a/2b, and nr1d1 also followed a
circadian pattern with peak expression at ZT0-02. Expression of the two paralogs 
of cry2 occurred in phase with clock1a/1b. Duplicated genes had a high
correlation of expression except for paralogs of clock1, nr1d2, and per1, with
cry1b showing no circadian pattern. The highest expression difference was
9.2-fold for the activator bmal1b and 51.7-fold for the repressor per1a. Out of
32 candidate clock-controlled genes, only myf6, igfbp3, igfbp5b, and hsf2 showed 
circadian expression patterns. Igfbp3, igfbp5b, and myf6 were expressed in phase 
with clock1a/1b and had an average of twofold change in expression from peak to
trough, whereas hsf2 transcripts were expressed in phase with cry1a and had a
7.2-fold-change in expression. The changes in expression of clock and
clock-controlled genes observed during continuous darkness were also observed at 
similar ZTs in fish exposed to a normal photoperiod in a separate control
experiment. The role of circadian clocks in regulating muscle maintenance and
growth are discussed.

PMID: 22031781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2011 Nov;21(11):751-9. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e32834a8621.

Ramipril modulates circadian gene expression in skeletal muscle.

Sauermann R(1), Schmidt WM, Krebs M, Brunner M, Müller M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria.

OBJECTIVES: Treatment with angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)-inhibitors
favorably affects glucose metabolism and the development of diabetes mellitus by 
largely elusive mechanisms. To identify these mechanisms, we studied the effect
of ACE-inhibition on gene expression in skeletal muscle, a primary target tissue 
for insulin in glucose homeostasis.
METHODS: A subject-blinded and analyst-blinded, placebo-controlled study was
conducted in nine healthy men. Two consecutive muscle biopsies were conducted
before and 9 h after a single dose of either 10-mg ramipril (n=6) or placebo
(n=3), (randomly allocated). Muscle ribonucleic acid was subjected to
transcriptome profiling.
RESULTS: In both ramipril-treated or placebo-treated individuals, the majority of
genes with differential expression between the two time points belonged to the
family of diurnally regulated genes, such as the NR1D1 and NR1D2 genes (nuclear
receptor subfamily 1, group D, members 1 and 2) or members of the period homolog 
family (PER1-3). Ramipril significantly modulated the expression of other
diurnally regulated genes, such as aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator-like (ARNTL), encoding aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator-like, a core component of the circadian clock (P=0.02). Concomitant 
attenuation of NR1D1 downregulation (-2.4-fold compared with -4.1-fold in
placebo; P=0.04), a transcriptional repressor of ARNTL, supported the view that
ramipril might modulate glucose homeostasis pathways involving the NR1D1 ARNTL
axis.
CONCLUSION: As circadian rhythms are deranged in patients who are diabetic,
modulated expression of circadian clock genes by ramipril could explain the
favorable metabolic effects of therapeutic ACE-inhibition.

PMID: 21881539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22545. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022545. Epub 2011 Jul 26.

Control of gene expression by the retinoic acid-related orphan receptor alpha in 
HepG2 human hepatoma cells.

Chauvet C(1), Vanhoutteghem A, Duhem C, Saint-Auret G, Bois-Joyeux B, Djian P,
Staels B, Danan JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmacologie, Toxicologie et Signalisation Cellulaire, INSERM 
UMR-S-747, Centre Universitaire des Saints Pères, Université Paris Descartes,
Paris, France. caroline.chauvet@parisdescartes.fr

Retinoic acid-related Orphan Receptor alpha (RORa; NR1F1) is a widely distributed
nuclear receptor involved in several (patho)physiological functions including
lipid metabolism, inflammation, angiogenesis, and circadian rhythm. To better
understand the role of this nuclear receptor in liver, we aimed at displaying
genes controlled by RORa in liver cells by generating HepG2 human hepatoma cells 
stably over-expressing RORa. Genes whose expression was altered in these cells
versus control cells were displayed using micro-arrays followed by qRT-PCR
analysis. Expression of these genes was also altered in cells in which RORa was
transiently over-expressed after adenoviral infection. A number of the genes
found were involved in known pathways controlled by RORa, for instance LPA, NR1D2
and ADIPOQ in lipid metabolism, ADIPOQ and PLG in inflammation, PLG in
fibrinolysis and NR1D2 and NR1D1 in circadian rhythm. This study also revealed
that genes such as G6PC, involved in glucose homeostasis, and AGRP, involved in
the control of body weight, are also controlled by RORa. Lastly, SPARC, involved 
in cell growth and adhesion, and associated with liver carcinogenesis, was
up-regulated by RORa. SPARC was found to be a new putative RORa target gene since
it possesses, in its promoter, a functional RORE as evidenced by EMSAs and
transfection experiments. Most of the other genes that we found regulated by RORa
also contained putative ROREs in their regulatory regions. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) confirmed that the ROREs present in the SPARC, PLG,
G6PC, NR1D2 and AGRP genes were occupied by RORa in HepG2 cells. Therefore these 
genes must now be considered as direct RORa targets. Our results open new routes 
on the roles of RORa in glucose metabolism and carcinogenesis within cells of
hepatic origin.

PMCID: PMC3144224
PMID: 21818335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 11;286(6):4392-403. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.193466. Epub 2010
Dec 1.

Thiol-disulfide redox dependence of heme binding and heme ligand switching in
nuclear hormone receptor rev-erb{beta}.

Gupta N(1), Ragsdale SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109-0606, USA.

Rev-erbß is a heme-binding nuclear hormone receptor that represses a broad
spectrum of target genes involved in regulating metabolism, the circadian cycle, 
and proinflammatory responses. Here, we demonstrate that a thiol-disulfide redox 
switch controls the interaction between heme and the ligand-binding domain of
Rev-erbß. The reduced dithiol state of Rev-erbß binds heme 5-fold more tightly
than the oxidized disulfide state. By means of site-directed mutagenesis and by
UV-visible and EPR spectroscopy, we also show that the ferric heme of reduced
(dithiol) Rev-erbß can undergo a redox-triggered switch from imidazole/thiol
ligation (via His-568 and Cys-384, based on a prior crystal structure) to
His/neutral residue ligation upon oxidation to the disulfide form. On the other
hand, we find that change in the redox state of iron has no effect on heme
binding to the ligand-binding domain of the protein. The low dissociation
constant for the complex between Fe(3+)- or Fe(2+)-heme and the reduced dithiol
state of the protein (K(d) = ~ 20 nM) is in the range of the intracellular free
heme concentration. We also determined that the Fe(2+)-heme bound to the
ligand-binding domain of Rev-erbß has high affinity for CO (K(d) = 60 nM), which 
replaces one of the internal ligands when bound. We suggest that this
thiol-disulfide redox switch is one mechanism by which oxidative stress is linked
to circadian and/or metabolic imbalance. Heme dissociation from Rev-erbß has been
shown to derepress the expression of target genes in response to changes in
intracellular redox conditions. We propose that oxidative stress leads to
oxidation of cysteine(s), thus releasing heme from Rev-erbß and altering its
transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC3039370
PMID: 21123168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2010 Nov;109(5):1328-36. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.01327.2009. Epub 2010 Sep 16.

Circadian regulation of locomotor activity and skeletal muscle gene expression in
the horse.

Martin AM(1), Elliott JA, Duffy P, Blake CM, Ben Attia S, Katz LM, Browne JA,
Gath V, McGivney BA, Hill EW, Murphy BA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture, Food Science and Veterinary Medicine, University
College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland.

Circadian rhythms are innate 24-h cycles in behavioral and biochemical processes 
that permit physiological anticipation of daily environmental changes.
Elucidating the relationship between activity rhythms and circadian patterns of
gene expression may contribute to improved human and equine athletic performance.
Six healthy, untrained mares were studied to determine whether locomotor activity
behavior and skeletal muscle gene expression reflect endogenous circadian
regulation. Activity was recorded for three consecutive 48-h periods: as a group 
at pasture (P), and individually stabled under a light-dark (LD) cycle and in
constant darkness (DD). Halter-mounted Actiwatch-L data-loggers recorded light
exposure and motor activity. Analysis of mean activity (average counts/min,
activity bouts/day, average bout length) and cosinor parameters (acrophase,
amplitude, mesor, goodness of fit) revealed a predominantly ultradian (8.9 ± 0.7 
bouts/24 h) and weakly circadian pattern of activity in all three conditions (P, 
LD, DD). A more robust circadian pattern was observed during LD and DD. Muscle
biopsies were obtained from the middle gluteal muscles every 4 h for 24 h under
DD. One-way qRT-PCR results confirmed the circadian expression (P < 0.05) of six 
core clock genes (Arntl, Per1, Per2, Nr1d1, Nr1d2, Dbp) and the muscle-specific
transcript, Myf6. Additional genes, Ucp3, Nrip1, and Vegfa, demonstrated P values
approaching significance. These findings demonstrate circadian regulation of
muscle function and imply that human management regimes may strengthen, or
unmask, equine circadian behavioral outputs. As exercise synchronizes circadian
rhythms, our findings provide a basis for future work determining peak times for 
training and competing horses, to reduce injury and to achieve optimal
performance.

PMID: 20847133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Aug 31;107(35):15643-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1003878107. Epub 2010 Aug 23.

Noninvasive method for assessing the human circadian clock using hair follicle
cells.

Akashi M(1), Soma H, Yamamoto T, Tsugitomi A, Yamashita S, Yamamoto T, Nishida E,
Yasuda A, Liao JK, Node K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Time Studies, Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi 753-8511,
Japan. akashima@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp

A thorough understanding of the circadian clock requires qualitative evaluation
of circadian clock gene expression. Thus far, no simple and effective method for 
detecting human clock gene expression has become available. This limitation has
greatly hampered our understanding of human circadian rhythm. Here we report a
convenient, reliable, and less invasive method for detecting human clock gene
expression using biopsy samples of hair follicle cells from the head or chin. We 
show that the circadian phase of clock gene expression in hair follicle cells
accurately reflects that of individual behavioral rhythms, demonstrating that
this strategy is appropriate for evaluating the human peripheral circadian clock.
Furthermore, using this method, we indicate that rotating shift workers suffer
from a serious time lag between circadian gene expression rhythms and lifestyle. 
Qualitative evaluation of clock gene expression in hair follicle cells,
therefore, may be an effective approach for studying the human circadian clock in
the clinical setting.

PMCID: PMC2932591
PMID: 20798039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Oct 30;388(4):654-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.08.045. Epub 2009 Aug 12.

Rev-erb beta regulates the Srebp-1c promoter and mRNA expression in skeletal
muscle cells.

Ramakrishnan SN(1), Lau P, Crowther LM, Cleasby ME, Millard S, Leong GM, Cooney
GJ, Muscat GE.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, St. Lucia,
Qld 4072, Australia.

The nuclear hormone receptor, Rev-erb beta operates as a transcriptional
silencer. We previously demonstrated that exogenous expression of Rev-erb
betaDeltaE in skeletal muscle cells increased Srebp-1c mRNA expression. We
validated these in vitro observations by injection of an expression vector
driving Rev-erb betaDeltaE expression into mouse tibialis muscle that resulted in
increased Srebp-1c mRNA expression. Paradoxically, Rev-erb beta siRNA expression 
in skeletal muscle cells repressed Srebp-1c expression, and indicated that
Rev-erb beta expression was necessary for Srebp-1c expression. ChIP analysis
demonstrated that Rev-erb beta was recruited to the Srebp-1c promoter. Moreover, 
Rev-erb beta trans-activated the Srebp-1c promoter, in contrast, Rev-erb beta
efficiently repressed the Rev-erb alpha promoter, a previously characterized
target gene. Finally, treatment with the Rev-erb agonist (hemin) (i) increased
the trans-activation of the Srebp-1c promoter by Rev-erb beta; and (ii) increased
Rev-erb beta and Srebp-1c mRNA expression. These data suggest that Rev-erb beta
has the potential to activate gene expression, and is a positive regulator of
Srebp-1c, a regulator of lipogenesis.

PMID: 19682428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2009 Nov;15(11):1721-36. doi: 10.1002/ibd.20999.

Balancing inflammatory, lipid, and xenobiotic signaling pathways by VSL#3, a
biotherapeutic agent, in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease.

Reiff C(1), Delday M, Rucklidge G, Reid M, Duncan G, Wohlgemuth S, Hörmannsperger
G, Loh G, Blaut M, Collie-Duguid E, Haller D, Kelly D.

Author information: 
(1)Rowett Institute of Nutrition and Health, Aberdeen University, Aberdeen, UK.

BACKGROUND: The interleukin 10 knockout mouse (IL10-KO) is a model of human
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) used to study host microbial interactions and
the action of potential therapeutics. Using Affymetrix data analysis, important
signaling pathways and transcription factors relevant to gut inflammation and
antiinflammatory probiotics were identified.
METHODS: Affymetrix microarray analysis on both wildtype (WT) and IL10-KO mice
orally administered with and without the probiotic VSL#3 was performed and the
results validated by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
immunocytochemistry, proteomics, and histopathology. Changes in metabolically
active bacteria were assessed with denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis
(DGGE).
RESULTS: Inflammation in IL10-KO mice was characterized by differential
regulation of inflammatory, nuclear receptor, lipid, and xenobiotic signaling
pathways. Probiotic intervention resulted in downregulation of CXCL9 (fold change
[FC] = -3.98, false discovery rate [FDR] = 0.019), CXCL10 (FC = -4.83, FDR =
0.0008), CCL5 (FC = -3.47, FDR = 0.017), T-cell activation (Itgal [FC = -4.72,
FDR = 0.00009], Itgae [FC = -2.54 FDR = 0.0044]) and the autophagy gene IRGM (FC 
= -1.94, FDR = 0.01), a recently identified susceptibility gene in human IBD.
Consistent with a marked reduction in integrins, probiotic treatment decreased
the number of CCL5+ CD3+ double-positive T cells and upregulated galectin2, which
triggers apoptosis of activated T cells. Importantly, genes associated with lipid
and PPAR signaling (PPARalpha [FC = 2.36, FDR = 0.043], PPARGC1alpha [FC = 2.58, 
FDR = 0.016], Nr1d2 [FC = 3.11, FDR = 0.0067]) were also upregulated. Altered
microbial diversity was noted in probiotic-treated mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Bioinformatics analysis revealed important immune response,
phagocytic and inflammatory pathways dominated by elevation of T-helper cell 1
type (TH1) transcription factors in IL10-KO mice. Probiotic intervention resulted
in a site-specific reduction of these pathways but importantly upregulated PPAR, 
xenobiotic, and lipid signaling genes, potential antagonists of NF-kappaB
inflammatory pathways.

PMID: 19639558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biochemistry. 2009 Jul 28;48(29):7056-71. doi: 10.1021/bi900697c.

Nuclear receptors homo sapiens Rev-erbbeta and Drosophila melanogaster E75 are
thiolate-ligated heme proteins which undergo redox-mediated ligand switching and 
bind CO and NO.

Marvin KA(1), Reinking JL, Lee AJ, Pardee K, Krause HM, Burstyn JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1101 University
Avenue, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Nuclear receptors E75, which regulates development in Drosophila melanogaster,
and Rev-erbbeta, which regulates circadian rhythm in humans, bind heme within
their ligand binding domains (LBD). The heme-bound ligand binding domains of E75 
and Rev-erbbeta were studied using electronic absorption, MCD, resonance Raman,
and EPR spectroscopies. Both proteins undergo redox-dependent ligand switching
and CO- and NO-induced ligand displacement. In the Fe(III) oxidation state, the
nuclear receptor hemes are low spin and 6-coordinate with cysteine(thiolate) as
one of the two axial heme ligands. The sixth ligand is a neutral donor,
presumably histidine. When the heme is reduced to the Fe(II) oxidation state, the
cysteine(thiolate) is replaced by a different neutral donor ligand, whose
identity is not known. CO binds to the Fe(II) heme in both E75(LBD) and
Rev-erbbeta(LBD) opposite a sixth neutral ligand, plausibly the same histidine
that served as the sixth ligand in the Fe(III) state. NO binds to the heme of
both proteins; however, the NO-heme is 5-coordinate in E75 and 6-coordinate in
Rev-erbbeta. These nuclear receptors exhibit coordination characteristics that
are similar to other known redox and gas sensors, suggesting that E75 and
Rev-erbbeta may function in heme-, redox-, or gas-regulated control of cellular
function.

PMCID: PMC2849663
PMID: 19405475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS Biol. 2009 Feb 24;7(2):e43. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000043.

The structural basis of gas-responsive transcription by the human nuclear hormone
receptor REV-ERBbeta.

Pardee KI(1), Xu X, Reinking J, Schuetz A, Dong A, Liu S, Zhang R, Tiefenbach J, 
Lajoie G, Plotnikov AN, Botchkarev A, Krause HM, Edwards A.

Author information: 
(1)Banting and Best Department of Medical Research, The Department of Molecular
Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Heme is a ligand for the human nuclear receptors (NR) REV-ERBalpha and
REV-ERBbeta, which are transcriptional repressors that play important roles in
circadian rhythm, lipid and glucose metabolism, and diseases such as diabetes,
atherosclerosis, inflammation, and cancer. Here we show that transcription
repression mediated by heme-bound REV-ERBs is reversed by the addition of nitric 
oxide (NO), and that the heme and NO effects are mediated by the C-terminal
ligand-binding domain (LBD). A 1.9 A crystal structure of the REV-ERBbeta LBD, in
complex with the oxidized Fe(III) form of heme, shows that heme binds in a
prototypical NR ligand-binding pocket, where the heme iron is coordinately bound 
by histidine 568 and cysteine 384. Under reducing conditions, spectroscopic
studies of the heme-REV-ERBbeta complex reveal that the Fe(II) form of the LBD
transitions between penta-coordinated and hexa-coordinated structural states,
neither of which possess the Cys384 bond observed in the oxidized state. In
addition, the Fe(II) LBD is also able to bind either NO or CO, revealing a total 
of at least six structural states of the protein. The binding of known
co-repressors is shown to be highly dependent upon these various liganded states.
REV-ERBs are thus highly dynamic receptors that are responsive not only to heme, 
but also to redox and gas. Taken together, these findings suggest new mechanisms 
for the systemic coordination of molecular clocks and metabolism. They also raise
the possibility for gas-based therapies for the many disorders associated with
REV-ERB biological functions.

PMCID: PMC2652392
PMID: 19243223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Med Sci (Paris). 2008 Jun-Jul;24(6-7):572-4. doi: 10.1051/medsci/20082467572.

[Heme as a ligand of REVERB alpha and beta nuclear receptors].

[Article in French]

Guillaumond F(1), Teboul M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie et de Physiopathologie des Systèmes Intégrés, CNRS FRE
3094, Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France. fguillau@unice.fr

PMID: 18601870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS Genet. 2008 Feb 29;4(2):e1000023. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000023.

Redundant function of REV-ERBalpha and beta and non-essential role for Bmal1
cycling in transcriptional regulation of intracellular circadian rhythms.

Liu AC(1), Tran HG, Zhang EE, Priest AA, Welsh DK, Kay SA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, Division of Biological Sciences,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of
America.

The mammalian circadian clockwork is composed of a core PER/CRY feedback loop and
additional interlocking loops. In particular, the ROR/REV/Bmal1 loop, consisting 
of ROR activators and REV-ERB repressors that regulate Bmal1 expression, is
thought to "stabilize" core clock function. However, due to functional redundancy
and pleiotropic effects of gene deletions, the role of the ROR/REV/Bmal1 loop has
not been accurately defined. In this study, we examined cell-autonomous circadian
oscillations using combined gene knockout and RNA interference and demonstrated
that REV-ERBalpha and beta are functionally redundant and are required for
rhythmic Bmal1 expression. In contrast, the RORs contribute to Bmal1 amplitude
but are dispensable for Bmal1 rhythm. We provide direct in vivo genetic evidence 
that the REV-ERBs also participate in combinatorial regulation of Cry1 and Rorc
expression, leading to their phase-delay relative to Rev-erbalpha. Thus, the
REV-ERBs play a more prominent role than the RORs in the basic clock mechanism.
The cellular genetic approach permitted testing of the robustness of the
intracellular core clock function. We showed that cells deficient in both
REV-ERBalpha and beta function, or those expressing constitutive BMAL1, were
still able to generate and maintain normal Per2 rhythmicity. Our findings thus
underscore the resilience of the intracellular clock mechanism and provide
important insights into the transcriptional topologies underlying the circadian
clock. Since REV-ERB function and Bmal1 mRNA/protein cycling are not necessary
for basic clock function, we propose that the major role of the ROR/REV/Bmal1
loop and its constituents is to control rhythmic transcription of clock output
genes.

PMCID: PMC2265523
PMID: 18454201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Bone. 2008 May;42(5):861-70. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2007.12.226. Epub 2008 Jan 26.

Circadian mechanisms in murine and human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
following dexamethasone exposure.

Wu X(1), Yu G, Parks H, Hebert T, Goh BC, Dietrich MA, Pelled G, Izadpanah R,
Gazit D, Bunnell BA, Gimble JM.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge, LA, 
USA.

A core group of regulatory factors control circadian rhythms in mammalian cells. 
While the suprachiasmatic nucleus in the brain serves as the central core
circadian oscillator, circadian clocks also exist within peripheral tissues and
cells. A growing body of evidence has demonstrated that >20% of expressed mRNAs
in bone and adipose tissues oscillate in a circadian manner. The current
manuscript reports evidence of the core circadian transcriptional apparatus
within primary cultures of murine and human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem 
cells (BMSCs). Exposure of confluent, quiescent BMSCs to dexamethasone
synchronized the oscillating expression of the mRNAs encoding the albumin D
binding protein (dbp), brain-muscle arnt-like 1 (bmal1), period 3 (per3), rev-erb
alpha (Rev A), and rev-erb beta (Rev B). The genes displayed a mean oscillatory
period of 22.2 to 24.3 h. The acrophase or peak expression of mRNAs encoding
"positive" (bmal1) and "negative" (per3) components of the circadian regulatory
apparatus were out of phase with each other by approximately 8-12 h, consistent
with in vivo observations. In vivo, phosphyrylation by glycogen synthase kinase
3beta (GSK3beta) is known to regulate the turnover of per3 and components of the 
core circadian regulatory apparatus. In vitro addition of lithium chloride, a
GSK3beta inhibitor, significantly shifted the acrophase of all genes by 4.2-4.7 h
oscillation in BMSCs; however, only the male murine BMSCs displayed a significant
increase in the length of the period of oscillation. We conclude that human and
murine BMSCs represent a valid in vitro model for the analysis of circadian
mechanisms in bone metabolism and stem cell biology.

PMCID: PMC2423188
PMID: 18302991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Jul;22(7):1509-20. doi: 10.1210/me.2007-0519. Epub 2008 Jan 
24.

Nuclear hormone receptors for heme: REV-ERBalpha and REV-ERBbeta are
ligand-regulated components of the mammalian clock.

Burris TP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Receptor Biology Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center,
Louisiana State University System, Baton Rouge, LA 70808, USA.
Thomas.burris@pbrc.edu

The nuclear hormone receptors (NHRs), REV-ERBalpha and REV-ERBbeta, regulate a
number of physiological functions including the circadian rhythm, lipid
metabolism, and cellular differentiation. These two receptors lack the activation
function-2 region that is associated with the ability of NHRs to recruit
coactivators and activate target gene transcription. These NHRs have been
characterized as constitutive repressors of transcription due to their lack of an
identified ligand and their strong ability to recruit the corepressor, nuclear
receptor corepressor. Recently, the porphyrin heme was demonstrated to function
as a ligand for both REV-ERBs. Heme binds directly to the ligand-binding domain
and regulates the ability of these NHRs to recruit nuclear receptor corepressor
to target gene promoters. This review focuses on the physiological roles that
these two receptors play and the implications of heme functioning as their
ligand. The prospect that these NHRs, now known to be regulated by small molecule
ligands, may be targets for development of drugs for treatment of diseases
associated with aberrant circadian rhythms including metabolic and psychiatric
disorders as well as cancer is also addressed.

PMID: 18218725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 22;283(8):4535-42. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

The circadian clock component BMAL1 is a critical regulator of p21WAF1/CIP1
expression and hepatocyte proliferation.

Gréchez-Cassiau A(1), Rayet B, Guillaumond F, Teboul M, Delaunay F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie et Physiopathologie des Systèmes Intégrés, Université 
de Nice-Sophia-Antipolis, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 06108
Nice cedex 2, France.

Most living organisms show circadian (approximately 24 h) rhythms in physiology
and behavior. These oscillations are generated by endogenous circadian clocks,
present in virtually all cells where they control key biological processes.
Although circadian gating of mitosis has been reported for many years in some
peripheral tissues, the underlying molecular mechanisms have remained poorly
understood. Here we show that the cell cycle inhibitor p21WAF1/CIP1 is
rhythmically expressed in mouse peripheral organs. This rhythmic pattern of mRNA 
and protein expression was recapitulated in vitro in serum-shocked differentiated
skeletal muscle cells. p21WAF1/CIP1 circadian expression is dramatically
increased and no longer rhythmic in clock-deficient Bmal1-/- knock-out mice.
Biochemical and genetic data show that oscillation of p21WAF1/CIP1 gene
transcription is regulated by the antagonistic activities of the orphan nuclear
receptors REV-ERBalpha/beta and RORalpha4/gamma, which are core clock regulators.
Importantly, p21WAF1/CIP1 overexpressing Bmal1-/- primary hepatocytes exhibit a
decreased proliferation rate. This phenotype could be reversed using small
interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of p21WAF1/CIP1. These data establish a novel 
molecular link between clock and cell cycle genes and suggest that the G1
progression phase is a target of the circadian clock during liver cell
proliferation.

PMID: 18086663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2007 Nov;15(11):2560-70.

Induction of circadian gene expression in human subcutaneous adipose-derived stem
cells.

Wu X(1), Zvonic S, Floyd ZE, Kilroy G, Goh BC, Hernandez TL, Eckel RH, Mynatt RL,
Gimble JM.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana 70808, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Genes encoding the circadian transcriptional apparatus exhibit robust 
oscillatory expression in murine adipose tissues. This study tests the hypothesis
that human subcutaneous adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) provide an in vitro
model in which to monitor the activity of the core circadian transcriptional
apparatus.
RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: Primary cultures of undifferentiated or
adipocyte-differentiated ASCs were treated with dexamethasone, rosiglitazone, or 
30% fetal bovine serum. The response of undifferentiated ASCs to dexamethasone
was further evaluated in the presence of lithium chloride. Lithium inhibits
glycogen synthase kinase 3, a key component of the circadian apparatus. Total RNA
was harvested at 4-hour intervals over 48 hours and examined by real-time reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Adipocyte-differentiated cells responded more rapidly to treatments than
their donor-matched undifferentiated controls; however, the period of the
circadian gene oscillation was longer in the adipocyte-differentiated cells.
Dexamethasone generated circadian gene expression patterns with mean periods of
25.4 and 26.7 hours in undifferentiated and adipocyte-differentiated ASCs,
respectively. Both rosiglitazone and serum shock generated a significantly longer
period in adipocyte-differentiated ASCs relative to undifferentiated ASCs. The
Bmal1 profile was phase-shifted by approximately 8 to 12 hours relative to Per1, 
Per3, and Cry2, consistent with their expression in vivo. Lithium chloride
inhibited adipogenesis and significantly lengthened the period of Per3 and
Rev-erbalpha gene expression profiles by >5 hours in dexamethasone-activated
undifferentiated ASCs.
DISCUSSION: These results support the initial hypothesis and validate ASCs as an 
in vitro model for the analysis of circadian biology in human adipose tissue.

PMID: 18070747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2007 Dec;14(12):1207-13. Epub 2007 Nov 25.

Identification of heme as the ligand for the orphan nuclear receptors
REV-ERBalpha and REV-ERBbeta.

Raghuram S(1), Stayrook KR, Huang P, Rogers PM, Nosie AK, McClure DB, Burris LL, 
Khorasanizadeh S, Burris TP, Rastinejad F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Center for Molecular Design, University of
Virginia Health System, 1300 Jefferson Park Avenue, Charlottesville, Virginia
22908-0733, USA.

The nuclear receptors REV-ERBalpha (encoded by NR1D1) and REV-ERBbeta (NR1D2)
have remained orphans owing to the lack of identified physiological ligands. Here
we show that heme is a physiological ligand of both receptors. Heme associates
with the ligand-binding domains of the REV-ERB receptors with a 1:1 stoichiometry
and enhances the thermal stability of the proteins. Results from experiments of
heme depletion in mammalian cells indicate that heme binding to REV-ERB causes
the recruitment of the co-repressor NCoR, leading to repression of target genes
including BMAL1 (official symbol ARNTL), an essential component of the circadian 
oscillator. Heme extends the known types of ligands used by the human nuclear
receptor family beyond the endocrine hormones and dietary lipids described so
far. Our results further indicate that heme regulation of REV-ERBs may link the
control of metabolism and the mammalian clock.

PMCID: PMC2743565
PMID: 18037887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Feb;1783(2):224-36. Epub 2007 Oct 4.

The orphan nuclear receptor Rev-erbbeta recruits Tip60 and HDAC1 to regulate
apolipoprotein CIII promoter.

Wang J(1), Liu N, Liu Z, Li Y, Song C, Yuan H, Li YY, Zhao X, Lu H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200433, China.

Nuclear hormone receptors function as ligand activated transcription factors.
Ligand binding and modification such as acetylation have been reported to
regulate nuclear hormone receptors. The orphan receptors, Rev-erbalpha and
Rev-erbbeta, are members of the nuclear receptor superfamily and act as
transcriptional repressors. In this study, the role of recruitment of co-factors 
by Rev-erbbeta and acetylation of Rev-erbbeta in modulating apolipoprotein CIII
(apoCIII) transcription were investigated. Rev-erbbeta was found to
transcriptionally repress apoCIII after binding to the apoCIII promoter. Tip60, a
histone acetyl-transferase (HAT), was a novel binding partner for Rev-erbbeta and
recruited to the apoCIII promoter by Rev-erbbeta. Tip60 was able to acetylate
Rev-erbbeta and relieve the apoCIII repression mediated by Rev-erbbeta. This
de-repression effect depended on acetylation of Rev-erbbeta at its RXKK motif by 
Tip60. In addition, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) interacted with Rev-erbbeta and
was recruited to the apoCIII promoter by Rev-erbbeta to antagonize Tip60's
activity. Taken together, we have provided evidence that Rev-erbbeta modulates
the apoCIII gene expression by recruiting different transcription co-activator or
co-repressor.

PMID: 17996965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. FEBS J. 2007 Oct;274(20):5370-81. Epub 2007 Sep 24.

A zinc finger HIT domain-containing protein, ZNHIT-1, interacts with orphan
nuclear hormone receptor Rev-erbbeta and removes Rev-erbbeta-induced inhibition
of apoCIII transcription.

Wang J(1), Li Y, Zhang M, Liu Z, Wu C, Yuan H, Li YY, Zhao X, Lu H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.

The orphan receptors, Rev-erbalpha and Rev-erbbeta, are members of the nuclear
receptor superfamily and specifically repress apolipoprotein CIII (apoCIII) gene 
expression in rats and humans. Moreover, Rev-erbalpha null mutant mice have
elevated very low density lipoprotein triacylglycerol and apoCIII levels.
However, ligands for Rev-erb are unknown and the regulatory mechanism of Rev-erb 
is poorly understood. Conceivably, cofactors for Rev-erb may play an important
role in the regulation of lipid metabolism. In this study, a zinc finger HIT
domain-containing protein, ZNHIT-1, interacted with Rev-erbbeta. ZNHIT-1 was
found to be a conserved protein in eukaryotes and was highly abundant in human
liver. Furthermore, ZNHIT-1 was identified as a nuclear protein. Serial truncated
fragments and substitution mutations established a putative nuclear localization 
signal at amino acids 38-47 of ZNHIT-1. A putative ligand-binding domain of
Rev-erbbeta and the FxxLL motif of ZNHIT-1 were required for their interaction.
Finally, ZNHIT-1 was recruited by Rev-erbbeta to the apoCIII promoter and removed
the Rev-erbbeta-induced inhibition of apoCIII transcription. These findings
demonstrate that ZNHIT-1 functions as a cofactor to regulate the activity of
Rev-erbbeta, and may play a role in lipid metabolism.

PMID: 17892483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Mol Biol. 2007 Oct 26;373(3):735-44. Epub 2007 Aug 22.

Structural insight into the constitutive repression function of the nuclear
receptor Rev-erbbeta.

Woo EJ(1), Jeong DG, Lim MY, Jun Kim S, Kim KJ, Yoon SM, Park BC, Ryu SE.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology (KRIBB), 52 Eoeun-dong, Yuseonggu, Daejeon, Korea.
ejwoo@kribb.re.kr

The Rev-erb family is an orphan nuclear receptor acting as a negative regulator
of transcription. Rev-erbalpha and Rev-erbbeta are crucial components of the
circadian clock and involved in various lipid homeostasis. They are unique
nuclear receptors that lack the activation function 2 helix (AF2-helix) required 
for ligand-dependent activation by other members of nuclear receptors. Here, we
report the crystal structure of Rev-erbbeta (NR1D2) in a dimeric arrangement. The
putative ligand-binding pocket (LBP) of Rev-erbbeta is filled with bulky
hydrophobic residues resulting in a residual cavity size that is too small to
allow binding of any known ligand molecules. However, an alternative conformation
of the putative LBP observed in another crystal form suggests the flexibility of 
this region. The kinked conformation of helix H11 allows helix H11 to bend toward
helix H3 over the putative ligand binding pocket by filling and closing the
cavity with its side-chains. In the absence of the AF2-helix and a cognate
ligand, Rev-erbbeta appears to stabilize the hydrophobic cluster in the putative 
ligand binding pocket and provide a structural platform for co-repressor binding 
by adopting the unique geometry of helix H11, a suitable conformation for the
constitutive repression activity.

PMID: 17870090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Nucl Recept Signal. 2006;4:e009. Epub 2006 Apr 28.

The orphan Rev-erb nuclear receptors: a link between metabolism, circadian rhythm
and inflammation?

Ramakrishnan SN(1), Muscat GE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Division of Molecular Genetics and
Development, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Australia.

Nuclear hormone receptors (NRs) function as ligand dependent DNA binding proteins
that translate physiological/nutritional signals into gene regulation.
Dysfunctional NR signaling leads to many disorders in reproduction, inflammation,
and metabolism. The opportunity to identify novel regulatory pathways in the
context of human health and disease drives the challenge to unravel the
biological function of the "orphan nuclear hormone receptors". For example, the
Rev-erb (NR1D) subgroup (Rev-erbalpha/NR1D1 and Rev-erbbeta/NR1D2) of orphan NRs 
are transcriptional silencers and negative regulators of RORalpha mediated
trans-activation. The NR1D subgroup is highly enriched in peripheral tissues with
onerous energy demands including skeletal muscle, brown and white adipose, brain,
liver and kidney. This alludes to the involvement of this subgroup in metabolism.
In this context, Rev-erbalpha-/- mice have a dyslipidemic phenotype. Recent
studies in vascular smooth and skeletal muscle cells also suggest that the NR1D
subgroup modulates inflammation by regulating IkappaBalpha/NFkappaB dependent
gene expression. Rev-erbalpha has been identified as a critical regulator (and
target) of circadian rhythm, a factor in blood pressure control and inflammation.
Finally, two recent reports have demonstrated: (i) lithium mediated regulation of
Rev-erbalpha stability and (ii) E75 (the Drosophila orthologue of human
Rev-erbalpha) is tightly bound by heme, and functions as a "gas sensor" through
interaction with CO/NO and interferes with the repression of DHR3 (the Drosophila
orthologue of human RORalpha). In conclusion, the role of these receptors at the 
cross-roads of metabolism, inflammation, and circadian cycling underscores the
importance of understanding the organ-specific function of the NR1D subgroup in
homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC1472670
PMID: 16741567  [PubMed]


48. Eur J Dermatol. 2005 Jul-Aug;15(4):251-7.

Gene expression profiling of peripheral blood mononuclear leukocytes from
psoriasis patients identifies new immune regulatory molecules.

Koczan D(1), Guthke R, Thiesen HJ, Ibrahim SM, Kundt G, Krentz H, Gross G, Kunz
M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, University of Rostock, Schillingallee 70, 18055
Rostock, Germany.

In the present report gene expression profiling of peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) from psoriasis patients suffering from severe generalized disease
was performed comparing diseased stage with cured stage. By this means, 18 genes 
were identified which showed differential expression. The most significant
differences were found for IL-8, annexin A3, cycloxygenase-2 (COX-2), cell cycle 
regulator G0S2, and pre-B cell enhancing factor (PBEF), all of which showed
upregulation in the diseased stage. Microarray data were confirmed by real-time
RT-PCR. Further analyses using support vector machines identified three pairs of 
genes (IL-8 - CDKN1C/p57, cyclooxygenase-2 - NR1D2, and desmocollin-2 -
CDKN1C/p57) which allowed an accuracy of disease stage prediction of 86%, based
on gene expression patterns. Taken together, this is the first large-scale gene
expression study of psoriasis PBMC identifying candidate genes that might
contribute to psoriasis immunopathogenesis. The genes identified in the present
report and the molecular mechanisms underlying their regulation might serve as
future targets for therapeutic intervention in psoriasis.

PMID: 16048752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 11;280(10):8651-9. Epub 2004 Dec 28.

Rev-erbbeta regulates the expression of genes involved in lipid absorption in
skeletal muscle cells: evidence for cross-talk between orphan nuclear receptors
and myokines.

Ramakrishnan SN(1), Lau P, Burke LJ, Muscat GE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Division of Molecular Genetics and
Development, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia.

Rev-erbbeta is an orphan nuclear receptor that selectively blocks
trans-activation mediated by the retinoic acid-related orphan receptor-alpha
(RORalpha). RORalpha has been implicated in the regulation of high density
lipoprotein cholesterol, lipid homeostasis, and inflammation. Reverbbeta and
RORalpha are expressed in similar tissues, including skeletal muscle; however,
the pathophysiological function of Rev-erbbeta has remained obscure. We
hypothesize from the similar expression patterns, target genes, and overlapping
cognate sequences of these nuclear receptors that Rev-erbbeta regulates lipid
metabolism in skeletal muscle. This lean tissue accounts for >30% of total body
weight and 50% of energy expenditure. Moreover, this metabolically demanding
tissue is a primary site of glucose disposal, fatty acid oxidation, and
cholesterol efflux. Consequently, muscle has a significant role in insulin
sensitivity, obesity, and the blood-lipid profile. We utilize ectopic expression 
in skeletal muscle cells to understand the regulatory role of Rev-erbbeta in this
major mass peripheral tissue. Exogenous expression of a dominant negative version
of mouse Rev-erbbeta decreases the expression of many genes involved in fatty
acid/lipid absorption (including Cd36, and Fabp-3 and -4). Interestingly, we
observed a robust induction (>15-fold) in mRNA expression of interleukin-6, an
"exercise-induced myokine" that regulates energy expenditure and inflammation.
Furthermore, we observed the dramatic repression (>20-fold) of myostatin mRNA,
another myokine that is a negative regulator of muscle hypertrophy and
hyperplasia that impacts on body fat accumulation. This study implicates
Rev-erbbeta in the control of lipid and energy homoeostasis in skeletal muscle.
In conclusion, we speculate that selective modulators of Rev-erbbeta may have
therapeutic utility in the treatment of dyslipidemia and regulation of muscle
growth.

PMID: 15623503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Genomics. 1999 Apr 15;57(2):289-92.

Linkage of the nuclear hormone receptor genes NR1D2, THRB, and RARB: evidence for
an ancient, large-scale duplication.

Koh YS(1), Moore DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The THRA gene encoding thyroid hormone receptor alpha shares an unusual partial
overlap with the NR1D1 gene encoding the orphan receptor Rev-ErbAalpha. Though
THRA and NR1D1 have close relatives in THRB and NR1D2, which encode TRbeta and
Rev-ErbAbeta, these beta isoforms do not share an analogous overlap. Here we
report that the human THRB and NR1D2 genes are separated by approximately 1 Mb on
chromosome 3 and that these two genes are also linked to the RARB gene, which
encodes retinoic acid receptor beta. Since previous results indicate that the
THRA/NR1D1 locus is also linked to the RARA gene, these results suggest that the 
two receptor gene clusters were generated by a single large-scale duplication.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10198169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Aug;8(8):996-1005.

A new orphan member of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily closely related
to Rev-Erb.

Dumas B(1), Harding HP, Choi HS, Lehmann KA, Chung M, Lazar MA, Moore DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114.

We have isolated complementary DNA clones encoding a novel orphan member of the
nuclear receptor superfamily, termed BD73. This protein shows strong amino acid
sequence similarity to the previously described Rev-ErbA alpha. Unlike Rev-Erb,
in which the opposite strand of the C-terminal coding region encodes the
C-terminal portion of a variant thyroid hormone receptor isoform, the opposite
strand of the C-terminal coding region of BD73 does not have any extensive open
reading frames. BD73 messenger RNA is expressed in a wide variety of tissues and 
cell lines. In quiescent HepG2 cells, BD73 messenger RNA levels are strongly
induced by planar aromatic antioxidants. Like Rev-Erb, BD73 binds as a monomer to
a DNA sequence which consists of a specific A/T-rich sequence upstream of the
consensus hexameric half-site specified by the P box of the DNA-binding domain.
Amino acid sequence comparisons suggest that the A box sequence, which has been
suggested to mediate monomer binding by other superfamily members, lies closer to
the DNA-binding domain in BD73 and Rev-Erb than in other receptors. Under the
conditions examined, neither BD73 nor Rev-Erb activated reporters containing
multiple copies of their common binding site. Thus, these two orphans may require
an as yet unidentified ligand or other signal for such activation. Together, BD73
and Rev-Erb define a subgroup of orphan receptors that bind as monomers to a
half-site flanked by a specific and extended A/T-rich sequence.

PMID: 7997240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


