
1. Cardiovasc Ther. 2016 Apr;34(2):67-75. doi: 10.1111/1755-5922.12171.

Bioinformatics Analyses of Differentially Expressed Genes Associated with Acute
Myocardial Infarction.

Gao Y(1), Qi GX(1), Guo L(1), Sun YX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, China.

BACKGROUND: We aimed to predict key genes associated with acute myocardial
infarction (AMI) by bioinformatics analysis.
METHODS: The microarray data of GSE48060, including peripheral blood samples from
31 first-time AMI patients within 48-h post-MI and 21 normal controls, were
obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus database. The differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) in AMI samples compared with normal controls were identified.
Functional enrichment analysis was then performed, followed by analysis of
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network and transcription regulatory network
(TRN).
RESULTS: A total of 385 up- and 504 down-regulated DEGs were identified. They
were mainly enriched in five pathways, such as natural killer (NK) cell-mediated 
cytotoxicity and chemokine signaling pathway. Chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 5
(CCL5) was hub protein in PPI network. Besides, four transcription factors (TFs),
including nuclear receptor subfamily 2, group C, member 2 (NR2C2), MYC-associated
factor X (MAX), general transcription factor IIIC, polypeptide 2, beta 110 kDa
(GTF3C2), and B-cell CLL/lymphoma 3 (BCL3), were identified. Notably, nuclear
receptor coactivator 7 (NCOA7) interacted with GTF3C2 and MAX directly.
CONCLUSIONS: CCL5, BCL3, NR2C2, MAX, GTF3C2, and NCOA7 might play important roles
in AMI development.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26725916  [PubMed - in process]


2. Neoplasia. 2015 Apr;17(4):339-47. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2015.02.005.

The Differential Effects of Anti-Diabetic Thiazolidinedione on Prostate Cancer
Progression Are Linked to the TR4 Nuclear Receptor Expression Status.

Lin SJ(1), Lin CY(1), Yang DR(2), Izumi K(1), Yan E(1), Niu X(1), Chang HC(1),
Miyamoto H(1), Wang N(1), Li G(3), Chang C(4).

Author information: 
(1)The George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology, Urology,
Radiation Oncology and the Wilmot Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical 
Center, Rochester, NY, USA. (2)The George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research,
Departments of Pathology, Urology, Radiation Oncology and the Wilmot Cancer
Center, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA; Department of
Urology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
(3)The George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology, Urology,
Radiation Oncology and the Wilmot Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical 
Center, Rochester, NY, USA; Department of Urology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address:
ligonghui1970@hotmail.com. (4)The George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research,
Departments of Pathology, Urology, Radiation Oncology and the Wilmot Cancer
Center, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA; Sex Hormone
Research Center, China Medical University/Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. Electronic 
address: chang@urmc.rochester.edu.

The insulin sensitizers, thiazolidinediones (TZDs), have been used as
anti-diabetic drugs since the discovery of their ability to alter insulin
resistance through transactivation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors
(PPARs). However, their side effects in hepatitis, cardiovascular diseases, and
bladder cancer resulted in some selling restrictions in the USA and Europe. Here,
we found that the potential impact of TZDs on the prostate cancer (PCa)
progression might be linked to the TR4 nuclear receptor expression. Clinical
surveys found that 9% of PCa patients had one allele TR4 deletion in their
tumors. TZD increased cell growth and invasion in PCa cells when TR4 was knocked 
down. In contrast, TZD decreased PCa progression in PCa cells with wild type TR4.
Mechanism dissection found that the Harvey Rat Sarcoma (HRAS) oncogene increased 
on TZD treatment of the TR4 knocked-down CWR22Rv1 and C4-2 cells, and
interruption with HRAS inhibitor resulted in reversal of TZD-induced PCa
progression. Together, these results suggest that TZD treatment may promote PCa
progression depending on the TR4 expression status that may be clinically
relevant since extra caution may be needed for those diabetic PCa patients
receiving TZD treatment who have one allele TR4 deletion.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4415117
PMID: 25925376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Bioinformatics. 2015 Aug 1;31(15):2537-44. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv186.
Epub 2015 Apr 2.

Regulatory network inferred using expression data of small sample size:
application and validation in erythroid system.

Zhu F(1), Shi L(2), Engel JD(3), Guan Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (2)State Key Laboratory of Experimental
Hematology, Institute of Hematology and Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin 300020, China.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology. (4)Department of Computational
Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA,
Department of Internal Medicine, and Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

MOTIVATION: Modeling regulatory networks using expression data observed in a
differentiation process may help identify context-specific interactions. The
outcome of the current algorithms highly depends on the quality and quantity of a
single time-course dataset, and the performance may be compromised for datasets
with a limited number of samples.
RESULTS: In this work, we report a multi-layer graphical model that is capable of
leveraging many publicly available time-course datasets, as well as a cell
lineage-specific data with small sample size, to model regulatory networks
specific to a differentiation process. First, a collection of network inference
methods are used to predict the regulatory relationships in individual public
datasets. Then, the inferred directional relationships are weighted and
integrated together by evaluating against the cell lineage-specific dataset. To
test the accuracy of this algorithm, we collected a time-course RNA-Seq dataset
during human erythropoiesis to infer regulatory relationships specific to this
differentiation process. The resulting erythroid-specific regulatory network
reveals novel regulatory relationships activated in erythropoiesis, which were
further validated by genome-wide TR4 binding studies using ChIP-seq. These
erythropoiesis-specific regulatory relationships were not identifiable by single 
dataset-based methods or context-independent integrations. Analysis of the
predicted targets reveals that they are all closely associated with hematopoietic
lineage differentiation.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4514931 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25840044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Immunol. 2015 Apr 1;194(7):3116-26. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401303. Epub 2015
Mar 4.

Demethylation of the RORC2 and IL17A in human CD4+ T lymphocytes defines Th17
origin of nonclassic Th1 cells.

Mazzoni A(1), Santarlasci V(2), Maggi L(2), Capone M(3), Rossi MC(3), Querci
V(3), De Palma R(4), Chang HD(5), Thiel A(6), Cimaz R(7), Liotta F(8), Cosmi
L(8), Maggi E(8), Radbruch A(5), Romagnani S(3), Dong J(5), Annunziato F(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence,
Florence 50134, Italy; DENOTHE Center, University of Florence, Florence 50134,
Italy; Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Second University of
Naples, Naples 80131, Italy; Center for Biomolecular Studies Supporting Human
Health, Second University of Naples, Naples 80131, Italy; (2)Department of
Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, Florence 50134,
Italy; DENOTHE Center, University of Florence, Florence 50134, Italy;
Regenerative Medicine Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Florence 50134, Italy;
(3)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence,
Florence 50134, Italy; DENOTHE Center, University of Florence, Florence 50134,
Italy; (4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Second University of 
Naples, Naples 80131, Italy; Center for Biomolecular Studies Supporting Human
Health, Second University of Naples, Naples 80131, Italy; (5)Cell Biology Group, 
German Rheumatism Research Center Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany; (6)Regenerative 
Immunology and Aging, Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies,
Charité University Medicine Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany; (7)Anna Meyer
Children's Hospital and University of Florence, Florence 50134, Italy; and.
(8)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence,
Florence 50134, Italy; DENOTHE Center, University of Florence, Florence 50134,
Italy; Immunology and Cellular Therapy Unit, Careggi University Hospital,
Florence 50134, Italy. (9)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine,
University of Florence, Florence 50134, Italy; DENOTHE Center, University of
Florence, Florence 50134, Italy; Regenerative Medicine Unit, Careggi University
Hospital, Florence 50134, Italy; francesco.annunziato@unifi.it.

Th17-derived Th1 lymphocytes, termed nonclassic, differ from classic Th1 cells
because of the presence of retinoic acid orphan receptor (ROR)C2 and the surface 
expression of CD161 and CCR6. We demonstrate in this article that nonclassic Th1 
cells, like Th17 cells, have a marked RORC2 and IL17A demethylation, whereas
classic Th1 cells exhibit a complete methylation of these genes. The analysis of 
RORC2 DNA methylation in the CD4(+)CD161(+) and CD4(+)CD161(-) naive Th subsets
from umbilical cord blood surprisingly revealed comparable hypermethylation
levels. PCR analysis at the single-cell level revealed that RORC2 mRNA was
expressed by none of the CD4(+)CD161(-) and present only in a minority of
CD4(+)CD161(+) naive Th cells. These findings provide two important novel
observations on the physiology of human Th17 cells: 1) they confirm at the
epigenetic level the origin of nonclassic Th1 cells from Th17 cells, also
identifying in the RORC2 and IL17A methylation status a novel tool for their
distinction from classic Th1 cells, and 2) they demonstrate that RORC2-expressing
cells are only a minority in the subset of CD4(+)CD161(+) naive Th cells, which
are known to contain all Th17 cell precursors.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25740946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Cancer. 2015 Jan 27;14:16. doi: 10.1186/s12943-014-0281-1.

Targeting TR4 nuclear receptor suppresses prostate cancer invasion via reduction 
of infiltrating macrophages with alteration of the TIMP-1/MMP2/MMP9 signals.

Ding X(1,)(2), Yang DR(3,)(4), Xia L(5), Chen B(6), Yu S(7), Niu Y(8), Wang M(9),
Li G(10), Chang C(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Chawnshang Chang Liver Cancer Center, Sir Run Run
Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310016, China. 
1291128592@qq.com. (2)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of
Pathology, Urology and Radiation Oncology, and The Wilmot Cancer Center,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, 14646, USA.
1291128592@qq.com. (3)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of
Pathology, Urology and Radiation Oncology, and The Wilmot Cancer Center,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, 14646, USA.
doc_ydr@163.com. (4)Department of Urology, the 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, 215004, China. doc_ydr@163.com. (5)Department of Urology and 
Chawnshang Chang Liver Cancer Center, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310016, China.
xialiqun2008@yahoo.com.cn. (6)Department of Urology and Chawnshang Chang Liver
Cancer Center, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, 310016, China. peter1989212@gmail.com. (7)Department of
Urology and Chawnshang Chang Liver Cancer Center, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital,
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310016, China.
yushicheng1982@163.com. (8)Chawnshang Chang Sex Hormone Research Center, Tianjin 
Institute of Urology, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300211, China.
niuyuanjie9317@163.com. (9)Department of Urology and Chawnshang Chang Liver
Cancer Center, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, 310016, China. wmc_32@163.com. (10)Department of Urology
and Chawnshang Chang Liver Cancer Center, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310016, China.
ligonghui1970@hotmail.com. (11)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research,
Departments of Pathology, Urology and Radiation Oncology, and The Wilmot Cancer
Center, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, 14646, USA.
chang@urmc.rochester.edu. (12)Sex Hormone Research Center, China Medical
University/Hospital, Taichung, 404, Taiwan. chang@urmc.rochester.edu.

BACKGROUND: TR4 nuclear receptor 4 (TR4) plays an important role in
macrophages-associated foam cell formation of cardiovascular diseases and
infiltrating macrophages are critical for prostate cancer (PCa) progression.
However, the linkage of macrophages and TR4 and their impacts on PCa metastasis
remains unclear.
RESULTS: Knocking-down TR4 in human PCa cells (C4-2, CWR22Rv1), but not in human 
macrophages cells (THP-1), led to suppress the macrophages infiltration to PCa
cells. The consequences of such suppression of the recruitment of macrophages
toward PCa then resulted in suppressing the PCa cell invasion. Mechanism
dissection found that knocking-down TR4 in PCa cells suppressed
metastasis-related genes including MMP2, with induction of TIMP-1. Interruption
assays using TIMP-1 neutralizing antibody could then reverse
TR4-macrophage-mediated PCa invasion. IHC staining showed higher TR4 level, more 
macrophage infiltration, lower TIMP-1 and stronger MMP2/MMP9 in tumor tissues of 
the Gleason score 5<U+2009>+<U+2009>4 patients compared with the Gleason score 3<U+2009>+<U+2009>3 patients.
CONCLUSION: Targeting TR4 in prostate tumor microenvironment might represent a
potential new therapeutic approach to better battle PCa metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4316804
PMID: 25623427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Blood. 2015 Feb 26;125(9):1477-87. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-10-605022. Epub 2015
Jan 5.

Compound loss of function of nuclear receptors Tr2 and Tr4 leads to induction of 
murine embryonic ß-type globin genes.

Cui S(1), Tanabe O(2), Sierant M(1), Shi L(3), Campbell A(4), Lim KC(1), Engel
JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI; (2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI; Department of Integrative
Genomics Tohoku Medical Megabank, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan; (3)Department
of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, MI; State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of
Hematology and Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and
Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin, China; and. (4)Department of Pediatrics
and Infectious Diseases, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI.

The orphan nuclear receptors TR2 and TR4 have been shown to play key roles in
repressing the embryonic and fetal globin genes in erythroid cells. However,
combined germline inactivation of Tr2 and Tr4 leads to periimplantation lethal
demise in inbred mice. Hence, we have previously been unable to examine the
consequences of their dual loss of function in adult definitive erythroid cells. 
To circumvent this issue, we generated conditional null mutants in both genes and
performed gene inactivation in vitro in adult bone marrow cells. Compound Tr2/Tr4
loss of function led to induced expression of the embryonic ey and ßh1 globins
(murine counterparts of the human e- and <U+03B3>-globin genes). Additionally, TR2/TR4
function is required for terminal erythroid cell maturation. Loss of TR2/TR4
abolished their occupancy on the ey and ßh1 gene promoters, and concurrently
impaired co-occupancy by interacting corepressors. These data strongly support
the hypothesis that the TR2/TR4 core complex is an adult stage-specific,
gene-selective repressor of the embryonic globin genes. Detailed mechanistic
understanding of the roles of TR2/TR4 and their cofactors in embryonic and fetal 
globin gene repression may ultimately enhance the discovery of novel therapeutic 
agents that can effectively inhibit their transcriptional activity and be safely 
applied to the treatment of ß-globinopathies.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4342359
PMID: 25561507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. FEBS Lett. 2014 Nov 3;588(21):3947-53. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.09.007. Epub
2014 Sep 19.

TR4 promotes fatty acid synthesis in 3T3-L1 adipocytes by activation of pyruvate 
carboxylase expression.

Park SS(1), Kim SJ(1), Choi H(1), Chang C(2), Kim E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Chonnam
National University, South Korea. (2)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer
Research, Departments of Pathology and Urology, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, College
of Natural Sciences, Chonnam National University, South Korea. Electronic
address: ekim@chonnam.ac.kr.

We show that testicular orphan nuclear receptor 4 (TR4) increases the expression 
of pyruvate carboxylase (PC) gene in 3T3-L1 adipocytes by direct binding to a TR4
responsive element in the murine PC promoter. While TR4 overexpression increased 
PC activity, oxaloacetate (OAA) and glycerol levels with enhanced incorporation
of (14)C from (14)C-pyruvate into fatty acids in 3T3-L1 adipocytes, PC knockdown 
by short interfering RNA (siRNA) or inhibition of PC activity by phenylacetic
acid (PAA) abolished TR4-enhanced fatty acid synthesis. Moreover, TR4 microRNA
reduced PC expression with decreased fatty acid synthesis in 3T3-L1 adipocytes,
suggesting that TR4-mediated enhancement of fatty acid synthesis in adipocytes
requires increased expression of PC gene.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25240193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cancer Gene Ther. 2014 Oct;21(10):411-5. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2014.41. Epub 2014 Aug 
8.

The role of testicular nuclear receptor 4 in chemo-resistance of docetaxel in
castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Chen B(1), Yu S(1), Ding X(1), Jing C(1), Xia L(1), Wang M(1), Matro E(1), Rehman
F(1), Niu Y(2), Li G(1), Chang C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Chawnshang Chang Liver Cancer Center, Sir Run Run
Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Chawnshang Chang Sex Hormone Research Center, Department of Urology, The 2nd
affiliated hospital of Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China. (3)1]
Department of Urology and Chawnshang Chang Liver Cancer Center, Sir Run Run Shaw 
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China [2] George
Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology, Urology and Radiation 
Oncology, and The Wilmot Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, NY, USA.

Docetaxel-based therapy is one of the first-line options for castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC). However, a large proportion of CRPC patients show
different extents of docetaxel resistance. The current study aims to investigate 
the role of testicular nuclear receptor 4 (TR4) in docetaxel resistance in CRPC. 
TR4 expression level in prostate biopsy samples from CRPC patients treated with
docetaxel was measured by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Alternation of TR4
expression in prostate cancer (PCa) cell line PC3 was applied to find out the
influence of TR4 on half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50), cell viability 
and cell apoptosis. Patients who failed to achieve prostate-specific antigen
(PSA) response (<50% PSA reduction from baseline) after docetaxel-based
chemotherapy had a comparatively higher TR4 expression than those who achieved
PSA response (<U+2A7E>50% PSA reduction from baseline). Knocking down TR4 in PC3 cells
led to a lower IC50 dose, poorer cell viability and more cell apoptosis when
treated with docetaxel, whereas overexpression of TR4 in PC3 led to a higher IC50
dose, better cell viability and less cell apoptosis. TR4 enhances the
chemo-resistance of docetaxel in CRPC. It may serve as a biomarker to determine
the prognosis of docetaxel-based therapy and as a potential therapy target to
combine with docetaxel to better suppress CRPC.

PMID: 25104727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Int J Cancer. 2015 Feb 15;136(4):955-64. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29049. Epub 2014 Jul
14.

TR4 nuclear receptor promotes prostate cancer metastasis via upregulation of
CCL2/CCR2 signaling.

Ding X(1), Yang DR, Lee SO, Chen YL, Xia L, Lin SJ, Yu S, Niu YJ, Li G, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)Chawnshang Chang Liver Cancer Center, Department of Urology, Sir Run Run Shaw 
Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejang University, Hangzhou, China; George Whipple
Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology, Urology, and Radiation
Oncology, and The Wilmot Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, NY.

Testicular nuclear receptor 4 (TR4) plays protective roles against oxidative
stress and DNA damage and might contribute to aging. Our recent clinical tumor
tissue staining results showed higher expression of TR4 in prostate cancer (PCa) 
patients with high Gleason scores compared to the tissues with the low Gleason
scores. In vitro migration/invasion assays after manipulation of the TR4
expression in PCa cells showed that TR4 promoted PCa cells migration/invasion.
Mechanism dissection found that the CCL2/CCR2 signal plays the key role in the
mediation of TR4-promoted PCa cells migration/invasion. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and Luciferase assays further confirmed TR4 modulation of
CCL2 at the transcriptional level and addition of the CCR2 antagonist led to
interruption of the TR4-enhanced PCa cells migration/invasion. Finally, the
orthotopic xenografted mice studies using the luciferase expressing CWR22Rv1
cells found that TR4 enhanced PCa metastasis and this increased metastasis was
reversed when the CCR2 antagonist was injected into the mice. Together, these in 
vitro and in vivo results revealed a positive role of TR4 in PCa metastasis and
demonstrated CCL2/CCR2 signaling as an important mediator in exerting TR4 action.
This finding suggests that TR4 may represent a biomarker related to PCa
metastasis and targeting the TR4-CCL2/CCR2 axis may become a new therapeutic
approach to battle PCa metastasis.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 24975468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Immunol. 2014 Jul 1;193(1):295-305. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400092. Epub 2014
Jun 6.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis keto-mycolic acid and macrophage nuclear receptor TR4 
modulate foamy biogenesis in granulomas: a case of a heterologous and
noncanonical ligand-receptor pair.

Dkhar HK(1), Nanduri R(1), Mahajan S(1), Dave S(1), Saini A(1), Somavarapu AK(1),
Arora A(2), Parkesh R(1), Thakur KG(1), Mayilraj S(1), Gupta P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Council of Scientific and Industrial Research-Institute of Microbial
Technology, Chandigarh 160036, India; and. (2)Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow 226031, India.
(3)Council of Scientific and Industrial Research-Institute of Microbial
Technology, Chandigarh 160036, India; and pawan@imtech.res.in.

The cell wall of Mycobacterium tuberculosis is configured of bioactive lipid
classes that are essential for virulence and potentially involved in the
formation of foamy macrophages (FMs) and granulomas. Our recent work established 
crosstalk between M. tuberculosis cell wall lipids and the host lipid-sensing
nuclear receptor TR4. In this study, we have characterized, identified, and
adopted a heterologous ligand keto-mycolic acid from among M. tuberculosis lipid 
repertoire for the host orphan NR TR4. Crosstalk between cell wall lipids and TR4
was analyzed by transactivation and promoter reporter assays. Mycolic acid (MA)
was found to transactivate TR4 significantly compared with other cell wall
lipids. Among the MA, the oxygenated form, keto-MA, was responsible for
transactivation, and the identity was validated by TR4 binding assays followed by
TLC and nuclear magnetic resonance. Isothermal titration calorimetry revealed
that keto-MA binding to TR4 is energetically favorable. This keto-MA-TR4 axis
seems to be essential to this oxygenated MA induction of FMs and granuloma
formation as evaluated by in vitro and in vivo model of granuloma formation. TR4 
binding with keto-MA features a unique association of host nuclear receptor with 
a bacterial lipid and adds to the presently known ligand repertoire beyond
dietary lipids. Pharmacologic modulation of this heterologous axis may hold
promise as an adjunct therapy to frontline tuberculosis drugs.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 24907344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cell Metab. 2014 Apr 1;19(4):712-21. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2014.03.006.

SIRT7 controls hepatic lipid metabolism by regulating the ubiquitin-proteasome
pathway.

Yoshizawa T(1), Karim MF(1), Sato Y(1), Senokuchi T(2), Miyata K(3), Fukuda T(4),
Go C(1), Tasaki M(5), Uchimura K(6), Kadomatsu T(3), Tian Z(3), Smolka C(7), Sawa
T(8), Takeya M(9), Tomizawa K(10), Ando Y(11), Araki E(12), Akaike T(8), Braun
T(7), Oike Y(3), Bober E(7), Yamagata K(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan. (2)Department of Medical Biochemistry,
Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan;
Department of Metabolic Medicine, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto University, 
Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan. (3)Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Life
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan. (4)Department of Anatomy
and Neurobiology, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto
860-8556, Japan. (5)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan; Department of Immunology and Hematology,
Division of Informative Clinical Science, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan. (6)Department of Nephrology, Faculty of
Life Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan. (7)Department of
Cardiac Development and Remodeling, Max-Planck-Institute for Heart and Lung
Research, Ludwigstr. 43, 61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany. (8)Department of
Microbiology, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-8556,
Japan. (9)Department of Cell Pathology, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan. (10)Department of Molecular Physiology,
Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.
(11)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan. (12)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Faculty of Life
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan. (13)Department of
Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto
860-8556, Japan. Electronic address: k-yamaga@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

Sirtuins (SIRT1-7) have attracted considerable attention as regulators of
metabolism over the past decade. However, the physiological functions and
molecular mechanisms of SIRT7 are poorly understood. Here we demonstrate that
Sirt7 knockout mice were resistant to high-fat diet-induced fatty liver, obesity,
and glucose intolerance, and that hepatic triglyceride accumulation was also
attenuated in liver-specific Sirt7 knockout mice. Hepatic SIRT7 positively
regulated the protein level of TR4/TAK1, a nuclear receptor involved in lipid
metabolism, and as a consequence activated TR4 target genes to increase fatty
acid uptake and triglyceride synthesis/storage. Biochemical studies revealed that
the DDB1-CUL4-associated factor 1 (DCAF1)/damage-specific DNA binding protein 1
(DDB1)/cullin 4B (CUL4B) E3 ubiquitin ligase complex interacted with TR4, leading
to its degradation, while binding of SIRT7 to the DCAF1/DDB1/CUL4B complex
inhibited the degradation of TR4. In conclusion, we propose that hepatic SIRT7
controls lipid metabolism in liver by regulating the ubiquitin-proteasome
pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24703702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Jun;28(6):805-21. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1422. Epub 2014 Apr
4.

Minireview: Pathophysiological roles of the TR4 nuclear receptor: lessons learned
from mice lacking TR4.

Lin SJ(1), Zhang Y, Liu NC, Yang DR, Li G, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research (S.-J.L., Y.Z., N.-C.L., C.C.), 
Departments of Pathology, Urology, Radiation Oncology, and The Wilmot Cancer
Center. University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14646;
Department of Urology (D.-R.Y.), the Second Affiliated Hospital of Suzhou
University, Suzhou, 215004 China; Chawnshang Chang Liver Cancer Center and
Department of Urology (G.L.), Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310016 China; and Sex Hormone Research Center
(C.C.), China Medical University/Hospital, Taichung, 404 Taiwan.

Testicular nuclear receptor 4 (TR4), also known as NR2C2, belongs to the nuclear 
receptor superfamily and shares high homology with the testicular nuclear
receptor 2. The natural ligands of TR4 remained unclear until the recent
discoveries of several energy/lipid sensors including the polyunsaturated fatty
acid metabolites, 13-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid and 15-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic
acid, and their synthetic ligands, thiazolidinediones, used for treatment of
diabetes. TR4 is widely expressed throughout the body and particularly
concentrated in the testis, prostate, cerebellum, and hippocampus. It has been
shown to play important roles in cerebellar development, forebrain myelination,
folliculogenesis, gluconeogenesis, lipogenesis, muscle development, bone
development, and prostate cancer progression. Here we provide a comprehensive
summary of TR4 signaling including its upstream ligands/activators/suppressors,
transcriptional coactivators/repressors, downstream targets, and their in vivo
functions with potential impacts on TR4-related diseases. Importantly, TR4 shares
similar ligands/activators with another key nuclear receptor, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>, which raised several interesting questions
about how these 2 nuclear receptors may collaborate with or counteract each
other's function in their related diseases. Clear dissection of such molecular
mechanisms and their differential roles in various diseases may help researchers 
to design new potential drugs with better efficacy and fewer side effects to
battle TR4 and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> involved diseases.

PMCID: PMC4042077
PMID: 24702179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jun;34(11):1956-65. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00247-14. Epub 2014 Mar 
24.

PGC-1 coactivator activity is required for murine erythropoiesis.

Cui S(1), Tanabe O, Lim KC, Xu HE, Zhou XE, Lin JD, Shi L, Schmidt L, Campbell A,
Shimizu R, Yamamoto M, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>) coactivator 1a (PGC-1a) 
and PGC-1ß have been shown to be intimately involved in the transcriptional
regulation of cellular energy metabolism as well as other biological processes,
but both coactivator proteins are expressed in many other tissues and organs in
which their function is, in essence, unexplored. Here, we found that both PGC-1
proteins are abundantly expressed in maturing erythroid cells. PGC-1a and PGC-1ß 
compound null mutant (Pgc-1(c)) animals express less ß-like globin mRNAs
throughout development; consequently, neonatal Pgc-1(c) mice exhibit growth
retardation and profound anemia. Flow cytometry shows that the number of mature
erythrocytes is markedly reduced in neonatal Pgc-1(c) pups, indicating that
erythropoiesis is severely compromised. Furthermore, hematoxylin and eosin
staining revealed necrotic cell death and cell loss in Pgc-1(c) livers and
spleen. Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies revealed that both PGC-1a and -1ß, 
as well as two nuclear receptors, TR2 and TR4, coordinately bind to the various
globin gene promoters. In addition, PGC-1a and -1ß can interact with TR4 to
potentiate transcriptional activation. These data provide new insights into our
understanding of globin gene regulation and raise the interesting possibility
that the PGC-1 coactivators can interact with TR4 to elicit differential
stage-specific effects on globin gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC4019057
PMID: 24662048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014 Jun;21(3):R279-300. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0529. Epub 2014
Mar 12.

Differential roles of PPAR<U+03B3> vs TR4 in prostate cancer and metabolic diseases.

Liu S(1), Lin SJ(1), Li G(1), Kim E(1), Chen YT(1), Yang DR(1), Tan MH(1), Yong
EL(1), Chang C(2).

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer ResearchDepartments of Pathology,
Urology, Radiation Oncology, and The Wilmot Cancer Center, University of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USADepartment of Obstetrics 
and GynecologyNational University of Singapore, Singapore, SingaporeChawnshang
Chang Liver Cancer Center and Department of UrologySir Run Run Shaw Hospital,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310016, ChinaDepartment of Biological
SciencesChonnam National University, Youngbong, Buk-Gu, Gwangju 500-757
KoreaCardiovascular Research InstituteNational University Health System and The
Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, SingaporeSex Hormone Research CenterChina Medical University/Hospital,
Taichung 404, Taiwan. (2)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer ResearchDepartments
of Pathology, Urology, Radiation Oncology, and The Wilmot Cancer Center,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USADepartment 
of Obstetrics and GynecologyNational University of Singapore, Singapore,
SingaporeChawnshang Chang Liver Cancer Center and Department of UrologySir Run
Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310016, ChinaDepartment of
Biological SciencesChonnam National University, Youngbong, Buk-Gu, Gwangju
500-757 KoreaCardiovascular Research InstituteNational University Health System
and The Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, SingaporeSex Hormone Research CenterChina Medical
University/Hospital, Taichung 404, TaiwanGeorge Whipple Laboratory for Cancer
ResearchDepartments of Pathology, Urology, Radiation Oncology, and The Wilmot
Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642,
USADepartment of Obstetrics and GynecologyNational University of Singapore,
Singapore, SingaporeChawnshang Chang Liver Cancer Center and Department of
UrologySir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310016,
ChinaDepartment of Biological SciencesChonnam National University, Youngbong,
Buk-Gu, Gwangju 500-757 KoreaCardiovascular Research InstituteNational University
Health System and The Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, SingaporeSex Hormone Research CenterChina
Medical University/Hospital, Taichung 404, Taiwan chang@urmc.rochester.edu.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>, NR1C3) and testicular
receptor 4 nuclear receptor (TR4, NR2C2) are two members of the nuclear receptor 
(NR) superfamily that can be activated by several similar ligands/activators
including polyunsaturated fatty acid metabolites, such as
13-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid and 15-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid, as well as
some anti-diabetic drugs such as thiazolidinediones (TZDs). However, the
consequences of the transactivation of these ligands/activators via these two NRs
are different, with at least three distinct phenotypes. First, activation of
PPAR<U+03B3> increases insulin sensitivity yet activation of TR4 decreases insulin
sensitivity. Second, PPAR<U+03B3> attenuates atherosclerosis but TR4 might increase the 
risk of atherosclerosis. Third, PPAR<U+03B3> suppresses prostate cancer (PCa)
development and TR4 suppresses prostate carcinogenesis yet promotes PCa
metastasis. Importantly, the deregulation of either PPAR<U+03B3> or TR4 in PCa alone
might then alter the other receptor's influences on PCa progression. Knocking out
PPAR<U+03B3> altered the ability of TR4 to promote prostate carcinogenesis and knocking 
down TR4 also resulted in TZD treatment promoting PCa development, indicating
that both PPAR<U+03B3> and TR4 might coordinate with each other to regulate PCa
initiation, and the loss of either one of them might switch the other one from a 
tumor suppressor to a tumor promoter. These results indicate that further and
detailed studies of both receptors at the same time in the same cells/organs may 
help us to better dissect their distinct physiological roles and develop better
drug(s) with fewer side effects to battle PPAR<U+03B3>- and TR4-related diseases
including tumor and cardiovascular diseases as well as metabolic disorders.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 24623743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Jun;35(6):1399-406. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgu052. Epub 2014
Feb 28.

TR4 nuclear receptor functions as a tumor suppressor for prostate tumorigenesis
via modulation of DNA damage/repair system.

Lin SJ, Lee SO, Lee YF, Miyamoto H, Yang DR, Li G, Chang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)chang@urmc.rochester.edu.

Testicular nuclear receptor 4 (TR4), a member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily, plays important roles in metabolism, fertility and aging. The
linkage of TR4 functions in cancer progression, however, remains unclear. Using
three different mouse models, we found TR4 could prevent or delay prostate cancer
(PCa)/prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia development. Knocking down TR4 in human
RWPE1 and mouse mPrE normal prostate cells promoted tumorigenesis under
carcinogen challenge, suggesting TR4 may play a suppressor role in PCa
initiation. Mechanism dissection in both in vitro cell lines and in vivo mice
studies found that knocking down TR4 led to increased DNA damage with altered DNA
repair system that involved the modulation of ATM expression at the
transcriptional level, and addition of ATM partially interrupted the TR4 small
interfering RNA-induced tumorigenesis in cell transformation assays.
Immunohistochemical staining in human PCa tissue microarrays revealed ATM
expression is highly correlated with TR4 expression. Together, these results
suggest TR4 may function as a tumor suppressor to prevent or delay prostate
tumorigenesis via regulating ATM expression at the transcriptional level.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4043245
PMID: 24583925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Feb;28(2):157-72. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1291. Epub 2013 Dec
2.

Minireview: role of orphan nuclear receptors in cancer and potential as drug
targets.

Safe S(1), Jin UH, Hedrick E, Reeder A, Lee SO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology (S.S., E.H., A.R.), Texas
A&M University, College Station, Texas 77808; and Institute of Biosciences and
Technology (S.S., U.-H.J., S.-O.L.), Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston,
Texas 77030.

The nuclear orphan receptors for which endogenous ligands have not been
identified include nuclear receptor (NR)0B1 (adrenal hypoplasia congenita
critical region on chromosome X gene), NR0B2 (small heterodimer partner), NR1D1/2
(Rev-Erba/ß), NR2C1 (testicular receptor 2), NR2C2 (testicular receptor 4), NR2E1
(tailless), NR2E3 (photoreceptor-specific NR [PNR]), NR2F1 chicken ovalbumin
upstream promoter transcription factor 1 (COUP-TFI), NR2F2 (COUP-TFII), NR2F6
(v-erbA-related protein), NR4A1 (Nur77), NR4A2 (Nurr1), NR4A3 (Nor1), and NR6A1
(GCNF). These receptors play essential roles in development, cellular
homeostasis, and disease including cancer where over- or underexpression of some 
receptors has prognostic significance for patient survival. Results of receptor
knockdown or overexpression in vivo and in cancer cell lines demonstrate that
orphan receptors exhibit tumor-specific pro-oncogenic or tumor suppressor-like
activity. For example, COUP-TFII expression is both a positive (ovarian) and
negative (prostate and breast) prognostic factor for cancer patients; in
contrast, the prognostic activity of adrenal hypoplasia congenita critical region
on chromosome X gene for the same tumors is the inverse of COUP-TFII. Functional 
studies show that Nur77 is tumor suppressor like in acute leukemia, whereas
silencing Nur77 in pancreatic, colon, lung, lymphoma, melanoma, cervical,
ovarian, gastric, and some breast cancer cell lines induces one or more of
several responses including growth inhibition and decreased survival, migration, 
and invasion. Although endogenous ligands for the orphan receptors have not been 
identified, there is increasing evidence that different structural classes of
compounds activate, inactivate, and directly bind several orphan receptors. Thus,
the screening and development of selective orphan receptor modulators will have
important clinical applications as novel mechanism-based agents for treating
cancer patients overexpressing one or more orphan receptors and also for combined
drug therapies.

PMCID: PMC3896638
PMID: 24295738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Blood. 2013 Nov 28;122(23):3798-807. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-04-496166. Epub 2013
Oct 3.

TRIM28 is essential for erythroblast differentiation in the mouse.

Hosoya T(1), Clifford M, Losson R, Tanabe O, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI;

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Nov 28;122(23):3701-2.

In previous mass spectrometry and coimmune precipitation studies, we identified
tripartite motif-containing 28 (TRIM28; also known as transcriptional
intermediary factor1ß and Krüppel-associated box-associated protein-1) as a
cofactor that specifically copurified with an NR2C1/NR2C2 (TR2/TR4) orphan
nuclear receptor heterodimer that previous studies had implicated as an
embryonic/fetal ß-type globin gene repressor. TRIM28 has been characterized as a 
transcriptional corepressor that can associate with many different transcription 
factors and can play functional roles in multiple tissues and cell types. Here,
we tested the contribution of TRIM28 to globin gene regulation and erythropoiesis
using a conditional loss-of-function in vivo model. We discovered that Trim28
genetic loss in the adult mouse leads to defective immature erythropoiesis in the
bone marrow and consequently to anemia. We further found that TRIM28 controls
erythropoiesis in a cell-autonomous manner by inducibly deleting Trim28
exclusively in hematopoietic cells. Finally, in the absence of TRIM28, we
observed increased apoptosis as well as diminished expression of multiple
erythroid transcription factors and heme biosynthetic enzymes in immature
erythroid cells. Thus, TRIM28 is essential for the cell-autonomous development of
immature erythroblasts in the bone marrow.

PMCID: PMC3843238
PMID: 24092935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 5;8(8):e71239. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071239. Print 2013.

AMD-associated genes encoding stress-activated MAPK pathway constituents are
identified by interval-based enrichment analysis.

SanGiovanni JP(1), Lee PH.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Trials Branch, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America. jpsangio@post.harvard.edu

PURPOSE: To determine whether common DNA sequence variants within groups of genes
encoding elements of stress-activated mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
signaling pathways are, in aggregate, associated with advanced AMD (AAMD).
METHODS: We used meta-regression and exact testing methods to identify
AAMD-associated SNPs in 1177 people with AAMD and 1024 AMD-free elderly peers
from 3 large-scale genotyping projects on the molecular genetics of AMD. SNPs
spanning independent AAMD-associated genomic intervals were examined with a
multi-locus-testing method (INRICH) for enrichment within five sets of genes
encoding constituents of stress-activated MAPK signaling cascades.
RESULTS: Four-of-five pathway gene sets showed enrichment with AAMD-associated
SNPs; findings persisted after adjustment for multiple testing in two. Strongest 
enrichment signals (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.006) existed in a c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)/MAPK
cascade (Science Signaling, STKE CMP_10827). In this pathway, seven independent
AAMD-associated regions were resident in 6 of 25 genes examined. These included
sequence variants in: 1) three MAP kinase kinase kinases (MAP3K4, MAP3K5, MAP3K9)
that phosphorylate and activate the MAP kinase kinases MAP2K4 and MAP2K7
(molecules that phosphorylate threonine and tyrosine residues within the
activation loop of JNK); 2) a target of MAP2K7 (JNK3A1) that activates complexes 
involved in transcriptional regulation of stress related genes influencing cell
proliferation, apoptosis, motility, metabolism and DNA repair; and 3) NR2C2, a
transcription factor activated by JNK1A1 (a drugable molecule influencing retinal
cell viability in model systems). We also observed AAMD-related sequence variants
resident in genes encoding PPP3CA (a drugable molecule that inactivates MAP3K5), 
and two genes (TGFB2, TGFBR2) encoding factors involved in MAPK sensing of growth
factors/cytokines.
CONCLUSIONS: Linkage disequilibrium (LD)-independent genomic enrichment analysis 
yielded associations of AAMD with aggregates of functionally related genes
encoding constituents of the JNK MAPK signaling pathway. FDA-approved drugs now
exist to target constituents of stress-activated MAPK pathways and may offer
reasonable approaches to preventing or treating AAMD.

PMCID: PMC3734129
PMID: 23940728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 21;110(21):8555-60. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1306182110. Epub 2013 May 7.

Evidence for orphan nuclear receptor TR4 in the etiology of Cushing disease.

Du L(1), Bergsneider M, Mirsadraei L, Young SH, Jonker JW, Downes M, Yong WH,
Evans RM, Heaney AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Neurosurgery, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Cushing disease (CD) is a life-threatening disorder attributed to excess
pituitary tumor-derived adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) and adrenal steroid
secretion caused by pituitary tumors. Whereas CD was first described in 1932, the
underlying genetic basis driving tumor growth and ACTH secretion remains
unsolved. Here, we show that testicular orphan nuclear receptor 4 (TR4, nuclear
receptor subfamily 2, group C, member 2) is overexpressed in human corticotroph
tumors as well as in human and mouse corticotroph tumor cell lines. Forced
overexpression of TR4 in both human and murine tumor cells increased
proopiomelanocortin transcription, ACTH secretion, cellular proliferation, and
tumor invasion rates in vitro. Conversely, knockdown of TR4 expression reversed
all phenotypes. Mechanistically, we show that TR4 transcriptionally activates
proopiomelanocortin through binding of a direct repeat 1 response element in the 
promoter, and that this is enhanced by MAPK-mediated TR4 phosphorylation. In
vivo, TR4 overexpression promotes murine corticotroph tumor growth as well as
enhances ACTH and corticosterone production, whereas TR4 knockdown decreases
circulating ACTH and corticosterone levels in mice harboring ACTH-secreting
tumors. Our findings directly link TR4 to the etiology of corticotroph tumors,
hormone secretion, and cell growth as well as identify it as a potential target
in the treatment of CD.

PMCID: PMC3666748
PMID: 23653479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 7;288(23):16476-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.448142. Epub 2013
Apr 22.

Increased chemosensitivity via targeting testicular nuclear receptor 4
(TR4)-Oct4-interleukin 1 receptor antagonist (IL1Ra) axis in prostate cancer
CD133+ stem/progenitor cells to battle prostate cancer.

Yang DR(1), Ding XF, Luo J, Shan YX, Wang R, Lin SJ, Li G, Huang CK, Zhu J, Chen 
Y, Lee SO, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Prostate cancer (PCa) stem/progenitor cells are known to have higher
chemoresistance than non-stem/progenitor cells, but the underlying molecular
mechanism remains unclear. We found the expression of testicular nuclear receptor
4 (TR4) is significantly higher in PCa CD133(+) stem/progenitor cells compared
with CD133(-) non-stem/progenitor cells. Knockdown of TR4 levels in the
established PCa stem/progenitor cells and the CD133(+) population of the C4-2 PCa
cell line with lentiviral TR4 siRNA led to increased drug sensitivity to the two 
commonly used chemotherapeutic drugs, docetaxel and etoposide, judging from
significantly reduced IC50 values and increased apoptosis in the TR4 knockdown
cells. Mechanism dissection studies found that suppression of TR4 in these
stem/progenitor cells led to down-regulation of Oct4 expression, which, in turn, 
down-regulated the IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL1Ra) expression. Neutralization
experiments via adding these molecules into the TR4 knockdown PCa stem/progenitor
cells reversed the chemoresistance, suggesting that the TR4-Oct4-IL1Ra axis may
play a critical role in the development of chemoresistance in the PCa
stem/progenitor cells. Together, these studies suggest that targeting TR4 may
alter chemoresistance of PCa stem/progenitor cells, and this finding provides the
possibility of targeting TR4 as a new and better approach to overcome the
chemoresistance problem in PCa therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3675583
PMID: 23609451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B. 2013 Mar;14(3):171-7. doi: 10.1631/jzus.B1200357.

Recent advances in the study of testicular nuclear receptor 4.

Ding XF(1), Yu SC, Chen BD, Lin SJ, Chang C, Li GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China.

Testicular nuclear receptor 4 (TR4), also known as NR2C2 (nuclear receptor
subfamily 2, group C, member 2), is a transcriptional factor and a member of the 
nuclear receptor family. TR4 was initially cloned from human and rat
hypothalamus, prostate, and testes libraries. For almost two decades, its
specific tissue distribution, genomic organization, and chromosomal assignment
have been well investigated in humans and animals. However, it has been very
difficult to study TR4's physiological functions due to a lack of specific
ligands. Gene knock-out animal techniques provide an alternative approach for
defining the biological functions of TR4. In vivo studies of TR4 gene knockout
mice (TR4(-/-)) found that they display severe spinal curvature, subfertility,
premature aging, and prostate prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN)
development. Upstream modulators, downstream target gene regulation, feedback
mechanisms, and differential modulation mediated by the recruitment of other
nuclear receptors and coregulators have been identified in studies using the
TR4(-/-) phenotype. With the establishment of a tissue-specific TR4(-/-) mouse
model, research on TR4 will be more convenient in the future.

PMCID: PMC3596567
PMID: 23463759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Nat Med. 2013 Mar;19(3):291-4. doi: 10.1038/nm.3101. Epub 2013 Feb 17.

Lysine-specific demethylase 1 is a therapeutic target for fetal hemoglobin
induction.

Shi L(1), Cui S, Engel JD, Tanabe O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2013 Apr;12(4):262-3.

Enhanced fetal <U+03B3>-globin synthesis alleviates symptoms of ß-globinopathies such as
sickle cell disease and ß-thalassemia, but current <U+03B3>-globin-inducing drugs offer 
limited beneficial effects. We show here that lysine-specific demethylase 1
(LSD1) inhibition by RNAi in human erythroid cells or by the monoamine oxidase
inhibitor tranylcypromine in human erythroid cells or ß-type globin-transgenic
mice enhances <U+03B3>-globin expression. LSD1 is thus a promising therapeutic target
for <U+03B3>-globin induction, and tranylcypromine may serve as a lead compound for the 
development of a new <U+03B3>-globin inducer.

PMID: 23416702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Cell Biol. 2012 Dec 10;199(6):893-906. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201207189.

Variant repeats are interspersed throughout the telomeres and recruit nuclear
receptors in ALT cells.

Conomos D(1), Stutz MD, Hills M, Neumann AA, Bryan TM, Reddel RR, Pickett HA.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead NSW
2145, Australia.

Telomeres in cells that use the recombination-mediated alternative lengthening of
telomeres (ALT) pathway elicit a DNA damage response that is partly independent
of telomere length. We therefore investigated whether ALT telomeres contain
structural abnormalities that contribute to ALT activity. Here we used next
generation sequencing to analyze the DNA content of ALT telomeres. We discovered 
that variant repeats were interspersed throughout the telomeres of ALT cells. We 
found that the C-type (TCAGGG) variant repeat predominated and created a
high-affinity binding site for the nuclear receptors COUP-TF2 and TR4. Nuclear
receptors were directly recruited to telomeres and ALT-associated characteristics
were induced after incorporation of the C-type variant repeat by a mutant
telomerase. We propose that the presence of variant repeats throughout ALT
telomeres results from recombination-mediated telomere replication and spreading 
of variant repeats from the proximal regions of the telomeres and that the
consequent binding of nuclear receptors alters the architecture of telomeres to
facilitate further recombination.

PMCID: PMC3518223
PMID: 23229897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Oncol Rep. 2013 Jan;29(1):297-305. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.2107. Epub 2012 Oct 26.

Testicular orphan nuclear receptor 4-associated protein 16 promotes non-small
cell lung carcinoma by activating estrogen receptor ß and blocking testicular
orphan nuclear receptor 2.

Fang F(1), Zheng Q, Zhang J, Dong B, Zhu S, Huang X, Wang Y, Zhao B, Li S, Xiong 
H, Chen J, Wu N, Song SW, Chang C, Yang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery <U+2161>, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Peking University Cancer Hospital
and Institute, Beijing 100142, PR China.

The possible involvement of estrogen receptors (ERs) and testicular orphan
nuclear receptors (TRs) in human non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) has been
suggested, but their precise roles and their relationship remain largely unknown.
This study aimed to investigate whether TR4-associated protein 16 (TRA16)
regulates the ERß and TR2 pathways and could be a potential target in NSCLC. We
used tissue microarrays including NSCLC tissues (n=154) and negative controls
(n=14) to examine the expression of TRA16 and ERß, and in vitro reporter gene
assays, the mammalian two-hybrid method and immunoprecipitation in Cos-1 cells to
investigate the relationships among TRA16, ERß and TR2. We found that TRA16 was
highly expressed in approximately 90% of the NSCLC tissues examined. TRA16
overexpression was significantly associated with TNM stage, tumor size, lymph
node metastasis, tumor thrombus in vein, tumor differentiation and prognosis of
NSCLC patients, in which TRA16 was shown to be an independent prognostic factor. 
Introduction of TRA16 into Cos-1 cells enhanced cell proliferation. Co-expression
of TRA16 and ERß in Cos-1 cells using different reporter gene systems and
mammalian two-hybrid approaches revealed that TRA16 enhanced ERß-mediated
transcriptional activity. By adopting similar approaches, and immunoprecipitation
and immunocytofluorescence assays, we found that TRA16 also interacted with TR2, 
and blocked the TR2 inhibitory effect on ERß. Our findings demonstrate that TRA16
could be a promising diagnostic and prognostic biomarker in NSCLC, and promotes
cancer cell growth through activation of the ERß pathway by interacting with ERß 
and TR2.

PMCID: PMC3583481
PMID: 23129017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Innate Immun. 2013;5(1):39-49. doi: 10.1159/000341630. Epub 2012 Sep 14.

Bacterial stimulation of the TLR-MyD88 pathway modulates the homeostatic
expression of ileal Paneth cell a-defensins.

Menendez A(1), Willing BP, Montero M, Wlodarska M, So CC, Bhinder G, Vallance BA,
Finlay BB.

Author information: 
(1)Michael Smith Laboratories, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada.

Paneth cell a-defensins are antimicrobial peptides involved in the control of the
intestinal microbiota and immunological homeostasis. In mice, they are encoded by
multiple, highly homologous genes (Defa). The transcriptional activity of ileal
Defa genes was studied in response to pharmacological and genetic perturbations
of the intestinal environment of C57BL/6 mice. Defa gene transcription was
sensitive to oral antibiotic administration suggesting that commensal microbes
regulate Defa expression. Ileal microbiota analysis showed that decreased
transcription of Defa genes correlated with depletion of Lactobacillus. Defa
expression was partially restored in vivo by lactobacillus administration to
antibiotic-treated mice. Defa transcripts were less abundant in ex vivo,
microbiota-free intestinal explants but recovered after explant exposure to
UV-killed bacteria, Toll-like receptor (TLR)-2 or TLR4 agonists. Genetic
deficiency of several TLRs or MyD88 led to dramatic drops in Defa transcription
in vivo. These results show that Paneth cell Defa genes are regulated by
commensal bacteria through TLR-MyD88 signaling and provide a further
understanding of the dysregulation of intestinal homeostasis that occurs as a
result of imbalances in the populations of commensal bacteria.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22986642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2012 Jun 7;10:43.

Reduced osteoblast activity in the mice lacking TR4 nuclear receptor leads to
osteoporosis.

Lin SJ(1), Ho HC, Lee YF, Liu NC, Liu S, Li G, Shyr CR, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, The Wilmot
Cancer center, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

BACKGROUND: Early studies suggested that TR4 nuclear receptor might play
important roles in the skeletal development, yet its detailed mechanism remains
unclear.
METHODS: We generated TR4 knockout mice and compared skeletal development with
their wild type littermates. Primary bone marrow cells were cultured and we
assayed bone differentiation by alkaline phosphatase and alizarin red staining.
Primary calvaria were cultured and osteoblastic marker genes were detected by
quantitative PCR. Luciferase reporter assays, chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assays, and electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) were performed to
demonstrate TR4 can directly regulate bone differentiation marker osteocalcin.
RESULTS: We first found mice lacking TR4 might develop osteoporosis. We then
found that osteoblast progenitor cells isolated from bone marrow of TR4 knockout 
mice displayed reduced osteoblast differentiation capacity and calcification.
Osteoblast primary cultures from TR4 knockout mice calvaria also showed higher
proliferation rates indicating lower osteoblast differentiation ability in mice
after loss of TR4. Mechanism dissection found the expression of osteoblast
markers genes, such as ALP, type I collagen alpha 1, osteocalcin, PTH, and PTHR
was dramatically reduced in osteoblasts from TR4 knockout mice as compared to
those from TR4 wild type mice. In vitro cell line studies with luciferase
reporter assay, ChIP assay, and EMSA further demonstrated TR4 could bind directly
to the promoter region of osteocalcin gene and induce its gene expression at the 
transcriptional level in a dose dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these results demonstrate TR4 may function as a novel
transcriptional factor to play pathophysiological roles in maintaining normal
osteoblast activity during the bone development and remodeling, and disruption of
TR4 function may result in multiple skeletal abnormalities.

PMCID: PMC3447707
PMID: 22676849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2012 Jun;159B(4):437-44. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32047. Epub 2012 Apr 4.

Genome-wide search for replicable risk gene regions in alcohol and nicotine
co-dependence.

Zuo L(1), Zhang F, Zhang H, Zhang XY, Wang F, Li CS, Lu L, Hong J, Lu L, Krystal 
J, Deng HW, Luo X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA. lingjun.zuo@yale.edu

The present study searched for replicable risk genomic regions for alcohol and
nicotine co-dependence using a genome-wide association strategy. The data
contained a total of 3,143 subjects including 818 European-American (EA) cases
with alcohol and nicotine co-dependence, 1,396 EA controls, 449 African-American 
(AA) cases, and 480 AA controls. We performed separate genome-wide association
analyses in EAs and AAs and a meta-analysis to derive combined P-values, and
calculated the genome-wide false discovery rate (FDR) for each SNP. Regions with 
P < 5 × 10(-7) together with FDR < 0.05 in the meta-analysis were examined to
detect all replicable risk SNPs across EAs, AAs, and meta-analysis. These SNPs
were followed with a series of functional expression quantitative trait locus
(eQTL) analyses. We found a unique genome-wide significant gene
region--SH3BP5-NR2C2--that was enriched with 11 replicable risk SNPs for alcohol 
and nicotine co-dependence. The distributions of -log(P) values for all
SNP-disease associations within this region were consistent across EAs, AAs, and 
meta-analysis (0.315 = r = 0.868; 8.1 × 10(-52) = P = 3.6 × 10(-5)). In the
meta-analysis, this region was the only association peak throughout chromosome 3 
at P < 0.0001. All replicable risk markers available for eQTL analysis had
nominal cis- and trans-acting regulatory effects on gene expression. The
transcript expression of the genes in this region was regulated partly by several
nicotine dependence (ND)-related genes and significantly correlated with
transcript expression of many alcohol dependence- and ND-related genes. We
concluded that the SH3BP5-NR2C2 region on Chromosome 3 might harbor causal loci
for alcohol and nicotine co-dependence.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3405545
PMID: 22488850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2012 Jun;17(2):309-22. doi: 10.2478/s11658-012-0012-9. Epub
2012 Mar 7.

Deficiency in TR4 nuclear receptor abrogates Gadd45a expression and increases
cytotoxicity induced by ionizing radiation.

Yan SJ(1), Lee YF, Ting HJ, Liu NC, Liu S, Lin SJ, Yeh SD, Li G, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, University of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

The testicular receptor 4 (TR4) is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily
that controls various biological activities. A protective role of TR4 against
oxidative stress has recently been discovered. We here examined the protective
role of TR4 against ionizing radiation (IR) and found that small hairpin RNA
mediated TR4 knockdown cells were highly sensitive to IR-induced cell death. IR
exposure increased the expression of TR4 in scramble control small hairpin RNA
expressing cells but not in TR4 knockdown cells. Examination of IR-responsive
molecules found that the expression of Gadd45a, the growth arrest and DNA damage 
response gene, was dramatically decreased in Tr4 deficient (TR4KO) mice tissues
and could not respond to IR stimulation in TR4KO mouse embryonic fibroblast
cells. This TR4 regulation of GADD45A was at the transcriptional level. Promoter 
analysis identified four potential TR4 response elements located in intron 3 and 
exon 4 of the GADD45A gene. Reporter and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assays provided evidence indicating that TR4 regulated the GADD45A expression
through TR4 response elements located in intron 3 of the GADD45A gene. Together, 
we find that TR4 is essential in protecting cells from IR stress. Upon IR
challenges, TR4 expression is increased, thereafter inducing GADD45A through
transcriptional regulation. As GADD45A is directly involved in the DNA repair
pathway, this suggests that TR4 senses genotoxic stress and up-regulates GADD45A 
expression to protect cells from IR-induced genotoxicity.

PMCID: PMC3402907
PMID: 22396141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Hum Hered. 2011;72(3):182-93. doi: 10.1159/000331222. Epub 2011 Nov 11.

Application of a novel score test for genetic association incorporating gene-gene
interaction suggests functionality for prostate cancer susceptibility regions.

Ciampa J(1), Yeager M, Jacobs K, Thun MJ, Gapstur S, Albanes D, Virtamo J,
Weinstein SJ, Giovannucci E, Willett WC, Cancel-Tassin G, Cussenot O, Valeri A,
Hunter D, Hoover R, Thomas G, Chanock S, Holmes C, Chatterjee N.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology and Biostatistics Program, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and
Genetics, Department of Health and Human Services, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20852, USA.

AIMS: We introduce an innovative multilocus test for disease association. It is
an extension of an existing score test that gains power over alternative methods 
by incorporating a parsimonious one-degree-of-freedom model for interaction. We
use our method in applications designed to detect interactions that generate
hypotheses about the functionality of prostate cancer (PRCA) susceptibility
regions.
METHODS: Our proposed score test is designed to gain additional power through the
use of a retrospective likelihood that exploits an assumption of independence
between unlinked loci in the underlying population. Its performance is validated 
through simulation. The method is used in conditional scans with data from stage 
II of the Cancer Genetic Markers of Susceptibility PRCA genome-wide association
study.
RESULTS: Our proposed method increases power to detect susceptibility loci in
diverse settings. It identified two high-ranking, biologically interesting
interactions: (1) rs748120 of NR2C2 and subregions of 8q24 that contain
independent susceptibility loci specific to PRCA and (2) rs4810671 of SULF2 and
both JAZF1 and HNF1B that are associated with PRCA and type 2 diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our score test is a promising multilocus tool for genetic
epidemiology. The results of our applications suggest functionality for poorly
understood PRCA susceptibility regions. They motivate replication study.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3242702
PMID: 22086326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Nov 15;108(46):18808-13. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1104964108. Epub 2011 Oct 31.

Forced TR2/TR4 expression in sickle cell disease mice confers enhanced fetal
hemoglobin synthesis and alleviated disease phenotypes.

Campbell AD(1), Cui S, Shi L, Urbonya R, Mathias A, Bradley K, Bonsu KO, Douglas 
RR, Halford B, Schmidt L, Harro D, Giacherio D, Tanimoto K, Tanabe O, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Infectious Diseases, Division of Pediatric
Hematology Oncology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, 
USA.

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a hematologic disorder caused by a missense mutation
in the adult ß-globin gene. Higher fetal hemoglobin (HbF) levels in red blood
cells of SCD patients have been shown to improve morbidity and mortality. We
previously found that nuclear receptors TR2 and TR4 repress expression of the
human embryonic e-globin and fetal <U+03B3>-globin genes in definitive erythroid cells. 
Because forced expression of TR2/TR4 in murine adult erythroid cells
paradoxically enhanced fetal <U+03B3>-globin gene expression in transgenic mice, we
wished to determine if forced TR2/TR4 expression in a SCD model mouse would
result in elevated HbF synthesis and thereby alleviate the disease phenotype. In 
a "humanized" sickle cell model mouse, forced TR2/TR4 expression increased HbF
abundance from 7.6% of total hemoglobin to 18.6%, accompanied by increased
hematocrit from 23% to 34% and reticulocyte reduction from 61% to 18%, indicating
a significant reduction in hemolysis. Moreover, forced TR2/TR4 expression reduced
hepatosplenomegaly and liver parenchymal necrosis and inflammation in SCD mice,
indicating alleviation of usual pathophysiological characteristics. This article 
shows that genetic manipulation of nonglobin proteins, or transcription factors
regulating globin gene expression, can ameliorate the disease phenotype in a SCD 
model animal. This proof-of-concept study demonstrates that modulating TR2/TR4
activity in SCD patients may be a promising therapeutic approach to induce
persistent HbF accumulation and for treatment of the disease.

PMCID: PMC3219144
PMID: 22042865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2011 Oct 13;9:138. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-9-138.

The roles of testicular nuclear receptor 4 (TR4) in male fertility-priapism and
sexual behavior defects in TR4 knockout mice.

Collins LL(1), Lee YF, Ting HJ, Lin WJ, Liu NC, Meshul CK, Uno H, Bao BY, Chen
YT, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, The Cancer
Center, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

BACKGROUND: Successful reproductive efforts require the establishment of a
situation favorable for reproduction that requires integration of both behavior
and internal physiological events. TR4 nuclear receptor is known to be involved
in male fertility via controlling spermatogenesis, yet its roles in regulating
other biological events related to reproduction have not been completely
revealed.
METHODS: Male TR4 knockout (TR4 -/-) and wild type mice were used for the sexual 
behavior and penile dysfunction studies. Mice were sacrificed for histological
examination and corresponding genes profiles were analyzed by quantitative
RT-PCR. Reporter gene assays were performed.
RESULTS: We describe an unexpected finding of priapism in TR4 -/- mice. As a
transcriptional factor, we demonstrated that TR4 transcriptionally modulates a
key enzyme regulating penis erection and neuronal nitric oxide synthese NOS
(nNOS). Thereby, elimination of TR4 results in nNOS reduction in both mRNA and
protein levels, consequently may lead to erectile dysfunction. In addition, male 
TR4 -/- mice display defects in sexual and social behavior, with increased fear
or anxiety, as well as reduced mounting, intromission, and ejaculation. Reduction
of ER alpha, ER beta, and oxytocin in the hypothalamus may contribute to defects 
in sexual behavior and stress response.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these results provide in vivo evidence of important TR4
roles in penile physiology, as well as in male sexual behavior. In conjunction
with previous finding, TR4 represents a key factor that controls male fertility
via regulating behavior and internal physiological events.

PMCID: PMC3212810
PMID: 21995792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 4;286(44):38103-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.259523. Epub 2011 
Sep 14.

Testicular nuclear receptor 4 (TR4) regulates UV light-induced responses via
Cockayne syndrome B protein-mediated transcription-coupled DNA repair.

Liu S(1), Yan SJ, Lee YF, Liu NC, Ting HJ, Li G, Wu Q, Chen LM, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology and Urology, 
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

UV irradiation is one of the major external insults to cells and can cause skin
aging and cancer. In response to UV light-induced DNA damage, the nucleotide
excision repair (NER) pathways are activated to remove DNA lesions. We report
here that testicular nuclear receptor 4 (TR4), a member of the nuclear receptor
family, modulates DNA repair specifically through the transcription-coupled (TC) 
NER pathway but not the global genomic NER pathway. The level of Cockayne
syndrome B protein (CSB), a member of the TC-NER pathway, is 10-fold reduced in
TR4-deficient mouse tissues, and TR4 directly regulates CSB at the
transcriptional level. Moreover, restored CSB expression rescues UV
hypersensitivity of TR4-deficient cells. Together, these results indicate that
TR4 modulates UV sensitivity by promoting the TC-NER DNA repair pathway through
transcriptional regulation of CSB. These results may lead to the development of
new treatments for UV light-sensitive syndromes, skin cancer, and aging.

PMCID: PMC3207464
PMID: 21918225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. FEBS Lett. 2011 Sep 2;585(17):2763-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.08.002. Epub
2011 Aug 11.

TR4 activates FATP1 gene expression to promote lipid accumulation in 3T3-L1
adipocytes.

Choi H(1), Kim SJ, Park SS, Chang C, Kim E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Chonnam
National University, Buk-Gu, Gwangju, South Korea.

We show that TR4 facilitates lipid accumulation in 3T3-L1 adipocytes via
induction of the FATP1 gene. Further study showed that TR4 transactivated FATP1
5' promoter activity via direct binding to the TR4 responsive element located at 
the FATP1 5' promoter region. Constitutive overexpression of TR4 in 3T3-L1
adipocytes resulted in increased lipid accumulation, accompanied by an increase
in fatty acid uptake. However, small interfering RNA knockdown of FATP1 abolished
TR4-enhanced fatty acid uptake. Moreover, microRNA-mediated silencing of TR4 in
3T3-L1 adipocytes drastically reduced basal FATP1 5' promoter activity and FATP1 
expression with reduced lipid accumulation.

Copyright © 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21843524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Bioinformatics. 2011 Sep 15;27(18):2473-7. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr416.
Epub 2011 Jul 14.

Inferring statin-induced gene regulatory relationships in primary human
hepatocytes.

Schröder A(1), Wollnik J, Wrzodek C, Dräger A, Bonin M, Burk O, Thomas M, Thasler
WE, Zanger UM, Zell A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Bioinformatics Tuebingen, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen,
Germany. adrian.schroeder@uni-tuebingen.de

MOTIVATION: Statins are the most widely used cholesterol-lowering drugs. The
primary target of statins is HMG-CoA reductase, a key enzyme in cholesterol
synthesis. However, statins elicit pleitropic responses including beneficial as
well as adverse effects in the liver or other organs. Today, the regulatory
mechanisms that cause these pleiotropic effects are not sufficiently understood.
RESULTS: In this work, genome-wide RNA expression changes in primary human
hepatocytes of six individuals were measured at up to six time points upon
atorvastatin treatment. A computational analysis workflow was applied to
reconstruct regulatory mechanisms based on these drug-response data and available
knowledge about transcription factor (TF) binding specificities and protein-drug 
interactions. Several previously unknown TFs were predicted to be involved in
atorvastatin-responsive gene expression. The novel relationships of nuclear
receptors NR2C2 and PPARA on CYP3A4 were successfully validated in wet-lab
experiments.
AVAILABILITY: Microarray data are available at the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) 
database at www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/, under accession number GSE29868.
CONTACT: andreas.zell@uni-tuebingen.de; adrian.schroeder@uni-tuebingen.de
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

PMID: 21757465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Aug;31(16):3298-311. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05310-11. Epub 2011 Jun
13.

Nuclear receptors TR2 and TR4 recruit multiple epigenetic transcriptional
corepressors that associate specifically with the embryonic ß-type globin
promoters in differentiated adult erythroid cells.

Cui S(1), Kolodziej KE, Obara N, Amaral-Psarris A, Demmers J, Shi L, Engel JD,
Grosveld F, Strouboulis J, Tanabe O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Nuclear receptors TR2 and TR4 (TR2/TR4) were previously shown to bind in vitro to
direct repeat elements in the mouse and human embryonic and fetal ß-type globin
gene promoters and to play critical roles in the silencing of these genes. By
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) we show that, in adult erythroid cells,
TR2/TR4 bind to the embryonic ß-type globin promoters but not to the adult
ß-globin promoter. We purified protein complexes containing biotin-tagged TR2/TR4
from adult erythroid cells and identified DNMT1, NuRD, and LSD1/CoREST repressor 
complexes, as well as HDAC3 and TIF1ß, all known to confer epigenetic gene
silencing, as potential corepressors of TR2/TR4. Coimmunoprecipitation assays of 
endogenous abundance proteins indicated that TR2/TR4 complexes consist of at
least four distinct molecular species. In ChIP assays we found that, in
undifferentiated murine adult erythroid cells, many of these corepressors
associate with both the embryonic and the adult ß-type globin promoters but, upon
terminal differentiation, they specifically dissociate only from the adult
ß-globin promoter concomitant with its activation but remain bound to the
silenced embryonic globin gene promoters. These data suggest that TR2/TR4 recruit
an array of transcriptional corepressors to elicit adult stage-specific silencing
of the embryonic ß-type globin genes through coordinated epigenetic chromatin
modifications.

PMCID: PMC3147791
PMID: 21670149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Aug;25(8):1301-10. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0455. Epub 2011 May 
26.

Mice lacking TR4 nuclear receptor develop mitochondrial myopathy with deficiency 
in complex I.

Liu S(1), Lee YF, Chou S, Uno H, Li G, Brookes P, Massett MP, Wu Q, Chen LM,
Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Rochester, Medical Center, Rochester,
New York 14646, USA.

The estimated incidence of mitochondrial diseases in humans is approximately
1:5000 to 1:10,000, whereas the molecular mechanisms for more than 50% of human
mitochondrial disease cases still remain unclear. Here we report that mice
lacking testicular nuclear receptor 4 (TR4(-/-)) suffered mitochondrial myopathy,
and histological examination of TR4(-/-) soleus muscle revealed abnormal
mitochondrial accumulation. In addition, increased serum lactate levels,
decreased mitochondrial ATP production, and decreased electron transport chain
complex I activity were found in TR4(-/-) mice. Restoration of TR4 into TR4(-/-) 
myoblasts rescued mitochondrial ATP generation capacity and complex I activity.
Further real-time PCR quantification and promoter studies found TR4 could
modulate complex I activity via transcriptionally regulating the complex I
assembly factor NDUFAF1, and restoration of NDUFAF1 level in TR4(-/-) myoblasts
increased mitochondrial ATP generation capacity and complex I activity. Together,
these results suggest that TR4 plays vital roles in mitochondrial function, which
may help us to better understand the pathogenesis of mitochondrial myopathy, and 
targeting TR4 via its ligands/activators may allow us to develop better
therapeutic approaches.

PMCID: PMC3146253
PMID: 21622535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Jul;301(1):E91-8. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00701.2010. Epub 2011 Apr 26.

Premature aging with impaired oxidative stress defense in mice lacking TR4.

Lee YF(1), Liu S, Liu NC, Wang RS, Chen LM, Lin WJ, Ting HJ, Ho HC, Li G, Puzas
EJ, Wu Q, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology,
Urology, and Orthopaedics, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New
York 14620, USA. chang@urmc.rochester.edu

Early studies suggest that TR4 nuclear receptor is a key transcriptional factor
regulating various biological activities, including reproduction, cerebella
development, and metabolism. Here we report that mice lacking TR4 (TR4(-/-))
exhibited increasing genome instability and defective oxidative stress defense,
which are associated with premature aging phenotypes. At the cellular level, we
observed rapid cellular growth arrest and less resistance to oxidative stress and
DNA damage in TR4(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) in vitro. Restoring TR4
or supplying the antioxidant N-acetyl-l-cysteine (NAC) to TR4(-/-) MEFs reduced
the DNA damage and slowed down cellular growth arrest. Focused qPCR array
revealed alteration of gene profiles in the DNA damage response (DDR) and
anti-reactive oxygen species (ROS) pathways in TR4(-/-) MEFs, which further
supports the hypothesis that the premature aging in TR4(-/-) mice might stem from
oxidative DNA damage caused by increased oxidative stress or compromised genome
integrity. Together, our finding identifies a novel role of TR4 in mediating the 
interplay between oxidative stress defense and aging.

PMCID: PMC3129845
PMID: 21521714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 17;286(24):21129-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.208181. Epub
2011 Apr 22.

Increased acetylation in the DNA-binding domain of TR4 nuclear receptor by the
coregulator ARA55 leads to suppression of TR4 transactivation.

Xie S(1), Ni J, Lee YF, Liu S, Li G, Shyr CR, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, University of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

The nuclear receptor TR4 is a key regulator for many physiological processes,
including growth, development, and metabolism. However, how the transcriptional
activity of TR4 is regulated in the absence of ligand(s) remains largely unknown.
Here we found that an androgen receptor (AR) coactivator, ARA55, might function
as a corepressor to suppress TR4 transactivation. Molecular mechanistic
dissection with mutation analysis found that ARA55 could enhance TR4 acetylation 
at the conserved acetylation sites of lysine 175 and lysine 176 in the
DNA-binding domain via recruiting proteins with histone acetyl transferase
activity, which might then reduce significantly the TR4 DNA binding activity that
resulted in the suppression of TR4 transactivation. These results are in contrast
to the classic ARA55 coactivator function to enhance AR transactivation partially
via increased AR acetylation in the hinge/ligand-binding domain. Together, these 
results not only provide a novel functional mechanism showing that acetylation of
different nuclear receptors at different domains by coregulator may lead to
differential receptor transactivation activity but also provide a new way for
small molecules to control TR4 transactivation via altering TR4 acetylation
levels, and such small molecules may have potential therapeutic applications in
the future.

PMCID: PMC3122174
PMID: 21515881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Diabetes. 2011 May;60(5):1493-503. doi: 10.2337/db10-0393. Epub 2011 Apr 8.

Metformin inhibits nuclear receptor TR4-mediated hepatic stearoyl-CoA desaturase 
1 gene expression with altered insulin sensitivity.

Kim E(1), Liu NC, Yu IC, Lin HY, Lee YF, Sparks JD, Chen LM, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and the Wilmot Cancer Center, University of Rochester 
Medical Center, Rochester, New York, USA.

OBJECTIVE: TR4 is a nuclear receptor without clear pathophysiological roles. We
investigated the roles of hepatic TR4 in the regulation of lipogenesis and
insulin sensitivity in vivo and in vitro.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: TR4 activity and phosphorylation assays were carried
out using hepatocytes and various TR4 wild-type and mutant constructs. Liver
tissues from TR4 knockout, C57BL/6, and db/db mice were examined to investigate
TR4 target gene stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD) 1 regulation.
RESULTS: TR4 transactivation is inhibited via phosphorylation by
metformin-induced AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) at the amino acid serine
351, which results in the suppression of SCD1 gene expression. Additional
mechanistic dissection finds TR4-transactivated SCD1 promoter activity via direct
binding to the TR4-responsive element located at -243 to -255 on the promoter
region. The pathophysiological consequences of the metformin<U+2192>AMPK<U+2192>TR4<U+2192>SCD1
pathway are examined via TR4 knockout mice and primary hepatocytes with either
knockdown or overexpression of TR4. The results show that the suppression of SCD1
via loss of TR4 resulted in reduced fat mass and increased insulin sensitivity
with increased ß-oxidation and decreased lipogenic gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The pathway from metformin<U+2192>AMPK<U+2192>TR4<U+2192>SCD1<U+2192>insulin sensitivity
suggests that TR4 may function as an important modulator to control lipid
metabolism, which sheds light on the use of small molecules to modulate TR4
activity as a new alternative approach to battle the metabolic syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3292323
PMID: 21478464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. BMC Genomics. 2010 Dec 2;11:689. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-689.

Genome-wide binding of the orphan nuclear receptor TR4 suggests its general role 
in fundamental biological processes.

O'Geen H(1), Lin YH, Xu X, Echipare L, Komashko VM, He D, Frietze S, Tanabe O,
Shi L, Sartor MA, Engel JD, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Center, University of California at Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

BACKGROUND: The orphan nuclear receptor TR4 (human testicular receptor 4 or
NR2C2) plays a pivotal role in a variety of biological and metabolic processes.
With no known ligand and few known target genes, the mode of TR4 function was
unclear.
RESULTS: We report the first genome-wide identification and characterization of
TR4 in vivo binding. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high
throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq), we identified TR4 binding sites in 4 different 
human cell types and found that the majority of target genes were shared among
different cells. TR4 target genes are involved in fundamental biological
processes such as RNA metabolism and protein translation. In addition, we found
that a subset of TR4 target genes exerts cell-type specific functions. Analysis
of the TR4 binding sites revealed that less than 30% of the peaks from any of the
cell types contained the DR1 motif previously derived from in vitro studies,
suggesting that TR4 may be recruited to the genome via interaction with other
proteins. A bioinformatics analysis of the TR4 binding sites predicted a cis
regulatory module involving TR4 and ETS transcription factors. To test this
prediction, we performed ChIP-seq for the ETS factor ELK4 and found that 30% of
TR4 binding sites were also bound by ELK4. Motif analysis of the sites bound by
both factors revealed a lack of the DR1 element, suggesting that TR4 binding at a
subset of sites is facilitated through the ETS transcription factor ELK4. Further
studies will be required to investigate the functional interdependence of these
two factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that TR4 plays a pivotal role in fundamental
biological processes across different cell types. In addition, the identification
of cell type specific TR4 binding sites enables future studies of the pathways
underlying TR4 action and its possible role in metabolic diseases.

PMCID: PMC3019231
PMID: 21126370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 28;286(4):2877-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.168740. Epub 2010 
Nov 9.

The orphan nuclear receptor TR4 is a vitamin A-activated nuclear receptor.

Zhou XE(1), Suino-Powell KM, Xu Y, Chan CW, Tanabe O, Kruse SW, Reynolds R, Engel
JD, Xu HE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Structural Sciences and Drug Discovery, Van Andel Research
Institute, Grand Rapids, Michigan 49503, USA. edward.zhou@vai.org

Testicular receptors 2 and 4 (TR2/4) constitute a subgroup of orphan nuclear
receptors that play important roles in spermatogenesis, lipid and lipoprotein
regulation, and the development of the central nervous system. Currently, little 
is known about the structural features and the ligand regulation of these
receptors. Here we report the crystal structure of the ligand-free TR4 ligand
binding domain, which reveals an autorepressed conformation. The ligand binding
pocket of TR4 is filled by the C-terminal half of helix 10, and the cofactor
binding site is occupied by the AF-2 helix, thus preventing ligand-independent
activation of the receptor. However, TR4 exhibits constitutive transcriptional
activity on multiple promoters, which can be further potentiated by nuclear
receptor coactivators. Mutations designed to disrupt cofactor binding,
dimerization, or ligand binding substantially reduce the transcriptional activity
of this receptor. Importantly, both retinol and retinoic acid are able to promote
TR4 to recruit coactivators and to activate a TR4-regulated reporter. These
findings demonstrate that TR4 is a ligand-regulated nuclear receptor and suggest 
that retinoids might have a much wider regulatory role via activation of orphan
receptors such as TR4.

PMCID: PMC3024783
PMID: 21068381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Diabetes. 2011 Jan;60(1):177-88. doi: 10.2337/db10-0628. Epub 2010 Sep 23.

Nuclear orphan receptor TAK1/TR4-deficient mice are protected against
obesity-linked inflammation, hepatic steatosis, and insulin resistance.

Kang HS(1), Okamoto K, Kim YS, Takeda Y, Bortner CD, Dang H, Wada T, Xie W, Yang 
XP, Liao G, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Laboratory of Respiratory Biology, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The nuclear receptor TAK1/TR4/NR2C2 is expressed in several tissues
that are important in the control of energy homeostasis. In this study, we
investigate whether TAK1 functions as a regulator of lipid and energy homeostasis
and has a role in metabolic syndrome.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We generated TAK1-deficient (TAK1<U+207B>(/)<U+207B>) mice to
study the function of TAK1 in the development of metabolic syndrome in aged mice 
and mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD). (Immuno)histochemical, biochemical, and gene 
expression profile analyses were performed to determine the effect of the loss of
TAK1 expression on lipid homeostasis in liver and adipose tissues. In addition,
insulin sensitivity, energy expenditure, and adipose-associated inflammation were
compared in wild-type (WT) and TAK1<U+207B>(/)<U+207B> mice fed a HFD.
RESULTS: TAK1-deficient (TAK1<U+207B>(/)<U+207B>) mice are resistant to the development of age-
and HFD-induced metabolic syndrome. Histo- and biochemical analyses showed
significantly lower hepatic triglyceride levels and reduced lipid accumulation in
adipose tissue in TAK1<U+207B>(/)<U+207B> mice compared with WT mice. Gene expression profiling
analysis revealed that the expression of several genes encoding proteins involved
in lipid uptake and triglyceride synthesis and storage, including Cidea, Cidec,
Mogat1, and CD36, was greatly decreased in the liver and primary hepatocytes of
TAK1<U+207B>(/)<U+207B> mice. Restoration of TAK1 expression in TAK1<U+207B>(/)<U+207B> hepatocytes induced
expression of several lipogenic genes. Moreover, TAK1<U+207B>(/)<U+207B> mice exhibited reduced
infiltration of inflammatory cells and expression of inflammatory genes in white 
adipose tissue, and were resistant to the development of glucose intolerance and 
insulin resistance. TAK1<U+207B>(/)<U+207B> mice consume more oxygen and produce more carbon
dioxide than WT mice, suggesting increased energy expenditure.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data reveal that TAK1 plays a critical role in the regulation of
energy and lipid homeostasis, and promotes the development of metabolic syndrome.
TAK1 may provide a new therapeutic target in the management of obesity, diabetes,
and liver steatosis.

PMCID: PMC3012170
PMID: 20864514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Feb;222(2):347-56. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21959.

Human testicular orphan receptor 4 enhances thyroid hormone receptor signaling.

Huang YH(1), Liao CH, Chen RN, Liao CJ, Lin KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Chang-Gung University,
Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China.

The thyroid hormone receptor (TR) and human testicular orphan receptor 4 (TR4)
belong to the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily. They are ligand-dependent
transcription factors. TR and TR4 bind to a similar thyroid response element
(TRE), known as a direct repeat with four nucleotide spacing (DR4). This study
examined the possible interaction or cross-talking between those two receptors.
We hypothesized that protein-protein interaction between TR4 and TR may promote
TR-mediated transcriptional activity. Glutathione S-transferase pull-down and
immunoprecipitation assays showed direct interaction between TR and TR4.
Electrophoretic mobility-shift assay demonstrated that TR and TR4 could co-occupy
the same TRE. The interaction between TR4 and TR may enhance regulation of genes 
targeted by TR, such as furin, fibrinogen, cdk2 and p21 expression. We found that
TR4 function is similar with TR as TR4 alone could regulate expression of some TR
target genes, and could increase cell migration or inhibit cell proliferation.
Importantly, the TR-dependent inhibition of cell proliferation and stimulation of
cell migration are more enhanced in the HepG2-TR cells stably over-expressing
TR4. Overall, TR4 not only has modulation abilities similar to TR but also can
cross-talk with TR and promote the TR signaling pathway.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19859911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Nov-Dec;1789(11-12):734-40. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2009.09.010. Epub 2009 Sep 30.

Activation of testicular orphan receptor 4 by fatty acids.

Tsai NP(1), Huq M, Gupta P, Yamamoto K, Kagechika H, Wei LN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota Medical School, 6-120
Jackson Hall, 321 Church Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455-0217, USA.

Nuclear receptors can be activated by chemicals, metabolites, hormones or
environmental compounds to regulate gene expression. Bioassay-guided screening of
mouse tissue extracts found that natural fatty acids of a certain carbon length
and level of unsaturation could activate the mouse orphan nuclear receptor,
testicular orphan receptor 4 (TR4). Subsequent experiments focused on
gamma-linoleic acid, a compound identified during screening of mouse tissues that
exerts regulatory activity in TR4 transactivation assays. gamma-linoleic acid
positively modulates TR4 activity to promote the expression of downstream genes
such as apolipoprotein E (ApoE) and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, and to
activate a reporter carrying direct repeat 1 from the ApoE promoter. It also
induced the interaction of TR4 with transcription coregulators such as RIP140 and
PCAF. Comparisons of transactivation by TR4 and the metabolism-related peroxisome
proliferator-activated nuclear receptors indicate that gamma-linoleic acid
regulation is specific to TR4. The data suggest that TR4 might exert its
physiological function by sensing certain lipids. Identifying these compounds
could be useful for examining the physiological pathways in which TR4 and its
target genes are involved.

PMCID: PMC2784022
PMID: 19800043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 11;106(32):13353-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0905724106. Epub 2009 Jul 28.

TR4 nuclear receptor functions as a fatty acid sensor to modulate CD36 expression
and foam cell formation.

Xie S(1), Lee YF, Kim E, Chen LM, Ni J, Fang LY, Liu S, Lin SJ, Abe J, Berk B, Ho
FM, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, and
Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Testicular orphan nuclear receptor 4 (TR4) is an orphan member of the nuclear
receptor superfamily with diverse physiological functions. Using TR4 knockout
(TR4(-/-)) mice to study its function in cardiovascular diseases, we found
reduced cluster of differentiation (CD)36 expression with reduced foam cell
formation in TR4(-/-) mice. Mechanistic dissection suggests that TR4 induces CD36
protein and mRNA expression via a transcriptional regulation. Interestingly, we
found this TR4-mediated CD36 transactivation can be further enhanced by
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), such as omega-3 and -6 fatty acids, and
their metabolites such as 15-hydroxyeico-satetraonic acid (15-HETE) and
13-hydroxy octa-deca dieonic acid (13-HODE) and thiazolidinedione
(TZD)-rosiglitazone. Both electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) and
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrate that TR4 binds to the TR4
response element located on the CD36 5'-promoter region for the induction of CD36
expression. Stably transfected TR4-siRNA or functional TR4 cDNA in the RAW264.7
macrophage cells resulted in either decreased or increased CD36 expression with
decreased or increased foam cell formation. Restoring functional CD36 cDNA in the
TR4 knockdown macrophage cells reversed the decreased foam cell formation.
Together, these results reveal an important signaling pathway controlling
CD36-mediated foam cell formation/cardiovascular diseases, and findings that TR4 
transactivation can be activated via its ligands/activators, such as PUFA
metabolites and TZD, may provide a platform to screen new drug(s) to battle the
metabolism syndrome, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases.

PMCID: PMC2726407
PMID: 19666541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Endocrine. 2009 Oct;36(2):211-7. doi: 10.1007/s12020-009-9220-0. Epub 2009 Jul
18.

Activation of TR4 orphan nuclear receptor gene promoter by cAMP/PKA and C/EBP
signaling.

Liu NC(1), Lin WJ, Yu IC, Lin HY, Liu S, Lee YF, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology and
Urology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, 14642, USA.

In earlier studies, we had suggested that the fasting signal induces TR4 orphan
nuclear receptor expression in vivo. The detailed mechanism(s), however, remain
unclear. In this study, we found that cAMP/PKA, the mediator of fasting and
glucagon signals, could induce TR4 gene expression that in turn modulates
gluconeogenesis. Mechanistic dissection by in vitro studies in hepatocytes
demonstrated that cAMP/PKA might trigger C/EBP alpha and beta binding to the
selective cAMP response element, which is located at the TR4 promoter, thus
inducing TR4 transcription. We also demonstrated that the binding activity of
C/EBPs to the TR4 promoter is increased in response to cAMP treatment. Together, 
our data identified a new signaling pathway from the fasting signal --> cAMP/PKA 
--> C/EBP alpha and beta --> TR4 --> gluconeogenesis in hepatocytes; and
suggested that TR4 could be an important regulator to control glucose
homeostasis. The identification of activator(s)/inhibitor(s) or ligand(s) of TR4 
may provide us an alternative way to control gluconeogenesis.

PMID: 19618297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Endocrinology. 2009 May;150(5):2454-62. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1165. Epub 2009 Jan 
8.

Roles of testicular orphan nuclear receptors 2 and 4 in early embryonic
development and embryonic stem cells.

Shyr CR(1), Kang HY, Tsai MY, Liu NC, Ku PY, Huang KE, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Cancer Center, George Whipple Lab for Cancer
Research, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

The testicular orphan nuclear receptors (TRs) 2 and 4 act as either
transcriptional activators or regulatory proteins of other nuclear receptor
superfamily members. With no identified cognate ligands, their physiological
roles remain unclear. Here we showed the phenotypes of TR2(-/-):TR4(-/-) mutant
embryos, which reveal that the loss of TR2 and TR4 causes early embryonic
lethality and increased cell death. We also found that TR2 and TR4 are expressed 
in blastocysts and embryonic stem (ES) cells, and can act as transcriptional
activators in ES cells. The results on further investigating the roles of TR2 and
TR4 in ES cells showed that TR2 and TR4 were differentially expressed when ES
cells were induced into different specialized cell types, and their expression is
regulated by retinoic acid. Knocking down TR2 and TR4 mRNAs decreased the
expression of Oct-3/4 and Nanog genes. Mechanism dissection suggests that TR2 and
TR4 may affect the Oct-3/4 gene by binding to a direct repeat-1 element located
in its promoter region, which is influenced by retinoic acid. Together, our
findings highlight possible roles for TR2 and TR4 in early embryonic development 
by regulating key genes involved in stem cell self-renewal, commitment, and
differentiation.

PMID: 19131575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jan 15;18(2):373-80. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn350. Epub 2008 Oct
24.

Common variants in the JAZF1 gene associated with height identified by linkage
and genome-wide association analysis.

Johansson A(1), Marroni F, Hayward C, Franklin CS, Kirichenko AV, Jonasson I,
Hicks AA, Vitart V, Isaacs A, Axenovich T, Campbell S, Dunlop MG, Floyd J, Hastie
N, Hofman A, Knott S, Kolcic I, Pichler I, Polasek O, Rivadeneira F, Tenesa A,
Uitterlinden AG, Wild SH, Zorkoltseva IV, Meitinger T, Wilson JF, Rudan I,
Campbell H, Pattaro C, Pramstaller P, Oostra BA, Wright AF, van Duijn CM,
Aulchenko YS, Gyllensten U; EUROSPAN Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Rudbeck Laboratory, Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, 
SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

Genes for height have gained interest for decades, but only recently have
candidate genes started to be identified. We have performed linkage analysis and 
genome-wide association for height in approximately 4000 individuals from five
European populations. A total of five chromosomal regions showed suggestive
linkage and in one of these regions, two SNPs (rs849140 and rs1635852) were
associated with height (nominal P = 7.0 x 10(-8) and P = 9.6 x 10(-7),
respectively). In total, five SNPs across the genome showed an association with
height that reached the threshold of genome-wide significance (nominal P < 1.6 x 
10(-7)). The association with height was replicated for two SNPs (rs1635852 and
rs849140) using three independent studies (n = 31 077, n=1268 and n = 5746) with 
overall meta P-values of 9.4 x 10(-10) and 5.3 x 10(-8). These SNPs are located
in the JAZF1 gene, which has recently been associated with type II diabetes,
prostate and endometrial cancer. JAZF1 is a transcriptional repressor of NR2C2,
which results in low IGF1 serum concentrations, perinatal and early postnatal
hypoglycemia and growth retardation when knocked out in mice. Both the linkage
and association analyses independently identified the JAZF1 region affecting
human height. We have demonstrated, through replication in additional independent
populations, the consistency of the effect of the JAZF1 SNPs on height. Since
this gene also has a key function in the metabolism of growth, JAZF1 represents
one of the strongest candidates influencing human height identified so far.

PMCID: PMC2638782
PMID: 18952825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cerebellum. 2008;7(1):9-17. doi: 10.1007/s12311-008-0006-3.

The roles of testicular orphan nuclear receptor 4 (TR4) in cerebellar
development.

Chen YT(1), Collins LL, Chang SS, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology,
Urology, Radiation Oncology, The Cancer Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Since Testicular Receptor 4 (TR4) was cloned, efforts have been made to elucidate
its physiological function. To examine the putative functions of TR4, the
conventional TR4 knockout (TR4(-/-)) mouse model was generated. Throughout
postnatal and adult stages, TR4(-/-) mice exhibited behavioral deficits in motor 
coordination, suggesting impaired cerebellar function. Histological examination
of the postnatal and adult TR4(-/-) cerebellum revealed gross abnormalities in
foliation. Further analyses demonstrated changes in the lamination of the
TR4(-/-) cerebellar cortex, including reduction in the thickness of both the
molecular layer (ML) and the internal granule layer (IGL). Analyses of the
developing TR4(-/-) cerebellum indicate that the lamination irregularities
observed may result from disrupted granule cell proliferation within the external
granule cell layer (EGL), delayed inward migration of post-mitotic granule cells,
and increased apoptosis during cerebellar development. In addition, abnormal
development of Purkinje cells was observed in the postnatal TR4(-/-) cerebellum, 
as indicated by aberrant dendritic arborization. In postnatal, neuronal-specific 
TR4 knockout mice, architectural changes in the cerebellum were similar to those 
seen in TR4(-/-) animals, suggesting that TR4 function in neuronal lineages might
be important for cerebellar morphogenesis, and that the effect on Purkinje cell
development is likely mediated by changes elsewhere, such as in granule cells, or
is highly dependent on developmental stage. Together, our findings from various
TR4 knockout mouse models suggest that TR4 is required for normal cerebellar
development and that failure to establish proper cytoarchitecture results in
dysfunction of the cerebellum and leads to abnormal behavior.

PMID: 18418664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Endocrinology. 2008 Jul;149(7):3490-9. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0121. Epub 2008 Apr
3.

Oxidative stress stimulates testicular orphan receptor 4 through forkhead
transcription factor forkhead box O3a.

Li G(1), Lee YF, Liu S, Cai Y, Xie S, Liu NC, Bao BY, Chen Z, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George H. Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology,
University of Rochester Medical Center, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642, 
USA.

Early studies reveal that testicular orphan nuclear receptor 4 (TR4) modulates
signaling pathways that control various cell functions. However, how TR4 activity
is regulated without the involvement of specific ligand(s) remains unclear. Here 
we identify a daf-16 family protein-binding element (DBE; 5'-TGTTTAC-3') in the
TR4 promoter that can be recognized by the forkhead transcriptional factor
FOXO3a, a key stress-responsive factor, through which TR4 gene expression is
activated. The interaction between DBE and FOXO3a was confirmed using EMSA and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Activation of FOXO3a by oxidative stress
and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor induced TR4 expression; in contrast, 
suppression of FOXO3a by small interfering RNA can reduce oxidative
stress-induced TR4 expression. The biological consequence of the FOXO3a-induced
TR4 by oxidative stress is to protect against stress-induced cell death in which 
cells with reduced FOXO3a are less resistant to oxidative stress, and addition of
functional TR4 can increase stress resistance. These results suggest that this
new identified oxidative stress-FOXO3a-TR4 pathway is a fundamentally important
mechanism regulating stress resistance and cell survival.

PMCID: PMC2453090
PMID: 18388194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Apr;22(4):858-67. doi: 10.1210/me.2007-0181. Epub 2008 Jan
3.

Subfertility with defective folliculogenesis in female mice lacking testicular
orphan nuclear receptor 4.

Chen LM(1), Wang RS, Lee YF, Liu NC, Chang YJ, Wu CC, Xie S, Hung YC, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, New York 14620, USA.

Testicular orphan nuclear receptor 4 (TR4) plays essential roles for normal
spermatogenesis in male mice. However, its roles in female fertility and ovarian 
function remain largely unknown. Here we found female mice lacking TR4 (TR4-/-)
displayed subfertility and irregular estrous cycles. TR4-/- female mice ovaries
were smaller with fewer or no preovulatory follicles and corpora lutea. After
superovulation, TR4-/- female mice produced fewer oocytes, preovulatory
follicles, and corpora lutea. In addition, more intensive granulosa apoptosis was
found in TR4-/- ovaries. Functional analyses suggest that subfertility in TR4-/- 
female mice can be due to an ovarian defect with impaired folliculogenesis rather
than a deficiency in pituitary gonadotropins. Molecular mechanism dissection of
defective folliculogenesis found TR4 might induce LH receptor (LHR) gene
expression via direct binding to its 5' promoter. The consequence of reduced LHR 
expression in TR4-/- female mice might then result in reduced gonadal sex
hormones via reduced expression of enzymes involved in steroidogenesis. Together,
our results showed TR4 might play essential roles in normal folliculogenesis by
influencing LHR signals. Modulation of TR4 expression and/or activation via its
upstream signals or unidentified ligand(s) might allow us to develop small
molecule(s) to control folliculogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2725750
PMID: 18174360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Genes Dev. 2007 Nov 1;21(21):2832-44.

The TR2 and TR4 orphan nuclear receptors repress Gata1 transcription.

Tanabe O(1), Shen Y, Liu Q, Campbell AD, Kuroha T, Yamamoto M, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

When the orphan nuclear receptors TR2 and TR4, the DNA-binding subunits of the
DRED repressor complex, are forcibly expressed in erythroid cells of transgenic
mice, embryos exhibit a transient mid-gestational anemia as a consequence of a
reduction in the number of primitive erythroid cells. GATA-1 mRNA is specifically
diminished in the erythroid cells of these TR2/TR4 transgenic embryos as it is in
human CD34(+) progenitor cells transfected with forcibly expressed TR2/TR4. In
contrast, in loss-of-function studies analyzing either Tr2- or Tr4-germline-null 
mutant mice or human CD34(+) progenitor cells transfected with force-expressed
TR2 and TR4 short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs), GATA-1 mRNA is induced. An
evolutionarily conserved direct repeat (DR) element, a canonical binding site for
nuclear receptors, was identified in the GATA1 hematopoietic enhancer (G1HE), and
TR2/TR4 binds to that site in vitro and in vivo. Mutation of that DR element led 
to elevated Gata1 promoter activity, and reduced promoter responsiveness to
cotransfected TR2/TR4. Thus, TR2/TR4 directly represses Gata1/GATA1 transcription
in murine and human erythroid progenitor cells through an evolutionarily
conserved binding site within a well-characterized, tissue-specific Gata1
enhancer, thereby providing a mechanism by which Gata1 can be directly silenced
during terminal erythroid maturation.

PMCID: PMC2045135
PMID: 17974920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Sep 21;361(2):323-8. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

TR4 orphan nuclear receptor functions as an apoptosis modulator via regulation of
Bcl-2 gene expression.

Kim E(1), Ma WL, Lin DL, Inui S, Chen YL, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, University of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

While Bcl-2 plays an important role in cell apoptosis, its relationship to the
orphan nuclear receptors remains unclear. Here we report that mouse embryonic
fibroblast (MEF) cells prepared from TR4-deficient (TR4(-/-)) mice are more
susceptible to UV-irradiation mediated apoptosis compared to TR4-Wildtype
(TR4(+/+)) littermates. Substantial increasing TR4(-/-) MEF apoptosis to
UV-irradiation was correlated to the down-regulation of Bcl-2 RNA and protein
expression and collaterally increased caspase-3 activity. Furthermore, this
TR4-induced Bcl-2 gene expression can be suppressed by co-transfection with TR4
coregulators, such as androgen receptor (AR) and receptor-interacting protein 140
(RIP140) in a dose-dependent manner. Together, our results demonstrate that TR4
might function as an apoptosis modulator through induction of Bcl-2 gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC2121606
PMID: 17655826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. EMBO J. 2007 May 2;26(9):2295-306. Epub 2007 Apr 12.

Embryonic and fetal beta-globin gene repression by the orphan nuclear receptors, 
TR2 and TR4.

Tanabe O(1), McPhee D, Kobayashi S, Shen Y, Brandt W, Jiang X, Campbell AD, Chen 
YT, Chang Cs, Yamamoto M, Tanimoto K, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.

The TR2 and TR4 orphan nuclear receptors comprise the DNA-binding core of direct 
repeat erythroid definitive, a protein complex that binds to direct repeat
elements in the embryonic and fetal beta-type globin gene promoters. Silencing of
both the embryonic and fetal beta-type globin genes is delayed in definitive
erythroid cells of Tr2 and Tr4 null mutant mice, whereas in transgenic mice that 
express dominant-negative TR4 (dnTR4), human embryonic epsilon-globin is
activated in primitive and definitive erythroid cells. In contrast, human fetal
gamma-globin is activated by dnTR4 only in definitive, but not in primitive,
erythroid cells, implicating TR2/TR4 as a stage-selective repressor. Forced
expression of wild-type TR2 and TR4 leads to precocious repression of
epsilon-globin, but in contrast to induction of gamma-globin in definitive
erythroid cells. These temporally specific, gene-selective alterations in
epsilon- and gamma-globin gene expression by gain and loss of TR2/TR4 function
provide the first genetic evidence for a role for these nuclear receptors in
sequential, gene-autonomous silencing of the epsilon- and gamma-globin genes
during development, and suggest that their differential utilization controls
stage-specific repression of the human epsilon- and gamma-globin genes.

PMCID: PMC1864974
PMID: 17431400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Pharmacol. 2007 Jun;71(6):1703-14. Epub 2007 Mar 26.

Fisetin, an inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase 6, down-regulates nuclear
factor-kappaB-regulated cell proliferation, antiapoptotic and metastatic gene
products through the suppression of TAK-1 and receptor-interacting
protein-regulated IkappaBalpha kinase activation.

Sung B(1), Pandey MK, Aggarwal BB.

Author information: 
(1)Cytokine Research Laboratory, Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Pharmacol. 2012 Jun;81(6):856.

Fisetin (3,7,3',4'-tetrahydroxyflavone) exhibits anti-inflammatory and
antiproliferative effects through a mechanism that is poorly understood. Although
fisetin has been cocrystalized with cyclin-dependent kinase 6 and inhibits its
activity, this inhibition is not sufficient to explain various activities
assigned to this flavonol. Because of the critical role of the NF-kappaB pathway 
in regulation of inflammation and proliferation of tumor cells, we postulated
that fisetin modulates this pathway. To test this hypothesis, we examined the
effect of fisetin on NF-kappaB and NF-kappaB-regulated gene products in vitro. We
found that among nine different flavones tested, fisetin was potent in
suppressing tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-induced NF-kappaB activation. Fisetin
also suppressed the NF-kappaB activation induced by various inflammatory agents
and carcinogens, and it blocked the phosphorylation and degradation of
IkappaBalpha by inhibiting IkappaBalpha (IKK) activation, which in turn led to
suppression of the phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of p65.
NF-kappaB-dependent reporter gene expression was also suppressed by fisetin, as
was NF-kappaB reporter activity induced by TNFR1, TRADD, TRAF2, NIK, and IKK but 
not that induced by p65 transfection. Fisetin also inhibited TNF-induced TAK1 and
receptor-interacting protein activation, events that lie upstream of IKK
activation. The expression of NF-kappaB-regulated gene products involved in
antiapoptosis (cIAP-1/2, Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, XIAP, Survivin, and TRAF1), proliferation
(cyclin D1, c-Myc, COX-2), invasion (ICAM-1 and MMP-9), and angiogenesis
(vascular endothelial growth factor) were also down-regulated by fisetin. This
correlated with potentiation of apoptosis induced by TNF, doxorubicin, and
cisplatin. Thus, overall, our results indicate that fisetin mediates antitumor
and anti-inflammatory effects through modulation of NF-kappaB pathways.

PMID: 17387141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Apr;21(4):908-20. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

Loss of testicular orphan receptor 4 impairs normal myelination in mouse
forebrain.

Zhang Y(1), Chen YT, Xie S, Wang L, Lee YF, Chang SS, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Testicular orphan nuclear receptor 4 (TR4) has been suggested to play important
roles in the development and functioning of the central nervous system (CNS). We 
find reduced myelination in TR4 knockout (TR4(-/-)) mice, which is particularly
obvious in forebrains and in early developmental stages. Further analysis reveals
that CC-1-positive (CC-1+) oligodendrocytes are decreased in TR4(-/-) forebrains.
The O4+ signals are also reduced in TR4(-/-) forebrains when examined at
postnatal d 7. However, the number and proliferation rate of platelet-derived
growth factor receptor alpha-positive (PDGFalphaR+) oligodendrocyte precursor
cells (OPCs) remain unaffected in these regions, suggesting that loss of TR4
interrupts oligodendrocyte differentiation. This is further supported by the
observation that CC-1+ oligodendrocytes derived from 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine
incorporating OPCs are significantly reduced in TR4(-/-) forebrains. We also find
higher Jagged1 expression levels in axon fiber-enriched regions in TR4(-/-)
forebrains, suggesting a more activated Notch signaling in these regions that
correlates with previous reports showing that Notch activation inhibits
oligodendrocyte differentiation. Together, our results suggest that TR4 is
required for proper myelination in the CNS and is particularly important for
oligodendrocyte differentiation and maturation in the forebrain regions. The
altered Jagged1-Notch signaling in TR4(-/-) forebrain underlies a potential
mechanism that contributes to the reduced myelination in the forebrain.

PMID: 17227886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2006 Nov;5(11):2072-82. Epub 2006 Aug 3.

Modulation of testicular receptor 4 activity by mitogen-activated protein
kinase-mediated phosphorylation.

Huq MD(1), Gupta P, Tsai NP, Wei LN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Testicular receptor 4 (TR4) is an orphan member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily. Despite the lack of identified ligands, its functional role has been
demonstrated both in animals and cell cultures. However, it remains unclear how
the biological activity of TR4 is regulated without specific ligands. In this
study, we showed that in the absence of specific ligands the activity of TR4
could be modulated by mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-mediated
phosphorylation of its activation function 1 (AF-1) domain. A mass
spectrometry-based proteome analysis of TR4 expressed in insect cells revealed
three phosphorylation sites in its AF-1 domain, specifically on Ser(19), Ser(55),
and Ser(68). Site-directed mutagenesis studies demonstrated the functionality of 
phosphorylation on Ser(19) and Ser(68) but not Ser(55). We also demonstrated that
MAPK-mediated phosphorylation of the AF-1 domain rendered TR4 a repressor,
mediated through the preferential recruitment of corepressor RIP140.
Dephosphorylation of its AF-1 made TR4 an activator due to its selective
recruitment of coactivator, P300/cyclic AMP-responsive element binding
protein-binding protein-associated factor (PCAF). The biological effects were
validated by using the wild type TR4 and its constitutive negative
(dephosphorylated) and constitutive positive (phosphorylated) mutants in the
studies of regulation of its natural target gene, apoE. This study uncovered, for
the first time, a ligand-independent mechanism underlying the biological activity
of TR4 that was mediated by MAPK-mediated receptor phosphorylation of AF-1
domain.

PMID: 16887930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Apr;25(7):2722-32.

Deficits in motor coordination with aberrant cerebellar development in mice
lacking testicular orphan nuclear receptor 4.

Chen YT(1), Collins LL, Uno H, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Rochester Medical Center, Department of Pathology, Box 626, 601 
Elmwood Ave., Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Since testicular orphan nuclear receptor 4 (TR4) was cloned, its physiological
function has remained largely unknown. Throughout postnatal development,
TR4-knockout (TR4-/-) mice exhibited behavioral deficits in motor coordination,
suggesting impaired cerebellar function. Histological examination of the
postnatal TR4-/- cerebellum revealed gross abnormalities in foliation;
specifically, lobule VII in the anterior vermis was missing. Further analyses
demonstrated that the laminations of the TR4-/- cerebellar cortex were changed,
including reductions in the thickness of the molecular layer and the internal
granule layer, as well as delayed disappearance of the external granule cell
layer (EGL). These lamination irregularities may result from interference with
granule cell proliferation within the EGL, delayed inward migration of
postmitotic granule cells, and a higher incidence of apoptotis. In addition,
abnormal development of Purkinje cells was observed in the postnatal TR4-/-
cerebellum, as evidenced by aberrant dendritic arborization and reduced calbindin
staining intensity. Expression of Pax-6, Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), astrotactin
(Astn), reelin, and Cdk-5, genes correlated with the morphological development of
the cerebellum, is reduced in the developing TR4-/- cerebellum. Together, our
findings suggest that TR4 is required for normal cerebellar development.

PMCID: PMC1061629
PMID: 15767677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Oct 19;101(42):15058-63. Epub 2004 Oct 11.

Growth retardation and abnormal maternal behavior in mice lacking testicular
orphan nuclear receptor 4.

Collins LL(1), Lee YF, Heinlein CA, Liu NC, Chen YT, Shyr CR, Meshul CK, Uno H,
Platt KA, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology,
Urology, and Radiation Oncology, and Cancer Center, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Testicular orphan nuclear receptor 4 (TR4) is a member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily for which a ligand has not yet been found. In vitro data obtained
from various cell lines suggest that TR4 functions as a master regulator to
modulate many signaling pathways, yet the in vivo physiological roles of TR4
remain unclear. Here, we report the generation of mice lacking TR4 by means of
targeted gene disruption (TR4(-/-)). The number of TR4(-/-) pups generated by the
mating of TR4(+/-) mice is well under that predicted by the normal Mendelian
ratio, and TR4(-/-) mice demonstrate high rates of early postnatal mortality, as 
well as significant growth retardation. Additionally, TR4(-/-) females show
defects in reproduction and maternal behavior, with pups of TR4(-/-) dams dying
soon after birth with no indication of milk intake. These results provide in vivo
evidence that TR4 plays important roles in growth, embryonic and early postnatal 
pup survival, female reproductive function, and maternal behavior.

PMCID: PMC524065
PMID: 15477591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Oct 22;323(3):876-83.

Modulation of the retinoic acid-induced cell apoptosis and differentiation by the
human TR4 orphan nuclear receptor.

Lee YF(1), Bao BY, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

In our previous studies, the TR4 orphan nuclear receptor (TR4) has been
demonstrated to suppress retinoic acid (RA)-induced transactivation via a
negative feedback control mechanism and in situ analysis showed that TR4 is
extensively expressed in mouse brain, especially in regions where the cells are
proliferating. To further study the potential roles of TR4 during cell
differentiation, a tetracycline-inducible system with anti-sense TR4 in
teratocarcinoma P19 cell lines was generated to analyze the retinoic acid-induced
differentiation of these cells. The results indicated that the expression of TR4 
reduced by doxycycline anti-sense TR4 would alter the retinoic acid-induced
differentiation pathway that results in the changes of cell morphology and cell
cycle profile. Unexpectedly, our data further indicated that the RA-induced
apoptosis, judging by DNA fragmentation, could also be altered by the induction
of anti-sense TR4. Together, these findings provide the first in vivo evidence
that an orphan nuclear receptor, such as TR4, may play major roles in the
RA-mediated apoptosis or differentiation in P19 cells.

PMID: 15381082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Aug 9;32(14):4194-204. Print 2004.

TIP27: a novel repressor of the nuclear orphan receptor TAK1/TR4.

Nakajima T(1), Fujino S, Nakanishi G, Kim YS, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, 111 T.W. Alexander 
Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

The nuclear orphan receptor TAK1/TR4 functions as a positive as well as a
negative regulator of transcription; however, little is known about the factors
regulating or mediating its activity. Yeast two-hybrid analysis using the
ligand-binding domain (LBD) of TAK1 as bait identified a novel TAK1-interacting
protein, referred to as TIP27, which functions as a repressor of TAK1-mediated
transactivation. TIP27 is a 27 kDa protein containing two zinc finger motifs.
Mammalian two-hybrid analysis showed that TIP27 interacts specifically with TAK1 
and not with several other nuclear receptors tested. The region between Asp39 and
Lys79 of TIP27, referred to as TAK1-interaction domain (TID), is critical for its
interaction with TAK1 while the TAK1-LBD from helix 3 until the C-terminus is
required for the optimal interaction with TIP27. Pull-down assays demonstrated
that the TIP27 physically interacts with TAK1 and supported the critical
importance of the TID. Confocal microscopy showed that in the nucleus, TIP27 and 
TAK1 co-localize. TIP27 acts as a strong repressor of DR1-dependent
transcriptional activation by TAK1. This repression does not involve the
inhibition of TAK1 homodimerization or DR1 binding but may be due to an effect on
co-activator recruitment by TAK1. Our results indicate that TIP27 functions as a 
TAK1-selective repressor.

PMCID: PMC514368
PMID: 15302918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jul;24(13):5887-99.

Targeted inactivation of testicular nuclear orphan receptor 4 delays and disrupts
late meiotic prophase and subsequent meiotic divisions of spermatogenesis.

Mu X(1), Lee YF, Liu NC, Chen YT, Kim E, Shyr CR, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Testicular orphan nuclear receptor 4 (TR4) is specifically and stage-dependently 
expressed in late-stage pachytene spermatocytes and round spermatids. In the
developing mouse testis, the highest expression of TR4 can be detected at
postnatal days 16 to 21 when the first wave of spermatogenesis progresses to late
meiotic prophase. Using a knockout strategy to delete TR4 in mice, we found that 
sperm production in TR4(-/-) mice is reduced. The comparison of testes from
developing TR4(+/+) and TR4(-/-) mice shows that spermatogenesis in TR4(-/-) mice
is delayed. Analysis of the first wave of spermatogenesis shows that the delay
can be due to delay and disruption of spermatogenesis at the end of late meiotic 
prophase and subsequent meiotic divisions. Seminiferous tubule staging shows that
stages X to XII, where late meiotic prophase and meiotic divisions take place,
are delayed and disrupted in TR4(-/-) mice. Histological examination of testis
sections from TR4(-/-) mice shows degenerated primary spermatocytes and some
necrotic tubules. Testis-specific gene analyses show that the expression of sperm
1 and cyclin A1, which are genes expressed at the end of meiotic prophase, was
delayed and decreased in TR4(-/-) mouse testes. Taken together, results from
TR4(+/+) and TR4(-/-) mice indicate that TR4 is essential for normal
spermatogenesis in mice.

PMCID: PMC480911
PMID: 15199144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Vitam Horm. 2004;68:1-48.

Gene silencing by nuclear orphan receptors.

Zhang Y(1), Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Endocrinology, and Reproduction Research
Branch, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Nuclear orphan receptors represent a large and diverse subgroup in the nuclear
receptor superfamily. Although putative ligands for these orphan members remain
to be identified, some of these receptors possess intrinsic activating,
inhibitory, or dual regulatory functions in development, differentiation,
homeostasis, and reproduction. In particular, gene-silencing events elicited by
chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factors (COUP-TFs);
dosage-sensitive sex reversal-adrenal hypoplasia congenita critical region on the
X chromosome, gene 1 (DAX-1); germ cell nuclear factor (GCNF); short heterodimer 
partner (SHP); and testicular receptors 2 and 4 (TR2 and TR4) are among the best 
characterized. These orphan receptors are critical in controlling basal
activities or hormonal responsiveness of numerous target genes. They employ
multiple and distinct mechanisms to mediate target gene repression. Complex
cross-talk exists between these orphan receptors at their cognate DNA binding
elements and an array of steroid?nonsteroid hormone receptors, other
transcriptional activators, coactivators and corepressors, histone modification
enzyme complexes, and components of basal transcriptional components. Therefore, 
perturbation induced by these orphan receptors at multiple levels, including DNA 
binding activities, receptor homo- or heterodimerization, recruitment of cofactor
proteins, communication with general transcriptional machinery, and changes at
histone acetylation status and chromatin structures, may contribute to silencing 
of target gene expression in a specific promoter or cell-type context. Moreover, 
the findings derived from gene-targeting studies have demonstrated the
significance of these orphan receptors' function in physiologic settings. Thus,
COUP-TFs, DAX-1, GCNF, SHP, and TR2 and 4 are known to be required for multiple
physiologic and biologic functions, including neurogenesis and development of the
heart and vascular system steroidogenesis and sex determination, gametogenesis
and embryonic development, and cholesterol?lipid homeostasis.

PMID: 15193450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 21;278(47):46919-26. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

Disruption of TR4 orphan nuclear receptor reduces the expression of liver
apolipoprotein E/C-I/C-II gene cluster.

Kim E(1), Xie S, Yeh SD, Lee YF, Collins LL, Hu YC, Shyr CR, Mu XM, Liu NC, Chen 
YT, Wang PH, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Apolipoprotein E (apoE) is synthesized in many tissues, and the liver is the
primary site from which apoE redistributes cholesterol and other lipids to
peripheral tissues. Here we demonstrate that the TR4 orphan nuclear receptor
(TR4) can induce apoE expression in HepG2 cells. This TR4-mediated regulation of 
apoE gene expression was further confirmed in vivo using TR4 knockout mice. Both 
serum apoE protein and liver apoE mRNA levels were significantly reduced in TR4
knockout mice. Gel shift and luciferase reporter gene assays further demonstrated
that TR4 can induce apoE gene expression via a TR4 response element located in
the hepatic control region that is 15 kb downstream of the apoE gene. Furthermore
our in vivo data from TR4 knockout mice prove that TR4 can also regulate
apolipoprotein C-I and C-II gene expression via the TR4 response element within
the hepatic control region. Together our data show that loss of TR4
down-regulates expression of the apoE/C-I/C-II gene cluster in liver cells,
demonstrating important roles of TR4 in the modulation of lipoprotein metabolism.

PMID: 12954636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Dermatol Sci. 2003 Feb;31(1):65-71.

Differential and bi-directional regulation between TR2/TR4 orphan nuclear
receptors and a specific ligand mediated-peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor alpha in human HaCaT keratinocytes.

Inui S(1), Lee YF, Chang E, Shyr CR, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY
14642, USA.

BACKGROUND: We have reported that human TR2 orphan nuclear receptor (TR2) can
modulate the transcriptional activity of the reporter gene containing an AGGTCA
direct repeat-hormone response element.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to investigate the potential role and
regulation of TR2 in human HaCaT keratinocytes.
METHODS: We performed mainly chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene
assays (CAT assays), and Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: From CAT assays, TR2 can suppress retinoic acid (RA)-induced
transactivation by 44.7% in HaCaT keratinocytes. This suppression is similar to
our previous report showing TR4 orphan nuclear receptor (TR4) can suppress
RA-induced transactivation. However, TR4 but not TR2 can significantly repress
Wy-14643-mediated peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPAR alpha)
transactivation by 95%. Western blot analysis suggested that Wy-14643 can
differentially regulate the expression of TR2 and TR4 (by increasing the
expression of TR4 protein and decreasing that of TR2) in HaCaT keratinocytes.
CONCLUSION: Our data not only provides the first evidence to demonstrate that
close members of orphan nuclear receptors group, such as TR2 and TR4, can have
distinct functions, but also suggests the existence of differential and
bi-directional regulation between PPAR alpha and TR2/TR4, that may play some
important roles in the PPAR alpha signaling pathway in human keratinocytes.

PMID: 12615366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 14;278(11):9353-60. Epub 2003 Jan 8.

Suppression of hepatitis B virus core promoter by the nuclear orphan receptor
TR4.

Lin WJ(1), Li J, Lee YF, Yeh SD, Altuwaijri S, Ou JH, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, University of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

The TR4 orphan receptor is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily that
modulates gene expression via binding to the AGGTCA direct repeat hormone
response element. Here we report a functional study of TR4 interaction with the
core promoter of the hepatitis B virus (HBV). The electrophoretic mobility shift 
assay shows that TR4 can bind to the direct repeat 1 sequence element
(AGGTTAAAGGTCT, nucleotide coordinates 1757-1769, TR4RE-HBV) on the HBV core
promoter. TR4 also can enhance the activity of a synthetic luciferase reporter
linked with four copies of TR4RE-HBV in either liver HepG2 or non-liver H1299
cells in a dose-dependent manner. Surprisingly, TR4 represses the activity of a
luciferase reporter containing the entire HBV genome sequences. Moreover,
mutation of this TR4RE-HBV site in the HBV core promoter diminishes the TR4
suppression effect. This TR4-induced suppression of HBV core promoter activity is
further confirmed by primer extension analysis of the HBV core RNAs, showing that
TR4 represses both pre-core and core mRNAs. Further dissection of this repressive
mechanism indicates that TR4 may suppress the HBV core promoter activity via
repressing HNF4alpha-mediated transactivation by protein-protein interactions
without inhibition of HNF4alpha DNA binding. Furthermore, our results indicate
that the N- and C-terminal regions of TR4 protein are required for TR4-HNF4alpha 
interaction. It is possible that TR4-HNF4alpha interaction may block the
HNF4alpha function that results in the suppression of HBV gene expression.
Together, these results demonstrate that TR4 can serve as a negative modulator in
the transcriptional regulation of HBV core gene expression.

PMID: 12522137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 28;278(9):7709-17. Epub 2002 Dec 16.

Identification of a novel testicular orphan receptor-4 (TR4)-associated protein
as repressor for the selective suppression of TR4-mediated transactivation.

Yang Y(1), Wang X, Dong T, Kim E, Lin WJ, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research Department of Pathology,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Although many co-activators have been identified for various nuclear receptors,
relatively fewer co-repressors have been isolated and characterized. Here we
report the identification of a novel testicular orphan nuclear receptor-4
(TR4)-associated protein (TRA16) that is mainly localized in the nucleus of cells
as a repressor to suppress TR4-mediated transactivation. The suppression of
TR4-mediated transactivation is selective because TRA16 shows only a slight
influence on the transactivation of androgen receptor, glucocorticoid receptor,
and progesterone receptor. Sequence analysis shows that TRA16 is a novel gene
with 139 amino acids in an open reading frame with a molecular mass of 16 kDa,
which did not match any published gene sequences. Mammalian two-hybrid system and
co-immunoprecipitation assays both demonstrate that TRA16 can interact strongly
with TR4. The electrophoretic mobility shift assay suggests that TRA16 may
suppress TR4-mediated transactivation via decreased binding between the TR4
protein and the TR4 response element on the target gene(s). Furthermore, TRA16
can also block the interaction between TR4 and TR4 ligand-binding domain through 
interacting with TR4-DNA-binding and ligand-binding domains. These unique
suppression mechanisms suggest that TRA16 may function as a novel repressor to
selectively suppress the TR4-mediated transactivation.

PMID: 12486131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2002 Aug;81(4-5):291-308.

Recent advances in the TR2 and TR4 orphan receptors of the nuclear receptor
superfamily.

Lee YF(1), Lee HJ, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Urology,
University of Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

The human testicular receptor 2 (TR2) and TR4 orphan receptors are two
evolutionarily related proteins belonging to the nuclear receptor superfamily.
Numerous TR2 and TR4 variants and homologs have been identified from different
species, including vertebrates (e.g. human, murine, rabbit, fish, and amphibian) 
and invertebrates (e.g. Drosophila, sea urchin, and nematode) since TR2 was
initially isolated over a decade ago. Specific tissue distribution, genomic
organization, and chromosomal assignment of both orphan receptors have been
investigated. In order to reveal the physiological functions played by both TR2
and TR4, upstream modulators of TR2 and TR4 gene expression, their downstream
target gene regulation, feedback mechanisms, and differential modulation mediated
by the recruitment of other nuclear receptors and coregulators have been
investigated. Studies summarized in the present report have provided unexpected
insights into the TR2 and TR4 functions in a variety of biological processes. The
essential and difficult tasks of identifying orphan receptor ligands,
agonist/antagonist assignment, their physiological functions, and mechanisms of
action will continue to challenge nuclear receptor researchers in the future.

PMID: 12361719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 22;277(47):45547-57. Epub 2002 Sep 16.

Transforming growth factor-beta -Smad signaling pathway cooperates with NF-kappa 
B to mediate nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae-induced MUC2 mucin transcription.

Jono H(1), Shuto T, Xu H, Kai H, Lim DJ, Gum JR Jr, Kim YS, Yamaoka S, Feng XH,
Li JD.

Author information: 
(1)Gonda Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, House Ear Institute,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90057, USA.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) and related factors are
multifunctional cytokines that regulate diverse cellular processes, including
proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and immune response. The involvement
of TGF-beta receptor-mediated signaling in bacteria-induced up-regulation of
mucin, a primary innate defensive response for mammalian airways, however, still 
remains unknown. Here, we report that the bacterium nontypeable Haemophilus
influenzae (NTHi), an important human respiratory pathogen, utilizes the
TGF-beta-Smad signaling pathway together with the
TLR2-MyD88-TAK1-NIK-IKKbeta/gamma-IkappaBalpha pathway to mediate
NF-kappaB-dependent MUC2 mucin transcription. The NTHi-induced TGF-beta receptor 
Type II phosphorylation occurred at as early as 5 min. Pretreatment of NTHi with 
TGF-beta neutralization antibody reduced up-regulation of MUC2 transcription.
Moreover, functional cooperation of NF-kappaB p65/p50 with Smad3/4 appears to
positively mediate NF-kappaB-dependent MUC2 transcription. These data are the
first to demonstrate the involvement of TGF-beta receptor-mediated signaling in
bacteria-induced up-regulation of mucin transcription, bring insights into the
novel role of TGF-beta signaling in bacterial pathogenesis, and may lead to new
therapeutic intervention of NTHi infections.

PMID: 12237307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. EMBO J. 2002 Jul 1;21(13):3434-42.

An embryonic/fetal beta-type globin gene repressor contains a nuclear receptor
TR2/TR4 heterodimer.

Tanabe O(1), Katsuoka F, Campbell AD, Song W, Yamamoto M, Tanimoto K, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, and Robert
H.Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
60208-3500, USA.

We recently described an erythroid epsilon-globin gene repressor activity, which 
we named DRED (direct repeat erythroid-definitive). We show that DRED binds with 
high affinity to DR1 sites in the human embryonic (epsilon-) and fetal (gamma-)
globin gene promoters, but the adult beta-globin promoter has no DR1 element.
DRED is a 540 kDa complex; sequence determination showed that it contains the
nuclear orphan receptors TR2 and TR4. TR2 and TR4 form a heterodimer that binds
to the epsilon and gamma promoter DR1 sites. One mutation in a DR1 site causes
elevated gamma-globin transcription in human HPFH (hereditary persistence of
fetal hemoglobin) syndrome, and we show that this mutation reduces TR2/TR4
binding in vitro. The two receptor mRNAs are expressed at all stages of murine
and human erythropoiesis; their forced transgenic expression reduces endogenous
embryonic epsilony-globin transcription. These data suggest that TR2/TR4 forms
the core of a larger DRED complex that represses embryonic and fetal globin
transcription in definitive erythroid cells, and therefore that inhibition of its
activity might be an attractive intervention point for treating sickle cell
anemia.

PMCID: PMC126089
PMID: 12093744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jul;22(13):4661-6.

Spermatogenesis and testis development are normal in mice lacking testicular
orphan nuclear receptor 2.

Shyr CR(1), Collins LL, Mu XM, Platt KA, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642,USA.

Early in vitro cell culture studies suggested that testicular orphan nuclear
receptor 2 (TR2), a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily, may play
important roles in the control of several pathways including retinoic acids,
vitamin D, thyroid hormones, and ciliary neurotrophic factor. Here we report the 
surprising results showing that mice lacking TR2 are viable and have no serious
developmental defects. Male mice lacking TR2 have functional testes, including
normal sperm number and motility, and both male and female mice lacking TR2 are
fertile. In heterozygous TR2(+/-) male mice we found that beta-galactosidase, the
indicator of TR2 protein expression, was first detected at the age of 3 weeks and
its expression pattern was restricted mainly in the spermatocytes and round
spermatids. These protein expression patterns were further confirmed with
Northern blot analysis of TR2 mRNA expression. Together, results from
TR2-knockout mice suggest that TR2 may not play essential roles in
spermatogenesis and normal testis development, function, and maintenance.
Alternatively, the roles of TR2 may be redundant and could be played by other
close members of the nuclear receptor superfamily such as testicular orphan
receptor 4 (TR4) or unidentified orphan receptors that share many similar
functions with TR2. Further studies with double knockouts of both orphan nuclear 
receptors, TR2 and TR4, may reveal their real physiological roles.

PMCID: PMC133912
PMID: 12052874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 26;277(17):14622-8. Epub 2002 Feb 13.

Modulation of estrogen receptor-mediated transactivation by orphan receptor TR4
in MCF-7 cells.

Shyr CR(1), Hu YC, Kim E, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

The human testicular orphan receptor 4 (TR4) is a member of the nuclear receptor 
superfamily that shows a broad tissue distribution with higher expression in the 
nervous system and male reproductive tract. TR4 functions as a transcriptional
modulator that controls various target genes via binding to the DNA hormone
response elements. Here we report that instead of direct binding to hormone
response elements for gene regulation, TR4 can also go through direct
protein-protein interaction to repress estrogen receptor (ER)-mediated
transactivation. Electrophoretic mobility shift and glutathione S-transferase
pull-down assays clearly demonstrate that the direct interaction between TR4 and 
ER will inhibit the homodimerization of ER and interrupt/prevent ER binding to
the estrogen response element. The consequence of these events may then result in
the suppression of ER target genes, such as cyclin D1 and pS2 and inhibition of
ER-mediated cell proliferation in the MCF-7 cells stably transfected with TR4.
Together, our results showing that TR4 can suppress ER function via
protein-protein interaction not only represent a unique cross-talk signaling
pathway in the nuclear receptor superfamily, it may also provide us with a new
strategy to modulate ER function in the breast cancer cells.

PMID: 11844790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Cell Growth Differ. 2001 Nov;12(11):563-72.

The nuclear orphan receptor TR4 promotes proliferation of myeloid progenitor
cells.

Koritschoner NP(1), Madruga J, Knespel S, Blendinger G, Anzinger B, Otto A, Zenke
M, Bartunek P.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, D-13122 Berlin, Germany.

Nuclear receptors represent key regulators in cell proliferation,
differentiation, and development. Here we demonstrate that the nuclear orphan
receptor TR4 is highly expressed in hematopoietic cells and tissues and have
analyzed the impact of TR4 in this cell compartment. We show that TR4, when
ectopically expressed in bone marrow cells via retrovirus vector, promotes
proliferation of myeloid progenitor cells. Cells represent promyelocytes as
judged by morphological features, expression of cell surface molecules, and
specific markers like Mim-1 and CAAT/enhancer binding protein beta. We also
demonstrate that the growth promoting activity of TR4 is not exclusively
dependent on its association with DNA, because expression of a mutated TR4
version devoid of its DNA binding domain exhibits a similar proliferative
potential as wild-type TR4. In conclusion, these data position the orphan
receptor TR4 as an important regulator of myeloid progenitor cell proliferation
and development.

PMID: 11714637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Nov;15(11):1891-905.

EAR2 and EAR3/COUP-TFI regulate transcription of the rat LH receptor.

Zhang Y(1), Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research
Branch, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Our previous studies demonstrated regulation of the human LH receptor (hLHR)
promoter by nuclear orphan receptors EAR2, EAR3/COUP-TFI (repression), and TR4
(activation) through a direct-repeat motif (hDR). The current studies
investigated the differential binding of orphan receptors to rat (rLHR) and hLHR 
promoters, and their modulation of rLHR gene transcription in rat granulosa
cells. The rLHR DR with one nucleotide difference from hDR at its core sequence
mediated inhibition of the rLHR transcription, to which EAR2 and EAR3/COUP-TFI
but not TR4 bound. The A/C mismatch was responsible for the lack of TR4 binding
and function, but had no effect on EAR2 and EAR3/COUP-TFI. EAR2 and EAR3/COUP-TF 
bound to the rLHR DR with lower affinity than to the hDR, and exhibited lesser
inhibitory capacity. This difference resulted from the lack of a guanine in the
rDR, which is present 3' next to the hDR core. These studies have identified
sequence-specific requirements for the binding of EAR2, EAR3/COUP-TFI, and TR4 to
the DRs that explain their differential regulation of rat and human LHR genes. In
addition, hCG treatment significantly reduced the inhibition of rLHR gene in
granulosa cells and also decreased EAR2 and EAR3/COUP-TFI protein levels. These
results indicate that hormonally regulated expression of EAR2 and EAR3/COUP-TFI
contributes to gonadotropin-induced derepression of LHR promoter activity in
granulosa cells.

PMID: 11682620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Aug 3;285(5):1361-8.

TR4 orphan receptor represses the human steroid 21-hydroxylase gene expression
through the monomeric AGGTCA motif.

Lee HJ(1), Lee YF, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, National Dong Hwa University, Hualien, Taiwan,
974, Republic of China. hjlee@mail.ndhu.edu.tw

The human TR4 orphan receptor (TR4) is a member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily. It functions as a transcriptional factor which regulates and
controls many important physiological functions. It has been documented that TR4 
may bind as a homodimer to a DNA response element containing two direct repeats
of the AGGTCA consensus motif. Surprisingly, our data reveal that the expression 
of the human steroid 21-hydroxylase (21-OHase) gene could be repressed by TR4 via
the monomeric AGGTCA motif (-228TR4RE) at its 5' flanking region (nucleotide
numbers 1431-1444, 5'-GGAAAAAGGTCAGG-3'). Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
showed specific binding with a dissociation constant of 0.4 nM between TR4 and
the monomeric -288TR4RE motif. However, TR4 does not form heterodimers with
either retinoid X receptor alpha or SHP (short heterodimer partner) orphan
receptor. Additionally, both dual-luciferase and chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase assays demonstrated that TR4 can function as a repressor via
the -228TR4RE of the 21-OHase gene. In conclusion, our data suggest that TR4 may 
bind to a monomeric DNA response element and play an important role in the
suppression of the 21-OHase gene expression.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11478808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 28;275(4):2763-70.

Nuclear orphan receptors regulate transcription of the gene for the human
luteinizing hormone receptor.

Zhang Y(1), Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, NICHD, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

An imperfect estrogen receptor half-site response element direct-repeat, located 
within the TATA-less promoter of the human luteinizing hormone receptor (hLHR),
was identified as an inhibitory site for Sp1/Sp3-driven basal transcription.
Isolation of proteins recognizing this site by yeast one-hybrid screening of a
human placenta cDNA library revealed three nuclear orphan receptors, EAR2,
EAR3/COUP-TFI, and TR4. Electrophoresis mobility shift assays demonstrated that
the in vitro translated nuclear orphan receptors specifically bound the
direct-repeat motif of the hLHR promoter. Also, endogenous EAR2 and EAR3/COUP-TFI
from JAR cell and human testis and TR4 from testes bound this motif in
electrophoresis mobility shift assays. Functional analyses in CV-1 cells showed
that EAR2 and EAR3/COUP-TFI repressed the hLHR promoter activity by up to 70% in 
a dose-dependent and sequence-specific manner. Conversely, TR4 activated the hLHR
promoter activity up to 2.5-fold through binding to the same cis-element. The
stimulation was reversed by coexpression of EAR2 or EAR3/COUP-TFI, indicating
their competitive binding for this site. Such recognition of a common cognate
site by the proteins with antagonistic functions implies that a net regulation of
the hLHR gene may result from the relative availability of repressors and
activator in a physiological state. This also may contribute to the differential 
expression of the hLHR gene in gonadal and non-gonadal tissues.

PMID: 10644740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Dec 21;96(26):14724-9.

Convergence of two repressors through heterodimer formation of androgen receptor 
and testicular orphan receptor-4: a unique signaling pathway in the steroid
receptor superfamily.

Lee YF(1), Shyr CR, Thin TH, Lin WJ, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, The Cancer
Center, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

The androgen receptor (AR) binds to androgen response elements and regulates
target genes via a mechanism involving coregulators. Here we demonstrate that the
AR can interact with the testicular orphan receptor-4 (TR4) and function as a
repressor to down-regulate the TR4 target genes by preventing the TR4 binding to 
its target DNA. Interestingly, the heterodimerization of AR and TR4 also allows
TR4 to repress AR target gene expression. Simultaneous exposure to both receptors
therefore could result in bidirectional suppression of their target genes.
Together, these data demonstrate that the coupling of two different receptors,
through the heterodimerization of AR and TR4, is a unique signaling pathway in
the steroid receptor superfamily, which may facilitate further understanding of
the complicated androgen action in prostate cancer or libido.

PMCID: PMC24715
PMID: 10611280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 4;274(23):16198-205.

Differential regulation of direct repeat 3 vitamin D3 and direct repeat 4 thyroid
hormone signaling pathways by the human TR4 orphan receptor.

Lee YF(1), Young WJ, Lin WJ, Shyr CR, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology,
Urology, Radiation Oncology, and The Cancer Center, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

In situ hybridization analysis demonstrated that abundant testicular orphan
receptor (TR4) transcripts were detected in kidney, intestine, and bone, which
are vitamin D3 target organs. Cell transfection studies also demonstrated that
the expression of the vitamin D3 target gene, 25-hydroxyvitamin D3
24-hydroxylase, can be repressed by TR4 through high affinity binding (Kd = 1.32 
nM) to the direct repeat 3 vitamin D3 receptor response element (DR3VDRE). This
TR4-mediated repression of DR3VDRE is in contrast to our earlier report that TR4 
could induce thyroid hormone target genes containing a direct repeat 4 thyroid
hormone response element (DR4T3RE). Electrophoretic mobility shift assay using
several TR4 monoclonal antibodies when combined with either TR4-DR3VDRE or
TR4-DR4T3RE showed a distinct supershifted pattern, and proteolytic analysis
further demonstrated distinct digested peptides with either TR4-DR3VDRE or
TR4-DR4T3RE. These results may therefore suggest that TR4 can adapt to different 
conformations once bound to DR3VDRE or DR4T3RE. The consequence of these
different conformations of TR4-DR3VDRE and TR4-DR4T3RE may allow each of them to 
recruit different coregulators. The differential repression of TR4-mediated
DR3VDRE and DR4T3RE transactivation by the receptor interacting protein 140, a
TR4 coregulator, further strengthens our hypothesis that the specificity of gene 
regulation by TR4 can be modulated by protein-DNA and protein-protein
interactions.

PMID: 10347174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Invest Dermatol. 1999 Apr;112(4):426-31.

Induction of TR4 orphan receptor by retinoic acid in human HaCaT keratinocytes.

Inui S(1), Lee YF, Haake AR, Goldsmith LA, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Rochester Medical Center, New York,
USA.

Human TR4 orphan receptor (TR4) can modulate the transcriptional activity of the 
reporter gene containing an AGGTCA direct repeat-hormone response element. Here
we studied the potential role of TR4 in human HaCaT keratinocytes. Using a
chloramphenicol acetyl-transferase reporter gene assay, it was shown that TR4 can
suppress retinoic acid-induced transactivation by 47.3% in human HaCaT
keratinocytes. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay indicated that this
suppression may be due to TR4 binding with higher affinity to the retinoic acid
response element than retinoid receptors. Western blot analysis further suggested
that retinoic acid can increase the expression of TR4 protein in human HaCaT
keratinocytes, indicating that TR4 acts as a negative feedback modulator for
retinoic acid action. Interestingly, TR4 expression is increased in normal human 
keratinocytes when substituting a low calcium medium with a high calcium medium. 
Together, our data suggested, for the first time, that an orphan receptor, such
as TR4, may play an important part in retinoid-mediated signaling pathways in
human keratinocytes, providing a new insight into keratinocyte biology.

PMID: 10201524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mol Cell Biochem. 1998 Dec;189(1-2):195-200.

Thyroid hormone direct repeat 4 response element is a positive regulatory element
for the human TR2 orphan receptor, a member of steroid receptor superfamily.

Chang C(1), Pan HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

We demonstrate that TR2 orphan receptor (TR2) may induce transactivation
activities via an AGGTCA-like-direct-repeat-4 consensus thyroid hormone response 
element (DR4-TRE) system. TR2 showed a slightly greater binding affinity than
thyroid hormone receptor alpha1 (TR alpha1)/retinoid X receptor alpha (RXR alpha)
heterodimer with Kds 0.5 nM and 2.3 nM, respectively. These receptors, TR2 and TR
alpha1/RXR alpha heterodimer, competed with each other on binding to limited
amounts of DR4-TRE. TR2 canceled the suppression effect of unliganded-TR alpha1
on CAT reporter activity in a dose-dependent fashion. Estrogen receptor (ER) and 
2P2 (a mutated TR2 with P box sequence of androgen receptor) failed not only to
bind to DR4-TRE but also to recover this inhibitory effect of unliganded
TRalpha1. However, when T3 was supplemented, estradiol-ER competed for a full CAT
activity while TR2 showed an additive effect on the transcriptional activation.
These results indicate that DNA binding is essential for TR2 to take action and
fully functional liganded TR alpha1 may rely on common factors shared with ER but
not TR2.

PMID: 9879671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. EMBO J. 1999 Jan 4;18(1):179-87.

XIAP, a cellular member of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein family, links the
receptors to TAB1-TAK1 in the BMP signaling pathway.

Yamaguchi K(1), Nagai S, Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Nishita M, Tamai K, Irie K, Ueno N,
Nishida E, Shibuya H, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya
University, Nagoya, Japan.

Signals elicited by transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) superfamily
ligands are generated following the formation of heteromeric receptor complexes
consisting of type I and type II receptors. TAK1, a member of the MAP kinase
kinase kinase family, and its activator, TAB1, participate in the bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling pathway involved in mesoderm induction and 
patterning in early Xenopus embryos. However, the events leading from receptor
activation to TAK1 activation remain to be identified. A yeast interaction screen
was used to search for proteins that function in the pathway linking the
receptors and TAB1-TAK1. The human X-chromosome-linked inhibitor of apoptosis
protein (XIAP) was isolated as a TAB1-binding protein. XIAP associated not only
with TAB1 but also with the BMP receptors in mammalian cells. Injection of XIAP
mRNA into dorsal blastomeres enhanced the ventralization of Xenopus embryos in a 
TAB1-TAK1-dependent manner. Furthermore, a truncated form of XIAP lacking the
TAB1-binding domain partially blocked the expression of ventral mesodermal marker
genes induced by a constitutively active BMP type I receptor. These results
suggest that XIAP participates in the BMP signaling pathway as a positive
regulator linking the BMP receptors and TAB1-TAK1.

PMCID: PMC1171113
PMID: 9878061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 25;273(39):25209-15.

A novel nuclear receptor heterodimerization pathway mediated by orphan receptors 
TR2 and TR4.

Lee CH(1), Chinpaisal C, Wei LN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

A unique heterodimerization pathway involving orphan receptors TR2 and TR4 is
demonstrated. TR2 and TR4 preferentially form heterodimers in solution as well as
on DNA elements containing a direct repeat-5 (DR5). The in vitro interaction
between TR2 and TR4 is demonstrated by the yeast and the mammalian two-hybrid
interaction assays, the pull-down assay, and the gel mobility shift assay. The in
vivo interaction is demonstrated by following the intracellular localization of
fusion receptors tagged with a green fluorescent protein. The dimerization is
mediated by the ligand binding domains, and the three leucine residues on helix
10 of TR2 are critical for this interaction. In addition, coexpression of these
two receptors exerts a much stronger repressive activity on a DR5-containing
reporter than expressing either receptor alone. In the developing testis, TR2 and
TR4 are coexpressed in the same testicular cell populations and exhibit a
parallel pattern of expression along development. The preferential
heterodimerization between TR2 and TR4 and their coexistence in specific germ
cell populations suggest a physiological role of TR2/TR4 heterodimers in germ
cell development.

PMID: 9737983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Endocrine. 1998 Apr;8(2):169-75.

TR4 orphan receptor crosstalks to chicken ovalbumin upstream
protein-transcription factor and thyroid hormone receptor to induce the
transcriptional activity of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 long-terminal
repeat.

Hwang SB(1), Burbach JP, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology,
University of Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Here we investigate the roles of human testicular orphan receptors, TR2 and TR4, 
on the gene regulation of the long-terminal repeat of the human immunodeficiency 
virus type 1 (HIV-LTR). In gel-retardation assays, a palindromic element at the
5'-end of HIV-LTR,5'-AGGGGTCAGATATCCACTGACCTTT-3',showed high affinity to TR2 and
TR4 with an equilibrium dissociation constant (Kd) of 1.11 +/- 0.48 (n = 3) and
0.52 +/- 0.12 nM (n = 3), respectively. Interestingly, each half-site of the
palindromic element is sufficient to compete with the binding of the labeled
palindromic element to TR2 or TR4 with an equilibrium inhibition constant (ki)
around 10 nM. However, the transiently expressed TR2 or TR4 in Chinese hamster
ovary (CHO) cells or Japanese quail muscle myoblasts (QM7) cells showed no
activity in regulating the transcriptional activity of the chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene inserted downstream of the HIV-LTR
promoter. Although both TR2 and TR4 showed no effect on CAT activity by itself,
our data showed only the TR4 could crosstalk to the chicken ovalbumin upstream
protein-transcription factor (COUP-TF1) and thyroid hormone receptor (TR alpha
1), and potentiated the transcriptional activity of HIV-LTR on the CAT reporter
gene regulated by COUP-TF1 and TR alpha 1. These results indicate that TR4, but
not TR2, may couple to other nuclear receptors in the upregulation of the HIV
replication.

PMID: 9704574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 14;273(33):20877-85.

A bidirectional regulation between the TR2/TR4 orphan receptors (TR2/TR4) and the
ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) signaling pathway.

Young WJ(1), Lee YF, Smith SM, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology,
Urology, and Biochemistry, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New
York 14642, USA.

Previously, we reported that the nuclear orphan receptor TR4 could induce
transcriptional activity via the 5th intron of the ciliary neurotrophic factor
(CNTF) alpha receptor gene (CNTFR-I5). Here we show CNTF could increase TR4
expression and enhance the DNA-binding capacity of TR4. Interestingly, the
expression of TR2, a close family member of TR4, could also be induced by CNTF.
In return, TR2 induced CNTFRalpha transcriptional activity through binding to a
direct repeat response element of AGGTCA within CNTFR-I5. The possibility of this
mutual influence between TR2 and the CNTF signaling was further strengthened by
in situ hybridization. Similar expression patterns of TR2 and CNTFRalpha were
observed in most of the developing neural structures such as the ganglia, neural 
epithelia, spinal cord, and the periventricular areas of brain. Together, our
data suggest that an interaction between TR2/TR4 and the CNTF signaling pathway
may occur, supporting the hypothesis that TR2/TR4 may play important roles in
neurogenesis.

PMID: 9694834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 29;273(22):13437-43.

Negative feedback control of the retinoid-retinoic acid/retinoid X receptor
pathway by the human TR4 orphan receptor, a member of the steroid receptor
superfamily.

Lee YF(1), Young WJ, Burbach JP, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research and Departments of Pathology,
Urology, and Biochemistry, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14642,
USA.

Amino acid sequence analysis indicates that the human TR4 orphan receptor (TR4)
is a member of the estrogen/thyroid receptor subfamily of the steroid/thyroid
receptor superfamily and recognizes the AGGTCA direct repeat (DR) of the hormone 
response element. Here we demonstrate using the electrophoretic mobility shift
assay that TR4 binds specifically to DR with a spacing of 1 and 5 base pairs (DR1
and DR5), which are the response elements for retinoic acid receptor (RAR) and
retinoid X receptor (RXR), respectively. A reporter gene assay using
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase demonstrated that TR4 repressed RA-induced
transactivation in a TR4 dose-dependent manner. Inhibition of the retinoid signal
pathway also occurs through natural response elements found in CRBPII and RARbeta
genes. Our data suggest that the mechanism of repression may not involve the
formation of functionally inactive heterodimers between TR4 and RAR or RXR.
Instead, we show that TR4 may compete for hormone response elements with RAR and 
RXR due to its higher binding affinity. Furthermore, treatment of F9 murine
teratocarcinoma (F9) cells with 10(-6) M all-trans-retinoic acid increased TR4
mRNA levels, and this change was accompanied by an increased amount of endogenous
TR4 protein that can bind to RXRE in electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Our
data therefore strongly suggest that the retinoid signal pathway can be regulated
by TR4 in a negative feedback control mechanism, which may restrict retinoic acid
signaling to certain elements in a cell-specific fashion.

PMID: 9593676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 2;272(18):12215-20.

Identification of direct repeat 4 as a positive regulatory element for the human 
TR4 orphan receptor. A modulator for the thyroid hormone target genes.

Lee YF(1), Pan HJ, Burbach JP, Morkin E, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin
53792, USA.

While the TR4 orphan receptor (TR4) is able to repress the expression of its
target genes via its interaction with the direct repeat 1-hormone response
element (DR1-HRE) and DR2-HRE, we now report that TR4 can also induce the
transcriptional activity of the reporter gene containing a DR4-HRE via
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase assay. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and
Scatchard analysis reveal a strong binding affinity (dissociation constant = 2
nM) between TR4 and DR4-HRE. The induction mediated by TR4 was detected not only 
in the synthetic DR4-HRE but also in some genes, such as rat alpha-myosin
heavy-chain and S14 genes, containing the DR4 or DR4-like motif, which have been 
suggested to be the response elements for a thyroid hormone receptor. Our data
also demonstrate this TR4-mediated gene induction is TR4 dose- and DR4
sequence-dependent. Together, our data suggest that DR4-HRE can be a positive
regulatory element for TR4, which may be able to induce the transcriptional
activity of the genes containing such positive HREs.

PMID: 9115296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 31;272(5):3109-16.

Induction of the intronic enhancer of the human ciliary neurotrophic factor
receptor (CNTFRalpha) gene by the TR4 orphan receptor. A member of steroid
receptor superfamily.

Young WJ(1), Smith SM, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology-Reproductive Physiology Program, Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53792, USA.

A conserved hormone response element, CNTFR-DR1 (5'-AGGTCAGAGGTCAGG-3'), has been
identified in the 5th intron of the alpha component of the ciliary neurotrophic
factor receptor (CNTFRalpha) gene for the human TR4 orphan receptor (TR4).
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed a specific binding with high affinity
(Kd = 0.066 nM) between TR4 and the CNTFR-DR1. A reporter gene assay using
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase demonstrated that the 5th intron of CNTFRalpha 
has an enhancer activity which could be induced by TR4 in a dose-dependent
manner. Furthermore, our in situ hybridization data showed that abundant TR4
transcripts were detected in adult brain, in regions of cortical and hippocampal 
neurons, as well as in many developing neural structures, including brain, spinal
cord, ganglia (sympathetic and sensory), and neuronal epithelia (retinal, otic,
olfactory, and gustatory). The striking similarities in the expression patterns
of TR4 and CNTFRalpha in the developing and postnatal nervous systems further
support the potential role of TR4 in neurogenesis. Collectively, these data
suggest that the human CNTFRalpha gene could represent the first identified
neural-specific gene induced by TR4.

PMID: 9006963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Genomics. 1996 Jul 15;35(2):361-6.

New variants of the human and rat nuclear hormone receptor, TR4: expression and
chromosomal localization of the human gene.

Yoshikawa T(1), DuPont BR, Leach RJ, Detera-Wadleigh SD.

Author information: 
(1)Unit on Gene Mapping and Expression, National Institute of Mental Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, 20892, USA.

TR4 is a new member of the nuclear hormone receptor family. This receptor is
highly conserved in rat and human, but an in-frame insertion of 19 amino acid
residues in the amino-terminal (A/B) region was found in the human homolog, which
we refer to as hTR4alpha1. By reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) we have
identified a human TR4 mRNA (hTR4alpha2) that is analogous in size and sequence
to the reported rat TR4. RT-PCR analysis using total RNA derived from various rat
tissues revealed a new rat TR4 transcript, referred to as rTR4alpha1, which is
homologous to hTR4alpha1 since it contains the extra 19 amino acids in the A/B
region. The two rat transcripts showed a differential tissue distribution.
Analysis of the exon-intron organization of the hTR4 A/B region showed that the
19-amino-acid peptide insert in hTR4alpha1 was encoded by a separate exon,
indicating that hTR4alpha1 and hTR4alpha2 transcripts were produced by the
differential usage of the exon. RT-PCR analysis revealed that both hTR4alpha1 and
hTR4alpha2 were detectable in brain, placenta, and ovary. In contrast, the human 
ovarian cancer cell line, PA1, failed to express hTR4alpha1. By fluorescence in
situ hybridization, we have mapped the hTR4 gene to 3p25, a region deleted in
some forms of cancer.

PMID: 8661150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Endocrinology. 1996 May;137(5):1562-71.

Splice variants of rat TR4 orphan receptor: differential expression of novel
sequences in the 5'-untranslated region and C-terminal domain.

Yoshikawa T(1), Makino S, Gao XM, Xing GQ, Chuang DM, Detera-Wadleigh SD.

Author information: 
(1)Unit on Gene Mapping and Expression, National Institute of Mental Health,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The use of rapid amplification of 5'-cDNA ends-PCR yielded two novel sequences
for the rat orphan receptor, TR4, representing heterogeneity on the
5'-untranslated region. Genomic structure analysis revealed that the
5'-untranslated region of the longer messenger RNA fragment, rTR4-1, contained
three exons, alpha, beta, and gamma. The skipping of exon gamma gave rise to
rTR4-2, indicating that rTR4-1 and rTR4-2 are products of alternative splicing.
We isolated another novel rat TR4 splice variant, rTR4-NS, which was found to
diverge from rTR4-2 at codon 504. rTR4-NS contained an unspliced intronic
sequence with in-frame codons for eight amino acids followed by a termination
codon. The three TR4 messenger RNA variants were differentially expressed.
rTR4-NS appeared to be a rare transcript found in limited areas of the brain. In 
situ hybridization detect prominent TR4 signals in brain areas known to be
involved in stress response. In cerebellar granule cells, the rise in TR4
expression correlated with the progression of neuronal maturation.
N-Methyl-D-aspartate treatment triggered a marked increase in TR4 expression.
These results suggest a possible role for TR4 in neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 8612486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 1995 Dec 15;270(50):30129-33.

Suppression of gene expression on the simian virus 40 major late promoter by
human TR4 orphan receptor. A member of the steroid receptor superfamily.

Lee HJ(1), Lee Y, Burbach JP, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology-Reproductive Physiology Program, University of Wisconsin,
Madison 53792, USA.

The key expression of the simian virus 40 (SV40) major late promoter could be
repressed by the human TR4 orphan receptor via the +55 region of the SV40 major
late promoter (nucleotide numbers 368-389, 5' -GTTA-AGGTTCGTAGGTCATGGA-3'). Using
the coupled in vitro transcribed and translated TR4 orphan receptor with a
molecular mass of 67.3 kilodaltons, electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed
specific binding with a dissociation constant of 1.09 nM between the TR4 orphan
receptor and the SV40 +55 oligonucleotides. In addition, chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase assay demonstrated that this SV40 +55 region can function as a 
repressor via the TR4 orphan receptor, suppressing the transcriptional activities
of both SV40 early and late promoters. Together, our data suggest that the TR4
orphan receptor may play an important role for the suppression of the SV40 gene
expression.

PMID: 8530419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Gene. 1995 Oct 3;163(2):239-42.

Cloning of the gene encoding the murine orphan receptor TAK1 and
cell-type-specific expression in testis.

Hirose T(1), O'Brien DA, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences,
National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

We have cloned the gene encoding the mouse homologue of the orphan receptor,
TAK1, a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily, from a mouse testis cDNA
library. The amino acid sequence of mouse TAK1 (mTAK1) is highly homologous to
that of human TAK1, with an overall identity of 98%. Northern blot analysis using
RNA from different testicular cell types showed that the mTAK1 transcript is
predominantly expressed in pachytene spermatocytes at a low level in round
spermatids, but not in germ cells at earlier phases of spermatogenesis or in
Sertoli cells. Southern analysis using genomic DNA prepared from a panel of
hamster/human and mouse/human hybrid cell lines indicated that the TAK1 gene is
located on human chromosome 3.

PMID: 7590273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Jun 6;211(1):83-91.

The orphan receptor TAK1 acts as a repressor of RAR-, RXR- and T3R-mediated
signaling pathways.

Hirose T(1), Apfel R, Pfahl M, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, National Institute of Environmental Health and Sciences,
National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Recently, we reported the cloning and characterization of the novel orphan
receptor TAK1. In this study, we analyze the interaction of TAK1 with a variety
of response elements (RE's) and demonstrate that TAK1 binds effectively to RE's
composed of the core motif PuGGTCA configured in direct repeats spaced by one or 
more nucleotides. TAK1 bound poorly to palindromic or inverted palindromic motifs
and was unable to bind to a single core motif, suggesting that a dimeric site is 
required for binding. Transfection experiments with CV-1 cells revealed that TAK1
is able to repress retinoid- and thyroid-hormone-induced transactivation through 
a subset of retinoid and thyroid hormone RE's. Our studies indicate that the
antagonism of RAR-mediated transactivation does not involve the formation of
heterodimers between TAK1 and RAR or RXR but is due to the competition of TAK1
homodimers with RAR-RXR heterodimers and RXR homodimers for binding to RARE and
RXRE, respectively. Our results suggest that the orphan receptor TAK1 can be a
negative modulator of the regulation of gene expression mediated by retinoid and 
thyroid hormone signaling pathways.

PMID: 7779113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Dec;8(12):1667-80.

TAK1: molecular cloning and characterization of a new member of the nuclear
receptor superfamily.

Hirose T(1), Fujimoto W, Tamaai T, Kim KH, Matsuura H, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709.

Using polymerase chain reaction and two degenerate primers whose designs were
based on the two best conserved regions of the DNA-binding domain of the nuclear 
receptor superfamily, we identified and cloned a novel orphan receptor, named
TAK1. The open reading frame of TAK1 encodes a protein of 596 amino acid
residues. Based on the modular structure and the presence of a DNA-binding domain
containing two zinc fingers TAK1 belongs to the steroid/thyroid hormone receptor 
superfamily. The amino acid sequence of TAK1 is most closely related to the
orphan receptor TR2-11. Their overall sequence homology is 64%, with the highest 
similarity (82%) being observed in the DNA-binding domain. Northern blot analysis
using RNA from multiple human tissues showed that a 9.4 kilobase TAK1 transcript 
was expressed ubiquitously and that the presence of a 2.8 kilobase mRNA was
largely restricted to the testis. In situ hybridization using sections of rat and
mouse testes and Northern blot analysis using RNA from testes of rats at various 
ages revealed that TAK1 is most abundantly expressed in spermatocytes whereas
little expression was observed in other germ cells or somatic cells. In situ
hybridization using other mouse and rat tissues revealed cell type-specific
expression of TAK1 in several tissues. Our observations suggest a role for this
putative transcription factor in the regulation of gene expression in specific
cell types. In the testis, TAK1 appears to control gene expression during
spermatogenesis, particularly during the meiotic phase.

PMID: 7708055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Jun 21;91(13):6040-4.

Human and rat TR4 orphan receptors specify a subclass of the steroid receptor
superfamily.

Chang C(1), Da Silva SL, Ideta R, Lee Y, Yeh S, Burbach JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53792.

We have identified a member of the steroid receptor superfamily and cloned it
from human and rat hypothalamus, prostate, and testis cDNA libraries. The open
reading frame between first ATG and terminator TGA can encode 615 (human) and 596
(rat) amino acids with calculated molecular mass of 67.3 (human) and 65.4 (rat)
kDa. The amino acid sequence of this protein, called TR4 orphan receptor, is
closely related to the previously identified TR2 orphan receptor. The high
homology between TR2 and TR4 orphan receptor suggests that these two orphan
receptors constitute a unique subfamily within the steroid receptor superfamily. 
These two orphan receptors are differentially expressed in rat tissues. Unlike
TR2 orphan receptors, the TR4 orphan receptor appears to be predominantly located
in granule cells of the hippocampus and the cerebellum, suggesting that it may
play some role(s) in transcriptional regulation in these neurons.

PMCID: PMC44133
PMID: 8016112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Gene Expr. 1994;4(1-2):77-84.

Molecular cloning of a novel member of the nuclear receptor superfamily related
to the orphan receptor, TR2.

Law SW(1), Conneely OM, O'Malley BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030.

We have cloned a novel member (mTR2R1) of the nuclear receptor superfamily of
transcription factors from a mouse brain cDNA library. The cDNA sequence predicts
a protein primary structure of 629 amino acids with a calculated molecular weight
of 68.8 kDa. The amino acid sequence of the protein contains three regions of
consensus sequence that are conserved throughout the nuclear receptor
superfamily. One of these regions encodes a type II zinc finger DNA binding
domain that is characteristic of this family of transcription factors. Comparison
of the amino acid sequence of mTR2R1 with other nuclear receptors indicates that 
it is most closely related to the orphan receptor, hTR2, and suggests that these 
proteins constitute a novel subfamily within the nuclear receptor superfamily.
mTR2R1 is encoded by two mRNAs that show different but overlapping spatial
patterns of expression in the adult mouse. The identification of a subfamily of
TR2 receptors together with the existence of variant mRNAs for these receptors
prompts a close examination of the tissue-specific regulatory role of this
subfamily of nuclear receptors.

PMID: 7841789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


