
1. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2015 Oct;29(19):1701-5.

[The expression and clinical significance of Bax and PHF20 in laryngeal squamous 
cell carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang C, Gao W, Dong S, Chen G, Han R, Wen S, Wang B.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of Bax and PHF20 in laryngeal squamous
cell carcinoma (LSCC)and to discuss their relevance and the roles in
carcinogenesis and development in LSCC.
METHOD: The expressions of Bax and PHF20 in the LSCC tissues and normal mucosa
tissues adjacent to carcinoma were detected by SP immunohistochemistry assay. The
relationship between the expressions of Bax and PHF20 and the clinicopathological
characteristics including clinical stage, pathological type, histological grade
and lymph node metastasis in LSCC were analyzed according to the clinical data.
RESULT: (1) The expressions of Bax and PHF20 were both significantly lower in the
LSCC tissue than that in the normal laryngeal tissue (P < 0.01). (2) In clinical 
stage grouping, there were no statistical differences of the quantity and
positive rate of Bax and PHF20 expressions among supraglottic, glottic and
subglottic LSCC (P > 0.05). In histological differentiation grouping, the
quantity and positive rate of Bax and PHF20 expressions decreased significantly
in poorly differentiated LSCC compared with the well and moderately
differentiated LSCCs (P < 0.01, P < 0.05, respectively). In T stage grouping, the
quantity and positive rate of Bax and PHF20 expressions were both significantly
higher in T1 + T2 compared with T3 +T4 (both P < 0.01). In addition, the quantity
and positive rate of Bax and PHF20 expressions were both significantly higher in 
LSCC with lymph node metastasis compared to that without lymph node metastasis
(both P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: The lack of Bax and PHF20 might contribute to the carcinogenesis and 
development in LSCC. The positive expression of Bax and PHF20 maybe relative to T
term degree, differentiation degree and lymphamatic metastasis of LSCC.

PMID: 26999840  [PubMed - in process]


2. Nat Commun. 2016 Mar 10;7:10810. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10810.

G9a-mediated methylation of ERa links the PHF20/MOF histone acetyltransferase
complex to hormonal gene expression.

Zhang X(1,)(2), Peng D(1,)(2), Xi Y(3), Yuan C(1,)(2), Sagum CA(1,)(2), Klein
BJ(4), Tanaka K(1,)(2), Wen H(1,)(2), Kutateladze TG(4), Li W(3), Bedford
MT(1,)(2,)(5), Shi X(1,)(2,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epigenetics and Molecular Carcinogenesis, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (2)Center for Cancer 
Epigenetics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA. (3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Dan L. Duncan Cancer
Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (4)Department of
Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado 80045, 
USA. (5)The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, 
Texas 77030, USA.

The euchromatin histone methyltransferase 2 (also known as G9a) methylates
histone H3K9 to repress gene expression, but it also acts as a coactivator for
some nuclear receptors. The molecular mechanisms underlying this activation
remain elusive. Here we show that G9a functions as a coactivator of the
endogenous oestrogen receptor a (ERa) in breast cancer cells in a histone
methylation-independent manner. G9a dimethylates ERa at K235 both in vitro and in
cells. Dimethylation of ERaK235 is recognized by the Tudor domain of PHF20, which
recruits the MOF histone acetyltransferase (HAT) complex to ERa target gene
promoters to deposit histone H4K16 acetylation promoting active transcription.
Together, our data suggest the molecular mechanism by which G9a functions as an
ERa coactivator. Along with the PHF20/MOF complex, G9a links the crosstalk
between ERa methylation and histone acetylation that governs the epigenetic
regulation of hormonal gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4792926
PMID: 26960573  [PubMed - in process]


3. Nat Commun. 2016 Feb 12;7:10574. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10574.

SCF(Fbxo22)-KDM4A targets methylated p53 for degradation and regulates
senescence.

Johmura Y(1), Sun J(1), Kitagawa K(2), Nakanishi K(3), Kuno T(4), Naiki-Ito A(4),
Sawada Y(1), Miyamoto T(5), Okabe A(6), Aburatani H(6), Li S(7), Miyoshi I(5),
Takahashi S(4), Kitagawa M(2), Nakanishi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya City
University, 1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, 467-8601 Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
Higashi-ku, 431-3192 Hamamatsu, Japan. (3)Department of Perinatology, Aichi Human
Service Center, Institute for Developmental Research, 713-8 Kamiya-cho, Kasugai, 
Aichi 489-0392, Japan. (4)Department of Experimental Pathology and Tumor Biology,
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya City University, 1 Kawasumi,
Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, 467-8601 Nagoya, Japan. (5)Department of Comparative and
Experimental Medicine and Center for Animal Sciences, Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Nagoya City University, 1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, 467-8601
Nagoya, Japan. (6)Genome Science Division, Research Center for Advanced Science
and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku, 153-8904 Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Zhongshan Hospital of Dalian University, 6 Jiefang St, Zhongshan District,
116001 Dalian, China.

Recent evidence has revealed that senescence induction requires fine-tuned
activation of p53, however, mechanisms underlying the regulation of p53 activity 
during senescence have not as yet been clearly established. We demonstrate here
that SCF(Fbxo22)-KDM4A is a senescence-associated E3 ligase targeting methylated 
p53 for degradation. We find that Fbxo22 is highly expressed in senescent cells
in a p53-dependent manner, and that SCF(Fbxo22) ubiquitylated p53 and formed a
complex with a lysine demethylase, KDM4A. Ectopic expression of a catalytic
mutant of KDM4A stabilizes p53 and enhances p53 interaction with PHF20 in the
presence of Fbxo22. SCF(Fbxo22)-KDM4A is required for the induction of p16 and
senescence-associated secretory phenotypes during the late phase of senescence.
Fbxo22(-/-) mice are almost half the size of Fbxo22(+/-) mice owing to the
accumulation of p53. These results indicate that SCF(Fbxo22)-KDM4A is an E3
ubiquitin ligase that targets methylated p53 and regulates key senescent
processes.

PMCID: PMC4754341
PMID: 26868148  [PubMed - in process]


4. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Oct 1;8(10):12198-206. eCollection 2015.

Expression of PHF20 protein contributes to good prognosis of NSCLC and is
associated with Bax expression.

Tang N(1), Ma L(2), Lin XY(1), Zhang Y(1), Yang DL(3), Wang EH(1), Qiu XS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital and College of Basic
Medical Sciences, China Medical University Shenyang 110001, China. (2)Department 
of Pathology, Liaoning Tumor Hospital Shenyang 110042, China. (3)Center for
Assisted Reproduction, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing
Hospital, China Medical University Shenyang 110004, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies demonstrate that plant homeodomain finger protein 20
(PHF20), which was initially described as an immunogenic antigen in glioblastoma,
is a putative transcriptional factor, and exhibits tumor suppressor activity.
However, little is known about its expression and clinical significance in lung
cancer.
METHODS: We investigated the expression of PHF20 in 142 cases of NSCLC tissue and
30 cases of normal lung tissue by immunohistochemical staining and downregulated 
PHF20 expression in SPC cell.
RESULTS: PHF20 expression was significantly higher in normal lung tissues than
that in NSCLC tissues. The expression of PHF20 in NSCLC was significantly
correlated with histological grade, p-TNM stage and lymph node metastasis.
Moreover, the loss of PHF20 expression was associated with short overall
survival. We also found that the expression of PHF20 was associated with Bax
expression. Additionally, PHF20 markedly inhibited cell proliferation and
invasion.
CONCLUSIONS: PHF20 may play an important role in NSCLC, and may serve as a
potential therapeutic target of NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC4680349
PMID: 26722404  [PubMed - in process]


5. FASEB J. 2016 Feb;30(2):959-70. doi: 10.1096/fj.15-276907. Epub 2015 Nov 16.

Training intensity modulates changes in PGC-1a and p53 protein content and
mitochondrial respiration, but not markers of mitochondrial content in human
skeletal muscle.

Granata C(1), Oliveira RS(1), Little JP(1), Renner K(1), Bishop DJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Institute of Sport, Exercise and Active Living (ISEAL), College of Sport and 
Exercise Science, Victoria University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; School of 
Health and Exercise Sciences, University of British Columbia Okanagan, Kelowna,
British Columbia, Canada; and Department of Internal Medicine III, University
Hospital of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. (2)*Institute of Sport, Exercise and
Active Living (ISEAL), College of Sport and Exercise Science, Victoria
University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; School of Health and Exercise
Sciences, University of British Columbia Okanagan, Kelowna, British Columbia,
Canada; and Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital of
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany david.bishop@vu.edu.au.

Exercise training has been associated with increased mitochondrial content and
respiration. However, no study to date has compared in parallel how training at
different intensities affects mitochondrial respiration and markers of
mitochondrial biogenesis. Twenty-nine healthy men performed 4 wk (12 cycling
sessions) of either sprint interval training [SIT; 4-10 × 30-s all-out bouts at
~200% of peak power output (WPeak)], high-intensity interval training (HIIT; 4-7 
× 4-min intervals at ~90% WPeak), or sublactate threshold continuous training
(STCT; 20-36 min at ~65% WPeak). The STCT and HIIT groups were matched for total 
work. Resting biopsy samples (vastus lateralis) were obtained before and after
training. The maximal mitochondrial respiration in permeabilized muscle fibers
increased significantly only after SIT (25%). Similarly, the protein content of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator (PGC)-1a, p53, and plant
homeodomain finger-containing protein 20 (PHF20) increased only after SIT
(60-90%). Conversely, citrate synthase activity, and the protein content of TFAM 
and subunits of the electron transport system complexes remained unchanged
throughout. Our findings suggest that training intensity is an important factor
that regulates training-induced changes in mitochondrial respiration and that
there is an apparent dissociation between training-induced changes in
mitochondrial respiration and mitochondrial content. Moreover, changes in the
protein content of PGC-1a, p53, and PHF20 are more strongly associated with
training-induced changes in mitochondrial respiration than mitochondrial
content.-Granata, C., Oliveira, R. S. F., Little, J. P., Renner, K., Bishop, D.
J. Training intensity modulates changes in PGC-1a and p53 protein content and
mitochondrial respiration, but not markers of mitochondrial content in human
skeletal muscle.

© FASEB.

PMID: 26572168  [PubMed - in process]


6. Leukemia. 2014 Aug;28(8):1762-4. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.117. Epub 2014 Mar 28.

Altered expression of tumor suppressor PHF20 in myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Lasho TL(1), Pardanani A(2), Tefferi A(2), Smith DI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Mayo College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (2)Division of
Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA.

PMID: 24675105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2062. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3062.

PHF20 regulates NF-<U+03BA>B signalling by disrupting recruitment of PP2A to p65.

Zhang T(1), Park KA, Li Y, Byun HS, Jeon J, Lee Y, Hong JH, Kim JM, Huang SM,
Choi SW, Kim SH, Sohn KC, Ro H, Lee JH, Lu T, Stark GR, Shen HM, Liu ZG, Park J, 
Hur GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Infection Signaling Network Research Center,
College of Medicine, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 301 747, South Korea.

Constitutive NF-<U+03BA>B activation in cancer cells is caused by defects in the
signalling network responsible for terminating the NF-<U+03BA>B response. Here we report
that plant homeodomain finger protein 20 (PHF20) maintains NF-<U+03BA>B in an active
state in the nucleus by inhibiting the interaction between PP2A and p65. We show 
that PHF20 induces canonical NF-<U+03BA>B signalling by increasing the DNA-binding
activity of NF-<U+03BA>B subunit p65. In PHF20 overexpressing cells, the termination of 
tumour necrosis factor-induced p65 phosphorylation is impaired whereas upstream
signalling events triggered by tumour necrosis factor are unaffected. This effect
strictly depends on the interaction between PHF20 and methylated lysine residues 
of p65, which hinders recruitment of PP2A to p65, thereby maintaining p65 in a
phosphorylated state. We further show that PHF20 levels correlate with p65
phosphorylation levels in human glioma specimens. Our work identifies PHF20 as a 
novel regulator of NF-<U+03BA>B activation and suggests that elevated expression of
PHF20 may drive constitutive NF-<U+03BA>B activation in some cancers.

PMCID: PMC3942884
PMID: 23797602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cell. 2013 Feb 28;152(5):1037-50. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.02.006.

Jmjd3 inhibits reprogramming by upregulating expression of INK4a/Arf and
targeting PHF20 for ubiquitination.

Zhao W(1), Li Q, Ayers S, Gu Y, Shi Z, Zhu Q, Chen Y, Wang HY, Wang RF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Inflammation and Epigenetics, The Methodist Hospital Research
Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Although somatic cell reprogramming to generate inducible pluripotent stem cells 
(iPSCs) is associated with profound epigenetic changes, the roles and mechanisms 
of epigenetic factors in this process remain poorly understood. Here, we identify
Jmjd3 as a potent negative regulator of reprogramming. Jmjd3-deficient MEFs
produced significantly more iPSC colonies than did wild-type cells, whereas
ectopic expression of Jmjd3 markedly inhibited reprogramming. We show that the
inhibitory effects of Jmjd3 are produced through both histone
demethylase-dependent and -independent pathways. The latter pathway involves
Jmjd3 targeting of PHF20 for ubiquitination and degradation via recruitment of an
E3 ligase, Trim26. Importantly, PHF20-deficient MEFs could not be converted to
fully reprogrammed iPSCs, even with knockdown of Jmjd3, Ink4a, or p21, indicating
that PHF20 is required for reprogramming. Our findings demonstrate, to the best
of our knowledge, a previously unrecognized role of Jmjd3 in cellular
reprogramming and provide molecular insight into the mechanisms by which the
Jmjd3-PHF20 axis controls this process.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3742052
PMID: 23452852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Sep 17;31:76. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-31-76.

Whole blood transcriptome correlates with treatment response in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.

Zaatar AM(1), Lim CR, Bong CW, Lee MM, Ooi JJ, Suria D, Raman R, Chao S, Yang H, 
Neoh SB, Liew CC.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Miriam Cancer Hospital, 23, Jalan Bulan, Fettes Park, Tanjong Bungah
11200Penang, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Treatment protocols for nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) developed in
the past decade have significantly improved patient survival. In most NPC
patients, however, the disease is diagnosed at late stages, and for some patients
treatment response is less than optimal. This investigation has two aims: to
identify a blood-based gene-expression signature that differentiates NPC from
other medical conditions and from controls and to identify a biomarker signature 
that correlates with NPC treatment response.
METHODS: RNA was isolated from peripheral whole blood samples (2 x 10 ml)
collected from NPC patients/controls (EDTA vacutainer). Gene expression patterns 
from 99 samples (66 NPC; 33 controls) were assessed using the Affymetrix array.
We also collected expression data from 447 patients with other cancers (201
patients) and non-cancer conditions (246 patients). Multivariate logistic
regression analysis was used to obtain biomarker signatures differentiating NPC
samples from controls and other diseases. Differences were also analysed within a
subset (n=28) of a pre-intervention case cohort of patients whom we followed
post-treatment.
RESULTS: A blood-based gene expression signature composed of three genes -
LDLRAP1, PHF20, and LUC7L3 - is able to differentiate NPC from various other
diseases and from unaffected controls with significant accuracy (area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve of over 0.90). By subdividing our NPC
cohort according to the degree of patient response to treatment we have been able
to identify a blood gene signature that may be able to guide the selection of
treatment.
CONCLUSION: We have identified a blood-based gene signature that accurately
distinguished NPC patients from controls and from patients with other diseases.
The genes in the signature, LDLRAP1, PHF20, and LUC7L3, are known to be involved 
in carcinoma of the head and neck, tumour-associated antigens, and/or cellular
signalling. We have also identified blood-based biomarkers that are (potentially)
able to predict those patients who are more likely to respond to treatment for
NPC. These findings have significant clinical implications for optimizing NPC
therapy.

PMCID: PMC3504566
PMID: 22986368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cell Signal. 2013 Jan;25(1):74-84. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.09.009. Epub 2012 
Sep 11.

PKB-mediated PHF20 phosphorylation on Ser291 is required for p53 function in DNA 
damage.

Li Y(1), Park J, Piao L, Kong G, Kim Y, Park KA, Zhang T, Hong J, Hur GM, Seok
JH, Choi SW, Yoo BC, Hemmings BA, Brazil DP, Kim SH, Park J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Metabolic Diseases and Cell Signaling Laboratory, 
Cancer Research Institute, Research Institute for Medical Sciences, College of
Medicine, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, 301-131, South Korea.

PHD finger protein 20 (PHF20) is a transcription factor, which was originally
identified in glioma patients. PHF20 appears to be a novel antigen in glioma, and
has also termed glioma-expressed antigen 2. PHF20 is thought to contribute to the
development of cancers, including glioblastoma, lung cancer, colon cancer and
ovarian cancer. However, little is known about the function of PHF20 in various
cancers. Here we report that PHF20 contains two consensus sites for protein
kinase B (PKB) phosphorylation (RxRxxS/T). PKB can directly phosphorylate PHF20
on Ser291 in vitro and in vivo. It has been shown that PKB participates in the
tumor suppressor p53 regulated gene expression program and has a direct effect on
p21 regulation after DNA damage. UV-induced DNA damage results in accumulation of
p53 and PKB activation. Interestingly, PKB-mediated PHF20 phosphorylation led to 
an inhibition of p53 induction following UV treatment, leading to the reduction
of p21 transcriptional activity. Using anti PHF20 and anti pPKB (S473)
antibodies, these events were mapped in various human cancer tissues. Taken
together, these data suggest that PHF20 is a novel substrate for PKB and its
phosphorylation by PKB plays an important role in tumorigenesis via regulating of
p53 mediated signaling.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22975685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012 Sep;19(9):916-24. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2353. Epub 2012 Aug
5.

PHF20 is an effector protein of p53 double lysine methylation that stabilizes and
activates p53.

Cui G(1), Park S, Badeaux AI, Kim D, Lee J, Thompson JR, Yan F, Kaneko S, Yuan Z,
Botuyan MV, Bedford MT, Cheng JQ, Mer G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA.

PHF20 is a multidomain protein and subunit of a lysine acetyltransferase complex 
that acetylates histone H4 and p53 but whose function is unclear. Using
biochemical, biophysical and cellular approaches, we determined that PHF20 is a
direct regulator of p53. A Tudor domain in PHF20 recognized p53 dimethylated at
Lys370 or Lys382 and a homodimeric form of this Tudor domain could associate with
the two dimethylated sites on p53 with enhanced affinity, indicating a
multivalent interaction. Association with PHF20 promotes stabilization and
activation of p53 by diminishing Mdm2-mediated p53 ubiquitylation and
degradation. PHF20 contributes to upregulation of p53 in response to DNA damage, 
and ectopic expression of PHF20 in different cell lines leads to phenotypic
changes that are hallmarks of p53 activation. Overall our work establishes that
PHF20 functions as an effector of p53 methylation that stabilizes and activates
p53.

PMCID: PMC3454513
PMID: 22864287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. FEBS Lett. 2012 Mar 23;586(6):859-65. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.02.012. Epub
2012 Feb 24.

Crystal structures of the Tudor domains of human PHF20 reveal novel structural
variations on the Royal Family of proteins.

Adams-Cioaba MA(1), Li Z, Tempel W, Guo Y, Bian C, Li Y, Lam R, Min J.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

The human PHD finger protein 20 (PHF20) is a putative transcription factor. While
little is known about its cognate cellular role, antibodies against PHF20 are
present in sera from patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, glioblastoma and
childhood medulloblastula. PHF20 comprises two N-terminal Tudor domains, a
central C2H2-link zinc finger domain and a C-terminal zinc-binding PHD domain,
and is a component of some MLL methyltransferase complexes. Here, we report the
crystal structures of the N-terminal Tudor domains of PHF20 and highlight the
novel structural features of each domain. We also confirm previous studies
suggesting that the second Tudor domain of PHF20 exhibits preference for
dimethylated histone substrates.

Copyright Â© 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22449972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 30;287(14):11151-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.333922. Epub
2012 Feb 14.

Identification of Akt interaction protein PHF20/TZP that transcriptionally
regulates p53.

Park S(1), Kim D, Dan HC, Chen H, Testa JR, Cheng JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Akt regulates a diverse array of cellular functions, including cell survival,
proliferation, differentiation, and metabolism. Although a number of molecules
have been identified as upstream regulators and downstream targets of Akt, the
mechanisms by which Akt regulates these cellular processes remain elusive. Here, 
we demonstrate that a novel transcription factor, PHF20/TZP (referring to Tudor
and zinc finger domain containing protein), binds to Akt and induces p53
expression at the transcription level. Knockdown of PHF20 significantly reduces
p53. PHF20 inhibits cell growth, DNA synthesis, and cell survival. Akt
phosphorylates PHF20 at Ser(291) in vitro and in vivo, which results in its
translocation from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and attenuation of PHF20
function. These data indicate that PHF20 is a substrate of Akt and plays a role
in Akt cell survival/growth signaling.

PMCID: PMC3322870
PMID: 22334668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 2;287(1):429-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.271163. Epub 2011
Nov 9.

Loss of the methyl lysine effector protein PHF20 impacts the expression of genes 
regulated by the lysine acetyltransferase MOF.

Badeaux AI(1), Yang Y, Cardenas K, Vemulapalli V, Chen K, Kusewitt D, Richie E,
Li W, Bedford MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Carcinogenesis, University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

In epigenetic signaling pathways, histone tails are heavily modified, resulting
in the recruitment of effector molecules that can influence transcription. One
such molecule, plant homeodomain finger protein 20 (PHF20), uses a Tudor domain
to read dimethyl lysine residues and is a known component of the MOF (male absent
on the first) histone acetyltransferase protein complex, suggesting it plays a
role in the cross-talk between lysine methylation and histone acetylation. We
sought to investigate the biological role of PHF20 by generating a knockout
mouse. Without PHF20, mice die shortly after birth and display a wide variety of 
phenotypes within the skeletal and hematopoietic systems. Mechanistically, PHF20 
is not required for maintaining the global H4K16 acetylation levels or locus
specific histone acetylation but instead works downstream in transcriptional
regulation of MOF target genes.

PMCID: PMC3249094
PMID: 22072714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Lung Cancer. 2010 Feb;67(2):151-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2009.04.010. Epub 2009 
May 26.

Identification of genes associated with non-small-cell lung cancer promotion and 
progression.

Bankovic J(1), Stojsic J, Jovanovic D, Andjelkovic T, Milinkovic V, Ruzdijic S,
Tanic N.

Author information: 
(1)University of Belgrade, Institute for Biological Research, Department of
Neurobiology, Bulevar Despota Stefana 142, 11060 Belgrade, Serbia.

Lung cancer is the most common cause of neoplasia-related death worldwide. One of
the crucial early events in carcinogenesis is the induction of genomic
instability and mutator phenotype. We investigated genomic instability in 30
patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) by comparing DNA fingerprints of
paired tumor and normal tissues using arbitrarily primed polymerase chain
reaction (AP-PCR). Selected 21 DNA bands with altered mobility were isolated from
polyacrylamide gels, cloned and sequenced. Obtained sequences were submitted to
homology search in GenBank database which revealed the following genes: TSPAN14, 
CDH12, RDH10, CYP4Z1, KIR, E2F4, PHACTR3, PHF20, PRAME family member and SLC2A13.
Following the identification of these genes we examined their relation to the
clinicopathological parameters and survival of the patients. Our study revealed
that genetic alterations of TSPAN14, SLC2A13 and PHF20 appeared prevalently in
tumors of grade 1, stage I suggesting that structural changes of these genes
could play a role in NSCLC promotion. Contrary to this CYP4Z1, KIR and RDH10 were
prevalently mutated in tumors of grade 3, stage III suggesting that they could
play a role in NSCLC progression. E2F4, PHACTR3, PRAME family member and CDH12
most probably play important role in NSCLC geneses. In conclusion, our study
revealed altered genes previously not described in regard to this type of cancer.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19473719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. PLoS One. 2008 May 14;3(5):e2164. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002164.

Increased seroreactivity to glioma-expressed antigen 2 in brain tumor patients
under radiation.

Heisel SM(1), Ketter R, Keller A, Klein V, Pallasch CP, Lenhof HP, Meese E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Saarland University Medical School,
Homburg/Saar, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Surgery and radiation are the mainstays of therapy for human gliomas 
that are the most common primary brain tumors. Most recently, cell culture and
animal studies provided the first convincing evidence that radiation not only
eliminates tumor cells, but also modulates the immune response and likely
improves anti-tumor immunotherapy.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We present an in vivo study that analyzes the
effects of radiation on the immune response in tumor patients. As readout system,
we utilized the reactivity of glioma patients' sera against antigen GLEA2 as the 
most frequent antigen immunogenic in glioblastoma patients. We established an
ELISA assay to analyze reactivity of 24 glioblastoma patients over a period of
several months. As control we used 30 sera from healthy donors as well as 30 sera
from lung cancer patients. We compared the course of GLEA2 seroreactivity at
different times prior, during and after radiation. The GLEA2 seroreactivity was
increased by the time of surgery, decreased after surgery, increased again under 
radiation, and slightly decreased after radiation.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results provide in vivo evidence for an increased
antibody response against tumor antigens under radiation. Antigens that become
immunogenic with an increased antibody response as result of radiation can serve 
as ideal targets for immunotherapy of human tumors.

PMCID: PMC2366063
PMID: 18478111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Int J Oncol. 2006 Sep;29(3):567-75.

Gene expression profiles of small-cell lung cancers: molecular signatures of lung
cancer.

Taniwaki M(1), Daigo Y, Ishikawa N, Takano A, Tsunoda T, Yasui W, Inai K, Kohno
N, Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

To characterize the molecular mechanisms involved in the carcinogenesis and
progression of small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) and identify molecules to be applied
as novel diagnostic markers and/or for development of molecular-targeted drugs,
we applied cDNA microarray profile analysis coupled with purification of cancer
cells by laser-microbeam microdissection (LMM). Expression profiles of 32,256
genes in 15 SCLCs identified 252 genes that were commonly up-regulated and 851
transcripts that were down-regulated in SCLC cells compared with non-cancerous
lung tissue cells. An unsupervised clustering algorithm applied to the expression
data easily distinguished SCLC from the other major histological type of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and identified 475 genes that may represent
distinct molecular features of each of the two histological types. In particular,
SCLC was characterized by altered expression of genes related to neuroendocrine
cell differentiation and/or growth such as ASCL1, NRCAM, and INSM1. We also
identified 68 genes that were abundantly expressed both in advanced SCLCs and
advanced adenocarcinomas (ADCs), both of which had been obtained from patients
with extensive chemotherapy treatment. Some of them are known to be transcription
factors and/or gene expression regulators such as TAF5L, TFCP2L4, PHF20, LMO4,
TCF20, RFX2, and DKFZp547I048 as well as those encoding nucleotide-binding
proteins such as C9orf76, EHD3, and GIMAP4. Our data provide valuable information
for better understanding of lung carcinogenesis and chemoresistance.

PMID: 16865272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Int J Cancer. 2005 Nov 10;117(3):456-9.

Autoantibodies against GLEA2 and PHF3 in glioblastoma: tumor-associated
autoantibodies correlated with prolonged survival.

Pallasch CP(1), Struss AK, Munnia A, König J, Steudel WI, Fischer U, Meese E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Human Genetics, University Hospital of Saarland, Homburg/Saar,
Germany.

Using serological identification of recombinantly expressed tumor antigens
(SEREX), we identified several autoantibodies against glioma-expressed antigens
including GLEA1, GLEA2 and PHD-finger protein3 (PHF3). Analysing sera of 62
glioblastoma patients, we found an antibody response against GLEA1 in 15 sera
(24.2%), against GLEA2 in 30 sera (48.4%) and against PHF3 in 35 sera (56.5%).
Relating patient survival to the occurrence of autoantibodies against either
GLEA1, GLEA2 or PHF3, we found a significant prolonged survival for glioblastoma 
patients positive for autoantibodies against GLEA2 (p = 0.0115) and PHF3 (p =
0.0031), respectively. The median survival of patients with GLEA2 antibodies was 
increased to 17.4 months and for patients with PHF3 antibodies to 14.7 months, as
compared to 7.2 months for patients without GLEA2 or PHF3 antibodies. There was
no significant correlation between patient survival and GLEA1-autoantibodies (p =
0.1611). Herein we present autoantibodies that are: (i) most frequent in
glioblastoma patients; (ii) specific for glioblastoma-associated antigens; and
(iii) significantly correlated with prolonged survival in patients with
glioblastoma.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15906353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Clin Exp Immunol. 2001 Nov;126(2):206-13.

Glioma-expressed antigen 2 (GLEA2): a novel protein that can elicit immune
responses in glioblastoma patients and some controls.

Fischer U(1), Struss AK, Hemmer D, Pallasch CP, Steudel WI, Meese E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universität des Saarlandes, Homburg/Saar, Germany.

Glioma constitutes the most frequent brain tumour in man with glioblastoma as the
most prevalent and malignant type. The average survival time of less than 16
months underlines the need for improvements in diagnosis and therapy. Here, we
report the identification of a novel antigen termed glioma-expressed antigen 2
(GLEA2) causing a frequent immune response in glioma patients. Screening of 450
000 clones from a glioblastoma lambda zap expression library with autologous
patient serum revealed a group of five serum-positive clones sharing a high
sequence homology. Further sequence analysis showed a sequence homology to a
hepatocellular carcinoma associated antigen 58 (HCA58). We localized the novel
HCA homologous gene termed glioma-expressed antigen 2 (GLEA2) on chromosome 20 by
somatic cell hybrid panel mapping. Using allogenic sera from 39 glioblastoma
patients, we found an immune response against GLEA2 in 17 patients (43%). In
addition, screening with allogenic sera from other glioma patients revealed GLEA2
directed antibodies in two out of five pilocytic astrocytomas and in one out of
two astrocytomas. Unrelated tumour sera revealed no immune response and sera from
healthy persons showed an immune response in two out of 14 cases (14%). Northern 
blot hybridization and RT-PCR showed ubiquitous GLEA2 gene expression in glioma
and normal tissues. The novel HCA homologous gene, GLEA2, appears to induce a
frequent immune response in glioma. In the light of the lack of useful glioma
markers, it appears reasonable to consider GLEA2 as a potential future diagnostic
marker.

PMCID: PMC1906187
PMID: 11703362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


