
1. Genet Mol Res. 2016 Mar 11;15(1). doi: 10.4238/gmr.15017747.

Analysis of POU1F1 gene DdeI polymorphism in Chinese goats.

Li MJ(1,)(2), Zhang CM(2), Lan XY(1), Fang XT(3), Lei CZ(1), Chen H(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Crops with High Quality and Efficient Cultivation and
Security Control, Yunnan Higher Education Institutions, Honghe University,
Mengzi, Yunnan, China. (3)Institute of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Xuzhou
Normal University, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China.

As a member of the POU-domain family, the POU1F1 is a positive regulator for
growth hormone, prolactin and thyroid-stimulating hormone b, by binding to target
DNA promoters as a dimer in mammals. This study described the polymorphisms at
the goat POU1F1-DdeI locus and analyzed the distribution of alleles in 15
indigenous Chinese goat breeds. The PCR-RFLP analysis showed a predominance of
the D1D1 genotype and the D1 allele, with average frequencies of 0.550 and 0.790,
respectively, irrespective of goat utility type. The D1D2 genotype was the second
most frequent, with a mean frequency of 0.371. The distributions of genotypic and
allelic frequencies at this locus were found to be significantly different among 
populations based on a Chi square test (P < 0.001), suggesting that the breed
factor significantly affected the molecular genetic character of the POU1F1 gene.
The genetic diversity analysis revealed that Chinese indigenous populations had a
wide spectrum of genetic diversity at the goat POU1F1-DdeI locus. However, an
ANOVA analysis revealed no significant differences in gene homozygosity, gene
heterozygosity, effective allele numbers, or polymorphism information content
among meat, dairy, and cashmere utility types (P > 0.05). This suggests that the 
goat utility types had no significant effect on the spectrum of genetic
diversity.

PMID: 26985963  [PubMed - in process]


2. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2016 Apr;27:46-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ghir.2016.01.004. Epub
2016 Feb 19.

Growth, development, puberty and adult height of patients with congenital
multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies.

Haim-Pinhas H(1), Kauli R(1), Lilos P(1), Laron Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Diabetes Research Unit, Schneider Children's Medical Center,
Tel Aviv University, Israel. (2)Endocrinology and Diabetes Research Unit,
Schneider Children's Medical Center, Tel Aviv University, Israel. Electronic
address: laronz@clalit.org.il.

OBJECTIVE: Congenital MPHD is a rare condition caused by mutations in pituitary
transcription factors genes: PROP1, POU1F1 (PIT1), HESX1, LHX3, LHX4.
DESIGN: We evaluated in a retrospective study the effects on growth and
development in 29 patients with congenital MPHD (cMPHD), during hGH replacement
therapy alone and combined with sex hormones. Twenty nine patients with cMPHD
were included and diagnosed, treated and followed in our clinic from diagnosis to
adult age. Measurements on growth and development were taken by the same medical 
team.
RESULTS: Mean birth weight of 21/29 neonates was 3126±536g. Mean birth length of 
7/29 neonates was 48.7±2cm. Neuromotor development was normal or slightly
delayed. Mean age at referral was 9.5±7years (m), 6.7±3.5years (f) (p=0.17).
Height (SDS) before treatment was -2.8±1.0 (m), -2.8±1.0 (f) (p=0.99). Mean age
at initiation of hGH treatment was 9.9±6.7years (m), 10.3±4.2years (f) (p=0.85). 
Mean age at initiation of sex hormone treatment was 17.0±3.5years (m),
17.1±2.3years (f) (p=0.88). Penile and testicular sizes were below normal before 
and after treatment. Head circumference (SD) was -1.9±0.9 before and -0.6±1.8 at 
end of treatment (p<0.001). Adult height (SDS) reached -1.1±0.6 (p<0.001) for
both males and females.
CONCLUSION: Despite the multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies including hGH,
children with congenital MPHD present with a better auxological development than 
children with congenital IGHD or congenital IGF-1 deficiency. These findings may 
be due to irregular and incomplete hormone deficiencies increasing with
progressive age and late initiation of puberty.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26947989  [PubMed - in process]


3. Oncol Lett. 2016 Jan;11(1):125-133. Epub 2015 Nov 10.

Gene expression profiling analysis of MENX-associated rat pituitary adenomas
contributes to understand molecular mechanisms of human pituitary adenomas.

Zhang H(1), Xu C(2), Sun N(2), Zhou Y(2), Yu X(1), Yan X(2), Zhang Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Shuguang Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai University
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Neurology, Yueyang Hospital of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine Affiliated
to Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 200437, P.R.
China.

The present study aimed to screen potential genes associated with pituitary
adenomas to obtain further understanding with regard to the pathogenesis of
pituitary adenomas. The microarray GSE23207 dataset, containing 16 pituitary
adenoma samples from multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome-associated rats and 5 
normal pituitary tissue samples, was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus. The
Linear Models for Microarray Data package was used to identify the
differentially-expressed genes (DEGs) with the cut-off criteria of a |log2fold
change (FC)|>1 and adjusted P-values of <0.05. The potential functions of the
DEGs were predicted by functional and pathway enrichment analysis with the
Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery. Furthermore, the
interaction associations of the up- and downregulated DEGs obtained from the
Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes database were respectively
revealed by the protein-protein interaction networks visualized with Cytoscape. A
total of 391 upregulated and 238 downregulated DEGs in were screened in the
pituitary adenoma samples. The upregulated DEGs with a higher degree in the
protein-protein interaction network (e.g., CCNA2, CCNB1 and CDC20) were
significantly involved in cell cycle and cell division. Notably, PTTG1 was
enriched in every functional term. These DEGs interacted with each other. The
downregulated DEGs (e.g., GABRA1, GABRA4 and GABRB1) also interacted with each
other, and were relevant to neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction; the DEG
POU1F1, interacting with POMC, was correlated with the development of the
pituitary gland, adenohypophysis and endocrine system. Certain DEGs, including
CCNB1, CCNA2, CDC20, GABRA1, GABRA4, GABRB1, POU1F1 and POMC, and particularly
PTTG1, were shown to be closely involved in the pathogenesis of pituitary
adenomas.

PMCID: PMC4727179
PMID: 26870179  [PubMed]


4. Endocrinology. 2016 Apr;157(4):1385-96. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1862. Epub 2016 Jan 
26.

All Hormone-Producing Cell Types of the Pituitary Intermediate and Anterior Lobes
Derive From Prop1-Expressing Progenitors.

Davis SW(1), Keisler JL(1), Pérez-Millán MI(1), Schade V(1), Camper SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences (S.W.D., J.L.K.), University of South
Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29208; and Department of Human Genetics
(M.I.P.-M., V.S., S.A.C.), University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109.

Mutations in PROP1, the most common known cause of combined pituitary hormone
deficiency in humans, can result in the progressive loss of all hormones of the
pituitary anterior lobe. In mice, Prop1 mutations result in the failure to
initiate transcription of Pou1f1 (also known as Pit1) and lack somatotropins,
lactotropins, and thyrotropins. The basis for this species difference is unknown.
We hypothesized that Prop1 is expressed in a progenitor cell that can develop
into all anterior lobe cell types, and not just the somatotropes, thyrotropes,
and lactotropes, which are collectively known as the PIT1 lineage. To test this
idea, we produced a transgenic Prop1-cre mouse line and conducted lineage-tracing
experiments of Prop1-expressing cells. The results reveal that all
hormone-secreting cell types of both the anterior and intermediate lobes are
descended from Prop1-expressing progenitors. The Prop1-cre mice also provide a
valuable genetic reagent with a unique spatial and temporal expression for
generating tissue-specific gene rearrangements early in pituitary gland
development. We also determined that the minimal essential sequences for reliable
Prop1 expression lie within 10 kilobases of the mouse gene and demonstrated that 
human PROP1 can substitute functionally for mouse Prop1. These studies enhance
our understanding of the pathophysiology of disease in patients with PROP1
mutations.

PMID: 26812162  [PubMed - in process]


5. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2015 Dec 18. doi: 10.4274/jcrpe.2512. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Delayed Adrenarche May Be an Additional Feature of IGSF1 Deficiency Syndrome.

Van Hulle S, Craen M, Callewaert B, Joustra SD, Oostdijk W, Losekoot M, Wit JM,
Turgeon MO, Bernard D, De Schepper J.

Immunoglobulin superfamily member 1 (IGSF1) deficiency syndrome is characterized 
by central hypothyroidism, delayed surge in testosterone during puberty,
macro-orchidism, and in some cases hypoprolactinemia and/or transient growth
hormone (GH) deficiency.PATIENT: A male patient had been treated since the age of
9 years with GH and thyroxine for an idiopathic combined GH, TSH and PRL
deficiency. His GH deficiency proved transient upon stopping GH at 19 years old, 
but deficiencies of TSH and PRL persisted and he had developed macro-orchidism
since the end of puberty. Brain MRI and PROP1 and POU1F1 sequencing were normal. 
A disharmonious puberty (delayed genital and pubic hair development, bone
maturation, and pubertal growth spurt, despite normal testicular growth) was
observed as well as a delayed adrenarche, as reflected by very low DHEAS and
delayed pubarche. Direct sequencing of the IGSF1 gene revealed a novel hemizygous
mutation, c.3127T>C, p.Cys1043Arg. Pathogenicity of the mutation was demonstrated
in vitro. Male children with an idiopathic combined GH, PRL and TSH deficiency,
showing persistent central hypothyroidism but transient GH deficiency upon
retesting at adult height, should be screened for mutations in the IGSF1 gene,
especially when macro-orchidism and/or hypoprolactinemia are present. We suspect 
that delayed adrenarche, as a consequence of PRL deficiency, might be part of the
clinical phenotype of patients with IGSF1 deficiency.

PMID: 26757742  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Eur J Endocrinol. 2016 Jan 5. pii: EJE-15-1095. [Epub ahead of print]

MECHANISMS IN ENDOCRINOLOGY: AN UPDATE IN THE GENETIC AETIOLOGIES OF COMBINED
PITUITARY HORMONE DEFICIENCY.

Castinetti F(1), Reynaud R(2), Saveanu A(3), Jullien N(4), Quentien MH(5),
Rochette C(6), Barlier A(7), Enjalbert A(8), Brue T(9).

Author information: 
(1)F Castinetti, Department of endocrinology, Aix-Marseille université,
Assistance-Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, centre de référence des maladies rares
d'origine hypophysaire, Marseille, 13005, France. (2)R Reynaud, Pédiatrie
Multidisciplinaire, CHU timone Enfants, Marseille, France. (3)A Saveanu ,
Department of molecular biology, AP-HM, Marseille, France. (4)N Jullien,
Molecular Biology, Aix-Marseille université, Assistance-Publique-Hôpitaux de
Marseille, centre de référence des maladies rares d'origine hypophysaire,
Marseille, France. (5)M Quentien, Department of endocrinology, Aix-Marseille
université, Assistance-Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, centre de référence des
maladies rares d'origine hypophysaire, Marseille, France. (6)C Rochette,
Department of endocrinology, Aix-Marseille université,
Assistance-Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, centre de référence des maladies rares
d'origine hypophysaire, Department of endocrinology Marseille, France, Marseille,
France. (7)A Barlier, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, University Hospital of
Marseille - La Conception, Marseille, France. (8)A Enjalbert, UMR6231 - CNRS,
CRN2M Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France. (9)T Brue, Endocrinology,
AP-HM La Timone and Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France
thierry.brue@ap-hm.fr.

Over the last 5 years, new actors involved in the pathogenesis of combined
pituitary hormone deficiency in humans have been reported: they include a member 
of the immunoglobulin superfamily glycoprotein and ciliary G protein coupled
receptors, as well as new transcription factors and signalling molecules. New
modes of inheritance for alterations of genes encoding transcription factors have
also been described. Finally, actors known to be involved in a very specific
phenotype (hypogonadotroph hypogonadism for instance) have been identified in a
wider range of phenotypes. These data thus suggest that new mechanisms could
explain the low rate of etiological identification in this heterogeneous group of
diseases. Taking into account the fact that several reviews have been published
in recent years on classical aetiologies of CPHD such as mutations of POU1F1 or
PROP1, we focused the present overview on the data published in the last 5 years,
to provide the reader with an updated review on this rapidly evolving field of
knowledge.

PMID: 26733480  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Feb 1;25(3):472-83. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv486. Epub 2015 Nov
26.

Functional characterization of a human POU1F1 mutation associated with isolated
growth hormone deficiency: a novel etiology for IGHD.

Sobrier ML(1), Tsai YC(2), Pérez C(3), Leheup B(4), Bouceba T(5), Duquesnoy P(3),
Copin B(6), Sizova D(2), Penzo A(7), Stanger BZ(7), Cooke NE(2), Liebhaber SA(2),
Amselem S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm UMRS933, Hôpital Trousseau, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris, 26
Avenue du Dr Netter, Paris 75012, France, marie-laure.sobrier@inserm.fr.
(2)Department of Genetics. (3)Inserm UMRS933, Hôpital Trousseau, Sorbonne
Universités, UPMC Univ Paris, 26 Avenue du Dr Netter, Paris 75012, France.
(4)Service de Génétique Clinique Pédiatrique, Hôpital d'enfants, CHU Nancy,
Vandoeuvre-Lès-Nancy, France. (5)Institut de Biologie Paris-Seine, Plateforme
d'Intéractions Moléculaires Fr 3631, UPMC, Paris, France and. (6)Service de
Génétique et d'Embryologie Médicales, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France. (7)Gastroenterology Division, Department
of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, USA. (8)Inserm UMRS933, Hôpital Trousseau, Sorbonne Universités,
UPMC Univ Paris, 26 Avenue du Dr Netter, Paris 75012, France, Service de
Génétique et d'Embryologie Médicales, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France.

POU1F1, a pituitary-specific POU-homeo domain transcription factor, plays an
essential role in the specification of the somatotroph, lactotroph and thyrotroph
lineages and in the activation of GH1, PRL and TSHß transcription. Individuals
with mutations in POU1F1 present with combined deficiency of GH, PRL and TSH.
Here, we identified a heterozygous missense mutation with evidence of
pathogenicity, at the POU1F1 locus, in a large family in which an isolated growth
hormone deficiency segregates as an autosomal dominant trait. The corresponding
p.Pro76Leu mutation maps to a conserved site within the POU1F1 transactivation
domain. Bandshift assays revealed that the mutation alters wild-type POU1F1
binding to cognate sites within the hGH-LCR and hGH1 promoter, but not to sites
within the PRL promoter, and it selectively increases binding affinity to sites
within the hGH-LCR. Co-immunoprecipitation studies reveal that this substitution 
enhances interactions of POU1F1 with three of its cofactors, PITX1, LHX3a and
ELK1, and that residue 76 plays a critical role in these interactions. The
insertion of the mutation at the mouse Pou1f1 locus results in a dramatic loss of
protein expression despite normal mRNA concentrations. Mice heterozygous for the 
p.Pro76Leu mutation were phenotypically normal while homozygotes demonstrated a
dwarf phenotype. Overall, this study unveils the involvement of POU1F1 in
dominantly inherited isolated GH deficiency and demonstrates a significant impact
of the Pro76Leu mutation on DNA-binding activities, alterations in
transactivating functions and interactions with cofactors. Our data further
highlight difficulties in modeling human genetic disorders in the mouse despite
apparent conservation of gene expression pathways and physiologic functions.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26612202  [PubMed - in process]


8. J Appl Genet. 2015 Nov 25. [Epub ahead of print]

Two coexisting heterozygous frameshift mutations in PROP1 are responsible for a
different phenotype of combined pituitary hormone deficiency.

Ziemnicka K(1), Budny B(2), Drobnik K(2), Baszko-Blaszyk D(2), Stajgis M(3),
Katulska K(3), Wasko R(2), Wrotkowska E(2), Slomski R(4,)(5), Ruchala M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Laboratory, Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism
and Internal Diseases, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 49 Przybyszewskiego
Str., 60-355, Poznan, Poland. kaziem@ump.edu.pl. (2)Molecular Endocrinology
Laboratory, Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Diseases, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, 49 Przybyszewskiego Str., 60-355, Poznan, Poland.
(3)Department of General Radiology II, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
Poznan, Poland. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of
Agriculture, Poznan, Poland. (5)Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

The role of genetic background in childhood-onset combined pituitary hormone
deficiency (CPHD) has been extensively studied. The major contributors are the
PROP1, POU1F1, LHX3, LHX4 and HESX1 genes coding transcription factors implicated
in pituitary organogenesis. The clinical consequences of mutations encompass
impaired synthesis of a growth hormone (GH) and one or more concurrent pituitary 
hormones (i.e. LH, FSH, TSH, PRL). Manifestation of the disorder may vary due to 
various mutation impacts on the final gene products or an influence of
environmental factors during pituitary organogenesis. We describe the clinical
and molecular characteristics of two brothers aged 47 and 39 years presenting an 
uncommon manifestation of congenital hypopituitarism. Sequencing of the PROP1,
POU1F1, LHX3, LHX4 and HESX1 genes was performed to confirm the genetic origin of
the disorder. A compound heterozygosity in the PROP1 gene has been identified for
both probands. The first change represents a mutational hot spot (c.150delA,
p.R53fsX164), whereas the second is a novel alteration (p.R112X) that leads to
protein disruption. Based on precise genetic diagnosis, an in silico prediction
of a p.R112X mutation on protein architecture was performed. The resulting
clinical phenotype was surprisingly distinct compared to most patients with
genetic alterations in PROP1 reported in the current literature. This may be
caused by a residual activity of a newly identified p.R112X protein that
preserves over 70 % of the homeodomain structure. This examination may confirm a 
key role of a DNA-binding homeodomain in maintaining PROP1 functionality and
suggests a conceivable explanation of an unusual phenotype.

PMID: 26608600  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Rinsho Byori. 2015 Apr;63(4):491-7.

[A Novel Clinical Entity "Anti-PIT-1 Antibody Syndrome"--Autoimmunity against a
Transcription Factor].

[Article in Japanese]

Takahashi Y, Bando H, Iguchi G.

Autoimmunity against the pituitary has been observed in patients with
hypophysitis. Although various autoantibodies against pituitary proteins have
been reported, it is known that most of them are markers for the disease.
Recently, a unique autoantibody against pituitary transcription factor PIT-1
(POU1F1) was detected in patients with an acquired combined pituitary hormone
deficiency characterized by a specific defect in growth hormone (GH), prolactin
(PRL), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). The antibody has been suggested to 
be involved in the pathogenesis because PIT-1 is an essential transcription
factor that plays a role in the differentiation and maintenance of GH-, PRL-, and
TSH-producing cells and mutations in the PIT-1 gene, resulting in a specific
defect in these hormones. This syndrome was found to be a novel clinical entity; 
therefore, it was named 'anti-PIT-1 antibody syndrome'. Circulating anti-PIT-1
antibody and various autoantibodies were detected with multiple endocrine
organopathy, meeting the definition of autoimmune polyglandular syndrome.
Mechanistically, cytotoxic T lymphocytes that specifically react with PIT-1
protein play an important role in the development of this syndrome. In this
review, we discuss the clinical aspects and pathophysiology of anti-PIT-1
antibody syndrome.

PMID: 26536783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Endocrinol. 2015 Dec;227(3):R51-71. doi: 10.1530/JOE-15-0341. Epub 2015 Sep 28.

Recent advances in central congenital hypothyroidism.

Schoenmakers N(1), Alatzoglou KS(2), Chatterjee VK(2), Dattani MT(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Metabolic Research LaboratoriesWellcome Trust-Medical 
Research Council Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Level 4,
PO Box 289, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UKDevelopmental Endocrinology Research
GroupSection of Genetics and Epigenetics in Health and Disease, Genetics and
Genomic Medicine Programme, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK
naaa2@cam.ac.uk. (2)University of Cambridge Metabolic Research
LaboratoriesWellcome Trust-Medical Research Council Institute of Metabolic
Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Level 4, PO Box 289, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2
0QQ, UKDevelopmental Endocrinology Research GroupSection of Genetics and
Epigenetics in Health and Disease, Genetics and Genomic Medicine Programme, UCL
Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

Central congenital hypothyroidism (CCH) may occur in isolation, or more
frequently in combination with additional pituitary hormone deficits with or
without associated extrapituitary abnormalities. Although uncommon, it may be
more prevalent than previously thought, affecting up to 1:16<U+200A>000 neonates in the 
Netherlands. Since TSH is not elevated, CCH will evade diagnosis in primary,
TSH-based, CH screening programs and delayed detection may result in
neurodevelopmental delay due to untreated neonatal hypothyroidism. Alternatively,
coexisting growth hormones or ACTH deficiency may pose additional risks, such as 
life threatening hypoglycaemia. Genetic ascertainment is possible in a minority
of cases and reveals mutations in genes controlling the TSH biosynthetic pathway 
(TSHB, TRHR, IGSF1) in isolated TSH deficiency, or early (HESX1, LHX3, LHX4,
SOX3, OTX2) or late (PROP1, POU1F1) pituitary transcription factors in combined
hormone deficits. Since TSH cannot be used as an indicator of euthyroidism,
adequacy of treatment can be difficult to monitor due to a paucity of alternative
biomarkers. This review will summarize the normal physiology of pituitary
development and the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis, then describe known
genetic causes of isolated central hypothyroidism and combined pituitary hormone 
deficits associated with TSH deficiency. Difficulties in diagnosis and management
of these conditions will then be discussed.

© 2015 The authors.

PMCID: PMC4629398
PMID: 26416826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Asian-Australas J Anim Sci. 2015 Oct;28(10):1394-406. doi: 10.5713/ajas.14.0860.

Novel Nucleotide Variations, Haplotypes Structure and Associations with Growth
Related Traits of Goat AT Motif-Binding Factor (ATBF1) Gene.

Zhang X(1), Wu X(1), Jia W(1), Pan C(1), Li X(2), Lei C(1), Chen H(1), Lan X(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, 
China . (2)Institute of Beijing Animal Science and Veterinary, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Science, Beijing 100194, China .

The AT motif-binding factor (ATBF1) not only interacts with protein inhibitor of 
activated signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) (PIAS3) to
suppress STAT3 signaling regulating embryo early development and cell
differentiation, but is required for early activation of the pituitary specific
transcription factor 1 (Pit1) gene (also known as POU1F1) critically affecting
mammalian growth and development. The goal of this study was to detect novel
nucleotide variations and haplotypes structure of the ATBF1 gene, as well as to
test their associations with growth-related traits in goats. Herein, a total of
seven novel single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (SNP 1-7) within this gene
were found in two well-known Chinese native goat breeds. Haplotypes structure
analysis demonstrated that there were four haplotypes in Hainan black goat while 
seventeen haplotypes in Xinong Saanen dairy goat, and both breeds only shared one
haplotype (hap1). Association testing revealed that the SNP2, SNP5, SNP6, and
SNP7 loci were also found to significantly associate with growth-related traits
in goats, respectively. Moreover, one diplotype in Xinong Saanen dairy goats
significantly linked to growth related traits. These preliminary findings not
only would extend the spectrum of genetic variations of the goat ATBF1 gene, but 
also would contribute to implementing marker-assisted selection in genetics and
breeding in goats.

PMCID: PMC4554846
PMID: 26323396  [PubMed]


12. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2015 Dec;83(6):849-60. doi: 10.1111/cen.12849. Epub 2015
Aug 6.

Frequency of genetic defects in combined pituitary hormone deficiency: a
systematic review and analysis of a multicentre Italian cohort.

De Rienzo F(1), Mellone S(2), Bellone S(1), Babu D(2), Fusco I(2), Prodam F(1),
Petri A(1), Muniswamy R(2), De Luca F(3), Salerno M(4), Momigliano-Richardi P(2),
Bona G(1), Giordano M(2); Italian Study Group on Genetics of CPHD.

Collaborators: Ambrosio MR, Beccaria L, Bernasconi S, Bozzola M, Buzi F, Capalbo 
D, Cavallo L, D'Avanzo MG, De Feo ML, De Filippo G, Genoni G, Ghigo E,
Guazzarotti L, Moro M, Loche S, Messina MF, Pasquino AM, Pocecco M, Pozzobon G,
Razzore P, Salerno MC, Saggese G, Sposito M, Strisciuglio P, Tonini G, Vigneri R,
Weber G.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Paediatrics, Department of Health Sciences, University of Eastern
Piedmont, Novara, Italy. (2)Laboratory of Genetics, Department of Health
Sciences, University of Eastern Piedmont and IRCAD, Novara, Italy. (3)Department 
of Paediatrics, University of Messina, Messina, Italy. (4)Paediatric Section,
Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Federico II University, Naples,
Italy.

OBJECTIVE: Combined pituitary hormonal deficiency (CPHD) can result from
mutations within genes that encode transcription factors. This study evaluated
the frequency of mutations in these genes in a cohort of 144 unrelated Italian
patients with CPHD and estimated the overall prevalence of mutations across
different populations using a systematic literature review.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A multicentre study of adult and paediatric patients with
CPHD was performed. The PROP1, POU1F1, HESX1, LHX3 and LHX4 genes were analysed
for the presence of mutations using direct sequencing. We systematically searched
PubMed with no date restrictions for studies that reported genetic screening of
CPHD cohorts. We only considered genetic screenings with at least 10 individuals.
Data extraction was conducted in accordance with the guidelines set by the
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA).
RESULTS: Global mutation frequency in Italian patients with CPHD was 2·9% (4/136)
in sporadic cases and 12·5% (1/8) in familial cases. The worldwide mutation
frequency for the five genes calculated from 21 studies was 12·4%, which ranged
from 11·2% in sporadic to 63% in familial cases. PROP1 was the most frequently
mutated gene in sporadic (6·7%) and familial cases (48·5%).
CONCLUSION: The frequency of defects in genes encoding pituitary transcription
factors is quite low in Italian patients with CPHD and other western European
countries, especially in sporadic patients. The decision of which genes should be
tested and in which order should be guided by hormonal and imaging phenotype, the
presence of extrapituitary abnormalities and the frequency of mutation for each
gene in the patient-referring population.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26147833  [PubMed - in process]


13. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 10;6(16):14456-71.

Pit-1 inhibits BRCA1 and sensitizes human breast tumors to cisplatin and vitamin 
D treatment.

Seoane S(1,)(2), Arias E(2,)(3), Sigueiro R(4), Sendon-Lago J(1,)(2),
Martinez-Ordoñez A(1,)(2), Castelao E(5), Eiró N(6), Garcia-Caballero T(7), Macia
M(3), Lopez-Lopez R(8), Maestro M(4), Vizoso F(6), Mouriño A(4), Perez-Fernandez 
R(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de
Compostela 15782, Spain. (2)Center for Research in Molecular Medicine and Chronic
Diseases-CIMUS, University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela
15782, Spain. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Santiago 
de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela 15782, Spain. (4)Department Organic
Chemistry, Research Laboratory Ignacio Rivas, University of Santiago de
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela 15782, Spain. (5)Oncology and Genetics Unit,
Biomedical Research Institute of Vigo (IBIV), Complejo Hospitalario Universitario
de Vigo, Servicio Galego de Saude (SERGAS), Vigo 36036, Spain. (6)Research Unit, 
Fundación Hospital de Jove, Gijón 33290, Spain. (7)Department of Morphological
Sciences, University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela 15782,
Spain. (8)Department of Clinical Oncology, University of Santiago de Compostela, 
Santiago de Compostela 15782, Spain.

The POU class 1 homeobox 1 (POU1F1, also known as Pit-1), pertaining to the
Pit-Oct-Unc (POU) family of transcription factors, has been related to tumor
growth and metastasis in breast. However, its role in response to breast cancer
therapy is unknown. We found that Pit-1 down-regulated DNA-damage and repair
genes, and specifically inhibited BRCA1 gene expression, sensitizing breast
cancer cells to DNA-damage agents. Administration of 1a,
25-dihydroxy-3-epi-vitamin D3 (3-Epi, an endogenous low calcemic vitamin D
metabolite) reduced Pit-1 expression, and synergized with cisplatin, thus,
decreasing cell proliferation and apoptosis in vitro, and reducing tumor growth
in vivo. In addition, fifteen primary cultures of human breast tumors showed
significantly decreased proliferation when treated with 3-Epi+cisplatin, compared
to cisplatin alone. This response positively correlated with Pit-1 levels. Our
findings demonstrate that high levels of Pit-1 and reduced BRCA1 levels increase 
breast cancer cell susceptibility to 3-Epi+cisplatin therapy.

PMCID: PMC4546479
PMID: 25992773  [PubMed - in process]


14. Endocr J. 2015;62(6):523-9. doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ15-0033. Epub 2015 Apr 3.

Growth hormone deficiency in monozygotic twins with autosomal dominant
pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ib.

Sano S(1), Iwata H, Matsubara K, Fukami M, Kagami M, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.

Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) is associated with compromised signal
transductions via PTH receptor (PTH-R) and other G-protein-coupled receptors
including GHRH-R. To date, while GH deficiency (GHD) has been reported in
multiple patients with PHP-Ia caused by mutations on the maternally expressed
GNAS coding regions and in two patients with sporadic form of PHP-Ib accompanied 
by broad methylation defects of maternally derived GNAS differentially methylated
regions (DMRs), it has not been identified in a patient with an autosomal
dominant form of PHP-Ib (AD-PHP-Ib) accompanied by an STX16 microdeletion and an 
isolated loss of methylation (LOM) at exon A/B-DMR. We studied 5 4/12-year-old
monozygotic twins with short stature (both -3.4 SD) and GHD (peak GH values, <6.0
µg/L after arginine and clonidine stimulations). Molecular studies revealed
maternally derived STX16 microdeletions and isolated LOMs at exon A/B-DMR in the 
twins, confirming the diagnosis of AD-PHP-Ib. GNAS mutation was not identified,
and neither mutation nor copy number variation was detected in GH1, POU1F1,
PROP1, GHRHR, LHX3, LHX4, and HESX1 in the twins. The results, in conjunction
with the previous finding that GNAS shows maternal expression in the pituitary,
suggest that GHD of the twins is primarily ascribed to compromised GHRH-R
signaling caused by AD-PTH-Ib. Thus, resistance to multiple hormones including
GHRH should be considered in AD-PHP-Ib.

PMID: 25843330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 30;10(3):e0120010. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120010.
eCollection 2015.

Dose-dependent dual role of PIT-1 (POU1F1) in somatolactotroph cell proliferation
and apoptosis.

Jullien N(1), Roche C(2), Brue T(3), Figarella-Branger D(4), Graillon T(5),
Barlier A(2), Herman JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, UMR7286, 13015 Marseille, France.
(2)Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, UMR7286, 13015 Marseille, France; Laboratory
of Molecular Biology, APHM Conception, 13385 Marseille, France. (3)Aix-Marseille 
Université, CNRS, UMR7286, 13015 Marseille, France; Department of Endocrinology, 
APHM Timone, 13385 Marseille, France. (4)Laboratory of Neuropathology, APHM
Timone, 13385 Marseille, France. (5)Department of Neurosurgery, APHM Timone,
13385 Marseille, France.

To test the role of wtPIT-1 (PITWT) or PIT-1 (R271W) (PIT271) in somatolactotroph
cells, we established, using inducible lentiviral vectors, sublines of GH4C1
somatotroph cells that allow the blockade of the expression of endogenous PIT-1
and/or the expression of PITWT or PIT271, a dominant negative mutant of PIT-1
responsible for Combined Pituitary Hormone Deficiency in patients. Blocking
expression of endogenous PIT-1 induced a marked decrease of cell proliferation.
Overexpressing PITWT twofold led also to a dose-dependent decrease of cell
proliferation that was accompanied by cell death. Expression of PIT271 induced a 
strong dose-dependent decrease of cell proliferation accompanied by a very
pronounced cell death. These actions of PIT271 are independent of its
interaction/competition with endogenous PIT-1, as they were unchanged when
expression of endogenous PIT-1 was blocked. All these actions are specific for
somatolactotroph cells, and could not be observed in heterologous cells. Cell
death induced by PITWT or by PIT271 was accompanied by DNA fragmentation, but was
not inhibited by inhibitors of caspases, autophagy or necrosis, suggesting that
this cell death is a caspase-independent apoptosis. Altogether, our results
indicate that under normal conditions PIT-1 is important for the maintenance of
cell proliferation, while when expressed at supra-normal levels it induces cell
death. Through this dual action, PIT-1 may play a role in the
expansion/regression cycles of pituitary lactotroph population during and after
lactation. Our results also demonstrate that the so-called "dominant-negative"
action of PIT271 is independent of its competition with PIT-1 or a blockade of
the actions of the latter, and are actions specific to this mutant variant of
PIT-1.

PMCID: PMC4379079
PMID: 25822178  [PubMed - in process]


16. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Jun 15;24(12):3506-17. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv102. Epub 2015 Mar
18.

FGFR2 regulates Mre11 expression and double-strand break repair via the
MEK-ERK-POU1F1 pathway in breast tumorigenesis.

Huang YL(1), Chou WC(2), Hsiung CN(2), Hu LY(2), Chu HW(2), Shen CY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei
114, Taiwan, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115,
Taiwan and. (2)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115,
Taiwan and. (3)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical
Center, Taipei 114, Taiwan, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica,
Taipei 115, Taiwan and College of Public Health, China Medical University,
Taichong 404, Taiwan bmcys@ibms.sinica.edu.tw.

The association between breast cancer risk and genetic variants of fibroblast
growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) has been identified and repeatedly confirmed;
however, the mechanism underlying FGFR2 in breast tumorigenesis remains obscure. 
Given that breast tumorigenesis is particularly related to DNA
double-strand-break-repair (DSBR), we examined the hypothesis that FGFR2 is
involved in DSBR. Our results show that expression of Mre11, a vital exonuclease 
in DSBR, is downregulated by FGFR2, which is further linked to decreased DSBR.
Analysis of the Mre11 promoter revealed that POU1F1 mediates FGFR2-induced Mre11 
downregulation. Furthermore, ERK, downstream of FGFR2, directly interacts with
and phosphorylates POU1F1, increasing POU1F1 binding capacity to the Mre11
promoter and repressing Mre11 expression, which consequently affects DSBR and
sensitizes breast cancer cells to chemotherapeutic treatments. The importance of 
the FGFR2-Mre11-DSBR link in cancer progression is suggested by the finding that 
genotypes of FGFR2 and Mre11 are associated with survival of breast cancer
patients and that FGFR2 expression correlates with cancer prognosis specifically 
in patients receiving chemotherapy. This study yields important insight into the 
role of FGFR2 in breast tumorigenesis and may facilitate development of a useful 
therapeutic approach for breast cancer.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25788520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Genet. 2014 Dec;93(3):831-5.

Associations of POU1F1 gene polymorphisms and protein structure changes with
growth traits and blood metabolites in two Iranian sheep breeds.

Sadeghi M(1), Jalil-Sarghale A, Moradi-Shahrbabak M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, College of Agriculture and Natural Resources,
University of Tehran, Karaj 3158777871, Iran. sadeghimos@ut.ac.ir.

Erratum in
    J Genet. 2015 Mar;94(1):169.
    J Genet. J Genet. 2015 Sep;94(3):555.

PMID: 25572243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2015 Jun;82(6):876-84. doi: 10.1111/cen.12706. Epub 2015
Feb 6.

Molecular screening of a large cohort of Moroccan patients with congenital
hypopituitarism.

Fritez N(1), Sobrier ML(2,)(3), Iraqi H(4), Vié-Luton MP(2), Netchine I(5), El
Annas A(1), Pantel J(6), Collot N(7), Rose S(7), Piterboth W(7), Legendre
M(2,)(7,)(3), Chraibi A(4), Amselem S(2,)(7,)(3), Kadiri A(4), Hilal L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry-Immunology, Faculty of Science, Mohammed V
University, Rabat, Morocco. (2)Inserm UMRS933, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France. 
(3)UMRS933, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Paris, France. (4)Hôpital
Ibn Sina, Faculté de Médecine et de Pharmacie, Université Mohammed V, Rabat,
Morocco. (5)Service d'Endocrinologie Pédiatrique, AP-HP, Hôpital Trousseau,
Paris, France. (6)Inserm U894, 2 ter rue d'Alesia, Paris, France. (7)UF de
Génétique Moléculaire, AP-HP, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Congenital hypopituitarism is a rare disease which, for
most patients, has no identified molecular cause. We aimed to document the
molecular basis of growth retardation in a Moroccan cohort.
DESIGN/PATIENTS: 80 index cases [54 with isolated growth hormone deficiency
(IGHD), 26 with combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD)] were screened for
molecular defects in GH1 (including LCR-GH1), GHRHR, GHSR, GHRH, PROP1, POU1F1,
HESX1, LHX3, LHX4 and SOX3.
RESULTS: Five different deleterious mutations were identified in 14 patients from
eight families. In the IGHD group, three genes were found to be involved: GH1,
GHRHR and GHSR. In the CPHD group, PROP1 was the only mutated gene. In addition, 
two heterozygous variations whose deleterious effect remains to be demonstrated
were identified (in GH1 and LHX4), and two polymorphisms (missense variations)
were detected (in LHX3 and in GHSR). The prevalence of mutations in this Moroccan
GHD cohort was 10% (8/80), 11·1% (6/54) in the IGHD group and 7·7% (2/26) in the 
CPHD group.
CONCLUSION: This is the first molecular screening of congenital GHD in a Moroccan
population and, like other studies, mutations were preferentially identified in
familial cases (75%); mutations in genes such as POU1F1, HESX1, SOX3, LHX3 and
LHX4 are extremely rare. The p.R73C PROP1 mutation was the most frequent mutation
in CPHD; this should be the first one to screen in this population. Our results
should contribute to a better diagnosis and management of this heterogeneous
disease condition.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25557026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 20;16(6):505. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0505-8.

Cancer progression by breast tumors with Pit-1-overexpression is blocked by
inhibition of metalloproteinase (MMP)-13.

Sendon-Lago J(1), Seoane S(2), Eiro N(3), Bermudez MA(4), Macia M(5),
Garcia-Caballero T(6), Vizoso FJ(7), Perez-Fernandez R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology- Center for Research in Molecular Medicine and
Chronic Diseases (CIMUS), School of Medicine, University of Santiago de
Compostela, Praza do Obradoiro, Santiago de Compostela, 15782, Spain.
bautistax@hotmail.com. (2)Department of Physiology- Center for Research in
Molecular Medicine and Chronic Diseases (CIMUS), School of Medicine, University
of Santiago de Compostela, Praza do Obradoiro, Santiago de Compostela, 15782,
Spain. samuel.seoane@usc.es. (3)Unidad de Investigación, Fundacion Hospital de
Jove, Avenida Eduardo Castro, Gijón, 33290, Spain.
investigacion@hospitaldejove.com. (4)Department of Physiology- Center for
Research in Molecular Medicine and Chronic Diseases (CIMUS), School of Medicine, 
University of Santiago de Compostela, Praza do Obradoiro, Santiago de Compostela,
15782, Spain. maria.bermudez@usc.es. (5)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
School of Medicine, University of Santiago de Compostela, Praza do Obradoiro,
Santiago de Compostela, 15782, Spain. manuelmaciac@msn.com. (6)Departments of
Morphological Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Santiago de Compostela,
Praza do Obradoiro, Santiago de Compostela, 15782, Spain.
tomas.garcia-caballero@usc.es. (7)Unidad de Investigación, Fundacion Hospital de 
Jove, Avenida Eduardo Castro, Gijón, 33290, Spain. franvizoso@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Physiology- Center for Research in Molecular Medicine and
Chronic Diseases (CIMUS), School of Medicine, University of Santiago de
Compostela, Praza do Obradoiro, Santiago de Compostela, 15782, Spain.
roman.perez.fernandez@usc.es.

INTRODUCTION: The POU class 1 homeobox 1 transcription factor (POU1F1, also known
as Pit-1) is expressed in the mammary gland and its overexpression induces
profound phenotypic changes in proteins involved in cell proliferation,
apoptosis, and invasion. Patients with breast cancer and elevated expression of
Pit-1 show a positive correlation with the occurrence of distant metastasis. In
this study we evaluate the relationship between Pit-1 and two collagenases:
matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) and matrix metalloproteinase-13 (MMP-13),
which have been related to metastasis in breast cancer.
METHODS: We began by transfecting the MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 human breast
adenocarcinoma cell lines with the Pit-1 overexpression vector (pRSV-hPit-1).
Afterward, the mRNA, protein, and transcriptional regulation of both MMP-1 and
MMP-13 were evaluated by real-time PCR, Western blot, chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP), and luciferase reporter assays. We also evaluated
Pit-1 overexpression with MMP-1 and MMP-13 knockdown in a severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID) mouse tumor xenograft model. Finally, by
immunohistochemistry we correlated Pit-1 with MMP-1 and MMP-13 protein expression
in 110 human breast tumors samples.
RESULTS: Our data show that Pit-1 increases mRNA and protein of both MMP-1 and
MMP-13 through direct transcriptional regulation. In SCID mice, knockdown of
MMP-13 completely blocked lung metastasis in Pit-1-overexpressing MCF-7 cells
injected into the mammary fat pad. In breast cancer patients, expression of Pit-1
was found to be positively correlated with the presence of both MMP-1 and MMP-13.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicates that Pit-1 regulates MMP-1 and MMP-13, and that
inhibition of MMP-13 blocked invasiveness to lung in Pit-1-overexpressed breast
cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4305241
PMID: 25527274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Endocrine. 2015 Jun;49(2):479-91. doi: 10.1007/s12020-014-0498-1. Epub 2014 Dec
11.

Molecular analysis of PROP1, POU1F1, LHX3, and HESX1 in Turkish patients with
combined pituitary hormone deficiency: a multicenter study.

Bas F(1), Uyguner ZO, Darendeliler F, Aycan Z, Çetinkaya E, Berberoglu M, Siklar 
Z, Öcal G, Darcan S, Göksen D, Topaloglu AK, Yüksel B, Özbek MN, Ercan O,
Evliyaoglu O, Çetinkaya S, Sen Y, Atabek E, Toksoy G, Aydin BK, Bundak R.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology, Istanbul Faculy of Medicine, Istanbul University,
Çapa, Istanbul, 34093, Turkey, firdevsb@istanbul.edu.tr.

To investigate the specific mutations in PROP1, POU1F1, LHX3, and HESX1 genes in 
patients with combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) in Turkey. Seventy-six
patients with CPHD were included in this study. Based on clinical, hormonal, and 
neuro-radiological data, relevant transcription factor genes were evaluated by
Sanger sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. Total
frequency of mutations was 30.9 % in patients with CPHD. Frequency was
significantly higher in familial patients (p = 0.001). Three different types of
mutations in PROP1 gene (complete gene deletion, c.301-302delAG, a novel
mutation; IVS1+2T>G) were found in 12 unrelated patients (21.8 %). Mutations in
PROP1 gene were markedly higher in familial than in sporadic cases (58.8 vs. 5.3 
%, p < 0.001). Homozygous complete gene deletion was the most common mutation in 
PROP1 gene (8/12) and was identified in six familial patients. Four different
homozygous mutations [p.Q4X, novel mutations; exons 1-2 deletion, p.V153F,
p.I244S] were detected in POU1F1 gene. Central precocious puberty was firstly
observed in a sporadic-male patient with homozygous POU1F1 (p.I244S) mutation. A 
homozygous mutation in HESX1 gene (p.R160H) was detected in one patient. This
study is the first to investigate specific mutations in CPHD patients in Turkey. 
Complete deletion in PROP1 gene was the most common mutation encountered in
patients with CPHD. We believe that the results of this study will contribute to 
the establishment of genetic screening strategies in Turkey, as well as to the
studies on phenotype-genotype correlations and early diagnosis of CPHD patients.

PMID: 25500790  [PubMed - in process]


21. Oncol Lett. 2014 Dec;8(6):2423-2430. Epub 2014 Oct 13.

Pathogenesis analysis of pituitary adenoma based on gene expression profiling.

Wang W(1), Xu Z(2), Fu L(3), Liu W(2), Li X(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250012, P.R. China ; 
Department of Neurosurgery, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao, Shandong 266071,
P.R. China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao,
Shandong 266071, P.R. China. (3)Department of General Surgery, Qingdao Municipal 
Hospital, Qingdao, Shandong 266071, P.R. China. (4)School of Medicine, Shandong
University, Jinan, Shandong 250012, P.R. China ; Department of Neurosurgery, Qilu
Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250012, P.R. China.

The aim of the current study was to investigate the pathogenesis of pituitary
adenoma through screening of the differentially-expressed genes (DEGs) and
proteins in normal pituitary and pituitary adenoma tissues, and analyzing the
interactions among them. Following the acquisition of gene expression profiling
data from a public functional genomics data repository, Gene Expression Omnibus, 
DEGs were screened in normal pituitary and pituitary adenoma tissues. Upregulated
and downregulated DEGs were further identified through gene ontology functional
enrichment analysis. Subsequently, the DEGs were mapped to the Search Tool for
the Retrieval of Interacting Genes database, and the protein-protein interaction 
(PPI) networks of the upregulated and downregulated DEGs were constructed.
Finally, the functional modules of the PPI network of the downregulated DEGs were
analyzed. In total, 211 upregulated and 413 downregulated DEGs were screened
between the normal pituitary and pituitary adenoma samples. Downregulated DEGs
were associated with certain functions, including the immune response, hormone
regulation and cell proliferation. Upregulated genes were associated with cation 
transport functions. Five modules were acquired from the PPI network of the
downregulated DEGs. Transcription factors, including signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), interleukin 6 (IL-6), B-cell lymphoma 6
protein, early growth response 1, POU1F1, jun B proto-oncogene and FOS were the
core nodes in the functional modules. In summary, the DEGs and proteins were
identified through screening gene expression profiling and PPI networks. The
results of the present study indicated that low expression levels of hormone- and
immune-related genes facilitated the occurrence of pituitary adenoma. Low
expression levels of IL-6 and STAT3 were significant in the dysimmunity of
pituitary adenoma. Furthermore, the low expression level of POU1F1 contributed to
the reduction in pituitary hormone secretion.

PMCID: PMC4214395
PMID: 25360166  [PubMed]


22. J Endocrinol Invest. 2015 Jan;38(1):1-12. doi: 10.1007/s40618-014-0141-2. Epub
2014 Sep 9.

Combined pituitary hormone deficiency: current and future status.

Castinetti F(1,)(2,)(3), Reynaud R(4,)(5,)(6), Quentien MH(4,)(7,)(6), Jullien
N(4), Marquant E(4,)(5,)(6), Rochette C(4,)(7,)(6), Herman JP(4), Saveanu
A(4,)(7,)(8,)(6), Barlier A(4,)(7,)(8,)(6), Enjalbert A(4,)(8,)(6), Brue
T(4,)(7,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, Centre de Recherche en Neurobiologie et
Neurophysiologie de Marseille CRN2M UMR 7286, cedex 15, 13344, Marseille, France.
frederic.castinetti@univ-amu.fr. (2)APHM, Hôpital Timone Adultes, Service
d'Endocrinologie, Diabète et Maladies Métaboliques, cedex 5, 13385, Marseille,
France. frederic.castinetti@univ-amu.fr. (3)Centre de Référence des Maladies
Rares d'Origine Hypophysaire DEFHY, cedex 15, 13385, Marseille, France.
frederic.castinetti@univ-amu.fr. (4)Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, Centre de
Recherche en Neurobiologie et Neurophysiologie de Marseille CRN2M UMR 7286, cedex
15, 13344, Marseille, France. (5)APHM, Hôpital Timone Enfants, Service de
Pédiatrie multidisciplinaire, cedex 5, 13385, Marseille, France. (6)Centre de
Référence des Maladies Rares d'Origine Hypophysaire DEFHY, cedex 15, 13385,
Marseille, France. (7)APHM, Hôpital Timone Adultes, Service d'Endocrinologie,
Diabète et Maladies Métaboliques, cedex 5, 13385, Marseille, France. (8)APHM,
Hôpital de la Conception, Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire, 13005, Marseille, 
France.

Over the last two decades, the understanding of the mechanisms involved in
pituitary ontogenesis has largely increased. Since the first description of
POU1F1 human mutations responsible for a well-defined phenotype without
extra-pituitary malformation, several other genetic defects of transcription
factors have been reported with variable degrees of phenotype-genotype
correlations. However, to date, despite the identification of an increased number
of genetic causes of isolated or multiple pituitary deficiencies, the etiology of
most (80-90 %) congenital cases of hypopituitarism remains unsolved. Identifying 
new etiologies is of importance as a post-natal diagnosis to better diagnose and 
treat the patients (delayed pituitary deficiencies, differential diagnosis of a
pituitary mass on MRI, etc.), and as a prenatal diagnosis to decrease the risk of
early death (undiagnosed corticotroph deficiency for instance). The aim of this
review is to summarize the main etiologies and phenotypes of combined pituitary
hormone deficiencies, associated or not with extra-pituitary anomalies, and to
suggest how the identification of such etiologies could be improved in the near
future.

PMID: 25200994  [PubMed - in process]


23. Endocrinology. 2014 Nov;155(11):4329-40. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1034. Epub 2014 Aug
19.

Somatotropinomas, but not nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas, maintain a
functional apoptotic RET/Pit1/ARF/p53 pathway that is blocked by excess GDNF.

Diaz-Rodriguez E(1), Garcia-Rendueles AR, Ibáñez-Costa A, Gutierrez-Pascual E,
Garcia-Lavandeira M, Leal A, Japon MA, Soto A, Venegas E, Tinahones FJ,
Garcia-Arnes JA, Benito P, Angeles Galvez M, Jimenez-Reina L, Bernabeu I, Dieguez
C, Luque RM, Castaño JP, Alvarez CV.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Investigations in Medicine of the USC (E.D.-R., A.R.G.-G., M.G.-L.,
C.D., C.V.A.), University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela,
Spain 15782; Department of Endocrinology (I.B.), University Hospital (University 
Hospital of Santiago de Compostela), Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain 15706; Departments of Cell Biology, Physiology, and
Immunology (A.I.-C., E.G.-P., R.M.L., J.P.C.), and Morphological Sciences
(L.J.-R.), University of Cordoba, and Reina Sofia University Hospital (P.B.,
M.A.G.), Maimonides Institute for Research in Biomedicine of Cordoba, Córdoba,
Spain 14014; Departments of Endocrinology and Pathology (A.L., M.A.J., A.S.,
E.V.), Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Instituto de Biomedicina de
Sevilla, University of Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain 41013; Department of Endocrinology
(F.J.T.), Hospital Virgen de la Victoria, and Department of Endocrinology
(J.A.G.-A.), Hospital Carlos Haya, Malaga, Spain 29010; and CIBER Fisiopatología 
de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn) 15706, spain (A.I.-C., F.J.T., P.B., I.B., 
C.D., R.M.L., J.P.C., C.V.A.), Spain 15706.

Acromegaly is caused by somatotroph cell adenomas (somatotropinomas [ACROs]),
which secrete GH. Human and rodent somatotroph cells express the RET receptor. In
rodents, when normal somatotrophs are deprived of the RET ligand, GDNF (Glial
Cell Derived Neurotrophic Factor), RET is processed intracellularly to induce
overexpression of Pit1 [Transcription factor (gene : POUF1) essential for
transcription of Pituitary hormones GH, PRL and TSHb], which in turn leads to
p19Arf/p53-dependent apoptosis. Our purpose was to ascertain whether human ACROs 
maintain the RET/Pit1/p14ARF/p53/apoptosis pathway, relative to nonfunctioning
pituitary adenomas (NFPAs). Apoptosis in the absence and presence of GDNF was
studied in primary cultures of 8 ACROs and 3 NFPAs. Parallel protein extracts
were analyzed for expression of RET, Pit1, p19Arf, p53, and phospho-Akt. When
GDNF deprived, ACRO cells, but not NFPAs, presented marked level of apoptosis
that was prevented in the presence of GDNF. Apoptosis was accompanied by RET
processing, Pit1 accumulation, and p14ARF and p53 induction. GDNF prevented all
these effects via activation of phospho-AKT. Overexpression of human Pit1 (hPit1)
directly induced p19Arf/p53 and apoptosis in a pituitary cell line. Using in
silico studies, 2 CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (cEBPa) consensus-binding 
sites were found to be 100% conserved in mouse, rat, and hPit1 promoters.
Deletion of 1 cEBPa site prevented the RET-induced increase in hPit1 promoter
expression. TaqMan qRT-PCR (real time RT-PCR) for RET, Pit1, Arf, TP53, GDNF,
steroidogenic factor 1, and GH was performed in RNA from whole ACRO and NFPA
tumors. ACRO but not NFPA adenomas express RET and Pit1. GDNF expression in the
tumors was positively correlated with RET and negatively correlated with p53. In 
conclusion, ACROs maintain an active RET/Pit1/p14Arf/p53/apoptosis pathway that
is inhibited by GDNF. Disruption of GDNF's survival function might constitute a
new therapeutic route in acromegaly.

PMID: 25137025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nature. 2014 Oct 9;514(7521):257-61. doi: 10.1038/nature13573. Epub 2014 Aug 3.

Required enhancer-matrin-3 network interactions for a homeodomain transcription
program.

Skowronska-Krawczyk D(1), Ma Q(1), Schwartz M(2), Scully K(1), Li W(1), Liu Z(1),
Taylor H(1), Tollkuhn J(1), Ohgi KA(1), Notani D(1), Kohwi Y(3), Kohwi-Shigematsu
T(3), Rosenfeld MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA. (2)1]
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA [2] The Mina
and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan,
5290002, Israel. (3)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California
94720, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2015;14(10):1487-8.

Homeodomain proteins, described 30 years ago, exert essential roles in
development as regulators of target gene expression; however, the molecular
mechanisms underlying transcriptional activity of homeodomain factors remain
poorly understood. Here investigation of a developmentally required
POU-homeodomain transcription factor, Pit1 (also known as Pou1f1), has revealed
that, unexpectedly, binding of Pit1-occupied enhancers to a nuclear matrin-3-rich
network/architecture is a key event in effective activation of the Pit1-regulated
enhancer/coding gene transcriptional program. Pit1 association with Satb1 (ref.
8) and ß-catenin is required for this tethering event. A naturally occurring,
dominant negative, point mutation in human PIT1(R271W), causing combined
pituitary hormone deficiency, results in loss of Pit1 association with ß-catenin 
and Satb1 and therefore the matrin-3-rich network, blocking Pit1-dependent
enhancer/coding target gene activation. This defective activation can be rescued 
by artificial tethering of the mutant R271W Pit1 protein to the matrin-3 network,
bypassing the pre-requisite association with ß-catenin and Satb1 otherwise
required. The matrin-3 network-tethered R271W Pit1 mutant, but not the untethered
protein, restores Pit1-dependent activation of the enhancers and recruitment of
co-activators, exemplified by p300, causing both enhancer RNA transcription and
target gene activation. These studies have thus revealed an unanticipated
homeodomain factor/ß-catenin/Satb1-dependent localization of target gene
regulatory enhancer regions to a subnuclear architectural structure that serves
as an underlying mechanism by which an enhancer-bound homeodomain factor
effectively activates developmental gene transcriptional programs.

PMCID: PMC4358797
PMID: 25119036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Sep;41(9):5787-92. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3451-8. Epub 2014
Jun 26.

Association of pituitary specific transcription factor-1 (POU1F1) gene
polymorphism with growth and biometric traits and blood metabolites in Iranian
Zel and Lori-Bakhtiari sheep.

Jalil-Sarghale A(1), Moradi Shahrbabak M, Moradi Sharbabak H, Sadeghi M, Mura MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, College of Agriculture and Natural Resources,
University of Tehran, Karaj, Iran, ali_jalil17@ut.ac.ir.

The pituitary-specific positive transcription factor 1 (POU1F1) gene has been the
subject of many recent studies because of its important roles in growth and
development of mammals. In this study, we investigated the single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) at the third exon of POU1F1 gene and its association with
growth and biometric traits and blood metabolites in two Iranian sheep breeds,
Zel and Lori-Bakhtiari. Blood samples from 90 Lori-Bakhtiari and 90 Zel sheep
were collected to extract DNA and the 295-bp fragment of the POU1F1 gene was
amplified and the restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) technique was
adopted for genotyping. A SNP was identified in both Lori-Bakhtiari and Zel sheep
breeds, which represents a non-synonymous single base mutation at restriction
site for endonuclease AciI. The results revealed differential frequencies of
alleles between the two studied breeds, where A allele was more frequent in
Lori-Bakhtiari breed, while G allele was more frequent in Zel breed. When POU1F1 
genotypes were tested, the animals with AA genotype had a higher weaning weight
than those with GG genotype (p < 0.05), however there were not significant
association between genotypes and birth weight, biometric traits (body length,
body height, heart girth, thigh girth and abdominal girth) and blood metabolites 
(triglyceride and cholesterol) of the studied breeds (p > 0.05). These findings
imply that the POU1F1 polymorphism may affect weaning weight, thus can be used as
a molecular marker for this production trait.

PMID: 24965143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Sep;99(9):E1744-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-1769. Epub 
2014 Jun 17.

Involvement of PIT-1-reactive cytotoxic T lymphocytes in anti-PIT-1 antibody
syndrome.

Bando H(1), Iguchi G, Fukuoka H, Yamamoto M, Hidaka-Takeno R, Okimura Y,
Matsumoto R, Suda K, Nishizawa H, Takahashi M, Tojo K, Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine (H.B.,
G.I., H.F., M.Y., R.H., R.M., K.S., H.N., M.T., Y.T.), Kobe University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kobe 650-0017, Japan; Department of Nutrition (Y.O.), Kobe
Woman's University, Kobe 654-8585; Division of Diabetes and Endocrinology,
Department of Medicine (K.T), Jikei University School of Medicine, 105-8461
Tokyo, Japan.

CONTEXT: Anti-pituitary-specific transcriptional factor 1 (PIT-1) antibody
syndrome is characterized by acquired growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL), and
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) deficiencies associated with circulating
anti-PIT-1 antibodies. Although autoimmunity to PIT-1 has been suggested as a
pathogenesis, the precise mechanism of the syndrome remains unclarified.
OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the involvement of antibody- or cell-mediated immunity in
anti-PIT-1 antibody syndrome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To investigate a direct effect of anti-PIT-1 antibody on
pituitary cells, cell proliferation, and cytotoxicity detection assays were
performed using patient serum. Enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISpot) assay was
performed to evaluate the involvement of PIT-1-reactive cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(CTLs). An immunohistochemical analysis using anti-CD4 or anti-CD8 antibody was
performed to examine tissue infiltration by CTLs.
RESULTS: Patient serum did not exhibit any inhibitory effect on cell
proliferation and secretion of GH and PRL in GH3 cells. In addition,
complement-dependent cytotoxicity was not detected in patient serum on GH3 cells 
or primary pituitary cells. The ELISpot assay revealed the presence of CTLs that 
specifically reacted to the recombinant PIT-1 protein in the patient's peripheral
lymphocytes. CD8(+) cell infiltrations, which is the characteristic of CTLs, were
observed in the pituitary gland, adrenal gland, stomach, thyroid gland, liver,
and pancreas of the patient with anti-PIT-1 antibody syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the anti-PIT-1 antibody is not a cause
but a marker of anti-PIT-1 antibody syndrome, in which CTLs play a pivotal role
in the pathogenesis.

PMID: 24937538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Gene. 2014 Jul 25;545(2):215-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.05.033. Epub 2014 May
14.

Polymorphism analysis in genes of the somatotropic axis in Nellore cattle
selected for growth.

Cardoso DF(1), de Souza FR(2), de Camargo GM(2), Fonseca PD(2), Fonseca LF(2),
Braz CU(2), Boligon AA(2), Mercadante ME(3), de Albuquerque LG(2), Tonhati H(2).

Author information: 
(1)São Paulo State University, Jaboticabal, SP, Brazil. Electronic address:
diercles.cardoso@yahoo.com.br. (2)São Paulo State University, Jaboticabal, SP,
Brazil. (3)Instituto de Zootecnia, Centro APTA Bovinos de Corte, Sertãozinho, SP,
Brazil.

The somatotropic axis consists of genes that are involved in muscular
development. These genes are potential regions of study to identify possible QTL 
for economically important traits in beef cattle. The aim of this study was to
verify the existence of GH1, POU1F1, and GHR polymorphisms in Nellore cattle to
verify the influence of selection in these mutations and to analyse the
association between molecular markers and body weight at different ages, yearling
hip height, carcass fat thickness and loin eye area. Six hundred forty-five
animals from the Centro APTA Bovinos de Corte, were genotyped by PCR-RFLP
techniques. The association analyses were performed with general mixed models
taking into consideration the effect of one marker, and other model taking into
consideration interactions between two molecular markers. Only the molecular
markers rs81109601 on GH1 and rs109136815 on GHR were polymorphic; however, they 
were not found to be under selection. The association of the GHR rs109136815
marker and loin eye area was observed (p<0.05), as well as the effect of
interaction between the markers and the female body weight at 550 days of age
(p<0.04). The interaction effect should be considered in situations where the
interactivity between two genes is known.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24835309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Anim Sci Technol. 2014 Nov 27;56:25. doi: 10.1186/2055-0391-56-25. eCollection 
2014.

Association of genotype of POU1F1 intron 1 with carcass characteristics in
crossbred pigs.

Kim GW(1), Yoo JY(2), Kim HY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Resources, Kong-Ju National University, # 54 Daehakro,
Yesan, Chungnam, 340-702 Korea. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ewha 
Woman's University, Seoul, 158-710 Korea.

This study was carried out to investigate the association of POU1F1 (POU domain, 
class 1, transcription factor 1, Pit1, renamed as POU1F1) gene with backfat
thickness (mm), carcass weight (kg), pH, and color values (L(*), a(*), b(*)) in
crossbred pigs (Landrace x Yorkshire x Duroc). Frequency of the AA genotype indel
was at the highest level (66.67%). Frequency of A allele (0.81) was higher than
that of b allele (0.19). This population followed Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.
Carcass weights and a(*) values of the three genotypes were all significantly
different (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), respectively. However, backfat thickness, L(*), b(*),
visual color, and pH of the three genotypes were not significantly different
(p<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05). Visual color was negatively correlated with L(*) (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>-0.521) and
b(*) (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>-0.390) values, L(*) value was correlated with b(*) (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.419) value, 
and a(*) value was positively correlated with b(*) (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.612) value. These
results indicate that the POU1F1 gene affected carcass weight and meat redness.

PMCID: PMC4540259
PMID: 26290714  [PubMed]


29. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Jan;28(1):40-52. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1245. Epub 2013 Jan 1.

Both estrogen receptor a and ß stimulate pituitary GH gene expression.

Avtanski D(1), Novaira HJ, Wu S, Romero CJ, Kineman R, Luque RM, Wondisford F,
Radovick S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (D.A., H.J.N., S.W., C.J.R., S.R.), Division of
Endocrinology, and Department of Pediatrics (F.W.), Division of Metabolism, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287; and Research
and Development Division (R.K., R.M.L.), Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612.

Although sex steroids have been implicated in the control of mammalian growth,
their direct effect on GH synthesis is less clear. The aim of this study was to
establish whether estradiol (E2) directly affects GH synthesis in somatotrophs.
Somatotroph GH3 and MtT/S cells were used as in vitro models. At physiological
doses of E2 stimulation, GH mRNA levels were increased and the ER antagonist ICI 
182,780 completely abolished this effect. Estrogen receptor (ER) a- and
ERß-selective agonists, propylpyrazole triol (PPT), and 2,3-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl) 
propionitrile (DPN), respectively, augmented GH mRNA expression and secretion,
whereas E2 and PPT, but not DPN increased prolactin (PRL) mRNA levels. E2, PPT,
and DPN stimulated expression of the pituitary transcription factor Pou1f1 and
increased its binding to the GH promoter. In vivo evidence of E2 effects on GH
synthesis was obtained from the generation of the somatotroph-specific ERa
knockout (sERa-KO) mouse model. Basal pituitary GH, PRL, POU1F1, and ERa mRNA
expression levels were lower in sERa-KO mice compared with those in controls;
whereas ERß mRNA levels remained unchanged. E2 and DPN stimulated pituitary GH
mRNA expression and serum GH levels in control and sERa-KO ovariectomized mice;
however, serum GH levels were unchanged in PPT-treated ovariectomized sERa-KO
mice. In these animal models, PRL mRNA levels increased after either E2 or PPT,
but an increase was not seen after DPN treatment. Thus, we propose a mechanism by
which estrogen directly regulates somatotroph GH synthesis at a pretranslational 
level. In contrast to the predominant effect of ERa in the lactotroph, these
results support a role for both ERa and ERß in the transcriptional control of Gh 
in the somatotroph and illustrate important differences in ER isoform specificity
in the anterior pituitary gland.

PMCID: PMC3874459
PMID: 24284820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Gene. 2013 Dec 15;532(2):203-10. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.062. Epub 2013 Sep
25.

Genetic variants and effects on milk traits of the caprine paired-like
homeodomain transcription factor 2 (PITX2) gene in dairy goats.

Zhao H(1), Wu X, Cai H, Pan C, Lei C, Chen H, Lan X.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, PR
China. Electronic address: haiyuzhao616@gmail.com.

The paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2 (PITX2) gene plays a critical 
role in cell proliferation, differentiation, hematopoiesis and organogenesis.
This gene regulates several genes' expressions in the Wnt/beta-catenin and POU1F1
pathways, thereby probably affecting milk performance. The goal of this study was
to characterize the genetic variants of the PITX2 gene and test their
associations with milk traits in dairy goats. Herein, four novel single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), AC_000163:g.18117T>C, g.18161C>G, g.18322C>A and
g.18353T>C, within the caprine PITX2 gene, were found in two famous Chinese dairy
goat breeds. These SNPs mapping at Cys28Arg, Pro42Pro, IVS1+79C>A and
IVS1+110T>C, were genotyped by the MvaI, SmaI, MspI and RsaI aCRS-RFLP or
PCR-RFLP methods, respectively. Accordingly, two main haplotypes (CGCT and CGCC) 
were identified among the specimens. Association testing revealed that the SmaI
and RsaI polymorphisms were significantly associated with the milk fat content,
milk lactose content and milk density (P<0.05 or P<0.01) in the Guanzhong (GZ)
dairy goats, respectively. At the same time, the RsaI locus was also found to
significantly link to the second lactation milk yield, milk fat content, milk
lactose content, milk density and milk total solid content (P<0.05 or P<0.01) in 
the Xinong Saanen (XNSN) dairy goats, respectively. These results indicated that 
the caprine PITX2 gene had the significant effects on milk traits. Hence, the
RsaI and SmaI loci could be regarded as two DNA markers for selecting superior
milk performance in dairy goats. These preliminary findings not only would extend
the spectrum of genetic variation of the goat PITX2 gene, but also would
contribute to implementing marker-assisted selection (MAS) in breeding and
genetics in dairy goats.

© 2013.

PMID: 24076438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Gene. 2013 Dec 1;531(2):398-402. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.002. Epub 2013 Sep
10.

A critical functional missense mutation (H173R) in the bovine PROP1 gene
significantly affects growth traits in cattle.

Pan C(1), Wu C, Jia W, Xu Y, Lei C, Hu S, Lan X, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi 712100, PR China. Electronic address: panyu1980@126.com.

The PROP1 protein, encoded by the prophet of Pit-1 (PROP1) gene, exhibits both
DNA-binding and transcriptional activation abilities. Its expression leads to the
ontogenesis of growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL), thyroid-stimulating hormone 
(TSH), and pituitary hormone. The missense mutation H173R in PROP1 may result in 
deficiencies of GH, PRL, TSH, and Pit-1, thereby affecting growth traits. The
objective of this study was to characterize the H173R mutation within the PROP1
gene and examine its associations with growth traits in cattle. Accordingly, the 
H173R mutation was genotyped in 1207 cows belonging to five Chinese native
breeds. Three genotypes were identified among the specimens, with genotype AA
being the major one. Consequently, the "G" allele was the minor allele.
Association testing revealed that the H173R mutation was significantly associated
with body weight, average daily weight gain and physical parameters in the
analyzed breeds. Interestingly, the cows with genotype AG and/or AA had superior 
growth traits compared with those expressing the GG genotype, in all tested
breeds. These findings revealed that the "A" allele had positive effects on
growth traits, which was consistent with the increasing binding ability and
enhanced activation capacity associated with the bovine isoform PROP1-173H,
representing the "A" allele. Therefore, the H173R mutation can be considered as a
DNA marker for selecting individuals with superior growth traits, thereby
contributing to research on breeding and genetics in the beef industry.

© 2013.

PMID: 24029076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jan;27(1-2):171-4. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2013-0208.

Multiple cutaneous hemangiomas in a patient with combined pituitary hormone
deficiency.

Aykut A, Ozen S, Simsek DG, Onay H, Cogulu O, Darcan S, Ozkinay F.

Combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) refers to a rare heterogeneous group
of conditions in which there is a deficiency in at least two anterior pituitary
hormones. Patients with POU1F1 mutations show a combined pituitary deficiency
with low or absent levels of growth hormone, prolactin, and thyroid-stimulating
hormone. In this study, a 7-month-old girl with a CPHD is presented. She had
facial dysmorphologic features, hypertrichosis, and hypotonia. Additionally, she 
also presented with multiple cutaneous hemangioma that until now has not been
reported in association with this disorder.

PMID: 24025721  [PubMed - in process]


33. Clin Pediatr Endocrinol. 2013 Apr;22(2):15-23. doi: 10.1292/cpe.22.15. Epub 2013 
Apr 26.

Molecular and Clinical Findings in Patients with LHX4 and OTX2 Mutations.

Tajima T(1), Ishizu K, Nakamura A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Hokkaido,
Japan.

The pituitary gland produces hormones that play important roles in both the
development and homeostasis of the body. Ontogeny of the anterior and posterior
pituitary is orchestrated by inputs from neighboring tissues, cellular signaling 
molecules and transcription factors. Disruption of expression or function of
these factors has been implicated in the etiology of combined pituitary hormone
deficiency (CPHD). These include the transcription factors HESX1, PROP1, POU1F1, 
LHX3, LHX4, OTX2, SOX2, SOX3 and GLI2. This review focuses on summarizing most
recent mutations in LHX4 and OTX2 responsible for pituitary hormone deficiency.
In both genetic defects of LHX4 and OTX2, there is high variability in clinical
manifestations even in the same family. In addition, there is no clear
phenotype-genotype correlation. These findings indicate that the other genetic
and/or environmental factors influence the phenotype. In addition, the
variability might reflect a plasticity during pituitary development and
maintenance. Over the past two decades, a genetic basis for pituitary hormone
deficiency and the mechanism of pituitary development have been clarified. It
should be kept in mind that this review is not comprehensive, and defects of
other transcriptional factors have been described in patients with CPHD.
Furthermore, the causes in many patients with CPHD have not yet been determined. 
Therefore, continuing efforts for the clarification of the etiology are
necessary.

PMCID: PMC3756183
PMID: 23990694  [PubMed]


34. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Oct;98(10):3920-5. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-2411. Epub 
2013 Aug 12.

Isolated prolactin deficiency associated with serum autoantibodies against
prolactin-secreting cells.

Iwama S(1), Welt CK, Romero CJ, Radovick S, Caturegli P.

Author information: 
(1)MD, MPH, Johns Hopkins Pathology, Ross 656, 720 Rutland Avenue, Baltimore,
Maryland 21205. pcat@jhmi.edu.

Erratum in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Dec;98(12):4992.

CONTEXT: Isolated prolactin (PRL) deficiency is a rare entity of unknown etiology
manifesting as failure of puerperal lactogenesis.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to determine the cause of isolated PRL
deficiency in an affected woman.
DESIGN AND SETTING: We examined genetic and autoimmune causes of isolated PRL
deficiency at academic medical centers.
PATIENT: The patient was a 39-year-old woman with puerperal alactogenesis after
two deliveries and undetectable PRL. The other pituitary axes, serum calcium
levels, and cranial magnetic resonance imaging were normal.
INTERVENTION: Recombinant human PRL (r-hPRL) was administered to the patient.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: We measured the sequencing of candidate genes and
immunofluorescence analysis of autoantibodies directed against pituitary
endocrine cells.
RESULTS: There were no rare sequence variants in the genes encoding for PRL,
putative PRL-releasing peptide, putative PRL-releasing peptide receptor, or in
other genes important for lactotroph lineage development (POU1F1, PROP1, LHX3,
LHX4, HESX1, OTX2, and LSD1). The patient serum, on the contrary, contained
autoantibodies that specifically recognized a subset of PRL-secreting cells but
not PRL itself or any other pituitary cells or hormones. The mother was able to
lactate fully after 17 days of treatment with r-hPRL 60 µg/kg every 12 hours, but
alactogenesis resumed after treatment was completed.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies report a new autoimmune etiology for women with
isolated PRL deficiency and puerperal alactogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3790613
PMID: 23940128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 30;8(7):e68840. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068840. Print 2013.

Genome array of hair follicle genes in lambskin with different patterns.

Sun W(1), Ni R, Yin JF, Musa HH, Ding Tj, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou,
China.

Hu sheep lambskin comes from a specific breed of sheep of China. Hu sheep are
considered a protected breed by the Chinese government. The hair follicles of
these sheep have three types of waves, large, medium, and small. There are only
few histological reports of Hu sheep lambskin, and there are no modern molecular 
or biological studies, so the molecular mechanisms underlying the formation of
hair follicles with different patterns are not currently known. The aim of this
article was to study the molecular mechanism of the formation of these types of
hair follicles in Hu sheep. Histological and microscopic analysis indicated that 
the number of follicles with small waves was not significantly higher than the
number of follicles with large waves (P>0.05). The diameters of primary and
secondary small-wave follicles were significantly smaller than those of
large-wave follicles (P<0.05; P<0.01). The ratio between the number primary
follicles and the number of secondary follicles was significantly higher among
small-wave follicles than among large-wave follicles (P<0.05). Differentially
expressed genes in the skin tissue were screened using an Agilent gene chip and
RT-PCR. Differential expression analysis revealed 3 groups of large waves and
small waves; 1067, 2071, and 3879 differentially expressed genes; and 137 genes
common to all 3 groups. Differentially expressed genes were classified using gene
ontology. They were found to be mainly involved in cell differentiation,
proliferation, apoptosis, growth, immune response, and ion transport. RT-PCR
results of 4 differentially expressed genes were consistent with gene chip
results. Combined with related literature, our results suggest that BMP7, MMP2,
SNAI1, SFXN1, CDKNIC, MT3, and POU1F1 may have important effects on the formation
of large-wave and small-wave hair follicles. This study may enrich knowledge of
hair follicle development, and may identify the genes responsible for the
formation of hair follicles with different patterns.

PMCID: PMC3728312
PMID: 23935896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2013 Jun;68(6):887-91. doi: 10.6061/clinics/2013(06)26.

PROP1 overexpression in corticotrophinomas: evidence for the role of PROP1 in the
maintenance of cells committed to corticotrophic differentiation.

Araujo RV(1), Chang CV, Cescato VA, Fragoso MC, Bronstein MD, Mendonca BB,
Arnhold IJ, Carvalho LR.

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, Laboratório de Hormônios e
Genética Molecular - LIM/42, Divisão de Endocrinologia, São Paulo/SP, Brazil.
araujorv@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: The expression of transcription factors involved in early pituitary
development, such as PROP1 and POU1F1, has been detected in pituitary adenoma
tissues. In this study, we sought to characterize the transcriptional profiles of
PROP1, POU1F1, and TBX19 in functioning and nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas in 
an attempt to identify their roles in tumorigenesis and hormone hypersecretion.
METHODS: RT-qPCR analyses were performed to assess the transcriptional pattern of
PROP1, POU1F1, TBX19, and hormone-producing genes in tissue samples of
corticotrophinomas (n=10), somatotrophinomas (n=8), and nonfunctioning adenomas
(n=6).
RESULTS: Compared with normal pituitary tissue, POU1F1 was overexpressed in
somatotrophinomas by 3-fold. PROP1 expression was 18-fold higher in
corticotrophinomas, 10-fold higher in somatotrophinomas, and 3-fold higher in
nonfunctioning adenomas. TBX19 expression was 27-fold higher in
corticotrophinomas. Additionally, the level of TBX19 mRNA positively correlated
with that of pro-opiomelanocortin (r=0.49, p=0.014).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that PROP1 is overexpressed in pituitary
adenomas, mainly in corticotrophinomas. Together with previously published data
showing that patients who harbor PROP1 loss-of-function mutations present a
progressive decline in corticotrope function, our results support a role for
PROP1 in pituitary tumor development and in the maintenance of cell lineages
committed to corticotrophic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3674306
PMID: 23778486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Jul;40(7):4645-50. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2558-7. Epub 2013
May 4.

Effects of single and combined genotypes of MC4R and POU1F1 genes on two
production traits in Langshan chicken.

Yan LJ(1), Fang XT, Liu Y, Zhang CL, Liu XX, Zhao J, Li JJ, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Molecular Biology, College of Life Science, Xuzhou
Normal University, Xuzhou, 221116, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
ylj_23@163.com

The objective of this study was to analyze the effects of single and combined
genotypes of MC4R and POU1F1 genes in Chinese well-known indigenous chicken
(Langshan chicken) population. Genetic variants within MC4R gene and POU1F1 gene 
were screened through PCR-SSCP and DNA sequencing methods. A C/T mutation at nt
944 in MC4R gene (NC_006089.2:g. 944C>T) and a G/A mutation at nt 3109 in POU1F1 
gene (NC_006088.2:g. 3109 G>A) were identified. Associations between the
mutations of the two genes with two production traits were analyzed. The results 
showed that, at MC4R locus, individuals with BB and AB genotypes had highly
significantly higher body weight at 16 weeks (p < 0.01) than did those with the
AA genotype. And, individuals within AA and AB genotypes had significantly higher
egg numbers at 300 days (p < 0.05). At POU1F1 locus, individuals with CD genotype
had higher body weight at 16 weeks and egg numbers at 300 days (p < 0.05).
Furthermore, combined genotypes from these two loci were found to be associated
with egg numbers at 300 days (p < 0.05). The individuals within combined genotype
AB/CD had higher egg production. Therefore, variations identified within the MC4R
and POU1F1genes are suitable for future use in identifying chickens with the
genetic potential of higher body weight and reproductive traits, at least in the 
population of Langshan chickens.

PMID: 23644987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. BMC Genomics. 2013 Feb 12;14:95. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-95.

Insights into the evolution of Darwin's finches from comparative analysis of the 
Geospiza magnirostris genome sequence.

Rands CM(1), Darling A, Fujita M, Kong L, Webster MT, Clabaut C, Emes RD, Heger
A, Meader S, Hawkins MB, Eisen MB, Teiling C, Affourtit J, Boese B, Grant PR,
Grant BR, Eisen JA, Abzhanov A, Ponting CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy, and Genetics, MRC Functional Genomics Unit,
University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3PT, UK.

BACKGROUND: A classical example of repeated speciation coupled with ecological
diversification is the evolution of 14 closely related species of Darwin's
(Galápagos) finches (Thraupidae, Passeriformes). Their adaptive radiation in the 
Galápagos archipelago took place in the last 2-3 million years and some of the
molecular mechanisms that led to their diversification are now being elucidated. 
Here we report evolutionary analyses of genome of the large ground finch,
Geospiza magnirostris.
RESULTS: 13,291 protein-coding genes were predicted from a 991.0 Mb<U+2009>G.
magnirostris genome assembly. We then defined gene orthology relationships and
constructed whole genome alignments between the G. magnirostris and other
vertebrate genomes. We estimate that 15% of genomic sequence is functionally
constrained between G. magnirostris and zebra finch. Genic evolutionary rate
comparisons indicate that similar selective pressures acted along the G.
magnirostris and zebra finch lineages suggesting that historical effective
population size values have been similar in both lineages. 21 otherwise highly
conserved genes were identified that each show evidence for positive selection on
amino acid changes in the Darwin's finch lineage. Two of these genes (Igf2r and
Pou1f1) have been implicated in beak morphology changes in Darwin's finches. Five
of 47 genes showing evidence of positive selection in early passerine evolution
have cilia related functions, and may be examples of adaptively evolving
reproductive proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide insights into past evolutionary processes that
have shaped G. magnirostris genes and its genome, and provide the necessary
foundation upon which to build population genomics resources that will shed light
on more contemporaneous adaptive and non-adaptive processes that have contributed
to the evolution of the Darwin's finches.

PMCID: PMC3575239
PMID: 23402223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Thyroid. 2013 Jul;23(7):892-7. doi: 10.1089/thy.2012.0332. Epub 2013 Jun 21.

Vertical transmission of hypopituitarism: critical importance of appropriate
interpretation of thyroid function tests and levothyroxine therapy during
pregnancy.

Pine-Twaddell E(1), Romero CJ, Radovick S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland 21201,
USA. epine@peds.umaryland.edu

BACKGROUND: Typically, newborns with congenital hypothyroidism are asymptomatic
at birth, having been exposed to euthyroid mothers. However, hypopituitarism may 
be associated with central hypothyroidism, preserved fertility, and autosomal
dominant inheritance, requiring increased attention to thyroid management during 
pregnancy.
PATIENT FINDINGS: A woman with a history of growth hormone deficiency and central
hypothyroidism gave birth to a term male neonate appropriate for gestational age.
Due to low thyrotropin (TSH) in the second trimester, the levothyroxine dose was 
decreased by the obstetrician, and free T4 was low throughout the latter half of 
pregnancy. The neonatal laboratory evaluation showed central hypothyroidism with 
a low T4 of 2.1 µg/dL (4.5-11.5) and an inappropriately normal TSH of 0.98 uIU/mL
(0.5-4.5); undetectable growth hormone, IGF-I, and IGFBP3; a normal cortisol
level; and a normal gonadotropin surge. After initiation of levothyroxine in the 
first week, both tone and feeding tolerance improved. However, the patient was
found to have hearing loss, gross motor delay, and speech delay.
SUMMARY: In this report, we review a case of vertical transmission of a dominant 
negative POU1F1 mutation in which fetal abnormalities due to the hypothyroxinemic
state during gestation may have been exacerbated by a decrease in the mother's
levothyroxine dose based on a low TSH in early gestation. Both mother and fetus
were unable to synthesize sufficient thyroid hormone, which may be responsible
for the patient's clinical presentation.
CONCLUSION: This case underscores several important points in the management of
women with hypopituitarism. First, it is important that patients and clinicians
are both aware of the differences in etiology, as well as appropriate screening
and treatment, of primary versus central hypothyroidism. Second, it is necessary 
to monitor the thyroid hormone status closely during pregnancy to prevent fetal
sequelae of maternal hypothyroidism. Third, genetic screening of patients with
combined pituitary hormone deficiency is necessary, so that prenatal genetic
counseling may be an option for expecting parents.

PMCID: PMC3704046
PMID: 23397938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Cancer. 2013 Jan 18;12:5. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-5.

POU1F1 is a novel fusion partner of NUP98 in acute myeloid leukemia with
t(3;11)(p11;p15).

Lisboa S(1), Cerveira N, Bizarro S, Correia C, Vieira J, Torres L, Mariz JM,
Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Rua Dr, António
Bernardino de Almeida, 4200-072, Porto, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: NUP98 gene rearrangements have been reported in acute myeloid
leukemia, giving rise to fusion proteins that seem to function as aberrant
transcription factors, and are thought to be associated with poor prognosis.
FINDINGS: A patient with treatment-related acute myeloid leukemia presented a
t(3;11)(p11;p15) as the only cytogenetic abnormality. FISH and molecular genetic 
analyses identified a class 1 homeobox gene, POU1F1, located on chromosome 3p11, 
as the fusion partner of NUP98. In addition, we have found that the patient
harbored an FLT3-ITD mutation, which most likely collaborated with the
NUP98-POU1F1 fusion gene in malignant transformation.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified POU1F1 as the NUP98 fusion partner in
therapy-related AML with a t(3;11)(p11;p15). This is the first POU family member 
identified as a fusion partner in human cancer.

PMCID: PMC3567982
PMID: 23332017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Clin Invest. 2013 Feb;123(2):812-22. doi: 10.1172/JCI64093. Epub 2013 Jan 9.

Spironolactone ameliorates PIT1-dependent vascular osteoinduction in
klotho-hypomorphic mice.

Voelkl J(1), Alesutan I, Leibrock CB, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Kuhn V, Feger M,
Mia S, Ahmed MS, Rosenblatt KP, Kuro-O M, Lang F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2013 Mar;9(3):125.

Klotho is a potent regulator of 1,25-hydroxyvitamin D3 [1,25(OH)2D3] formation
and calcium-phosphate metabolism. Klotho-hypomorphic mice (kl/kl mice) suffer
from severe growth deficits, rapid aging, hyperphosphatemia, hyperaldosteronism, 
and extensive vascular and soft tissue calcification. Sequelae of klotho
deficiency are similar to those of end-stage renal disease. We show here that the
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist spironolactone reduced vascular and soft
tissue calcification and increased the life span of kl/kl mice, without
significant effects on 1,25(OH)2D3, FGF23, calcium, and phosphate plasma
concentrations. Spironolactone also reduced the expression of osteoinductive Pit1
and Tnfa mRNA, osteogenic transcription factors, and alkaline phosphatase (Alpl) 
in calcified tissues of kl/kl mice. In human aortic smooth muscle cells
(HAoSMCs), aldosterone dose-dependently increased PIT1 mRNA expression, an effect
paralleled by increased expression of osteogenic transcription factors and
enhanced ALP activity. The effects of aldosterone were reversed by both
spironolactone treatment and PIT1 silencing and were mitigated by FGF23
cotreatment in HAoSMCs. In conclusion, aldosterone contributes to vascular and
soft tissue calcification, an effect due, at least in part, to stimulation of
spironolactone-sensitive, PIT1-dependent osteoinductive signaling.

PMCID: PMC3561808
PMID: 23298834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Dairy Sci. 2013 Feb;96(2):1255-7. doi: 10.3168/jds.2012-6019. Epub 2012 Dec 14.

Short communication: A missense mutation in the PROP1 (prophet of Pit 1) gene
affects male fertility and milk production traits in the US Holstein population.

Lan XY(1), Peñagaricano F, DeJung L, Weigel KA, Khatib H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi Province, 712100, China.

In previous studies, we reported significant associations of the POU1F1 pathway
genes with reproduction and production traits in several dairy cattle
populations. Polymorphisms in genes of this pathway were found to be associated
with both female and male fertility traits in dairy cattle. The POU1F1 gene is a 
direct downstream target for the regulation of the prophet of Pit1 (PROP1) gene, 
also known as PROP paired-like homeobox 1. Interestingly, the position of PROP1
coincides with a quantitative trait locus affecting ovulation rate in cattle.
Therefore, the objective of this study was to investigate whether PROP1 affects
fertility and milk production traits in Holstein cattle. Using the DNA pooling
sequencing approach, a missense single nucleotide polymorphism that replaces a
histidine amino acid with an arginine was detected in exon 3 of PROP1. The
arginine allele was found to be associated with a decrease in sire conception
rate and an increase in productive life, protein yield, and net merit index in a 
population of 1,951 Holstein bulls. The transcription factors produced from the
histidine and arginine isoforms are known to have different transcription, DNA
binding, and regulation activities. As such, we propose that the association of
the arginine isoform with decreased bull fertility is likely caused by reduced
activity of this allele in male functions. The findings of this study suggest
PROP1 polymorphisms as candidates in selection programs for fertility, health,
and milk production traits in dairy cattle.

Copyright © 2013 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 23245960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Apr;40(4):2829-35. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-2298-0. Epub 2012
Nov 25.

Identification of novel SNPs in the Sarda breed goats POU1F1 gene and their
association with milk productive performance.

Daga C(1), Paludo M, Luridiana S, Mura MC, Bodano S, Pazzola M, Dettori ML, Vacca
GM, Carcangiu V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Veterinaria, Università di Sassari, Via Vienna 2,
07100 Sassari, Italy.

The aim of the study was to detect polymorphism in the POU1F1 gene in Sarda breed
goat, as well as to establish if SNPs could be associated with milk productive
traits. The research was conducted on 129 Sarda breed goats from 4 to 5 years
old, multiparous, lactating and in their third to fifth lactation. We report nine
exonic and seven non-coding regions SNPs within the Sarda goat POU1F1 gene,
namely, Ex 1 61 G>C; Ex 1 108 G>A; Ex 3 C>T; Ex 3 92 C>T; Ex 4 110 A>G; Ex 5 34
G>A resulting in Arg213Lys change; IVS4 641 G>A, IVS4 643 A>C, IVS4 659 G>A, IVS4
677 A>C, IVS4 G699Del, IVS4 709 C>G, Ex 6 17 G>A resulting in Arg228Ser change,
Ex 6 58 G>T, Ex 6 172 T>C, 3'UTR 110 T>C. A statistically significant association
was found between genotype TT, in position 17 of the exon 6 (3.1 % of frequency),
and increased milk yield (P < 0.01) while genotype GT (25.6 % of frequency) was
associated with a higher fat content. Genotype TT in position 58 of the exon 6
(3.9 % of frequency) was found to be associated with a higher fat (P < 0.01) and 
protein content (P < 0.05). Twenty-eight haplotypes were detected, but no
significant association between the haplotypes and the milk production traits
have been found. Our data, as well as providing new SNPs extending the POU1F1
gene characterization, evidence a relationship between polymorphism and milk
production traits in Sarda goat breed.

PMID: 23184007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46008. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046008. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

Gradual loss of ACTH due to a novel mutation in LHX4: comprehensive mutation
screening in Japanese patients with congenital hypopituitarism.

Takagi M(1), Ishii T, Inokuchi M, Amano N, Narumi S, Asakura Y, Muroya K,
Hasegawa Y, Adachi M, Hasegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine Tokyo, Japan.

Mutations in transcription factors genes, which are well regulated spatially and 
temporally in the pituitary gland, result in congenital hypopituitarism (CH) in
humans. The prevalence of CH attributable to transcription factor mutations
appears to be rare and varies among populations.This study aimed to define the
prevalence of CH in terms of nine CH-associated genes among Japanese patients. We
enrolled 91 Japanese CH patients for DNA sequencing of POU1F1, PROP1, HESX1,
LHX3, LHX4, SOX2, SOX3, OTX2, and GLI2. Additionally, gene copy numbers for
POU1F1, PROP1, HESX1, LHX3, and LHX4 were examined by multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification. The gene regulatory properties of mutant 
LHX4 proteins were characterized in vitro. We identified two novel heterozygous
LHX4 mutations, namely c.249-1G>A, p.V75I, and one common POU1F1 mutation,
p.R271W. The patient harboring the c.249-1G>A mutation exhibited isolated growth 
hormone deficiency at diagnosis and a gradual loss of ACTH, whereas the patient
with the p.V75I mutation exhibited multiple pituitary hormone deficiency. In
vitro experiments showed that both LHX4 mutations were associated with an
impairment of the transactivation capacities of POU1F1 andaGSU, without any
dominant-negative effects. The total mutation prevalence in Japanese CH patients 
was 3.3%. This study is the first to describe, a gradual loss of ACTH in a
patient carrying an LHX4 mutation. Careful monitoring of hypothalamic-pituitary
-adrenal function is recommended for CH patients with LHX4 mutations.

PMCID: PMC3454328
PMID: 23029363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3635-46. doi: 10.1172/JCI64311. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

SOX2 regulates the hypothalamic-pituitary axis at multiple levels.

Jayakody SA(1), Andoniadou CL, Gaston-Massuet C, Signore M, Cariboni A, Bouloux
PM, Le Tissier P, Pevny LH, Dattani MT, Martinez-Barbera JP.

Author information: 
(1)Neural Development Unit, Institute of Child Health, and Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University College London, London, United Kingdom.

Sex-determining region Y (SRY) box 2 (SOX2) haploinsufficiency causes a form of
hypopituitarism in humans that is characterized by gonadotrophin deficiency known
as hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism. Here, we conditionally deleted Sox2 in mice to
investigate the pathogenesis of hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism. First, we found
that absence of SOX2 in the developing Rathke pouch of conditional embryos led to
severe anterior lobe hypoplasia with drastically reduced expression of the
pituitary-specific transcription factor POU class 1 homeobox 1 (POU1F1) as well
as severe disruption of somatotroph and thyrotroph differentiation. In contrast, 
corticotrophs, rostral-tip POU1F1-independent thyrotrophs, and, interestingly,
lactotrophs and gonadotrophs were less affected. Second, we identified a
requirement for SOX2 in normal proliferation of periluminal progenitors; in its
absence, insufficient precursors were available to produce all cell lineages of
the anterior pituitary. Differentiated cells derived from precursors exiting cell
cycle at early stages, including corticotrophs, rostral-tip thyrotrophs, and
gonadotrophs, were generated, while hormone-producing cells originating from
late-born precursors, such as somatotrophs and POU1F1-dependent thyrotrophs, were
severely reduced. Finally, we found that 2 previously characterized patients with
SOX2 haploinsufficiency and associated hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism had a
measurable response to gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) stimulation,
suggesting that it is not the absence of gonadotroph differentiation, but rather 
the deficient hypothalamic stimulation of gonadotrophs, that underlies typical
hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism.

PMCID: PMC3461924
PMID: 22945632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Dairy Sci. 2012 Oct;95(10):6122-9. doi: 10.3168/jds.2012-5591. Epub 2012 Aug
23.

Comparative genomics between fly, mouse, and cattle identifies genes associated
with sire conception rate.

Li G(1), Peñagaricano F, Weigel KA, Zhang Y, Rosa G, Khatib H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100193, China.

The decline in reproductive performance in cattle is of major concern to farmers 
and the dairy industry worldwide. Most fertility studies in cattle have focused
on fertility of the cow, whereas the genetics of male fertility have not been
thoroughly investigated. The present study hypothesizes that the high
conservation of spermatogenesis genes from fly to human implies important roles
of these genes in male fertility in cattle. To test this hypothesis, we performed
an association analysis between highly conserved spermatogenesis genes and sire
conception rate (SCR) in US Holsteins as a measure of bull fertility. Sequencing 
analysis revealed 24 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in 9 genes in the bull
population using the pooled DNA sequencing approach. Five SNP previously
identified in 5 genes from the POU1F1 pathway were also included in this study
because they have shown significant associations with female and male fertility
traits. Overall, 29 SNP located in 14 candidate genes were tested for association
with sire conception rate in a population of 1,988 bulls. Three SNP located in
MAP1B and 1 SNP in PPP1R11 showed significant associations with SCR. For the
POU1F1 pathway, single gene analysis revealed significant associations of POU1F1 
and STAT5A with SCR. Analysis of genotypic interactions between adjacent genes in
the pathway revealed significant associations of STAT5A and UTMP genotypic
combinations with SCR. The most significant spermatogenesis gene, MAP1B, was
found to be associated with fertilization and blastocyst rates. Thus, the
association of these genes with bull fertility testifies to the usefulness of the
comparative genomics approach in selecting candidate male fertility genes.

Copyright © 2012 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22921614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2013 Mar;78(3):415-23. doi: 10.1111/cen.12000.

Single-nucleotide variants in two Hedgehog genes, SHH and HHIP, as genetic cause 
of combined pituitary hormone deficiency.

Gorbenko del Blanco D(1), de Graaff LC, Visser TJ, Hokken-Koelega AC.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatrics, Subdiv. Endocrinology, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. d.gorbenkodelblanco@erasmusmc.nl

OBJECTIVE: Combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) is characterized by
deficiencies of two or more anterior pituitary hormones. Its genetic cause is
unknown in the majority of cases. The Hedgehog (Hh) signalling pathway has been
implicated in disorders associated with pituitary development. Mutations in Sonic
Hedgehog (SHH) have been described in patients with holoprosencephaly (with or
without pituitary involvement). Hedgehog interacting protein (HHIP) has been
associated with variations in adult height in genome wide association studies. We
investigated whether mutations in these two genes of the Hh pathway, SHH and
HHIP, could result in 'idiopathic' CPHD.
DESIGN/PATIENTS: We directly sequenced the coding regions and exon - intron
boundaries of SHH and HHIP in 93 CPHD patients of the Dutch HYPOPIT study in whom
mutations in the classical CPHD genes PROP1, POU1F1, HESX1, LHX3 and LHX4 had
been ruled out. We compared the expression of Hh genes in Hep3B transfected cells
between wild-type proteins and mutants.
RESULTS: We identified three single-nucleotide variants (p.Ala226Thr, c.1078C>T
and c.*8G>T) in SHH. The function of the latter was severely affected in our in
vitro assay. In HHIP, we detected a new activating variant c.-1G>C, which
increases HHIP's inhibiting function on the Hh pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest involvement of the Hedgehog pathway in CPHD. We 
suggest that both SHH and HHIP are investigated as a second screening in CPHD,
after mutations in the classical CPHD genes have been ruled out.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22897141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;32(21):4258-69. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00171-12. Epub 2012 Aug 
13.

Insulin-like growth factor 1 mediates negative feedback to somatotroph GH
expression via POU1F1/CREB binding protein interactions.

Romero CJ(1), Pine-Twaddell E, Sima DI, Miller RS, He L, Wondisford F, Radovick
S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. cromero5@jhmi.edu

Circulating insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) has been shown to act as a
negative feedback regulator of growth hormone (GH) gene expression; however, the 
mechanism of this negative feedback is poorly understood. Activation and
regulation of GH gene expression require the binding of the transcription factor 
POU1F1 to the GH promoter along with cyclic AMP (cAMP) response element binding
protein (CREB) binding protein (CBP). We investigate the role of CBP as a target 
of IGF-1 somatotroph regulation using the MtT/S somatotroph cell line. IGF-1
significantly inhibits basal GH mRNA levels but not POU1F1 levels. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays demonstrate inhibition of CBP binding to the GH
promoter after IGF-1 treatment. We hypothesized that IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R)
signaling disrupts the POU1F1/CBP complex to inhibit gene expression. In support,
the use of a mutant CBP (S436A) construct, which lacks a critical phosphorylation
site, leads to the loss of IGF-1 inhibition. The studies of CBP (S436A) knock-in 
mice show elevated serum GH levels, a greater response to GH releasing hormone
(GHRH) stimulation along with lower weight gain, and decreased body fat. Our data
confirm the inhibitory effects of IGF-1 on GH expression at the level of the
promoter and provide evidence of CBP's role as a target of IGF-1R signaling.

PMCID: PMC3486141
PMID: 22890843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Endocrinol. 2012 Nov;215(2):239-45. doi: 10.1530/JOE-12-0229. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

Pituitary development: a complex, temporal regulated process dependent on
specific transcriptional factors.

de Moraes DC(1), Vaisman M, Conceição FL, Ortiga-Carvalho TM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Endocrinologia Molecular, Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas 
Filho, Centro de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro,
Avenida Carlos Chagas Filho, s/n, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil. deboracmop@gmail.com

Pituitary organogenesis is a highly complex and tightly regulated process that
depends on several transcription factors (TFs), such as PROP1, PIT1 (POU1F1),
HESX1, LHX3 and LHX4. Normal pituitary development requires the temporally and
spatially organised expression of TFs and interactions between different TFs, DNA
and TF co-activators. Mutations in these genes result in different combinations
of hypopituitarism that can be associated with structural alterations of the
central nervous system, causing the congenital form of panhypopituitarism. This
review aims to elucidate the complex process of pituitary organogenesis, to
clarify the role of the major TFs, and to compile the lessons learned from
functional studies of TF mutations in panhypopituitarism patients and TF
deletions or mutations in transgenic animals.

PMID: 22872762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Aug;39(8):8363-71. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1686-9. Epub 2012
Jun 22.

Polymorphisms and expression of the chicken POU1F1 gene associated with carcass
traits.

Xu HY(1), Wang Y, Liu YP, Wang JW, Zhu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Genetic and Breeding, Institute of Animal Genetics and
Breeding, Sichuan Agriculture University, Xingkang Road 46#, Ya'an, Sichuan
625014, People's Republic of China.

POU1F1 is an essential factor that regulates the development and reproduction of 
animal. The objective of the current research was to screen for polymorphism,
expression of POU1F1 and their association with carcass quality traits. A total
of 126 Erlang mountainous chickens from two strains (SD02 and SD03) were employed
for testing. Seventeen single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were detected, but 
only two SNPs (g.96217999 T > C and g.96219442 C > T) were associated with
carcass quality traits. In SD03 chicken, g.96217999 T > C genotypes were
significantly associated with body weight (BW), carcass weight (CW), eviscerated 
weight (EW), and semi-eviscerated weight (SEW; P < 0.05), and was highly
significantly associated with breast muscle weight (BMW) and abdominal fat weight
(AW; P < 0.01). g.96219442 C > T was significantly associated with BW, EW, SEW (P
< 0.05). However, these two SNPs were not significantly associated with any
carcass traits in SD02 chicken. Diplotypes showed that in SD03 chicken, the
haplotype [C: C] was the most favorable haplotype because it was associated with 
higher BW, CW, SEW, EW, BMW, and AW (P < 0.05). On the contrary, haplotype [T: T]
was associated with lower carcass quality traits (P < 0.01). In addition, qRT-PCR
revealed that at 13 weeks, the POU1F1 mRNA expression was significantly higher in
breast muscle of cock compared to that of hens (P < 0.05), whereas there was no
significant correlation between POU1F1 expression and carcass traits. These
results suggested that POU1F1 could be a potential candidate gene for carcass
traits in chicken.

PMID: 22722987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Eur J Endocrinol. 2012 Sep;167(3):441-52. doi: 10.1530/EJE-12-0333. Epub 2012 Jun
19.

A novel OTX2 mutation in a patient with combined pituitary hormone deficiency,
pituitary malformation, and an underdeveloped left optic nerve.

Gorbenko Del Blanco D(1), Romero CJ, Diaczok D, de Graaff LC, Radovick S,
Hokken-Koelega AC.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatrics, Subdivision of Endocrinology, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Orthodenticle homolog 2 (OTX2) is a homeobox family transcription factor required
for brain and eye formation. Various genetic alterations in OTX2 have been
described, mostly in patients with severe ocular malformations. In order to
expand the knowledge of the spectrum of OTX2 mutation, we performed OTX2 mutation
screening in 92 patients with combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD). We
directly sequenced the coding regions and exon-intron boundaries of OTX2 in 92
CPHD patients from the Dutch HYPOPIT study in whom mutations in the classical
CPHD genes PROP1, POU1F1, HESX1, LHX3, and LHX4 had been ruled out. Among 92 CPHD
patients, we identified a novel heterozygous missense mutation c.401C>G
(p.Pro134Arg) in a patient with CPHD, pituitary malformation, and an
underdeveloped left optic nerve. Binding of both the wild-type and mutant OTX2
proteins to bicoid binding sites was equivalent; however, the mutant OTX2
exhibited decreased transactivation. We describe a novel missense heterozygous
OTX2 mutation that acts as a dominant negative inhibitor of target gene
expression in a patient with CPHD, pituitary malformation, and optic nerve
hypoplasia. We provide an overview of all OTX2 mutations described till date,
which show that OTX2 is a promising candidate gene for genetic screening of
patients with CPHD or isolated GH deficiency (IGHD). As the majority of the OTX2 
mutations found in patients with CPHD, IGHD, or short stature have been found in 
exon 5, we recommend starting mutational screening in those patients in exon 5 of
the gene.

PMID: 22715480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Aug;26(8):1455-63. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1308. Epub 2012 May 
25.

Research resource: A genome-wide study identifies potential new target genes for 
POU1F1.

Herman JP(1), Jullien N, Guillen S, Enjalbert A, Pellegrini I, Franc JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, CRN2M-Unité Mixte de Recherche
7286, F-13344 Marseille, France.

The pituitary transcription factor POU1F1 is required for the differentiation of 
lactotrope, thyrotrope, and somatotrope cells. Its expression is maintained in
the adult and is crucial for the expression of prolactin, GH, and TSHß-subunit.
Different studies indicated that POU1F1 could also have other functions in these 
cells. The identification of new targets of this factor could be useful to obtain
a better understanding of these functions. To address this question we combined
data obtained from expression microarrays and from chromatin immunoprecipitation 
(ChIP)-chips. Gene expression microarray assays were used to detect genes that
have their expression modified in somatolactotrope GH4C1 cells by the expression 
of a dominant-negative form of POU1F1, POU1F1(R271W), and led to the
identification of 1346 such genes. ChIP-chip experiments were performed from
mouse pituitaries and identified 1671 POU1F1-binding sites in gene-promoter
regions. Intersecting the gene expression and the ChIP-chip data yielded 121
potential new direct targets. The initial set of 1346 genes identified using the 
microarrays, as well as the 121 potential new direct targets, were analyzed with 
DAVID bioinformatics resource for gene ontology term enrichment and cluster. This
analysis revealed enrichment in different terms related to protein synthesis and 
transport, to apoptosis, and to cell division. The present study represents an
integrative genome-wide approach to identify new target genes of POU1F1 and
downstream networks controlled by this factor.

PMID: 22638072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Eur J Endocrinol. 2012 Jul;167(1):85-91. doi: 10.1530/EJE-12-0026. Epub 2012 Apr 
24.

Screening of LHX2 in patients presenting growth retardation with posterior
pituitary and ocular abnormalities.

Pérez C(1), Dastot-Le Moal F, Collot N, Legendre M, Abadie I, Bertrand AM,
Amselem S, Sobrier ML.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U.933, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris
6, 75571 Paris Cedex 12, France.

BACKGROUND: In humans, pituitary hormone deficiency may be part of a syndrome
including extra-pituitary defects like ocular abnormalities. Very few genes have 
been linked to this particular phenotype. In the mouse, Lhx2, which encodes a
member of the LIM (Lin-11, Isl-1, and Mec-3) class of homeodomain proteins, was
shown to be expressed during early development in the posterior pituitary, eye,
and liver, and its expression persists in adulthood in the central nervous system
Lhx2(-/-) mice display absence of posterior pituitary and intermediate lobes,
malformation of the anterior lobe, anophthalmia, and they die from anemia.
METHODS: We tested the implication of the LHX2 gene in patients presenting
pituitary hormone deficiency associated with ectopic or nonvisible posterior
pituitary and developmental ocular defects. A cohort of 59 patients, including
two familial cases, was studied. Direct sequencing of the LHX2 coding sequence
and intron/exon boundaries was performed. LHX2 transcriptional activity on
several pituitary promoters (AGSU, PRL, POU1F1, and TSHB) was tested in vitro.
RESULTS: Six heterozygous sequence variations were identified, among which two
are novel missense changes (p.Ala203Thr and p.Val333Met). In vitro, LHX2
activates transcription of TSHB, PRL, and POU1F1 promoters in the HEK293 cell
line. A synergistic action of POU1F1 and LHX2 was also shown on these promoters. 
The two missense variations were tested and no significant difference was
observed, leading to the conclusion that they are not deleterious.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that if LHX2 is involved in pituitary hormone 
deficiency associated with posterior pituitary and ocular defects, it would be a 
rare cause of this disease condition.

PMID: 22535646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Jun;39(6):6975-9. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1525-z. Epub 2012
Feb 4.

Analysis of polymorphism within POU1F1 gene in relation to milk production traits
in dairy Sarda sheep breed.

Mura MC(1), Daga C, Paludo M, Luridiana S, Pazzola M, Bodano S, Dettori ML, Vacca
GM, Carcangiu V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Animale, Università di Sassari, Sassari, Italy.

The ovine POU1F1 gene is localized on chromosome 1 and it contains five introns
and six exons. In different mammalian species some mutations in different exons
are associated with different production traits. The aim of our research was to
study the POU1F1 gene nucleotide sequence to detect possible polymorphisms and
their relationships with milk productive traits in Sarda breed sheep. The study
had been conducted on 140 ewes, 4 or 5 years old coming from a farm located in
Sardinia. All the animals were multiparous, lactating and in their third to fifth
lactation. Individual milk yield had been recorded monthly and for each sample
fat, protein, casein, lactose, and somatic cell count values were analysed. A
jugular blood sample was collected from each ewe to perform genomic DNA
extraction. PCR, SSCP and sequencing analysis were carried out to examine the six
exons to highlight possible SNPs. One-way ANOVA was used to analyse association
of variants with milk yield and/or its composition. Two novel SNP were found: 121
C>T in the 5'UTR of the fourth intron fragment and 249 G>A in the 3'UTR of the
sixth exon fragment. The statistical analysis did not shown association between
milk productive traits and the found polymorphisms. However, further
investigations about the promoter region or the prophet genes, like the PROP-1,
could clarify its exact role in regulating the productive traits in sheep.

PMID: 22311029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Mar;97(3):E503-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-2095. Epub
2012 Jan 11.

Symptomatic heterozygotes and prenatal diagnoses in a nonconsanguineous family
with syndromic combined pituitary hormone deficiency resulting from two novel
LHX3 mutations.

Sobrier ML(1), Brachet C, Vié-Luton MP, Perez C, Copin B, Legendre M, Heinrichs
C, Amselem S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 933,
Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, 26 avenue du 
Docteur Arnold Netter, 75571 Paris, Cedex 12 France.
marie-laure.sobrier@inserm.fr

CONTEXT: Only 11 mutations have been reported in the transcription factor LHX3,
known to be important for the development of the pituitary and motor neurons. All
patients were homozygous, with various syndromic forms of combined pituitary
hormone deficiency (CPHD), hampering to allocate, in these consanguineous
patients, the respective contribution of LHX3 and additional genes to each
symptom.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to report the family history and the
molecular basis of a nonconsanguineous patient with syndromic CPHD.
PATIENT: The patient, who presented at birth with respiratory distress, had a
syndromic CPHD, including severe scoliosis, and normal intelligence. His father
and paternal grandmother displayed limited head rotation.
RESULTS: Two new LHX3 defects were identified. The paternally inherited
c.252-3C>G mutation, which disrupts an acceptor splice site, would lead to
severely truncated proteins containing a single LIM domain, resembling LIM-only
proteins. Coexpression studies revealed the dominant-negative effect of this
LIM-only protein over the wild-type LHX3. The maternally inherited p.Cys118Tyr
mutation results in partial loss of transcriptional activity and synergy with
POU1F1. Given the severity of the patient's phenotype, two prenatal diagnoses
were performed: the first led to pregnancy interruption, the second to the birth 
of a healthy boy.
CONCLUSIONS: This study of the first nonconsanguineous patient with LHX3
mutations demonstrates the pleiotropic roles of LHX3 during development and its
full involvement in the complex disease phenotype. Isolated limitation of head
rotation may exist in heterozygous carriers and would result from a
dominant-negative effect. These data allowed the first prenatal diagnoses of this
severe condition to be performed.

PMID: 22238406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Yi Chuan. 2011 Dec;33(12):1359-65.

[Polymorphism of POU1F1 gene and PRL gene and their combined effects on milk
performance traits in Chinese Holstein cattle].

[Article in Chinese]

Jia XJ(1), Wang CF, Yang GW, Huang JM, Li QL, Zhong JF.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Academy of Agricultural Science, Jinan, China. jenyjia@yahoo.com.cn

Three novel SNPs were found by DNA sequencing, PCR-RFLP and CRS-PCR methods were 
used for genotyping in 979 Chinese Holstein cattle. One SNP, G1178C, was
identified in exon 2 of POU1F1 gene. Two novel SNPs, A906G and A1134G, were
identified in 5'-flanking regulatory region (5'-UTR) of PRL gene. The association
between polymorphisms of the two genes and milk performance traits were analyzed 
with PROC GLM of SAS. The results showed that GC genotype at 1178 locus of POU1F1
gene was advantageous for milk yield, milk protein yield, and milk fat yield. AG 
genotype at 906 locus was advantageous for milk yield. There was no significant
difference between 1134 locus and milk performance traits of 5'-UTR of PRL gene. 
Analysis of genotype combination effect on milk production traits showed that the
effect of combined genotype was not simple sum of single genotypes and the
effects of gene pyramiding seemed to be more important in molecular breeding.

PMID: 22207382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2012 Apr 10;19(2):123-35. doi: 10.1530/ERC-11-0135. Print
2012 Apr.

PIT1 upregulation by HMGA proteins has a role in pituitary tumorigenesis.

Palmieri D(1), Valentino T, De Martino I, Esposito F, Cappabianca P, Wierinckx A,
Vitiello M, Lombardi G, Colao A, Trouillas J, Pierantoni GM, Fusco A, Fedele M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Università degli 
Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

We have previously demonstrated that HMGA1B and HMGA2 overexpression in mice
induces the development of GH and prolactin (PRL) pituitary adenomas mainly by
increasing E2F1 transcriptional activity. Interestingly, these adenomas showed
very high expression levels of PIT1, a transcriptional factor that regulates the 
gene expression of Gh, Prl, Ghrhr and Pit1 itself, playing a key role in
pituitary gland development and physiology. Therefore, the aim of our study was
to identify the role of Pit1 overexpression in pituitary tumour development
induced by HMGA1B and HMGA2. First, we demonstrated that HMGA1B and HMGA2
directly interact with both PIT1 and its gene promoter in vivo, and that these
proteins positively regulate Pit1 promoter activity, also co-operating with PIT1 
itself. Subsequently, we showed, by colony-forming assays on two different
pituitary adenoma cell lines, GH3 and aT3, that Pit1 overexpression increases
pituitary cell proliferation. Finally, the expression analysis of HMGA1, HMGA2
and PIT1 in human pituitary adenomas of different histological types revealed a
direct correlation between PIT1 and HMGA expression levels. Taken together, our
data indicate a role of Pit1 upregulation by HMGA proteins in pituitary tumours.

PMID: 22199144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2012 Feb;19(1):33-9. doi:
10.1097/MED.0b013e32834ed639.

Genetic disorders of the pituitary.

Cohen LE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA. laurie.cohen@childrens.harvard.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To discuss pituitary development and function related to those
factors in which molecular defects resulting in combined pituitary hormone
deficiency have been described in humans, and to describe recently reported novel
mutations in these factors (January 2010 to September 2011).
RECENT FINDINGS: Novel mutations have been found in transcription factors
involved in pituitary development, HESX1; LHX3; LHX4; SOX3; Prophet of Pit-1; and
POU1FI, and in some of the signaling molecules expressed in the ventral
diencephalon (fibroblast growth factor 8 and GLI2). There is phenotypic
variability for the same mutation suggesting variable penetrance due to other
genetic, epigenetic, or environmental factors. The incidence of mutations in
these factors is low suggesting that other genes or environmental factors are
responsible for the majority of cases of combined pituitary hormone deficiency.
SUMMARY: Development of the pituitary gland and pituitary cell determination and 
specification depend on the expression and interaction of signaling molecules and
transcription factors in overlapping, but distinct, spatial and temporal
patterns. Studying genotype-phenotype correlations in patients with mutations in 
these factors give insight into the mechanisms involved in normal pituitary
development and function.

PMID: 22157402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2012 Apr;13(2):173-84. doi: 10.1007/s10162-011-0302-3.
Epub 2011 Dec 6.

Genetic background of Prop1(df) mutants provides remarkable protection against
hypothyroidism-induced hearing impairment.

Fang Q(1), Giordimaina AM, Dolan DF, Camper SA, Mustapha M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, 4945 Buhl, 1241 E
Catherine St., Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5618, USA.

Hypothyroidism is a cause of genetic and environmentally induced deafness. The
sensitivity of cochlear development and function to thyroid hormone (TH) mandates
understanding TH action in this sensory organ. Prop1(df) and Pou1f1(dw) mutant
mice carry mutations in different pituitary transcription factors, each resulting
in pituitary thyrotropin deficiency. Despite the same lack of detectable serum
TH, these mutants have very different hearing abilities: Prop1(df) mutants are
mildly affected, while Pou1f1(dw) mutants are completely deaf. Genetic studies
show that this difference is attributable to the genetic backgrounds. Using
embryo transfer, we discovered that factors intrinsic to the fetus are the major 
contributor to this difference, not maternal effects. We analyzed Prop1(df)
mutants to identify processes in cochlear development that are disrupted in other
hypothyroid animal models but protected in Prop1(df) mutants by the genetic
background. The development of outer hair cell (OHC) function is delayed, but
Prestin and KCNQ4 immunostaining appear normal in mature Prop1(df) mutants. The
endocochlear potential and KCNJ10 immunostaining in the stria vascularis are
indistinguishable from wild type, and no differences in neurofilament or
synaptophysin staining are evident in Prop1(df) mutants. The synaptic vesicle
protein otoferlin normally shifts expression from OHC to IHC as temporary
afferent fibers beneath the OHC regress postnatally. Prop1(df) mutants exhibit
persistent, abnormal expression of otoferlin in apical OHC, suggesting delayed
maturation of synaptic function. Thus, the genetic background of Prop1(df)
mutants is remarkably protective for most functions affected in other hypothyroid
mice. The Prop1(df) mutant is an attractive model for identifying the genes that 
protect against deafness.

PMCID: PMC3298611
PMID: 22143287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Mol Biol. 2012 Jan 6;415(1):29-45. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.11.001. Epub 2011
Nov 9.

POU1F1-mediated activation of hGH-N by deoxyribonuclease I hypersensitive site II
of the human growth hormone locus control region.

Hunsaker TL(1), Jefferson HS, Morrison JK, Franklin AJ, Shewchuk BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Brody School of Medicine at 
East Carolina University, Greenville, NC 27834, USA.

The human growth hormone gene (hGH-N) is regulated by a distal locus control
region (LCR) composed of five deoxyribonuclease I hypersensitive sites (HSs). The
region encompassing HSI and HSII contains the predominant pituitary
somatotrope-specific hGH-N activation function of the LCR. This activity was
attributed primarily to POU1F1 (Pit-1) elements at HSI, as linkage to HSI was
sufficient for properly regulated hGH-N expression in transgenic mice, while HSII
alone had no activity. However, the presence of HSII in conjunction with HSI
further enhanced hGH-N transgene expression, indicating additional determinants
of pituitary hGH-N activation in the HSII region, but limitations of transgenic
models and previous ex vivo systems have prevented the characterization of HSII. 
In the present study, we employ a novel minichromosome model of the hGH-N
regulatory domain and show that HSII confers robust POU1F1-dependent activation
of hGH-N in this system. This effect was accompanied by POU1F1-dependent histone 
acetylation and methylation throughout the minichromosome LCR/hGH-N domain. A
series of in vitro DNA binding experiments revealed that POU1F1 binds to multiple
sites at HSII, consistent with a direct role in HSII function. Remarkably, POU1F1
binding was localized in part to the 3' untranslated region of a primate-specific
LINE-1 (long interspersed nuclear element 1) retrotransposon, suggesting that its
insertion during primate evolution may have conferred function to the HSII region
in the context of pituitary GH gene regulation. These observations clarify the
function of HSII, expanding the role of POU1F1 in hGH LCR activity, and provide
insight on the molecular evolution of the LCR.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22094313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2012 Mar;76(3):387-93. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2011.04236.x.

Two novel mutations in the POU1F1 gene generate null alleles through different
mechanisms leading to combined pituitary hormone deficiency.

Turton JP(1), Strom M, Langham S, Dattani MT, Le Tissier P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neuroendocrinology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, UK.

BACKGROUND:   Mutations in the POU1F1 gene severely affect the development and
function of the anterior pituitary gland and lead to combined pituitary hormone
deficiency (CPHD).
OBJECTIVE:   The clinical and genetic analysis of a patient presenting with CPHD 
and functional characterization of identified mutations.
PATIENT:   We describe a male patient with extreme short stature, learning
difficulties, anterior pituitary hypoplasia, secondary hypothyroidism and
undetectable prolactin, growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF1), with normal random cortisol.
DESIGN:   The POU1F1 coding region was amplified by PCR and sequenced; the
functional consequence of the mutations was analysed by cell transfection and in 
vitro assays.
RESULTS:   Genetic analysis revealed compound heterozygosity for two novel
putative loss of function mutations in POU1F1: a transition at position +3 of
intron 1 [IVS1+3nt(A>G)] and a point mutation in exon 6 resulting in a
substitution of arginine by tryptophan (R265W). Functional analysis revealed that
IVS1+3nt(A>G) results in a reduction in the correctly spliced POU1F1 mRNA, which 
could be corrected by mutations of the +4, +5 and +6 nucleotides. Analysis of
POU1F1(R265W) revealed complete loss of function resulting from severely reduced 
protein stability.
CONCLUSIONS:   Combined pituitary hormone deficiency in this patient is caused by
loss of POU1F1 function by two novel mechanisms, namely aberrant splicing
(IVS1+3nt (A>G) and protein instability (R265W). Identification of the genetic
basis of CPHD enabled the cessation of hydrocortisone therapy without the need
for further assessment for evolving endocrinopathy.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22010633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Nov;25(11):1950-60. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0388. Epub 2011 Sep
29.

PITX2 AND PITX1 regulate thyrotroph function and response to hypothyroidism.

Castinetti F(1), Brinkmeier ML, Gordon DF, Vella KR, Kerr JM, Mortensen AH,
Hollenberg A, Brue T, Ridgway EC, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.

Pitx2 is a homeodomain transcription factor required in a dose-dependent manner
for the development of multiple organs. Pitx2-null homozygotes (Pitx2(-/-)) have 
severe pituitary hypoplasia, whereas mice with reduced-function alleles
(Pitx2(neo/neo)) exhibit modest hypoplasia and reduction in the developing
gonadotroph and Pou1f1 lineages. PITX2 is expressed broadly in Rathke's pouch and
the fetal pituitary gland. It predominates in adult thyrotrophs and gonadotrophs,
although it is not necessary for gonadotroph function. To test the role of PITX2 
in thyrotroph function, we developed thyrotroph-specific cre transgenic mice,
Tg(Tshb-cre) with a recombineered Tshb bacterial artificial chromosome that
ablates floxed genes in differentiated pituitary thyrotrophs. We used the best
Tg(Tshb-Cre) strain to generate thyrotroph-specific Pitx2-deficient offspring,
Pitx2(flox/-;)Tg(Tshb-cre). Double immunohistochemistry confirmed Pitx2 deletion.
Pitx2(flox/-);Tg(Tshb-cre) mice have a modest weight decrease. The thyroid glands
are smaller, although circulating T(4) and TSH levels are in the normal range.
The pituitary levels of Pitx1 transcripts are significantly increased, suggesting
a compensatory mechanism. Hypothyroidism induced by low-iodine diet and oral
propylthiouracil revealed a blunted TSH response in Pitx2(flox/-);Tg(Tshb-cre)
mice. Pitx1 transcripts increased significantly in control mice with induced
hypothyroidism, but they remained unchanged in Pitx2(flox/-);Tg(Tshb-cre) mice,
possibly because Pitx1 levels were already maximally elevated in untreated
mutants. These results suggest that PITX2 and PITX1 have overlapping roles in
thyrotroph function and response to hypothyroidism. The novel cre transgene that 
we report will be useful for studying the function of other genes in thyrotrophs.

PMCID: PMC3386545
PMID: 21964592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Hum Gene Ther. 2012 Jan;23(1):104-14. doi: 10.1089/hum.2011.105.

Inactivation of transcription factor pit-1 to target tumoral somatolactotroph
cells.

Roche C(1), Rasolonjanahary R, Thirion S, Goddard I, Fusco A, Figarella-Branger
D, Dufour H, Brue T, Franc JL, Enjalbert A, Barlier A.

Author information: 
(1)CRN2M, UMR 6231-CNRS, Aix-Marseille University , 13344 Marseille, France.

The treatment of growth hormone (GH)- and prolactin (PRL)-secreting tumors
resistant to current therapeutic molecules (somatostatin and dopamine analogues) 
remains challenging. To target these tumors specifically, we chose to inactivate 
a gene coding for a crucial factor in cell proliferation and hormonal regulation,
specifically expressed in pituitary, by using a dominant-negative form of this
gene involved in human pituitary deficiencies: transcription factor Pit-1
(POU1F1) mutated on arginine 271 to tryptophan (R271W). After lentiviral
transfer, the effect of R271W was studied in vitro on human tumoral somatotroph
and lactotroph cells and on the murine mammosomatotroph cell line GH4C1 and in
vivo on GH4C1 subcutaneous xenografts in nude mice. R271W induced a decrease in
GH and PRL hypersecretion by controlling the transcription of the corresponding
hormones. This mutant decreased cell viability by an apoptotic mechanism and in
vivo blocked the tumoral growth and GH secretion of xenografts obtained after
transplantation of GH4C1 expressing mutant R271W. The strategy of using a
dominant-negative form of a main factor controlling cell proliferation and
hormonal secretion, and exclusively expressed in pituitary, seems promising for
the gene therapy of human pituitary tumors and may be translated to other types
of tumors maintaining some differentiation features.

PMID: 21942649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Horm Res Paediatr. 2011;76 Suppl 3:11-3. doi: 10.1159/000330140. Epub 2011 Sep 7.

Genetics of human stature: Insight from single gene disorders.

Kiess W(1), Kratzsch J, Kruis T, Müller E, Wallborn T, Odeh R, Schlicke M, Klammt
J, Pfäffle R.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Leipzig, Leipzig,
Germany.

Mutations of numerous genes encoding proteins that affect multiple pathways
responsible for regulation of cell proliferation can cause growth disturbances in
humans. Genes such as HESX1, PROP1, PIT1/POU1F1 and GLI2 have been shown to cause
pituitary hormone deficiency. In addition, heterozygous mutations or gene
deletions in the growth hormone-insulin-like growth factor (GH-IGF) axis such as 
the GH, GH-releasing hormone receptor, GH receptor, STAT5b, IGF-I, IGF-I receptor
and the acid labile subunit have also been observed in children with growth
failure and short stature. More recently, mutations of genes encoding regulators 
of cell proliferation and division, i.e., the pericentrin gene, have also
resulted in severe growth disturbances.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21912148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Virol. 2011 Dec;85(23):12529-36. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00822-11. Epub 2011 Sep 14.

Feline leukemia virus infection requires a post-receptor binding
envelope-dependent cellular component.

Hussain N(1), Thickett KR, Na H, Leung C, Tailor CS.

Author information: 
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, Cell Biology Program, 555 University Avenue,
Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.

Gammaretrovirus receptors have been suggested to contain the necessary
determinants to mediate virus binding and entry. Here, we show that murine NIH
3T3 and baby hamster kidney (BHK) cells overexpressing receptors for subgroup A, 
B, and C feline leukemia viruses (FeLVs) are weakly susceptible (10(1) to 10(2)
CFU/ml) to FeLV pseudotype viruses containing murine leukemia virus (MLV) core
(Gag-Pol) proteins, whereas FeLV receptor-expressing murine Mus dunni tail
fibroblast (MDTF) cells are highly susceptible (10(4) to 10(6) CFU/ml). However, 
NIH 3T3 cells expressing the FeLV subgroup B receptor PiT1 are highly susceptible
to gibbon ape leukemia virus pseudotype virus, which differs from the FeLV
pseudotype viruses only in the envelope protein. FeLV resistance is not caused by
a defect in envelope binding, low receptor expression levels, or N-linked
glycosylation. Resistance is not alleviated by substitution of the MLV core in
the FeLV pseudotype virus with FeLV core proteins. Interestingly, FeLV resistance
is alleviated by fusion of receptor-expressing NIH 3T3 and BHK cells with MDTF or
human TE671 cells, suggesting the absence of an additional cellular component in 
NIH 3T3 and BHK cells that is required for FeLV infection. The putative
FeLV-specific cellular component is not a secreted factor, as MDTF conditioned
medium does not alleviate the block to FeLV infection. Together, our findings
suggest that FeLV infection requires an additional envelope-dependent cellular
component that is absent in NIH 3T3 and BHK cells but that is present in MDTF and
TE671 cells.

PMCID: PMC3209382
PMID: 21917946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Physiol Genomics. 2011 Oct 6;43(19):1105-16. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00080.2011. Epub 2011 Aug 9.

Candidate genes for panhypopituitarism identified by gene expression profiling.

Mortensen AH(1), MacDonald JW, Ghosh D, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Cancer Center, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5618, USA.

Mutations in the transcription factors PROP1 and PIT1 (POU1F1) lead to pituitary 
hormone deficiency and hypopituitarism in mice and humans. The dysmorphology of
developing Prop1 mutant pituitaries readily distinguishes them from those of Pit1
mutants and normal mice. This and other features suggest that Prop1 controls the 
expression of genes besides Pit1 that are important for pituitary cell migration,
survival, and differentiation. To identify genes involved in these processes we
used microarray analysis of gene expression to compare pituitary RNA from newborn
Prop1 and Pit1 mutants and wild-type littermates. Significant differences in gene
expression were noted between each mutant and their normal littermates, as well
as between Prop1 and Pit1 mutants. Otx2, a gene critical for normal eye and
pituitary development in humans and mice, exhibited elevated expression
specifically in Prop1 mutant pituitaries. We report the spatial and temporal
regulation of Otx2 in normal mice and Prop1 mutants, and the results suggest Otx2
could influence pituitary development by affecting signaling from the ventral
diencephalon and regulation of gene expression in Rathke's pouch. The discovery
that Otx2 expression is affected by Prop1 deficiency provides support for our
hypothesis that identifying molecular differences in mutants will contribute to
understanding the molecular mechanisms that control pituitary organogenesis and
lead to human pituitary disease.

PMCID: PMC3217323
PMID: 21828248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Sep;155A(9):2242-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34136. Epub 2011
Aug 3.

Homozygous microdeletion of the POU1F1, CHMP2B, and VGLL3 genes in chromosome
3--a novel syndrome.

Gat-Yablonski G(1), Frumkin-Ben David R, Bar M, Potievsky O, Phillip M, Lazar L.

Author information: 
(1)The Jesse Z and Sara Lea Shafer Institute for Endocrinology and Diabetes,
National Center for Childhood Diabetes, Schneider Children's Medical Center of
Israel, Petah Tiqwa, Israel. galiagy@post.tau.ac.il

Microdeletion syndromes include numerous syndromic phenotypes associated with
intellectual disability and dysmorphic features. We report on a patient with a
novel microdeletion of chromosomal region 3p11.2-p12.1 containing POU1F1,
chromatin-modifying protein 2B (CHMP2B), and vestigial-like 3 (VGLL3) genes. Our 
patient was diagnosed as having a neonatal multiple pituitary hormone [growth
hormone (GH), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), and prolactin] deficiency. In
addition to the typical findings associated with these hormonal deficiencies, she
exhibited clinical features resembling those of Laron syndrome (frontal bossing, 
saddle nose, small chin, blue sclera, and acromicria), with moderate intellectual
disability. She also displayed an unusual growth pattern characterized by
unresponsiveness to high doses of GH replacement therapy during infancy and early
childhood and an accelerated growth rate beginning at the age of 4.5 years.
Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1 levels were consistently extremely low or
undetectable. Extensive medical and genetic analysis ruled out primary and
secondary GH insensitivity. The distinct phenotype and the peculiar growth
pattern observed in this affected patient, not reported to have been observed in 
other cases with POU1F1 gene inactivity, suggest that the other two deleted genes
play a possible role in the development of this syndrome. This hypothesis may be 
supported by the fact that both the CHMP2B and VGLL3 genes are expressed in the
liver and the growth plate, the two main target organs of the GH/IGF-1 axis. The 
homozygous deletion of the CHMP2B gene, previously associated with frontotemporal
dementia, may contribute to the intellectual disability observed in this patient.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21815258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Dairy Sci. 2011 Aug;94(8):4220-3. doi: 10.3168/jds.2011-4144.

Short communication: expression and alternative splicing of POU1F1 pathway genes 
in preimplantation bovine embryos.

Laporta J(1), Driver A, Khatib H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, USA.

Early embryo loss is a major contributing factor to cow infertility and that 70
to 80% of this loss occurs between d 8 and 16 postfertilization. However, little 
is known about the molecular mechanisms and the nature of genes involved in
normal and abnormal embryonic development. Moreover, information is limited on
the contributions of the genomes of dams and of embryos to the development and
survival of preimplantation embryos. We hypothesized that proper gene expression 
level in the developing embryo is essential for embryo survival and pregnancy
success. As such, the characterization of expression profiles in early embryos
could lead to a better understanding of the mechanisms involved in normal and
abnormal embryo development. To test this hypothesis, 2 d-8 embryo populations
(degenerate embryos and blastocysts) that differed in morphology and
developmental status were investigated. Expression levels of POU1F1 pathway genes
were estimated in 4 sets of biological replicate pools of degenerate embryos and 
blastocysts. The OPN and STAT5A genes were found to be upregulated in degenerate 
embryos compared with blastocysts, whereas STAT5B showed similar expression
levels in both embryo groups. Analysis of splice variants of OPN and STAT5A
revealed expression patterns different from the total expression values of these 
genes. As such, measuring expression of individual transcripts should be
considered in gene expression studies.

Copyright © 2011 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 21787958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Apr;39(4):4029-38. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-1184-5. Epub 2011
Jul 17.

Polymorphisms of caprine POU1F1 gene and their association with litter size in
Jining Grey goats.

Feng T(1), Chu MX, Cao GL, Tang QQ, Di R, Fang L, Li N.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Farm Animal Genetic Resources and Utilization of Ministry of
Agriculture, Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Beijing, 100193, People's Republic of China.

Seven pairs of primers were designed to amplify 5' promoter region, six exons and
partial introns and to detect the polymorphisms of POU1F1 gene in five goat
breeds with different prolificacy. The results showed that six mutations were
identified in caprine POU1F1 gene including C256T in exon 3, C53T and T123G in
intron 3, and G682T (A228S), T723G and C837T in exon 6. The former four mutations
were novel SNPs in goat POU1F1 gene. The 53 and 123 loci were in complete linkage
disequilibrium in five caprine breeds. Regarding the 256 locus, the Jining Grey
goat does with genotype CT had 0.66 kids more than those with genotype CC
(P < 0.05), while does with genotype GT had 0.63 (P < 0.05) kids more than those 
with genotype GG at the 682 locus. The present study preliminarily showed an
association between allele T at the 256 and 682 loci of POU1F1 gene and high
litter size in Jining Grey goats. Totally 16 haplotypes and 50 genotypes were
identified at the above six loci in POU1F1 gene of five goat breeds. Three common
haplotypes (hap2, hap3 and hap4) were identified in five goat breeds joined. Four
specific haplotypes (hap7, hap9, hap11 and hap13) were detected in Jining Grey
goats. The predominant haplotype was hap1 (35.29% and 48.25%) in both Jining Grey
and Guizhou White goats, while hap4 (50%) in Boer goats, and hap2 (42.86% and
38.75%) in both Wendeng Dairy and Liaoning Cashmere goats. The most frequent
genotypes at six loci in the above five goat breeds were hap1/hap2 (14.38%) and
hap1/hap4 (14.38%), hap1/hap2 (38.60%), hap4/hap4 (40.91%), hap2/hap4 (26.53%),
hap2/hap5 (20.00%), respectively. The Jining Grey goat does with nine genotypes
analyzed of POU1F1 gene showed no obvious difference in litter size.

PMID: 21769479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2012 Jan;76(1):78-87. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2011.04165.x.

Identification of a novel mutation in the exon 2 splice donor site of the
POU1F1/PIT-1 gene in Japanese identical twins with mild combined pituitary
hormone deficiency.

Inoue H(1), Mukai T, Sakamoto Y, Kimura C, Kangawa N, Itakura M, Ogata T, Ito Y, 
Fujieda K; Japan Growth Genome Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Therapeutics and Research Center, Institute for Genome Research, The 
University of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan. hinoue@genome.tokushima-u.ac.jp

CONTEXT: To date, approximately 35 different POU1F1 mutations have been described
in patients with familial and sporadic combined pituitary hormone deficiency
(CPHD) from different ethnic backgrounds. The majority are missense mutations
clustered within the conserved POU-specific and POU-homeo domains, encoded by
exons 4 and 6, respectively.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to identify the molecular basis and clinical
characteristics of a Japanese CPHD family with a novel POU1F1 mutation.
DESIGN: The POU1F1 gene was sequenced in identical twin brothers with mild CPHD. 
The mutation identified was also evaluated in family members as well as 188
Japanese controls and then examined in functional studies.
RESULTS: A novel heterozygous splice site mutation (Ex2 + 1G>T; c.214 + 1G>T) was
detected. This mutation was also present in their undiagnosed mother, but not in 
any of the controls. In vitro splicing studies suggested this mutation to result 
in an in-frame skipping of exon 2, thus producing an internally deleted protein
lacking most of the R2 transactivation subdomain (TAD-R2). Heterologous
expression studies of the mutated POU1F1 protein showed only modest reductions in
its transactivation activities in HEK293T cells, while acting as a
dominant-negative inhibitor of the endogenous activities of POU1F1 in pituitary
GH3 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of a mutation at the exon 2 donor splice
site of POU1F1, affecting TAD-R2. The addition of this mutation to the growing
list of pathological POU1F1 mutations may provide deeper insights into clinical
heterogeneity in the expressions of individual mutations and a better
understanding of the structure-function relationships of POU1F1.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21722153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2011 Aug;75(2):214-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2011.04028.x.

A novel POU1F1 mutation (p.Thr168IlefsX7) associated with an early and severe
form of combined pituitary hormone deficiency: functional analysis and follow-up 
from infancy to adulthood.

Tenenbaum-Rakover Y(1), Sobrier ML, Amselem S.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrine Unit, Ha'Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel.
rakover_y@clalit.org.il

CONTEXT: POU1F1 encodes a pituitary-specific homeodomain transcription factor
that is crucial for development and differentiation of anterior pituitary cell
types producing GH, TSH and PRL. Although the first mutations in humans were
reported in 1992, to date, less than 25 different mutations of POU1F1 have been
identified worldwide.
OBJECTIVES: To describe the long-term follow-up of a 22-year-old male of Israeli 
Arab Muslim origin, born to a consanguineous union, with congenital
hypothyroidism, who presented with life-threatening hypoglycaemic episodes and
severe growth retardation from infancy. To identify the molecular basis of this
severe disease.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Endocrine investigations, neuroimaging, sequencing of
POU1F1 and assessment of the identified mutated POU1F1's ability to transactivate
three specific targets (POU1F1, TSHß and PRL).
RESULTS: Central hypothyroidism was diagnosed at the age of 2 months and GH and
PRL deficiencies were documented at 9 months. MRI at 14 years revealed a
hypoplastic adenohypophysis. The patient underwent spontaneous but delayed
puberty. A novel disease-causing mutation (c.502insT) was identified in the
homozygous state in exon 4 of POU1F1. This insertion results in a frameshift
introducing an early termination codon at position 174 (p.Thr168IlefsX7), leading
to a severely truncated protein lacking the entire homeodomain. This mutation
abolishes POU1F1's transactivation properties on three target promoters.
CONCLUSION: This study, which identifies a novel loss-of-function mutation in
POU1F1, describes the phenotype of a rare condition in a patient followed from
the first weeks of life to adulthood. The severity of the central hypothyroidism 
should alert clinicians to assess other pituitary axes, in particular GH and
prolactin.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21521297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Arch Pediatr. 2011 Jun;18(6):696-706. doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2011.03.005. Epub
2011 Apr 15.

[Genetic aspects of growth hormone deficiency].

[Article in French]

Reynaud R(1), Castinetti F, Galon-Faure N, Albarel-Loy F, Saveanu A, Quentien MH,
Jullien N, Khammar A, Enjalbert A, Barlier A, Brue T.

Author information: 
(1)Service de pédiatrie multidisciplinaire, hôpital de la Timone enfant, 13385
Marseille cedex 05, France. rachel.reynaud@ap-hm.fr

Congenital growth hormone deficiency (GHD) is a rare cause of growth delay. It
should be suspected when other causes of hypopituitarism (sellar tumor,
postsurgical or radioinduced hypopituitarism, etc.) have been ruled out. GHD can 
be isolated (IGHD) or associated with at least one other pituitary hormone
deficiency (CPHD) including thyrotroph, lactotroph, corticotroph, or gonadotroph 
deficiencies. CPHD is caused by mutations of genes coding for pituitary
transcription factors involved in pituitary ontogenesis or in the
hypothalamic-pituitary axis. Clinical presentation varies, depending on the type 
and severity of GHD, the age at diagnosis, the association with other pituitary
hormone deficiencies, or extrapituitary malformations. Clinical, biological, and 
radiological work-up is very important to determine for which transcription
factor the patient should be screened. There is a wide variety of phenotypes
depending on the transcription factor involved: PROP1 (somatolactotroph,
thyrotroph, gonadotroph, and sometimes corticotroph deficiencies ; pituitary
hyper- or hypoplasia), POU1F1 (somatolactotroph and thyrotroph deficiencies,
pituitary hypoplasia), HESX1 (variable pituitary deficiencies, septo-optic
dysplasia), and less frequently LHX3 (somatolactotroph, thyrotroph, and
gonadotroph deficiencies, deafness, and limited head and neck rotation), LHX4
(variable pituitary deficiencies, ectopic neurohypophysis, cerebral
abnormalities), and OTX2 (variable pituitary deficiencies, ectopic
neurohypophysis, ocular abnormalities). Mutations of PROP1 remain the first
identified cause of CPHD, and as a consequence the first to be sought. POU1F1
mutations should be looked for in the postpubertal population presenting with
GH/TSH deficiencies and no extrapituitary malformations. Once genetic diagnosis
has been concluded, a strict follow-up is necessary because patients can develop 
new deficiencies (for example, late-onset corticotroph deficiency in patients
with PROP1 mutations). Identification of gene defects allows early treatment of
pituitary deficiency and prevention of their potentially lethal consequences. If 
untreated, the main symptoms include short stature, cognitive alterations, or
delayed puberty. An appropriate replacement of hormone deficiencies is therefore 
required. Depending on the type of transmission (recessive transmission for PROP1
and LHX3, dominant for LHX4, autosomal dominant or recessive for POU1F1 and
HESX1), genetic counseling might be proposed. Genotyping appears highly
beneficial at an individual and familial level.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21497494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2011 May;7(5):255-6. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2011.53.

Autoimmunity: acquired versus inherited pituitary deficiency - same difference?

Drouin J, Takayasu S.

PMID: 21423243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Apr 5;108(14):5596-601. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1101752108. Epub 2011 Mar 21.

Malleability of folding intermediates in the homeodomain superfamily.

Banachewicz W(1), Religa TL, Schaeffer RD, Daggett V, Fersht AR.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 0QH, United Kingdom.

Members of the homeodomain superfamily are three-helix bundle proteins whose
second and third helices form a helix-turn-helix motif (HTH). Their folding
mechanism slides from the ultrafast, three-state framework mechanism for the
engrailed homeodomain (EnHD), in which the HTH motif is independently stable, to 
an apparent two-state nucleation-condensation model for family members with an
unstable HTH motif. The folding intermediate of EnHD has nearly native HTH
structure, but it is not docked with helix1. The determinant of whether two- or
three-state folding was hypothesized to be the stability of the HTH substructure.
Here, we describe a detailed F-value analysis of the folding of the Pit1
homeodomain, which has similar ultrafast kinetics to that of EnHD. Formation of
helix1 was strongly coupled with formation of HTH, which was initially surprising
because they are uncoupled in the EnHD folding intermediate. However, we found a 
key difference between Pit1 and EnHD: The isolated peptide corresponding to the
HTH motif in Pit1 was not folded in the absence of H1. Independent molecular
dynamics simulations of Pit1 unfolding found an intermediate with H1 misfolded
onto the HTH motif. The Pit1 folding pathway is the connection between that of
EnHD and the slower folding homeodomains and provides a link in the transition of
mechanisms from two- to three-state folding in this superfamily. The malleability
of folding intermediates can lead to unstable substructures being stabilized by a
variety of nonnative interactions, adding to the continuum of folding mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3078393
PMID: 21422286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Feb;25(1):43-60. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2010.10.014.

Pituitary transcription factors in the aetiology of combined pituitary hormone
deficiency.

Pfäffle R(1), Klammt J.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Leipzig, Liebigstrasse
20a, Leipzig, Germany. roland.pfaeffle@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

The somatotropic axis is the central postnatal regulator of longitudinal growth. 
One of its major components--growth hormone--is produced by the anterior lobe of 
the pituitary, which also expresses and secretes five additional hormones
(prolactin, thyroid stimulating hormone, follicle stimulating hormone,
luteinizing hormone, adrenocorticotropic hormone). Proper development of the
pituitary assures the regulation of critical processes such as metabolic control,
puberty and reproduction, stress response and lactation. Ontogeny of the
adenohypophysis is orchestrated by inputs from neighbouring tissues, cellular
signalling molecules and transcription factors. Perturbation of expression or
function of these factors has been implicated in the aetiology of combined
pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD). Mutations within the genes encoding for the 
transcription factors LHX3, LHX4, PROP1, and POU1F1 (PIT1) that act at different 
stages of pituitary development result in unique patterns of hormonal
deficiencies reflecting their differential expression during organogenesis. In
the case of LHX3 and LHX4 the phenotype may include extra-pituitary
manifestations due to the function of these genes/proteins outside the pituitary 
gland. The remarkable variability in the clinical presentation of affected
patients indicates the influence of the genetic background, environmental factors
and possibly stochastic events. However, in the majority of CPHD cases the
aetiology of this heterogeneous disease remains unexplained, which further
suggests the involvement of additional genes. Identification of these factors
might also help to close the gaps in our understanding of pituitary development, 
maintenance and function.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21396574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Feb;25(1):1-17. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2010.06.007.

Genetic evaluation of short stature.

Wit JM(1), Kiess W, Mullis P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, J6S Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. j.m.wit@lumc.nl

After a proper medical history, growth analysis and physical examination of a
short child, followed by radiological and laboratory screening, the clinician may
decide to perform genetic testing. We propose several clinical algorithms that
can be used to establish the diagnosis. GH1 and GHRHR should be tested in
children with severe isolated growth hormone deficiency and a positive family
history. A multiple pituitary dysfunction can be caused by defects in several
genes, of which PROP1 and POU1F1 are most common. GH resistance can be caused by 
genetic defects in GHR, STAT5B, IGF1, IGFALS, which all have their specific
clinical and biochemical characteristics. IGF-I resistance is seen in
heterozygous defects of the IGF1R. If besides short stature additional
abnormalities are present, these should be matched with known dysmorphic
syndromes. If no obvious candidate gene can be determined, a whole genome
approach can be taken to check for deletions, duplications and/or uniparental
disomies.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21396571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Formos Med Assoc. 2011 Jan;110(1):58-61. doi: 10.1016/S0929-6646(11)60009-0.

Congenital hypopituitarism due to POU1F1 gene mutation.

Lee NC(1), Tsai WY, Peng SF, Tung YC, Chien YH, Hwu WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan University Hospital and
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

POU1F1 (Pit-1; Gene ID 5449) is an anterior pituitary transcriptional factor, and
POU1F1 mutation is known to cause anterior pituitary hypoplasia, growth hormone
and prolactin deficiency and various degree of hypothyroidism. We report here a
patient who presented with growth failure and central hypothyroidism since early 
infancy. However, treatment with thyroxine gave no effect and he subsequently
developed calf muscle pseudohypertrophy (Kocher-Debre-Semelaigne syndrome),
elevation of creatinine kinase, dilated cardiomyopathy and pericardial effusion. 
Final diagnosis was made by combined pituitary function test and sequencing
analysis that revealed POU1F1 gene C.698T > C (p.F233S) mutation. The rarity of
the disease can result in delayed diagnosis and treatment.

Copyright © 2011 Formosan Medical Association & Elsevier. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21316014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Neuroendocrinology. 2011;93(3):181-8. doi: 10.1159/000324087. Epub 2011 Feb 8.

Pituitary stalk dysgenesis-induced hypopituitarism in adult patients: prevalence,
evolution of hormone dysfunction and genetic analysis.

Fernandez-Rodriguez E(1), Quinteiro C, Barreiro J, Marazuela M, Pereiro I, Peinó 
R, Cabezas-Agrícola JM, Dominguez F, Casanueva FF, Bernabeu I.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Division, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago de
Compostela, SERGAS, Departamento de Medicina, Universidad de Santiago de
Compostela, Spain.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the prevalence of pituitary stalk dysgenesis (PSD) in 
adult hypopituitary patients by describing the chronology of hormone deficiencies
and their potential correlation with traumatic delivery, mutations in genes
required for pituitary development and function and pituitary stalk visibility on
MRI.
DESIGN: Retrospective and prospective study involving 231 hypopituitary patients,
including 26 diagnosed with PSD. Clinical, biochemical and radiological studies
were reviewed. Molecular analyses of HESX1, LHX4,PROP1 and POU1F1 genes were
performed prospectively.
RESULTS: PSD was present in 11.2% of hypopituitary patients. PSD was diagnosed
before 14 years of age in 46.2% of cases, between 14 and 18 years of age in 23%, 
and in adulthood in 30.8%. Perinatal complications or gene mutations were present
in 26.9 and 4.3% of patients, respectively. At first assessment, 92.3% of
patients had growth hormone (GH) deficiency. 26.9% presented as combined
pituitary deficiencies and 7.6% as panhypopituitarism. Hormone deficiencies were 
progressive during follow-up in 84.6%. 96% progressed to multiple deficiencies
and 46% to panhypopituitarism. No significant association was found between
hormonal dysfunction and previous perinatal damage or breech delivery (p = 0.17),
PROP1 mutations (p = 0.26) or pituitary stalk visibility on MRI (p = 0.52). No
mutations in POU1F1, HESX1 and LHX-4 genes were detected.
CONCLUSION: In this study, PSD prevalence in adult hypopituitary patients was
11.2%. Typical clinical presentation includes isolated or combined pituitary
hormone deficiencies during the pediatric age, which usually progress to combined
or complete hypopituitarism in adulthood. Phenotype is highly variable depending 
on hormone profile and age at onset.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21304225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Orv Hetil. 2011 Feb 6;152(6):221-32. doi: 10.1556/OH.2011.29032.

[Genetic background of inherited multiple pituitary hormone deficiency. Mutations
of PROP1 gene in Hungary].

[Article in Hungarian]

Halász Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Semmelweis Egyetem, Általános Orvostudományi Kar I. Gyermekklinika Budapest
Bókay J. u. 53-54. 1083. halaszzita@gmail.com

In this work I analysed the outcome of growth hormone replacement treatment in
patients with inherited form of multiple pituitary hormone deficiency and
examined diseased-causing mutations of pituitary transcription factor genes which
may underlie this disorder. The results showed that after treatment for a longer 
than 7-year period with a growth hormone preparation available under
well-controlled distribution, the mean height of children with growth hormone
deficiency reached the normal national reference range adjusted for age and sex. 
After establishment of clinical criteria for screening PROP1 gene mutations, I
performed mutational analysis of all coding exons of this gene in 35 patients
with inherited form of multiple pituitary hormone deficiency. With these studies,
diseases-causing PROP1 gene mutations were detected in 15 of the 35 patients
(43%). It was also found that more than 80% of mutant alleles were accounted for 
by those containing the 150delA and 301-302delGA mutations of the PROP1 gene.
Importantly, these findings indicated a high relevance of mutational "hot spots" 
of the PROP1 gene in Hungarian patients with inherited form of multiple pituitary
hormone deficiency and they also offered an opportunity for the development of
rational and cost-effective screening strategy. When clinical and hormonal
findings of patients with and without PROP1 gene mutations were compared, results
showed that growth hormone deficiency was diagnosed at earlier age of life in
patients with PROP1 gene mutations, but the severity of growth retardation at the
time of diagnosis of growth hormone deficiency or the age of patients at the time
of manifestation of other pituitary hormone deficiencies (TSH, LH, FSH and ACTH) 
were similar in the two groups of patients. In 15 patients inherited form of
multiple pituitary hormone deficiency who had no PROP1 gene mutations, exon 6 of 
the POU1F1 gene containing a mutational "hot spot" was also examined but no
mutations were found. Thus, these results do not support a significant role of
the mutational "hot spot" of the POU1F1 gene in Hungarian patients with inherited
form of multiple pituitary hormone deficiency. Finally, I introduced a method for
the detection of mutations of the PITX2 gene, a pituitary transcription factor
that plays a role not only in pituitary development and differentiation but also 
in the lateralization of organs. With the use of this method, I performed
mutational analysis of all coding exons of this gene in an exceptionally unique
patient who had both situs inversus totalis and inherited form of multiple
pituitary hormone deficiency, but no mutation was found. Thus, the findings in
this patient failed to indicate that mutation of the PITX2 gene is involved in
the pathomechanism of situs inversus totalis associated with inherited form of
multiple pituitary hormone deficiency.

PMID: 21278027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Pituitary. 2011 Sep;14(3):208-16. doi: 10.1007/s11102-010-0278-8.

Detection of genetic hypopituitarism in an adult population of idiopathic
pituitary insufficiency patients with growth hormone deficiency.

Nyström HF(1), Saveanu A, Barbosa EJ, Barlier A, Enjalbert A, Glad C, Palming J, 
Johannsson G, Brue T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg,
Gröna Stråket 8, 41345, Gothenburg, Sweden. helena.filipsson@telia.com

Idiopathic pituitary insufficiency (IPI) is diagnosed in 10% of all hypopituitary
patients. There are several known and unknown aetiologies within the IPI group.
The aim of this study was to investigate an adult IPI population for genetic
cause according a screening schedule. From files of 373 GH deficient (GHD)
patients on GH replacement 50 cases with IPI were identified. Of the 39 patients 
that approved to the study, 25 patients were selected for genetic investigation
according to phenotype and 14 patients were not further tested, as sporadic
isolated GHD (n = 9) and GHD with diabetes insipidus (n = 5) have low probability
for a known genetic cause. Genotyping of all coding exons of HESX1, LHX4, PROP1, 
POU1F1 and GH1 genes were performed according to a diagnostic algorithm based on 
clinical, hormonal and neuroradiological phenotype. Among the 25 patients, an
overall rate of 8% of mutations was found, and a 50% rate in familial cases.
Among two sibling pairs, one pair that presented with complete anterior pituitary
insufficiency, had a compound heterozygous PROP1 gene mutation (codons 117 and
120: exon 3 p Phe 117 Ile (c349 T>A) and p Arg 120 Cys (c358 C>T)) with a
phenotype of very late onset ACTH-insufficiency. In the other sibling pair and in
the sporadic cases no mutation was identified. This study suggests that currently
known genetic causes are rare in sporadic adult IPI patients, and that systematic
genetic screening is not needed in adult-onset sporadic cases of IPI. Conversely,
familial cases are highly suspect for genetic causes.

PMID: 21132537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Clin Invest. 2011 Jan;121(1):113-9. doi: 10.1172/JCI44073. Epub 2010 Dec 1.

Adult combined GH, prolactin, and TSH deficiency associated with circulating
PIT-1 antibody in humans.

Yamamoto M(1), Iguchi G, Takeno R, Okimura Y, Sano T, Takahashi M, Nishizawa H,
Handayaningshi AE, Fukuoka H, Tobita M, Saitoh T, Tojo K, Mokubo A, Morinobu A,
Iida K, Kaji H, Seino S, Chihara K, Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kobe 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

The pituitary-specific transcriptional factor-1 (PIT-1, also known as POU1F1), is
an essential factor for multiple hormone-secreting cell types. A genetic defect
in the PIT-1 gene results in congenital growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL), and
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) deficiency. Here, we investigated 3 cases of
adult-onset combined GH, PRL, and TSH deficiencies and found that the
endocrinological phenotype in each was linked to autoimmunity directed against
the PIT-1 protein. We detected anti-PIT-1 antibody along with various
autoantibodies in the patients' sera. An ELISA-based screening revealed that this
antibody was highly specific to the disease and absent in control subjects.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that PIT-1-, GH-, PRL-, and TSH-positive
cells were absent in the pituitary of patient 2, who also had a range of
autoimmune endocrinopathies. These clinical manifestations were compatible with
the definition of autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome (APS). However, the main
manifestations of APS-I--hypoparathyroidism and Candida infection--were not
observed and the pituitary abnormalities were obviously different from the
hypophysitis associated with APS. These data suggest that these patients define a
unique "anti-PIT-1 antibody syndrome," related to APS.

PMCID: PMC3007153
PMID: 21123951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Apr;38(4):2723-8. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0416-4. Epub 2010
Nov 20.

Identification of SNPs within the sheep PROP1 gene and their effects on wool
traits.

Zeng XC(1), Chen HY, Jia B, Zhao ZS, Hui WQ, Wang ZB, Du YC.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Shihezi University, Shihezi, 832003,
Xinjiang, People's Republic of China. Zengxiancun0993@sina.com

Regarding mutations of PROP1 (Prophet of POU1F1) gene significantly associating
with combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) in human patients and animals, 
PROP1 gene is a novel important candidate gene for detecting genetic variation
and growth, reproduction, metabolism traits selection and breeding. The aim of
this study was to detect PROP1 gene mutation of the exon 1-3 and its association 
with wool traits in 345 Chinese Merino sheep. In this study, on the basis of
PCR-SSCP and DNA sequencing methods, ten novel SNPs within the sheep PROP1 gene, 
namely, AY533708: g.45A>G resulting in Glu15Glu, g.1198A>G, g.1341G>C resulting
in Arg63Ser, g.1389G>A resulting in Ala79Ala, g.1402C>T resulting in Leu84Leu,
g.1424A>G resulting in Asn91Ser, g.1522C>T, g.1556A>T, g.1574T>C, g.2430C>G were 
reported. In addition, association analysis showed that three genotypes of P4
fragment were significantly associated with fiber diameter in the analyzed
population (P=0.044). These results strongly suggested that polymorphisms of the 
PROP1 gene could be a useful molecular marker for sheep breeding and genetics
through marker-assisted selection (MAS).

PMID: 21104025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Exp Physiol. 2011 Feb;96(2):226-39. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2010.054502.

Epidermal growth factor induces a sexually dimorphic proliferative response of
lactotroph cells through protein kinase C-ERK1/2-Pit-1 in vitro.

De Paul AL(1), Gutiérrez S, Sabatino ME, Mukdsi JH, Palmeri CM, Soaje M, Petiti
JP, Torres AI.

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Nac de Córdoba, Argentina. adepaul@cmefcm.uncor.edu

Lactotroph cells display morphological and functional heterogeneity, a feature
which is closely related to the oestrogenic environment. In this study, we
focused on sex-related differences linked to the proliferative and secretory
responses of lactotrophs exposed to EGF in vitro. Furthermore, we addressed the
involvement of the PKCe/ERK1/2 signalling pathway and the contribution of Pit-1
in the EGF actions in primary pituitary cultures from male and female rats. EGF
promoted a differential proliferative activity on PRL cells, which was closely
associated to the sex, as revealed by the uptake of bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU). In 
females, the mitogenic activity was up to nine times greater, whereas in males,
the number of BrdU-labelled PRL cells was only doubled compared to control.
However, in both models, EGF had a similar effectiveness in promoting PRL
secretion. EGF also induced a significant increase in the PKCe, P -ERK 1/2, and
Pit-1 protein levels, which were higher in females than in males. Pre-incubation 
with BIM blocked EGF-induced ERK 1/2 activation and Pit-1 expression. These
results suggest a sexually dimorphic response of lactotroph cells to the
proliferative effects of EGF, with the PKCe/ERK1/2 Pit-1 pathway being involved
in this action.

PMID: 21075822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Clin Invest. 2010 Dec;120(12):4289-302. doi: 10.1172/JCI42015. Epub 2010 Nov 8.

Deregulation of the Pit-1 transcription factor in human breast cancer cells
promotes tumor growth and metastasis.

Ben-Batalla I(1), Seoane S, Garcia-Caballero T, Gallego R, Macia M, Gonzalez LO, 
Vizoso F, Perez-Fernandez R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, University of Santiago de
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

The Pit-1 transcription factor (also know as POU1F1) plays a critical role in
cell differentiation during organogenesis of the anterior pituitary in mammals
and is a transcriptional activator for pituitary gene transcription. Increased
expression of Pit-1 has been reported in human tumorigenic breast cells. Here, we
found that Pit-1 overexpression or knockdown in human breast cancer cell lines
induced profound phenotypic changes in the expression of proteins involved in
cell proliferation, apoptosis, and invasion. Some of these protumorigenic effects
of Pit-1 were mediated by upregulation of Snai1, an inductor of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. In immunodeficient mice, Pit-1 overexpression 
induced tumoral growth and promoted metastasis in lung. In patients with invasive
ductal carcinoma of the breast and node-positive tumor, high expression of Pit-1 
was significantly correlated with Snai1 positivity. Notably, in these patients
elevated expression of Pit-1 was significantly and independently associated with 
the occurrence of distant metastasis. These findings suggest that Pit-1 could
help to make a more accurate prognosis in patients with node-positive breast
cancer and may represent a new therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC2993584
PMID: 21060149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Dec 21;46(1):9-19. doi: 10.1677/JME-10-0063. Print 2011
Feb.

Truncation of PITX2 differentially affects its activity on physiological targets.

Quentien MH(1), Vieira V, Menasche M, Dufier JL, Herman JP, Enjalbert A, Abitbol 
M, Brue T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté de Médecine Secteur Nord, Université de la Méditerranée, Centre de
Recherche en Neurobiologie et Neurophysiologie de Marseille, UMR6231, CS 80011,
13344 Marseille Cedex 15, France.

The bicoid-like transcription factor PITX2 has been previously described to
interact with the pituitary-specific POU homeodomain factor POU1F1 (human
ortholog of PIT-1) to achieve cell-specific expression of prolactin (PRL) and GH 
in pituitary somatolactotroph cells. In this work, we have investigated the
functional properties of three PITX2 mutants reported in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome
patients relative to the regulation of these genes, using reporter genes under
the control of human PRL (hPRL), hGH, or POU1F1 promoters transfected in
nonpituitary and pituitary cell lines. Among the three mutations studied, Y167X
and E101X introduce a premature stop codon, and F104L leads to an amino acid
substitution. While PITX2(E101X) is not expressed in the cells following
transfection, and PITX2(F104L) is functionally inactive, the PITX2(Y167X) mutant 
keeps its DNA-binding capacity and displays a markedly enhanced activation of the
hPRL and POU1F1 promoters, but not of the hGH promoter. Y167X is the first
mutation of PITX2 described to result in a differential effect on the activation 
of its different physiological targets, hPRL and POU1F1 on one hand and hGH on
the other hand. The differential effect of the Y167X mutation might be linked to 
an interaction of PITX2 with different transcription factors or cofactors when
bound to the hPRL and POU1F1 or the hGH promoters. These results might form the
basis for the identification of the PITX2 protein complex necessary for the
differential GH or PRL expression.

PMID: 20978111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Aug;95(8):4043-7. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-0150. Epub
2010 Jun 9.

Mutation and gene copy number analyses of six pituitary transcription factor
genes in 71 patients with combined pituitary hormone deficiency: identification
of a single patient with LHX4 deletion.

Dateki S(1), Fukami M, Uematsu A, Kaji M, Iso M, Ono M, Mizota M, Yokoya S,
Motomura K, Kinoshita E, Moriuchi H, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, 2-10-1 Ohkura, Setagaya, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.

CONTEXT: Mutations of multiple transcription factor genes involved in pituitary
development have been identified in a minor portion of patients with combined
pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD). However, copy number aberrations involving
such genes have been poorly investigated in patients with CPHD.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to report the results of mutation and gene copy number
analyses in patients with CPHD.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Seventy-one Japanese patients with CPHD were examined for
mutations and gene copy number aberrations affecting POU1F1, PROP1, HESX1, LHX3, 
LHX4, and SOX3 by PCR-direct sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification. When a deletion was indicated, it was further studied by
fluorescence in situ hybridization, oligoarray comparative genomic hybridization,
and serial sequencing for long PCR products encompassing the deletion junction.
RESULTS: We identified a de novo heterozygous 522,009-bp deletion involving LHX4 
in a patient with CPHD (GH, TSH, PRL, LH, and FSH deficiencies), anterior
pituitary hypoplasia, ectopic posterior pituitary, and underdeveloped sella
turcica. We also identified five novel heterozygous missense substitutions
(p.V201I and p.H387P in LHX4, p.T63M and p.A322T in LHX3, and p.V53L in SOX3)
that were assessed as rare variants by sequencing analyses for control subjects
and available parents and by functional studies and in silico analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: The results imply the rarity of abnormalities affecting the six
genes in patients with CPHD and the significance of the gene copy number analysis
in such patients.

PMID: 20534763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Dairy Sci. 2010 May;93(5):2244-9. doi: 10.3168/jds.2009-2805.

Short communication: Validation of in vitro fertility genes in a Holstein bull
population.

Khatib H(1), Monson RL, Huang W, Khatib R, Schutzkus V, Khateeb H, Parrish JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA. hkhatib@wisc.edu

Previously, we constructed an in vitro fertilization system for the
identification of genes affecting fertility traits in dairy cattle. The
efficiency of this system has been demonstrated by the identification of several 
genes affecting fertilization rate and early embryonic survival. However, to
employ these genetic markers in marker- and gene-assisted selection programs,
there is a need to validate in vitro results in phenotypic data sets collected in
vivo. Thus, the objective of this study was to validate, in a population of
Holstein bulls, the fertility trait genes we previously identified in an in vitro
system. Estimated relative conception rate (ERCR) data from 222 Holstein bulls
were obtained from 5 different artificial insemination companies in the United
States. Bulls were genotyped for the genes FGF2, POU1F1, PRL, PRLR, GH, GHR,
STAT5A, OPN, and UTMP, and the data were analyzed for association with ERCR using
a mixed effects sire model. A stepwise model selection procedure revealed
evidence of association with ERCR for FGF2 and STAT5A polymorphisms. The in vivo 
validation suggests that these genes can be used in gene-assisted selection
programs for reproductive performance in dairy cattle. The genotypes found to be 
associated with low bull fertility in this study have been reported to be
associated with high milk composition in previous studies. These findings provide
molecular evidence for the antagonistic relationship between milk production and 
fertility observed for many years in different breeds of dairy cattle.

Copyright 2010 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 20412940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Hum Genet. 2010 Jun;127(6):721-9. doi: 10.1007/s00439-010-0820-9. Epub 2010 Apr
16.

A novel loss-of-function mutation in OTX2 in a patient with anophthalmia and
isolated growth hormone deficiency.

Ashkenazi-Hoffnung L(1), Lebenthal Y, Wyatt AW, Ragge NK, Dateki S, Fukami M,
Ogata T, Phillip M, Gat-Yablonski G.

Author information: 
(1)The Jesse Z and Sara Lea Shafer Institute of Endocrinology and Diabetes,
National Center for Childhood Diabetes, Schneider Children's Medical Center of
Israel, 14 Kaplan Street, 49202 Petach Tikva, Israel.

Heterozygous mutations of the gene encoding transcription factor OTX2 were
recently shown to be responsible for ocular as well as pituitary abnormalities.
Here, we describe a patient with unilateral anophthalmia and short stature.
Endocrine evaluation of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis revealed isolated growth 
hormone deficiency (IGHD) with small anterior pituitary gland, invisible stalk,
ectopic posterior lobe, and right anophthalmia on brain magnetic resonance
imaging. DNA was analyzed for mutations in the HESX1, SOX2, and OTX2 genes.
Molecular analysis yielded a novel heterozygous OTX2 mutation (c.270A>T, p.R90S) 
within the homeodomain. Functional analysis revealed that the mutation inhibited 
both the DNA binding and transactivation activities of the protein. This novel
loss-of-function mutation is associated with anophthalmia and IGHD in a patient
of Sephardic Jewish descent. We recommend that patients with GH deficiency and
ocular malformation in whom genetic analysis for classic transcription factor
genes (PROP1, POU1F1, HESX1, and LHX4) failed to identify alterations should be
checked for the presence of mutations in the OTX2 gene.

PMID: 20396904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Jul;45(1):19-32. doi: 10.1677/JME-10-0017. Epub 2010 Apr
15.

Appearance of the pituitary factor Pit-1 increases chromatin remodeling at
hypersensitive site III in the human GH locus.

Yang X(1), Jin Y, Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Expression of pituitary and placental members of the human GH and chorionic
somatomammotropin (CS) gene family is directed by an upstream remote locus
control region (LCR). Pituitary-specific expression of GH requires direct binding
of Pit-1 (listed as POU1F1 in the HUGO database) to sequences marked by a
hypersensitive site (HS) region (HS I/II) 14.6 kb upstream of the GH-N gene
(listed as GH1 in the HUGO database). We used human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293)
cells overexpressing wild-type and mutant Pit-1 proteins as a model system to
gain insight into the mechanism by which Pit-1 gains access to the GH LCR.
Addition of Pit-1 to these cells increased DNA accessibility at HS III, located
28 kb upstream of the human GH-N gene, in a POU homeodomain-dependent manner, as 
reflected by effects on histone hyperacetylation and RNA polymerase II activity. 
Direct binding of Pit-1 to HS III sequences is not supported. However, the
potential for binding of ETS family members to this region has been demonstrated,
and Pit-1 association with this ETS element in HS III sequences requires the POU 
homeodomain. Also, both ETS1 and ELK1 co-precipitate from human pituitary
extracts using two independent sources of Pit-1 antibodies. Finally,
overexpression of ELK1 or Pit-1 expression in HEK293 cells increased GH-N RNA
levels. However, while ELK1 overexpression also stimulated placental CS RNA
levels, the effect of Pit-1 appeared to correlate with ETS factor levels and
target GH-N preferentially. These data are consistent with recruitment and an
early role for Pit-1 in remodeling of the GH LCR at the constitutively open HS
III through protein-protein interaction.

PMID: 20395397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Horm Res Paediatr. 2010;73(5):363-71. doi: 10.1159/000308169. Epub 2010 Apr 14.

PROP1, HESX1, POU1F1, LHX3 and LHX4 mutation and deletion screening and GH1 P89L 
and IVS3+1/+2 mutation screening in a Dutch nationwide cohort of patients with
combined pituitary hormone deficiency.

de Graaff LC(1), Argente J, Veenma DC, Drent ML, Uitterlinden AG, Hokken-Koelega 
AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Endocrinology, Sophia Children's
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. l.degraaff@erasmusmc.nl

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Mutation frequencies of genes involved in combined pituitary
hormone deficiency (CPHD) vary substantially between populations. The HYPOPIT
study aims to obtain an overall picture of known and new genetic defects and
variations in a nationwide cohort of Dutch (mostly) sporadic CPHD patients.
METHODS: We screened 79 CPHD patients from 78 families (regardless of MRI and
hormonal phenotype) for mutations and deletions in PROP1, HESX1, POU1F1, LHX3 and
LHX4, as well as the P89L and IVS3+1/+2 mutations in GH1, recently described to
cause pituitary hormone impairment in addition to GH deficiency.
RESULTS: We did not find any mutation or deletion in PROP1, HESX1, LHX3 or LHX4, 
nor GH1 P89L and GH1 IVS3+1/+2 mutations. Among 12 patients with a typical
'POU1F1 phenotype', 1 patient was formerly known to have a POU1F1 mutation. This 
results in a POU1F1 mutation frequency in these patients of 8.3%.
CONCLUSION: Thorough screening for mutations and deletions in PROP1, HESX1,
POU1F1, LHX3, LHX4, as well as screening for GH1 P89L or GH1 IVS3+1/+2 mutations,
did not reveal any genetic defect in our cohort of CPHD patients except for one
formerly known POU1F1 mutation in 1 patient. Future research should focus on
alternative explanations for CPHD, like other genes or environmental factors.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20389107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2010 Jul 29;323(2):167-71. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.03.023.
Epub 2010 Apr 8.

W194XProp1 and S156insTProp1, both of which have intact DNA-binding domain, show 
a different DNA-binding activity to the Prop1-binding element in human Pit-1
gene.

Shibahara H(1), Ikeshita N, Sugiyama Y, Toda K, Yamamoto D, Herningtyas EH, Maki 
T, Kubota E, Iguchi G, Iida K, Takahashi Y, Kaji H, Chihara K, Okimura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Kobe University Graduate School of Health Science,
7-10-2 Tomogaoka, Suma-ku, Kobe 654-0142, Japan.

Prop1 activates POU1F1 (Pit-1) gene expression, which in turn stimulates GH, PRL,
TSHbeta and GHRH receptor gene expressions. Therefore the patients with Prop1
mutation show GH, PRL, and TSH deficiency. The mutation of Prop1 is a major
abnormality causing combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD). However,
DNA-binding and activating functions of mutant Prop1 have not been examined fully
because Prop1-binding elements (PBEs) in human POU1F1 gene were not identified
until 2008. The aim of this study is to test DNA-binding and transcriptional
activities of two mutant Prop1s (W194XProp1 and S156insTProp1, both of them were 
found in the patients with CPHD) whose mutation is located in putative
transactivating domain but not in DNA-binding domain. W194XProp1 showed a marked 
DNA-binding to PBE as well as a consensus element of paired-like transcription
factors (PRDQ9). Activating function for POU1F1 reporter genes expression was
lost or decreased in W194XProp1 but still preserved for PRDQ9 reporter gene.
S156insTProp1 did not bind PBE but bound PRDQ9. Consistent with the result,
S156insTProp1 did not stimulate POU1F1 reporter gene but stimulated PRDQ9
reporter gene. These results support the inference that W194XProp1 is unable to
increase POU1F1 gene expression by the defect of transactivating domain and that 
S156insTProp1 is unable to increase due to the loss of DNA-binding activity.
DNA-binding domain that has been assumed is not sufficient to provide full
DNA-binding activity of Prop1 and transactivating domain of Prop1 is likely to
affect DNA binding to PBE.

2010. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 20381582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2010 Dec;136(12):1901-13. doi:
10.1007/s00432-010-0849-0. Epub 2010 Mar 9.

Identification of genes related to a synergistic effect of taxane and
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid combination treatment in gastric cancer cells.

Chang H(1), Rha SY, Jeung HC, Jung JJ, Kim TS, Kwon HJ, Kim BS, Chung HC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei Cancer
Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, #134 Shinchon-Dong, Seodaemoon-gu,
Seoul 120-752, Korea.

PURPOSE: We evaluated the cytotoxic effects of combining suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, with taxanes in human
gastric cancer cell lines and assessed the pre-treatment difference of gene
expression to identify genes that could potentially mediate the cytotoxic
response.
METHODS: Gastric cancer cell lines were treated with SAHA and paclitaxel or
docetaxel, and the synergistic interaction between the drugs was evaluated in
vitro using the combination index (CI) method. We performed significance analysis
of microarray (SAM) to identify chemosensitivity-related genes in gastric cancer 
cell lines that were concomitantly treated with SAHA and taxane. We generated a
correlation matrix between gene expression and CI values to identify genes whose 
expression correlated with a combined effect of taxanes and SAHA.
RESULTS: Combination treatment with taxane and SAHA had a synergistic cytotoxic
effect against taxane-resistant gastric cancer cells. We identified 49
chemosensitivity-related genes via SAM analysis. Among them, nine common genes
(SLIT2, REEP2, EFEMP2, CDC42SE1, FSD1, POU1F1, ZNF79, ETNK1, and DOCK5) were
extracted from the subsequent correlation matrix analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of taxane and SAHA could be efficacious for the
treatment of gastric cancer. The genes that were related to the synergistic
response to taxane and SAHA could serve as surrogate biomarkers to predict the
therapeutic response in gastric cancer patients.

PMID: 20217129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Apr;24(4):754-65. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0359. Epub 2010 Feb
24.

Corepressors TLE1 and TLE3 interact with HESX1 and PROP1.

Carvalho LR(1), Brinkmeier ML, Castinetti F, Ellsworth BS, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109, USA.

Pituitary hormone deficiency causes short stature in one in 4000 children born
and can be caused by mutations in transcription factor genes, including HESX1,
PROP1, and POU1F1. HESX1 interacts with a member of the groucho-related gene
family, TLE1, through an engrailed homology domain and represses PROP1 activity. 
Mice with Prop1 deficiency exhibit failed differentiation of the POU1F1 lineage, 
resulting in lack of TSH, GH, and prolactin. In addition, these mutants exhibit
profound pituitary dysmorphology and excess Hesx1 and Tle3 expression. The
ability of HESX1 to interact with TLE3 has not been explored previously. We
tested the ability of TLE3 to enhance HESX1-mediated repression of PROP1 in cell 
culture. Both TLE3 and TLE1 repress PROP1 in conjunction with HESX1 with similar 
efficiencies. TLE1 and TLE3 can each repress PROP1 in the absence of HESX1 via a 
protein-protein interaction. We tested the functional consequences of ectopic
TLE3 and HESX1 expression in transgenic mice by driving constitutive expression
in pituitary thyrotrophs and gonadotrophs. Terminal differentiation of these
cells was suppressed by HESX1 alone and by TLE3 and HESX1 together but not by
TLE3 alone. In summary, we present evidence that HESX1 is a strong repressor that
can be augmented by the corepressors TLE1 and TLE3. Our in vitro studies suggest 
that TLE1 and TLE3 might also play roles independent of HESX1 by interacting with
other transcription factors like PROP1.

PMCID: PMC2852357
PMID: 20181723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Prilozi. 2009 Dec;30(2):33-55.

Growth hormone deficiency (GHD) and small for gestational age (SGA): genetic
alterations.

Jancevska A, Gucev ZS, Tasic V, Pop-Jordanova N.

Short stature associated with GH deficiency has been estimated to occur in about 
1 in 4000 to 1 in 10,000 in various studies. In the last decade new genetic
defects have been described in all the levels of the growth hormone-releasing
hormone (GH-RH)-GH-IGF (insulin-like growth factor) axis. Genetic defects in the 
GHRH and in various parts of the Insulin-like growth factor system have been
demonstrated. Genetic defects causing isolated GH deficiency (GHD), as well as
multiple pituitary hormonal deficiencies have been analysed in detail. Signalling
molecules and transcription factors leading to the development of the pituitary
gland have been discovered and their function recognized. In animal models and in
humans the importance of the transcription factors HESX1, PROP1, POU1F1, LHX3,
LHX4, TBX19, SOX2 and SOX3 has been extensively studied. Genetic alterations of
those transcription factors dictate the highly variable phenotype: from isolated 
hypopituitarism to multiple pituitary hormonal deficiencies with or without
malformations (e.g. septo-optic dysplasia or holoprosencephaly). Small for
gestational age (SGA) children are increasingly recognized to be a heterogeneous 
group in which new mechanisms of growth retardation and metabolic disturbances
have been proposed. Since SGA is considered to be the main reason for the short
stature in 10% of short adults this is a large group with a great potential for
novel insights into mechanisms of growth and metabolic disturbances. A group of
signalling proteins are involved in prenatal (SGA) growth retardation: IRS-1,
PDK1, AKT1, and S6K1. In addition, an attractive modern theory supposes that a
disturbed mother-placenta-foetus relation results in the activation of the
so-called "thrifty phenotype" of which the IGF system is a vital part. The
mechanisms assure short-term postnatal survival in conditions of deficient
nutritional supply. However, as a consequence, the abundant postnatal nutritional
supply and the "thrifty phenotype" result in increased adult risk of metabolic
syndrome, diabetes mellitus type 2 (DM2) and cardiovascular disease. The
manuscript reviews in brief genetic alterations in humans leading to growth
hormone deficiency (GHD), multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies (MPHD) and SGA.

PMID: 20087248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Horm Cancer. 2010 Aug;1(4):187-96. doi: 10.1007/s12672-010-0041-7.

CTNNB1 gene mutations, pituitary transcription factors, and MicroRNA expression
involvement in the pathogenesis of adamantinomatous craniopharyngiomas.

Campanini ML(1), Colli LM, Paixao BM, Cabral TP, Amaral FC, Machado HR, Neder LS,
Saggioro F, Moreira AC, Antonini SR, de Castro M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto,
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo 14049-900, Brazil.

Genes involved in formation/development of the adenohypophysis, CTNNB1 gene, and 
microRNAs might be implicated in the craniopharyngioma pathogenesis. The
objective of this study is to perform the molecular analysis of HESX1, PROP1,
POU1F1, and CTNNB1 genes and evaluate a panel of miRNA expression in
craniopharyngioma. We also verified whether the presence of CTNNB1 mutation is
associated with clinical findings and miRNA expression. The study included 16
patients with adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma (nine children and seven adults;
eight females and eight males; 6-55 years, median 15.5 years). DNA, RNA, and cDNA
were obtained from craniopharyngioma and normal pituitaries. DNA was also
extracted from peripheral blood of healthy subjects. All genes were amplified by 
polymerase chain reaction and direct sequenced. Relative quantification of miRNA 
expression was calculated using the 2(-<U+0394><U+0394>Ct) method. We found no mutations in
HESX1, PROP1, and POU1F1 genes and four polymorphisms in PROP1 gene which were in
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and had similar allelic frequencies in
craniopharyngioma and controls. We found seven different mutations in CTNNB1 in
eight of 16 patients. Younger patients presented more frequently CTNNB1 mutation 
than adults. We observed hyperexpression of miR-150 (1.7-fold); no different
expression of miR-16-1, miR-21, and miR23a; and an underexpression of miR-141,
let-7a, miR-16, miR-449, miR-145, miR-143, miR-23b, miR-15a, and miR-24-2
(ranging from -7.5 to -2.5-fold; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02) in craniopharyngioma. There was no
association between tumor size or the recurrence and the presence of
CTNNB1mutations. miR-16 and miR-141 were underexpressed in craniopharyngioma
presenting CTNNB1 mutations. miR-23a and miR24-2 were hyperexpressed in patients 
who underwent only one surgery. Mutations or polymorphisms in pituitary
transcription factors are unlikely to contribute to the adamantinomatous
craniopharyngioma pathogenesis, differently of CTNNB1 mutations. Our data suggest
the potential involvement of the deregulation of miRNA expression in the
craniopharyngioma pathogenesis and outcome and also that the miRNA could modulate
the Wnt signaling pathway in craniopharyngioma tumorigenesis.

PMID: 21761366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2010 Jul 8;323(1):4-19. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2009.12.012. Epub
2009 Dec 16.

Molecular mechanisms of pituitary organogenesis: In search of novel regulatory
genes.

Davis SW(1), Castinetti F, Carvalho LR, Ellsworth BS, Potok MA, Lyons RH,
Brinkmeier ML, Raetzman LT, Carninci P, Mortensen AH, Hayashizaki Y, Arnhold IJ, 
Mendonça BB, Brue T, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 41809-5618, USA.

Defects in pituitary gland organogenesis are sometimes associated with congenital
anomalies that affect head development. Lesions in transcription factors and
signaling pathways explain some of these developmental syndromes. Basic research 
studies, including the characterization of genetically engineered mice, provide a
mechanistic framework for understanding how mutations create the clinical
characteristics observed in patients. Defects in BMP, WNT, Notch, and FGF
signaling pathways affect induction and growth of the pituitary primordium and
other organ systems partly by altering the balance between signaling pathways.
The PITX and LHX transcription factor families influence pituitary and head
development and are clinically relevant. A few later-acting transcription factors
have pituitary-specific effects, including PROP1, POU1F1 (PIT1), and TPIT
(TBX19), while others, such as NeuroD1 and NR5A1 (SF1), are syndromic,
influencing development of other endocrine organs. We conducted a survey of genes
transcribed in developing mouse pituitary to find candidates for cases of
pituitary hormone deficiency of unknown etiology. We identified numerous
transcription factors that are members of gene families with roles in syndromic
or non-syndromic pituitary hormone deficiency. This collection is a rich source
for future basic and clinical studies.

PMCID: PMC2909473
PMID: 20025935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Feb;95(2):756-64. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-1334. Epub
2009 Dec 4.

Heterozygous orthodenticle homeobox 2 mutations are associated with variable
pituitary phenotype.

Dateki S(1), Kosaka K, Hasegawa K, Tanaka H, Azuma N, Yokoya S, Muroya K, Adachi 
M, Tajima T, Motomura K, Kinoshita E, Moriuchi H, Sato N, Fukami M, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, 2-10-1 Ohkura, Setagaya, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.

CONTEXT: Although recent studies have suggested a positive role of OTX2 in
pituitary as well as ocular development and function, detailed pituitary
phenotypes in OTX2 mutations and OTX2 target genes for pituitary function other
than HESX1 and POU1F1 remain to be determined.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to examine such unresolved issues.
SUBJECTS: We studied 94 Japanese patients with various ocular or pituitary
abnormalities.
RESULTS: We identified heterozygous p.K74fsX103 in case 1, p.A72fsX86 in case 2, 
p.G188X in two unrelated cases (3 and 4), and a 2,860,561-bp microdeletion
involving OTX2 in case 5. Clinical studies revealed isolated GH deficiency in
cases 1 and 5; combined pituitary hormone deficiency in case 3; abnormal
pituitary structures in cases 1, 3, and 5; and apparently normal pituitary
function in cases 2 and 4, together with ocular anomalies in cases 1-5. The
wild-type Orthodenticle homeobox 2 (OTX2) protein transactivated the GNRH1
promoter as well as the HESX1, POU1F1, and IRBP (interstitial retinoid-binding
protein) promoters, whereas the p.K74fsX103-OTX2 and p.A72fsX86-OTX2 proteins had
no transactivation functions and the p.G188X-OTX2 protein had reduced (
approximately 50%) transactivation functions for the four promoters, with no
dominant-negative effect. cDNA screening identified positive OTX2 expression in
the hypothalamus.
CONCLUSIONS: The results imply that OTX2 mutations are associated with variable
pituitary phenotype, with no genotype-phenotype correlations, and that OTX2 can
transactivate GNRH1 as well as HESX1 and POU1F1.

PMID: 19965921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2010 Jul;118(7):405-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1225612.
Epub 2009 Oct 23.

A novel mutation (V101A) of the LHX4 gene in a Japanese patient with combined
pituitary hormone deficiency.

Tajima T(1), Yorifuji T, Ishizu K, Fujieda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan. tajeari@hokudai.med.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: LHX4, a LIM-homeodomain transcription factor, is required for
development of the pituitary and nervous system. Several mutations of the LHX4
gene have been identified in patients with combined pituitary hormone deficiency 
(CPHD). The objective of the study was to clarify the molecular basis of a
Japanese patient of CPHD with a small anterior pituitary and an ectopic posterior
pituitary.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from blood samples of the patient. Exons and
exon-intron junctions of the LHX4 gene were amplified and sequenced. An
expression vector of the mutant LHX4 protein was constructed and its function was
analyzed in vitro.
RESULTS: A novel missense mutation (V101A) was identified. IN VITRO transfection 
studies demonstrated that V101A mutant LHX4 was unable to activate the POU1F1 and
FSHbeta subunit gene promoter, indicating a loss of function mutation.
CONCLUSION: Our results identify a novel loss of function mutation of the LHX4
gene in a Japanese patient with CPHD.

J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart, New York.

PMID: 19856252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2010 Jan 29;17(1):73-85. doi: 10.1677/ERC-09-0100. Print
2010 Mar.

The Pit-1/Pou1f1 transcription factor regulates and correlates with prolactin
expression in human breast cell lines and tumors.

Ben-Batalla I(1), Seoane S, Macia M, Garcia-Caballero T, Gonzalez LO, Vizoso F,
Perez-Fernandez R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, University Clinical Hospital,
University of Santiago de Compostela, 15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

The transcription factor Pit-1/Pou1f1 regulates GH and prolactin (PRL) secretion 
in the pituitary gland. Pit-1 expression and GH regulation by Pit-1 have also
been demonstrated in mammary gland. However, no data are available on the role of
Pit-1 on breast PRL. To evaluate this role, several human breast cancer cell
lines were transfected with either the Pit-1 expression vector or a Pit-1 small
interference RNA construct, followed by PRL mRNA and protein evaluation. In
addition, transient transfection of MCF-7 cells by a reporter construct
containing the proximal PRL promoter, and ChIP assays were performed. Our data
indicate that Pit-1 regulates mammary PRL at transcriptional level by binding to 
the proximal PRL promoter. We also found that Pit-1 raises cyclin D1 expression
before increasing PRL levels, suggesting a PRL-independent effect of Pit-1 on
cell proliferation. By using immunohistochemistry, we found a significant
correlation between Pit-1 and PRL expression in 94 human breast invasive ductal
carcinomas. Considering the possible role of PRL in breast cancer disorders, the 
function of Pit-1 in breast should be the focus of further research.

PMCID: PMC2828808
PMID: 19808898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Early Hum Dev. 2009 Nov;85(11):705-12. doi: 10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2009.08.057.
Epub 2009 Sep 16.

Genetic forms of hypopituitarism and their manifestation in the neonatal period.

Alatzoglou KS(1), Dattani MT.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Endocrinology Research Group, Clinical and Molecular Genetics
Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.
s.alatzoglou@ich.ucl.ac.uk

The anterior pituitary gland is a central regulator of growth, reproduction and
homeostasis. The development of the pituitary gland depends on the sequential
temporal and spatial expression of transcription factors and signalling
molecules. Naturally occurring and transgenic murine models have demonstrated a
role for many of these molecules in the aetiology of congenital hypopituitarism. 
These include the transcription factors HESX1, PROP1, POU1F1, LHX3, LHX4, PITX1, 
PITX2, OTX2, SOX2 and SOX3. Mutations in any of the genes involved in pituitary
development may result in congenital hypopituitarism, which manifests as the
deficiency in one or more pituitary hormones. The phenotype can be highly
variable and may consist of isolated hypopituitarism, or more complex disorders
such as septo-optic dysplasia (SOD) and holoprosencephaly. Neonates with
congenital hypopituitarism may present with non-specific symptoms, with or
without associated developmental defects such as ocular, midline and genital
abnormalities. Alternatively, they may be initially asymptomatic but at risk of
developing pituitary hormone deficiencies over time. The overall incidence of
mutations in known transcription factors in patients with hypopituitarism is low,
indicating that many genes remain to be identified. Their characterization will
further elucidate the pathogenesis of this complex condition and will shed light 
on normal pituitary development.

PMID: 19762173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2010 Jun;118(6):377-80. doi:
10.1055/s-0029-1224154. Epub 2009 Jul 16.

Pit-1 mutation and lipoedema in a family.

Bano G(1), Mansour S, Brice G, Ostergaard P, Mortimer PS, Jeffery S, Nussey S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, St George's University of London,
Cranmer Terrace, London, UK. gbano@sgul.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: A 23-year-old male was referred to our clinic with diagnosis of
idiopathic isolated growth hormone deficiency. A detailed family history revealed
short stature and swelling of legs which only affected females in four
generations of his family.
METHODS: Combined pituitary function tests revealed growth hormone deficiency,
secondary hypothyroidism and hypoprolactinemia in the proband. His mother had
hypoprolactinemia and growth hormone deficiency. A diagnosis of inherited
combined pituitary deficiency due to a PIT-1 mutation was suspected in view of
the short stature with associated multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies.
RESULTS: A mutation was identified in PIT-1 (POU1F1), 196C>T, which produces the 
amino acid change P24L in exon 1. The mutation was also found in the mother of
the proband but not in his phenotypically normal half-sister.
CONCLUSION: The case shows a novel association of two rare conditions Pit-1
mutation and lipoedema in a family that has not been described before. It also
allows formulation of hypothesis on the interaction of growth hormone and sex
steroids resulting in abnormal fat distribution in predisposed subjects at the
time of puberty.

(c) J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart, New York.

PMID: 19609847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Oct;23(10):1563-71. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0111. Epub 2009 Jul
16.

Expression of the synaptotagmin I gene is enhanced by binding of the
pituitary-specific transcription factor, POU1F1.

Howard PW(1), Jue SF, Maurer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

The POU1F1 transcription factor (also known as Pit-1/GHF1) is required for
development of pituitary cells that secrete prolactin, GH, and TSH. Presumably,
POU1F1 regulates the expression of multiple genes required for expansion and
differentiation of these pituitary cell lineages. However, only a few genes
regulated by POU1F1 have been identified. In the present studies we have
identified synaptotagmin I (Syt1) as a target gene for POU1F1 in GH(3) pituitary 
cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays have provided evidence that POU1F1
binds close to the Syt1 exon that contains the initiation codon. Although this
exon has previously been considered to be located far from the transcription
initiation site, transcript mapping in GH(3) cells indicates that Syt1 mRNA
synthesis is initiated close to the mapped POU1F1-binding site. POU1F1 knockdown 
studies using a short hairpin RNA vector have provided evidence that POU1F1 plays
a role in stimulating expression of the endogenous Syt1 gene. Transfection
studies with a Syt1-luciferase reporter gene are consistent with the presence of 
an internal, POU1F1-regulated promoter in the Syt1 gene. In vitro binding studies
have provided further evidence for a POU1F1-binding site within this region of
the Syt1 gene. Overall the studies provide evidence that Syt1 is a target gene
regulated by POU1F1 in GH(3) pituitary cells. Because SYT1 has been extensively
studied as an important transducer of Ca(2+) signaling in regulated secretion, it
seems likely that activation of Syt1 gene expression is part of a mechanism
mediating POU1F-induced differentiation of pituitary cells.

PMCID: PMC2754892
PMID: 19608642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Endocrinol Invest. 2009 Sep;32(8):653-8. doi: 10.3275/6278. Epub 2009 May 12.

A novel recessive splicing mutation in the POU1F1 gene causing combined pituitary
hormone deficiency.

Carlomagno Y(1), Salerno M, Vivenza D, Capalbo D, Godi M, Mellone S, Tiradani L, 
Corneli G, Momigliano-Richiardi P, Bona G, Giordano M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Genetics, Department of Medical Sciences, Eastern Piedmont
University and Interdisciplinary Research Center on Autoimmune Diseases, 28100
Novara, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the gene encoding the pituitary transcription factor
POU1F1 (Pit-1, pituitary transcription factor-1) have been described in combined 
pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD).
AIM: The aim of this study was the characterisation of the molecular defect
causing CPHD in a patient born to consanguineous parents.
SUBJECT AND METHODS: The case of a 12.5-yr-old girl presenting with severe growth
failure at diagnosis (-3 SD score at 3 months) and deficiency of GH, PRL, and TSH
was investigated for the presence of POU1F1 gene mutations by denaturing high
performance liquid chromatography analysis.
RESULTS: A novel mutation adjacent to the IVS2 splicing acceptor site
(IVS2-3insA) was identified in the patient at the homozygous state. Analysis of
patient's lymphocyte mRNA and an in vitro splicing assay revealed the presence of
2 aberrant splicing products: a) deletion of the first 71 nucleotides of exon 3, 
altering the open reading frame and generating a premature stop codon, b) total
exon 3 skipping resulting in an in frame deleted mRNA encoding a putative protein
lacking part of the transactivation domain and of the POUspecific homeodomain.
Notably, the patient's relatives heterozygous for the mutation had PRL levels
under the normal range with no evident clinical symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: The IVS2- 3insAmutation, responsible for CPHD at the homozygous
state, causes the presence of 2 aberrant splicing products encoding
non-functional products. In the heterozygotes one normal allele might not
guarantee a complete pituitary function.

PMID: 19498317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Mol Biol. 2009 Jul 3;390(1):26-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.04.081. Epub 2009
May 7.

Expression of Pit-1 in nonsomatotrope cell lines induces human growth hormone
locus control region histone modification and hGH-N transcription.

Hogan KA(1), Jefferson HS, Karschner VA, Shewchuk BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Brody School of Medicine at 
East Carolina University, Greenville, NC 27834, USA.

The POU domain transcription factor Pit-1 is expressed in somatotropes,
lactotropes, and thyrotropes of the anterior pituitary. Pit-1 is essential for
the establishment of these lineages during development and regulates the
expression of genes encoding the peptide hormones secreted by each cell type,
including the growth hormone gene expressed in somatotropes. In contrast to
rodent growth hormone loci, the human growth hormone (hGH) locus is regulated by 
a distal locus control region (LCR), which is required in cis for the proper
expression of the hGH gene cluster in transgenic mice. The hGH LCR mediates a
domain of histone acetylation targeted to the hGH locus that is associated with
distal hGH-N activation, and the discrete determinants of this activity coincide 
with DNaseI hypersensitive site (HS) I of the LCR. The identification of three in
vitro Pit-1 binding sites within the HS-I region suggested a model in which Pit-1
binding at HS-I initiates the chromatin modification mechanism associated with
hGH LCR activity. To test this hypothesis directly and to determine whether Pit-1
expression is sufficient to confer hGH locus histone acetylation and activate
hGH-N transcription from an inactive locus, we expressed Pit-1 in nonpituitary
cell types. We show that Pit-1 expression established a domain of histone
hyperacetylation at the LCR and hGH-N promoter in these cells similar to that
observed in pituitary chromatin. This was accompanied by the activation of hGH-N 
transcription and an increase in intergenic and CD79b transcripts proximal to
HS-I. These effects were coincident with Pit-1 occupancy at HS-I and the hGH-N
promoter and were observed irrespective of the basal histone modification status 
of HS-I in the heterologous cell line. These findings are consistent with a role 
for Pit-1 as an initiating factor in hGH locus activation during somatotrope
ontogeny, acting through binding sites at HS-I of the hGH LCR.

PMID: 19427323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Horm Res. 2009 Apr;71 Suppl 2:101-15. doi: 10.1159/000192447. Epub 2009 Apr 29.

Genetics, gene expression and bioinformatics of the pituitary gland.

Davis SW(1), Potok MA, Brinkmeier ML, Carninci P, Lyons RH, MacDonald JW, Fleming
MT, Mortensen AH, Egashira N, Ghosh D, Steel KP, Osamura RY, Hayashizaki Y,
Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0618, USA.

Genetic cases of congenital pituitary hormone deficiency are common and many are 
caused by transcription factor defects. Mouse models with orthologous mutations
are invaluable for uncovering the molecular mechanisms that lead to problems in
organ development and typical patient characteristics. We are using mutant mice
defective in the transcription factors PROP1 and POU1F1 for gene expression
profiling to identify target genes for these critical transcription factors and
candidates for cases of pituitary hormone deficiency of unknown aetiology. These 
studies reveal critical roles for Wnt signalling pathways, including the TCF/LEF 
transcription factors and interacting proteins of the groucho family, bone
morphogenetic protein antagonists and targets of notch signalling. Current
studies are investigating the roles of novel homeobox genes and pathways that
regulate the transition from proliferation to differentiation, cell adhesion and 
cell migration. Pituitary adenomas are a common human health problem, yet most
cases are sporadic, necessitating alternative approaches to traditional Mendelian
genetic studies. Mouse models of adenoma formation offer the opportunity for gene
expression profiling during progressive stages of hyperplasia, adenoma and
tumorigenesis. This approach holds promise for the identification of relevant
pathways and candidate genes as risk factors for adenoma formation, understanding
mechanisms of progression, and identifying drug targets and clinically relevant
biomarkers.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3140954
PMID: 19407506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Dairy Sci. 2009 May;92(5):2238-47. doi: 10.3168/jds.2008-1767.

Single gene and gene interaction effects on fertilization and embryonic survival 
rates in cattle.

Khatib H(1), Huang W, Wang X, Tran AH, Bindrim AB, Schutzkus V, Monson RL,
Yandell BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison 53706,
USA. hkhatib@wisc.edu

Decrease in fertility and conception rates is a major cause of economic loss and 
cow culling in dairy herds. Conception rate is the product of fertilization rate 
and embryonic survival rate. Identification of genetic factors that cause the
death of embryos is the first step in eliminating this problem from the
population and thereby increasing reproductive efficiency. A candidate pathway
approach was used to identify candidate genes affecting fertilization and embryo 
survival rates using an in vitro fertilization experimental system. A total of
7,413 in vitro fertilizations were performed using oocytes from 504 ovaries and
semen samples from 10 different bulls. Fertilization rate was calculated as the
number of cleaved embryos 48 h postfertilization out of the total number of
oocytes exposed to sperm. Survival rate of embryos was calculated as the number
of blastocysts on d 7 of development out of the number of total embryos cultured.
All ovaries were genotyped for 8 genes in the POU1F1 signaling pathway.
Single-gene analysis revealed significant associations of GHR, PRLR, STAT5A, and 
UTMP with survival rate and of POU1F1, GHR, STAT5A, and OPN with fertilization
rate. To further characterize the contribution of the entire integrated POU1F1
pathway to fertilization and early embryonic survival, a model selection
procedure was applied. Comparisons among the different models showed that
interactions between adjacent genes in the pathway revealed a significant
contribution to the variation in fertility traits compared with other models that
analyzed only bull information or only genes without interactions. Moreover, some
genes that were not significant in the single-gene analysis showed significant
effects in the interaction analysis. Thus, we propose that single genes as well
as an entire pathway can be used in selection programs to improve reproduction
performance in dairy cattle.

PMID: 19389983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Anim Biotechnol. 2009;20(2):71-4. doi: 10.1080/10495390802640462.

Associations of a HinfI PCR-RFLP of POU1F1 gene with growth traits in Qinchuan
cattle.

Zhang C(1), Liu B, Chen H, Lan X, Lei C, Zhang Z, Zhang R.

Author information: 
(1)Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaaxi, P.R. China.

The objectives of the present study were to estimate the allele and genotype
frequencies of the POU1F1/HinfI polymorphisms in beef cattle belonging to four
different genetic groups and to determine the effects of these polymorphisms on
growth traits in cattle. The 451-bp PCR products of POU1F1 gene digested with
HinfI exhibited three genotypes and two alleles, which were at Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium (P > 0.05). Genotype BB was the predominant genotype and B the
predominant allele in the studied populations. There was significant difference
between Limousin x Qinchuan and Qinchuan in the distribution of genotypes (P <
0.0001). The association of the polymorphism of the POU1F1 gene with growth
traits among Qinchuan, Limousin x Qinchuan, Angus x Qinchuan and Germany Yellow x
Qinchuan crosses was analyzed. Body weight and wither height of individuals with 
genotypes AB were higher (P < 0.05)than that of individuals with genotype BB in
the Germany Yellow x Qinchua cross, but were not in the other three populations
(P > 0.05).

PMID: 19370456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Rheumatol. 2009 Jun;36(6):1265-72. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.081118. Epub 2009 Apr
15.

The CPPDD-associated ANKH M48T mutation interrupts the interaction of ANKH with
the sodium/phosphate cotransporter PiT-1.

Wang J(1), Tsui HW, Beier F, Tsui FW.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto Western Research Institute, University Health Network, University of
Toronto, and Toronto Western Hospital, Mc14-419, 399 Bathurst Street, Toronto,
Ontario M5T 2S8, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Numerous dominant human homolog of progressive ankylosis (ANKH)
mutations have been identified in familial calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate
crystal deposition disease (CPPDD). Due to the dominant nature of these
mutations, we investigated whether ANKH interacts with other proteins; and if so,
whether any CPPDD-associated ANKH mutation might disrupt such protein
interactions.
METHODS: Stable ATDC5 ANKH wt- and ANKH M48T-transfectants were generated.
Lysates from these transfectants were used to identify candidate protein
interaction with ANKH by coimmunoprecipitation followed by Western blot analysis.
The effect of high phosphate on the expression of genes involved in modulating Pi
(inorganic phosphate)/PPi (inorganic pyrophosphate) homeostasis in these
transfectants was assessed.
RESULTS: We showed that ANKH protein associates with the sodium/phosphate
cotransporter PiT-1, and that ANKH M48T mutant protein failed to interact with
PiT-1. We also showed that upon high phosphate treatment, the normally
coordinated upregulation of endogenous Ank and PiT1 transcript expression was
disrupted in ANKH M48T transfectants.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggested that there is a coordinated interrelationship
between 2 key participants of Pi and PPi metabolism, ANKH and PiT-1.

PMID: 19369455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2009 Jan;6 Suppl 2:283-90.

LHX3 and LHX4 transcription factors in pituitary development and disease.

Colvin SC(1), Mullen RD, Pfaeffle RW, Rhodes SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana University School
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5120, USA.

The LHX3 and LHX4 LIM-homeodomain proteins are regulatory transcription factors
that play overlapping but distinct functions during the establishment of the
specialized cells of the mammalian pituitary gland and the nervous system. Recent
studies have identified a variety of mutations in the LHX3 and LHX4 genes in
patients with combined pituitary hormone deficiency diseases. These patients have
complex and variable syndromes involving short stature, metabolic disorders,
reproductive system deficits, and nervous system developmental abnormalities. The
short stature secondary to growth hormone deficiency is a key feature of the
disorders associated with these gene mutations and responds well to
supplementation with recombinant growth hormone. Overall, the frequency of
mutations in the LHX3 and LHX4 genes in patients with combined pituitary hormone 
deficiency is low. Mutations in other regulatory genes such as HESX1, PROP1, PIT1
/ POU1F1, and GLI2 have been shown to be additional causes of pituitary hormone
deficiency, but overall, the etiology of many cases of hypopituitarism is not
understood. Further investigation is therefore required to identify other genes, 
both primary regulatory genes and those with modifier functions, which contribute
to pituitary development and function.

PMID: 19337183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Mol Carcinog. 2009 Dec;48(12):1077-92. doi: 10.1002/mc.20535.

Characterization of the 3p12.3-pcen region associated with tumor suppression in a
novel ovarian cancer cell line model genetically modified by chromosome 3
fragment transfer.

Cody NA(1), Shen Z, Ripeau JS, Provencher DM, Mes-Masson AM, Chevrette M, Tonin
PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 
1A4.

The genetic analysis of nontumorigenic radiation hybrids generated by transfer of
chromosome 3 fragments into the tumorigenic OV-90 ovarian cancer cell line
identified the 3p12.3-pcen region as a candidate tumor suppressor gene (TSG)
locus. In the present study, polymorphic microsatellite repeat analysis of the
hybrids further defined the 3p12.3-pcen interval to a 16.1 Mb common region
containing 12 known or hypothetical genes:
3ptel-ROBO2-ROBO1-GBE1-CADM2-VGLL3-CHMP2B-POU1F1-HTR1F-CGGBP1-ZNF654-C3orf38-EPHA
3-3pcen. Seven of these genes, ROBO1, GBE1, VGLL3, CHMP2B, CGGBP1, ZNF654, and
C3orf38, exhibited gene expression in the hybrids, placing them as top TSG
candidates for further analysis. The expression of all but one (VGLL3) of these
genes was also detected in the parental OV-90 cell line. Mutations were not
identified in a comparative sequence analysis of the predicted protein coding
regions of these candidates in OV-90 and donor normal chromosome 3 contig.
However, the nondeleterious sequence variants identified in the transcribed
regions distinguished parent of origin alleles for ROBO1, VGLL3, CHMP2B, and
CGGBP1 and cDNA sequencing of the hybrids revealed biallelic expression of these 
genes. Interestingly, underexpression of VGLL3 and ZNF654 were observed in
malignant ovarian tumor samples as compared with primary cultures of normal
ovarian surface epithelial cells or benign ovarian tumors, and this occurred
regardless of allelic content of 3p12.3-pcen. The results taken together suggest 
that dysregulation of VGLL3 and/or ZNF654 expression may have affected pathways
important in ovarian tumorigenesis which was offset by the transfer of chromosome
3 fragments in OV-90, a cell line hemizygous for 3p.

PMID: 19347865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Endocr Dev. 2009;14:67-82. doi: 10.1159/000207478.

Role of transcription factors in midline central nervous system and pituitary
defects.

Kelberman D(1), Dattani MT.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Endocrine Research Group, Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

The anterior pituitary gland is a central regulator of growth, reproduction and
homeostasis, and is the end-product of a carefully orchestrated pattern of
expression of signalling molecules and transcription factors leading to the
development of this complex organ secreting six hormones from five different cell
types. Naturally-occurring and transgenic murine models have demonstrated a role 
for many of these molecules in the aetiology of combined pituitary hormone
deficiency (CPHD). These include the transcription factors HESX1, PROP1, POU1F1, 
LHX3, LHX4, SOX2 and SOX3. The expression pattern of these transcription factors 
dictates the phenotype that results when the gene encod-ing the relevant
transcription factor is mutated. The highly variable phenotype may consist of
isolated hypopituitarism, or more complex disorders such as septo-optic
dysplasia. Since mutations in any one transcription factor are uncommon, and
since the overall incidence of mutations in known transcription factors is low in
patients with CPHD, it is clear that many genes remain to be identified, and
characterization of these will further elucidate the pathogenesis of these
complex conditions, and also shed light on normal pituitary development.

PMID: 19293576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Biol Rep. 2009 Nov;36(8):2069-73. doi: 10.1007/s11033-008-9418-x. Epub 2008
Nov 22.

A novel missense (A79V) mutation of goat PROP1 gene and its association with
production traits.

Lan X(1), Pan C, Zhang L, Zhao M, Zhang C, Lei C, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular 
Biology for Agriculture, Northwest A&F University, No. 22 Xinong Road, 712100
Yangling, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China. llxxyyease@126.com

As a paired class homeodomain transcription factor, mutations of PROP1 (Prophet
of POU1F1) are responsible for deficiencies of GH, PRL, TSH, LH and FSH.
Regarding mutations of GH, PRL, and POU1F1 genes significantly associating with
different production traits, PROP1 gene is a novel important candidate gene for
detecting genetic variation and association analysis in marked-assist selection
(MAS) program. Therefore, the objective of this study is to detect goat PROP1
gene mutation and its association with production traits. Herein, a novel
mutation (AF453512:g.1795C>T) within PROP1 gene is revealed by PCR-SSCP and DNA
sequencing methods, and genotyped by Hin6I PCR-RFLP method in 1,344 individuals
belonging to eight goat breeds. Only two genotypes (CC and CT) are revealed and
the frequencies of allele C go from 0.9014 to 1.000 in analyzed populations. The 
genetic diversity analysis reveals that all PIC values are less than 0.1619,
implying that the Hin6I locus within PROP1 gene possesses low genetic diversity
in goat. Furthermore, nucleotide sequence analysis shows that AF453512:g.1795C>T 
results in a missense amino acid (A79V). But, association analysis demonstrates
no significant differences between different genotypes and production traits
(such as body weight, cashmere yield, fiber length and wool thickness) of Inner
Mongolia White Cashmere goat (P > 0.05), as well as no significant relationship
between different genotypes and average milk yield (P > 0.05). Although Hin6I
polymorphism can not be used as a molecular marker for production traits in MAS, 
the present work presents preliminary novel missense mutation which extends the
spectrum of genetic variations of goat PROP1 gene and may benefit for considering
its association with other biophysical and biochemical indexes.

PMID: 19031010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Rev Med Chil. 2008 Aug;136(8):996-1006. doi: /S0034-98872008000800006. Epub 2008 
Oct 7.

[Congenital hypopituitarism: report of 23 cases].

[Article in Spanish]

Lammoglia JJ(1), Eyzaguirre F, Unanue N, Román R, Codner E, Cassorla F, Mericq V.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Materno Infantil, Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

BACKGROUND: Congenital hypopituitarism is an uncommon cause of hypophyseal
insufficiency It is less common than growth hormone deficiency which has an
incidence of 1:4.000 to 1:8.000 live newborns. Early diagnosis of this condition 
is important to prevent impairment of cognitive function, poor growth and
alterations in metabolic profile in these patients.
AIM: To report 23 patients diagnosed with congenital hypopituitarism.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Retrospective review of clinical records of 23 patients (12
males) with congenital hypopituitarism, diagnosed during a 21 years period. In a 
group of 16 patients a molecular study was performed searching for mutations in
HESX1, PROP-1 or POUF-1.
RESULTS: Short stature was the most frequent sign at the first evaluation,
followed by neonatal hypoglycemia and presence of nystagmus, strabismus, atrophic
optic nerve or malformations in the middle line showed in CNS imaging, suggesting
septo-optic-dysplasia. All male patients diagnosed during neonatal period,
exhibited micropenis. CNS images showed isolated hypophyseal hypoplasia or
associated to an ectopic neurohypophysis in most patients. No patient in the
subgroup subjected to molecular analysis had any of the mutations in the searched
genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of hypopituitarism must be based on clinical grounds, 
especially when hypoglycemia, prolonged jaundice, micropenis or midline
alterations are found in the neonatal period.

PMID: 18949183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Dec;4(12):683-94. doi:
10.1038/ncpendmet0995. Epub 2008 Oct 21.

Mechanisms related to the pathophysiology and management of central
hypothyroidism.

Yamada M(1), Mori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Molecular Science, Gunma University Graduate School
of Medicine, Gunma, Japan. myamada@med.gunma-u.ac.jp

Central hypothyroidism (CH) is defined as hypothyroidism due to insufficient
stimulation of the thyroid gland by TSH, for which secretion or activity can be
impaired at the hypothalamic or pituitary levels. Patients with CH frequently
present with multiple other pituitary hormone deficiencies. In addition to
classic CH induced by hypothalamic-pituitary tumors or Sheehan syndrome, novel
causes include traumatic brain injury or subarachnoid hemorrhage, bexarotene (a
retinoid X receptor agonist) therapy, neonates being born to mothers with
insufficiently controlled Graves disease, and lymphocytic hypophysitis. Growth
hormone therapy, which may be used in children and adults, is now also recognized
as a possible cause of unmasking CH in susceptible individuals. In addition,
mutations in genes, such as TRHR, POU1F1, PROP1, HESX1, SOX3, LHX3, LHX4 and
TSHB, have been associated with CH. The difficulty in making a clear diagnosis of
CH is that the serum TSH levels can vary; values are normal in most cases, but in
some might be low or slightly elevated. Levels of endogenous T(4) in serum might 
also be subnormal. Appropriate doses of levothyroxine for T(4) replacement
therapy have not been confirmed, but might need to be higher than presently used 
empirically in patients with CH and should be adjusted according to age and other
hormone deficiencies, to achieve free T(4) concentrations in the upper end of the
normal range.

PMID: 18941435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Jan;94(1):314-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-1219. Epub
2008 Oct 14.

OTX2 loss of function mutation causes anophthalmia and combined pituitary hormone
deficiency with a small anterior and ectopic posterior pituitary.

Tajima T(1), Ohtake A, Hoshino M, Amemiya S, Sasaki N, Ishizu K, Fujieda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, N15, W7,
Sapporo, Japan 060-0835. tajeari@hokudai.med.ac.jp

CONTEXT: Orthodenticle homeobox 2 (OTX2) is a transcription factor necessary for 
ocular and forebrain development. In humans, heterozygous mutations of OTX2 cause
severe ocular malformations. However, whether mutations of OTX2 cause pituitary
structural abnormalities or combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) has not 
been clarified.
OBJECTIVES: We surveyed the functional consequences of a novel OTX2 mutation that
was detected in a patient with anophthalmia and CPHD.
PATIENT: We examined a Japanese patient with growth disturbance, anophthalamia,
and severe developmental delay. He showed deficiencies in GH, TSH, LH, FSH, and
ACTH. Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed a small anterior pituitary gland,
invisible stalk, ectopic posterior lobe, and Chiari malformation.
RESULTS: Sequence analysis of OTX2 demonstrated a heterozygous two bases
insertion [S136fsX178 (c.576-577insCT)] in exon 3. The mutant Otx2 protein
localized to the nucleus, but did not activate the promoter of the HESX1 and
POU1F1 gene, indicating a loss of function mutation. No dominant negative effect 
in the presence of wild-type Otx2 was observed.
CONCLUSION: This case indicates that the OTX2 mutation is a cause of CPHD.
Further study of more patients with OTX2 defects is necessary to clarify the
clinical phenotypes and endocrine defects caused by OTX2 mutations.

PMID: 18854396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Yi Chuan. 2008 Aug;30(8):1015-20.

[Polymorphisms of POU1F1 gene in 13/17 Robertsonian translocation pigs].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang LH(1), Zhao W, He XB, Zhang TR, Sun JH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural
University, Qingdao 266109, China. jianglh1220@yahoo.com.cn

Karyotype analysis was carried out by means of culturing whole peripheral blood
from 394 pigs, which were produced from three hybridization combinations of 13/17
Robertsonian translocation pig. Three types of karyotype were detected in these
hybrids, i.e., the homozygous pigs [2n=36, XY or XX, rob (13; 17)], the
heterozygous pigs [2n=37, XY or XX, rob (13; 17)], and the normal karyotype pigs 
[2n=38, XY or XX]. A Rsa restriction enzyme polymorphic site in a 1 746 bp
fragment of porcine POU1F1 gene was detected by PCR-RFLP analysis. While no
mutation in exon 4 of porcine POU1F1 gene was detected by PCR-SSCP analysis in
the hybrids of the three hybridization combinations. Population genetics analysis
showed that for Rsa-RFLP, the frequencies of allele A and genotype AA were
significantly higher than allele B and genotype BB in the three hybrid
populations and the three type of karyotype populations. The frequency of
genotype AB was higher in the heterozygous translocation population than in the
other two karyotype populations. Chi-square test suggested that all the
populations did not reach Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. The progeny populations of 
heterozygous 13/17 translocation pig x heterozygous 13/17 translocation pig,
heterozygous 13/17 translocation pig x Yorkshire, and heterozygous pig population
had medium polymorphism and others had low polymorphism.

PMID: 18779151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Yi Chuan. 2008 Jul;30(7):900-6.

[Genetic effects of MC4R and POU1F1 gene on the growth performance in Jinghai
yellow chicken].

[Article in Chinese]

Tao Y(1), Li GH, Hu YP, Mekki MD, Chen KW, Wang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Science and Technology Department of Yangzhou University, Yangzhou
225009, China. tyrsm1975tg@126.com

Melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) gene and pituitary specific transcription factor 1
(POU1F1) gene were studied as candidate genes on the Jinghai yellow chicken in
this study. Polymorphisms of MC4R and POU1F1 gene had been analyzed by PCR-SSCP
and DNA sequencing method. The relationship between two candidate genes and the
growth performance of Jinghai yellow chicken had also been analyzed by GLM model.
The frequency of A/B alleles for MC4R gene in the population was 0.929 and 0.071,
and that of C/D alleles for POU1F1 gene was 0.500 and 0.500. The results showed
that AA genotype of MC4R gene had higher bodyweight at 4, 8, 12 weeks compared to
AB and BB genotype (P<0.05); CD genotype of POU1F1 gene had significantly higher 
bodyweight at all weeks compared to CC and DD genotype (P<0.01). So, it could be 
preliminarily deduced that MC4R and POU1F1 gene were probably the major gene on
growth performance or a QTL linked gene which associated with growth performance 
in chicken.

PMID: 18779134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Nov;93(11):4351-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-1189. Epub 
2008 Aug 26.

A novel dominant negative mutation of OTX2 associated with combined pituitary
hormone deficiency.

Diaczok D(1), Romero C, Zunich J, Marshall I, Radovick S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, 600 North Wolfe Street, CMSC 406, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA.

CONTEXT: Combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) is characterized by
deficiencies in more than one anterior pituitary hormone. Mutations in
developmental factors responsible for pituitary cell specification and gene
expression have been found in CPHD patients. OTX2, a bicoid class homeodomain
protein, is necessary for both forebrain development and transactivation of the
HESX1 promoter, but as of yet, has not been associated with CPHD.
OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study was to identify and characterize novel
mutations in pituitary specific transcription factors from CPHD patients.
DESIGN: Genomic DNA was isolated from patients with hypopituitarism to amplify
and sequence eight pituitary specific transcription factors (HESX1, LHX3, LHX4,
OTX2, PITX2, POU1F1, PROP1, and SIX6). Characterization of novel mutations is
based on structural and functional studies.
RESULTS: We describe two unrelated children with CPHD who presented with neonatal
hypoglycemia, and deficiencies of GH, TSH, LH, FSH, and ACTH. Magnetic resonance 
imaging revealed anterior pituitary hypoplasia with an ectopic posterior
pituitary. A novel heterozygous OTX2 mutation (N233S) was identified. Wild-type
and mutant OTX2 proteins bind equivalently to bicoid binding sites, whereas
mutant OTX2 revealed decreased transactivation.
CONCLUSIONS: A novel mutation in OTX2 binds normally to target genes and acts as 
a dominant negative inhibitor of HESX1 gene expression. This suggests that the
expression of HESX1, required for spaciotemporal development of anterior
pituitary cell types, when disrupted, results in an absent or underdeveloped
anterior pituitary with diminished hormonal expression. These results demonstrate
a novel mechanism for CPHD and extend our knowledge of the spectrum of gene
mutations causing CPHD.

PMCID: PMC2582563
PMID: 18728160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Biol Rep. 2009 Jul;36(6):1371-4. doi: 10.1007/s11033-008-9322-4. Epub 2008
Jul 25.

A PstI polymorphism at 3'UTR of goat POU1F1 gene and its effect on cashmere
production.

Lan XY(1), Shu JH, Chen H, Pan CY, Lei CZ, Wang X, Liu SQ, Zhang YB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, No. 22, Xinong Road,
Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, China.

POU1F1 is a positive regulator for prolactin (PRL) whose metabolites may directly
or indirectly affect some aspects of the hair growth cycle, therefore, POU1F1
gene is an important candidate gene for cashmere traits selection through
marker-assisted selection (MAS). Hence, in this study, the PCR-RFLP method was
applied to detect a T>C transition determining a PstI polymorphism at the 3'UTR
of POU1F1 locus and evaluate its associations with cashmere traits in 847 Inner
Mongolia White Cashmere goats. In the analyzed population, the allelic
frequencies for the T and C alleles are 0.959 and 0.041, respectively and the
genotypic frequencies are in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (P > 0.05). Moreover,
significant statistical relationships between the PstI polymorphism of POU1F1
gene and goat cashmere yields were found (*P < 0.05). When compared with TC
genotype, TT genotype was associated with superior cashmere yields in 2, 4, and 5
years old individuals, as well as with average cashmere yield. Hence, TT genotype
is suggested to be a molecular marker for senior cashmere yield.

PMID: 18654839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Oct;93(10):3697-702. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-0720.
Epub 2008 Jul 15.

OTX2 mutation in a patient with anophthalmia, short stature, and partial growth
hormone deficiency: functional studies using the IRBP, HESX1, and POU1F1
promoters.

Dateki S(1), Fukami M, Sato N, Muroya K, Adachi M, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, 2-10-1 Ohkura, Setagaya, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.

CONTEXT: OTX2 is a transcription factor gene essential for eye development.
Although recent studies suggest the involvement of OTX2 in pituitary function,
there is no report demonstrating a positive role of OTX2 in the pituitary
function.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to report the results of functional
studies indicating the relevance of OTX2 to pituitary function.
PATIENT: A Japanese female patient with bilateral anophthalmia was found to have 
short stature (height, -3.3 sd) and isolated partial GH deficiency (peak serum GH
3.1 and 9.7 mug/liter after insulin and arginine stimulations, respectively;
serum IGF-I 37 ng/ml) at 3 yr 9 months of age. Magnetic resonance imaging
delineated apparently normal pituitary gland.
RESULTS: Mutation analysis showed a de novo heterozygous frameshift mutation
(c.402insC) that is predicted to retain the homeodomain but lose the
transactivation domain. Functional studies revealed that the wild-type and mutant
OTX2 proteins localized to the nucleus and bound to the target sequences within
the IRBP (interstitial retinoid-binding protein), HESX1 (HESX homeobox 1), and
POU1F1 promoters. Furthermore, the wild-type OTX2 protein markedly transactivated
the promoters of IRBP ( approximately 27-fold), HESX1 ( approximately 4.5-fold), 
and POU1F1 ( approximately 19-fold), whereas the mutant OTX2 protein barely
retained the transactivation activities and had no dominant-negative effects.
CONCLUSIONS: The results provide direct evidence for OTX2 being involved in the
pituitary function. It is likely that the heterozygous severe OTX2
loss-of-function mutation caused GH deficiency and short stature, primarily
because of decreased transactivation function for HESX1 and POU1F1.

PMID: 18628516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2008 Aug;15(4):359-63. doi:
10.1097/MED.0b013e3283060a56.

Basic science and clinical research advances in the pituitary transcription
factors: Pit-1 and Prop-1.

Kerr J(1), Wood W, Ridgway EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes,
University of Colorado, Denver, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.
Janice.kerr@uchsc.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The pituitary-specific transcription factors, Pit-1 (also
called Pou1f1) and prophet of Pit-1 (Prop-1), are critical for normal pituitary
development and function. The aim of the present review is to highlight the
recent basic science and clinical research advances in these transcription
factors, as they relate to signaling pathway interactions, gene regulation, and
mutations in human diseases.
RECENT FINDINGS: A number of important basic research discoveries have been made 
in the area of the pituitary-specific transcription factors, Pit-1 and Prop-1.
Among these findings include: the effects of the Pit-1 coactivators, GATA-2 and
TRAP-220, on the transcriptional regulation of the TSHbeta gene and thyrotropin
expression, characterization of a novel pituitary regulator of Pit-1 expression, 
Atbf1, elucidation of the roles of Wnt and Notch signaling on Prop-1-mediated
specification of the Pit-1 cell lineage and gonadotropes, and the identification 
of regulatory regions of the Prop-1 gene. Advances in clinical research include: 
the identification of novel mutations in the human POU1F1 and PROP-1 genes, and
screening guidelines for patients with combined pituitary hormone deficiencies
and possible mutations in these transcription factors.
SUMMARY: Research into the complex interplay of signaling pathways and
transcription factors that regulate the pituitary gland are important areas of
developmental biology and normal physiology. Clinically, such research has
important implications for human diseases by identifying inheritable
transcription factor mutations that may cause pituitary hormonal deficiencies.

PMID: 18594277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Anim Genet. 2008 Oct;39(5):554-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2008.01749.x. Epub
2008 Jun 28.

A proline-to-histidine mutation in POU1F1 is associated with production traits in
dairy cattle.

Huang W(1), Maltecca C, Khatib H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA.

POU class 1 homeobox 1 (POU1F1) is a member of the tissue-specific POU-containing
transcription factor family. The expression of POU1F1 in mammalian pituitary
gland controls the transcription of the genes encoding growth hormone, prolactin 
(PRL) and the subunits of thyroid-stimulating hormone. In addition, some genes in
the JAK/STAT signalling pathway downstream of POU1F1 have been shown to be
associated with different production traits in dairy cattle. To investigate
whether the POU1F1 gene is associated with economically important traits in dairy
cattle, a pooled DNA sequencing approach was used to identify single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the gene. An SNP in exon 3 of POU1F1 that changes a
proline to a histidine was identified. A total of 2141 individuals from two North
American Holstein cattle resource populations were genotyped for this SNP using a
modified PCR-RFLP method. Statistical analyses revealed significant association
of POU1F1 variants with milk yield and productive life, which makes POU1F1 a
possible candidate for marker-assisted selection in dairy cattle breeding
programmes.

PMID: 18557974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Jun;82(6):1270-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.04.019.

Phosphodiesterase 8B gene variants are associated with serum TSH levels and
thyroid function.

Arnaud-Lopez L(1), Usala G, Ceresini G, Mitchell BD, Pilia MG, Piras MG, Sestu N,
Maschio A, Busonero F, Albai G, Dei M, Lai S, Mulas A, Crisponi L, Tanaka T,
Bandinelli S, Guralnik JM, Loi A, Balaci L, Sole G, Prinzis A, Mariotti S,
Shuldiner AR, Cao A, Schlessinger D, Uda M, Abecasis GR, Nagaraja R, Sanna S,
Naitza S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) controls thyroid growth and hormone secretion
through binding to its G protein-coupled receptor (TSHR) and production of cyclic
AMP (cAMP). Serum TSH is a sensitive indicator of thyroid function, and overt
abnormalities in thyroid function lead to common endocrine disorders affecting
approximately 10% of individuals over a life span. By genotyping 362,129 SNPs in 
4,300 Sardinians, we identified a strong association (p = 1.3 x 10(-11)) between 
alleles of rs4704397 and circulating TSH levels; each additional copy of the
minor A allele was associated with an increase of 0.13 muIU/ml in TSH. The
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) is located in intron 1 of PDE8B, encoding a 
high-affinity cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase. The association was replicated in 
4,158 individuals, including additional Sardinians and two genetically distant
cohorts from Tuscany and the Old Order Amish (overall p value = 1.9 x 10(-20)).
In addition to association of TSH levels with SNPs in PDE8B, our genome scan
provided evidence for association with PDE10A and several biologically
interesting candidates in a focused analysis of 24 genes. In particular, we found
evidence for association of TSH levels with SNPs in the THRB (rs1505287, p = 7.3 
x 10(-5)), GNAQ (rs10512065, p = 2.0 x 10(-4)), TG (rs2252696, p = 2.2 x 10(-3)),
POU1F1 (rs1976324, p = 3.9 x 10(-3)), PDE4D (rs27178, p = 8.3 x 10(-3)), and TSHR
(rs4903957, p = 8.6 x 10(-3)) loci. Overall, the results suggest a primary effect
of PDE8B variants on cAMP levels in the thyroid. This would affect production of 
T4 and T3 and feedback to alter TSH release by the pituitary. PDE8B may thus
provide a candidate target for the treatment of thyroid dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC2427267
PMID: 18514160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Jul;93(7):2790-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-2389. Epub
2008 Apr 29.

A novel dysfunctional LHX4 mutation with high phenotypical variability in
patients with hypopituitarism.

Castinetti F(1), Saveanu A, Reynaud R, Quentien MH, Buffin A, Brauner R, Kaffel
N, Albarel F, Guedj AM, El Kholy M, Amin M, Enjalbert A, Barlier A, Brue T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Hôpital de la Timone, 264 rue St Pierre cedex 5, 
Marseille, France.

CONTEXT: LHX4 is a LIM homeodomain transcription factor involved in pituitary
ontogenesis. Only a few heterozygous LHX4 mutations have been reported to be
responsible for congenital pituitary hormone deficiency.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: A total of 136 patients with congenital hypopituitarism
associated with malformations of brain structures, pituitary stalk, or posterior 
pituitary gland was screened for LHX4 mutations.
RESULTS: Three novel allelic variants that cause predicted changes in the protein
sequence of LHX4 (2.3%) were found (p.Thr99fs, p.Thr90Met, and p.Gly370Ser). On
the basis of functional studies, p.Thr99fs mutation was responsible for the
patients' phenotype, whereas p.Thr90Met and p.Gly370Ser were likely
polymorphisms. Patients bearing the heterozygous p.Thr99fs mutation had variable 
phenotypes: two brothers presented somato-lactotroph and thyrotroph deficiencies,
with pituitary hypoplasia and poorly developed sella turcica; the youngest
brother (propositus) also had corpus callosum hypoplasia and ectopic
neurohypophysis; their father only had somatotroph deficiency and delayed puberty
with pituitary hyperplasia. Functional studies showed that the mutation induced a
complete loss of transcriptional activity on POU1F1 promoter and a lack of DNA
binding. Cotransfection of p.Thr99fs mutant and wild-type LHX4 failed to evidence
any dominant negative effect, suggesting a mechanism of haploinsufficiency. We
also identified prolactin and GH promoters as potential target genes of LHX4 and 
found that the p.Thr99fs mutant was also unable to transactivate these promoters.
CONCLUSIONS: The present report describes three new exonic LHX4 allelic variants 
with at least one being responsible for congenital hypopituitarism. It also
extends the phenotypical heterogeneity associated with LHX4 mutations, which
includes variable anterior pituitary hormone deficits, as well as pituitary and
extrapituitary abnormalities.

PMID: 18445675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Biochem Genet. 2008 Aug;46(7-8):424-32. doi: 10.1007/s10528-008-9160-z. Epub 2008
Apr 23.

A TaqI PCR-RFLP detecting a novel SNP in exon 2 of the bovine POU1F1 gene.

Pan C(1), Lan X, Chen H, Guo Y, Shu J, Lei C, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Northwest A&F
University, Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, People's Republic of China.

PCR-SSCP and DNA sequencing methods were applied to reveal three novel single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in exon 2 of the POU1F1 gene in 963 Chinese
cattle belonging to eight breeds. Among them, a silent SNP (NM_174579:c.545G > A)
detected by TaqI endonuclease is described. Frequencies of the POU1F1-G allele
varied from 0.685 to 1.000. The association of TaqI polymorphism with growth
traits was analyzed in 251 Nanyang cattle. No significant associations of the
TaqI polymorphism with body weight and average daily gain for different growth
periods (6, 12, 18, and 24 months old) were observed (P > 0.05), as well as for
body sizes (P > 0.05).

PMID: 18431643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mol Biol Rep. 2009 Apr;36(4):705-9. doi: 10.1007/s11033-008-9232-5. Epub 2008 Mar
21.

Analysis of caprine pituitary specific transcription factor-1 gene polymorphism
in indigenous Chinese goats.

Lan XY(1), Li MJ, Chen H, Zhang LZ, Jing YJ, Wei TB, Ren G, Wang X, Fang XT,
Zhang CL, Lei CZ.

Author information: 
(1)Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, College of Animal
Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, No.22 Xinong Road, Yangling,
Shaanxi 712100, China. llxxyyease@126.com

Since mutations on POU1F1 gene possibly resulted in deficiency of GH, PRL, TSH
and POU1F1, this study revealed the polymorphism of goat POU1F1-AluI locus and
analyzed the distribution of alleles on 13 indigenous Chinese goat breeds. The
PCR-RFLP analysis showed the predominance of TT genotype and the frequencies of
allele T varied from 0.757 to 0.976 in the analyzed populations (SBWC, Bo, XH and
HM). Further study, distributions of genotypic and allelic frequencies at this
locus were found to be significantly different among populations based on a
chi(2)-test (P < 0.001), suggesting that the breed factor significantly affected 
the molecular genetic character of POU1F1 gene. The genetic diversity analysis
revealed that Chinese indigenous populations had a wide spectrum of genetic
diversity in goat POU1F1-AluI locus. However, the ANOVA analysis revealed no
significant differences for gene homozygosty, gene heterozygosty, effective
allele numbers and PIC (polymorphism information content) among meat, dairy and
cashmere utility types (P > 0.05), suggesting that goat utility types had no
significant effect on the spectrum of genetic diversity.

PMID: 18357513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Dev Dyn. 2008 Apr;237(4):1006-20. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21511.

WNT signaling affects gene expression in the ventral diencephalon and pituitary
gland growth.

Potok MA(1), Cha KB, Hunt A, Brinkmeier ML, Leitges M, Kispert A, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-0618, USA.

We examined the role of WNT signaling in pituitary development by characterizing 
the pituitary phenotype of three WNT knockout mice and assessing the expression
of WNT pathway components. Wnt5a mutants have expanded domains of Fgf10 and bone 
morphogenetic protein expression in the ventral diencephalon and a reduced domain
of LHX3 expression in Rathke's pouch. Wnt4 mutants have mildly reduced cell
differentiation, reduced POU1F1 expression, and mild anterior lobe hypoplasia.
Wnt4, Wnt5a double mutants exhibit an additive pituitary phenotype of
dysmorphology and mild hypoplasia. Wnt6 mutants have no obvious pituitary
phenotype. We surveyed WNT expression and identified transcripts for numerous
Wnts, Frizzleds, and downstream pathway members in the pituitary and ventral
diencephalon. These findings support the emerging model that WNT signaling
affects the pituitary gland via effects on ventral diencephalon signaling, and
suggest additional Wnt genes that are worthy of functional studies.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2799114
PMID: 18351662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2008 Feb;69(1):7-17. doi: 10.1016/j.ando.2008.01.001.
Epub 2008 Mar 4.

[Clinical and genetic aspects of combined pituitary hormone deficiencies].

[Article in French]

Castinetti F(1), Reynaud R, Saveanu A, Quentien MH, Albarel F, Barlier A,
Enjalbert A, Brue T.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'endocrinologie, diabète et maladies métaboliques, hôpital de la
Timone, 13385 Marseille, cedex 5, France.

DEFINITION: Congenital hypopituitarism is characterized by multiple pituitary
hormone deficiency, including somatotroph, thyrotroph, lactotroph, corticotroph
or gonadotroph deficiencies, due to mutations of pituitary transcription factors 
involved in pituitary ontogenesis.
INCIDENCE: Congenital hypopituitarism is rare compared with the high incidence of
hypopituitarism induced by pituitary adenomas, transsphenoidal surgery or
radiotherapy. The incidence of congenital hypopituitarism is estimated to be
between 1:3000 and 1:4000 births.
CLINICAL SIGNS: Clinical presentation is variable, depending on the type and
severity of deficiencies and on the age at diagnosis. If untreated, main symptoms
include short stature, cognitive alterations or delayed puberty.
DIAGNOSIS: A diagnosis of combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) must be
suspected when evident causes of hypopituitarism (sellar tumor, postsurgical or
radioinduced hypopituitarism...) have been ruled out. Clinical, biological and
radiological work-up is very important to better determine which transcription
factor should be screened. Confirmation is provided by direct sequencing of the
transcription factor genes.
AETIOLOGY: Congenital hypopituitarism is due to mutations of several genes
encoding pituitary transcription factors. Phenotype varies with the factor
involved: PROP1 (somatolactotroph, thyrotroph, gonadotroph and sometimes
corticotroph deficiencies; pituitary hyper and hypoplasia), POU1F1
(somatolactotroph and thyrotroph deficiencies, pituitary hypoplasia), HESX1
(variable pituitary deficiencies, septo-optic dysplasia), and less frequently
LHX3 (somatolactotroph, thyrotroph and gonadotroph deficiencies, limited head and
neck rotation) and LHX4 (variable pituitary deficiencies, ectopic
neurohypophysis, cerebral abnormalities).
MANAGEMENT: An appropriate replacement of hormone deficiencies is required.
Strict follow-up is necessary because patients develop new deficiencies (for
example late onset corticotroph deficiency in patients with PROP1 mutations).
GENETIC COUNSELLING: Type of transmission varies with the factor and the mutation
involved (recessive transmission for PROP1 and LHX3, dominant for LHX4, autosomal
or recessive for POU1F1 and HESX1).
PROGNOSIS: It is equivalent to patients without pituitary deficiencies if
treatment is started immediately when diagnosis is confirmed, and if a
specialized follow-up is performed.

PMID: 18291347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Feb;22(1):191-206. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2007.07.007.

Developmental disorders of the hypothalamus and pituitary gland associated with
congenital hypopituitarism.

Mehta A(1), Dattani MT.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Endocrinology Research Group, Clinical and Molecular Genetics
Unit, Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

The pituitary gland is a complex organ secreting six hormones from five different
cell types. It is the end product of a carefully orchestrated pattern of
expression of signalling molecules and transcription factors. Naturally occurring
and transgenic murine models have demonstrated a role for many of these molecules
in the aetiology of congenital hypopituitarism. These include the transcription
factors HESX1, PROP1, POU1F1, LHX3, LHX4, PITX1, PITX2, SOX2 and SOX3. The
expression pattern of these transcription factors dictates the phenotype that
results when the gene encoding the relevant transcription factor is mutated. The 
highly variable phenotype may consist of isolated hypopituitarism or more complex
disorders such as septo-optic dysplasia and holoprosencephaly. However, the
overall incidence of mutations in known transcription factors in patients with
hypopituitarism is low, indicating that many genes remain to be identified;
characterization of these will further elucidate the pathogenesis of this complex
condition and also shed light on normal pituitary development and function.

PMID: 18279788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Horm Res. 2007;68 Suppl 5:138-44. doi: 10.1159/000110610. Epub 2007 Dec 10.

Hypopituitarism oddities: congenital causes.

Kelberman D(1), Dattani MT.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Endocrinology Research Group, Institute of Child Health, London,
UK.

BACKGROUND: The last 15 years have witnessed an explosion in our knowledge of
hypothalamo-pituitary development, acquired mainly from naturally-occurring and
transgenic animal models. A complex genetic cascade dictates organ commitment,
cell differentiation and cell proliferation within the anterior pituitary.
Mutations in genes encoding both signalling molecules and transcription factors
have been implicated in the aetiology of hypopituitarism, with or without other
syndromic features, in mice and humans. These include HESX1, LHX3, LHX4, PROP1,
POU1F1 and, more recently, SOX3 and SOX2. Phenotypes associated with mutations in
genes encoding these factors and their inheritance may be highly variable.
PHENOTYPIC PROFILE: Mutations in genes implicated in early pituitary development 
may be associated with extrapituitary phenotypes, which in turn may be highly
variable. For example, dominant and recessive mutations in HESX1 may be
associated with septo-optic dysplasia, combined pituitary hormone deficiency
(CPHD) and isolated growth hormone (GH) deficiency. Duplications and polyalanine 
expansions within the transcription factor SOX3 have recently been described in
association with infundibular hypoplasia, hypopituitarism and variable mental
retardation, whilst mutations in SOX2 are associated with variable
hypopituitarism in association with learning difficulties, oesophageal atresia
and anophthalmia. Mutations within the LIM domain gene LHX3 are associated with a
recessive phenotype characterised by deficiencies in GH, thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH), luteinising hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
with sparing of the corticotrophs, in association with a short stiff neck with
limited rotation. A single mutation has been described within the LHX4 gene, and 
is dominantly inherited and associated with GH, TSH and adrenocorticotrophic
hormone (ACTH) deficiency. The mutation is associated with a hypoplastic anterior
pituitary, an undescended posterior pituitary and pointed cerebellar tonsils.
PROP1 and POU1F: Recessive mutations within the pituitary-specific transcription 
factor Prophet of Pit1, or PROP1, are associated with CPHD (GH, prolactin [PRL]
and TSH deficiency with additional LH and FSH deficiency). An enlarged sella
turcica with appearances suggestive of a pituitary tumour is occasionally
observed in association with PROP1 mutations. ACTH deficiency can evolve in a
number of patients, reflecting the need for constant review of the phenotype.
Mutations within POU1F1 are associated with GH, TSH and PRL deficiencies, with
the TSH deficiency being highly variable. Magnetic resonance imaging reveals
either a normal or hypoplastic anterior pituitary. Mutations may be either
dominantly or recessively inherited, and the R271W mutation, which is believed to
act as a dominant negative mutation, represents a mutational 'hot spot'.
CONCLUSIONS: In the future, genetic analysis together with functional analysis of
the mutations at the protein level will have a greater role to play in
understanding the mechanisms leading to particular hypopituitary phenotypes and
in predicting the evolution of these disorders. However, there is no substitute
for careful delineation of the clinical, biochemical and neuroradiological
phenotype prior to undertaking genetic studies.

Copyright (c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18174732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Horm Res. 2008;69(1):60-4. Epub 2007 Dec 4.

A novel germline mutation, IVS4+1G>A, of the POU1F1 gene underlying combined
pituitary hormone deficiency.

Snabboon T(1), Plengpanich W, Buranasupkajorn P, Khwanjaipanich R, Vasinanukorn
P, Suwanwalaikorn S, Khovidhunkit W, Shotelersuk V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, Thailand. Thiti.s@chula.ac.th

BACKGROUND: POU1F1 is a pituitary transcription factor that plays a pivotal role 
in pituitary development and expression of the GH, PRL and TSH beta genes.
Therefore, abnormalities of the POU1F1 gene are known to be responsible for a
phenotype causing combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) involving growth
hormone, prolactin and thyrotropin.
METHODS: We described an 18-year-old Thai man, from a consanguineous family, who 
presented with short stature and cognitive deficit. He underwent endocrinological
and molecular investigations.
RESULTS: Hormonal studies showed that the patient had GH deficiency and secondary
hypothyroidism, consistent with CPHD. Direct DNA sequencing revealed a novel
homozygous mutation at the splice site of exon 4, IVS4+1G>A. It is the first
splice site mutation in the POU1F1 gene described to date. Of the 7 other family 
members studied for this mutation by restriction enzyme digestions, 5 were
heterozygous. They were all unaffected, suggesting a recessive pattern of
inheritance.
CONCLUSIONS: We described a novel POU1F1 splice site mutation, IVS4+1G>A, the
first of its kind, in a Thai patient with CPHD. Recessive inheritance is
suggested. We also noted preventable morbidities which resulted from delay in
diagnosis of concomitant pituitary hormone defects in newborns suspected of CPHD.

(c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18059085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Appl Genet. 2007;48(4):371-4.

Polymorphisms in intron 1 of the porcine POU1F1 gene.

Song CY(1), Gao B, Teng SH, Wang XY, Xie F, Chen GH, Wang ZY, Jing RB, Mao JD.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science & Technology, Yangzhou University, 12 Wenhui East
Road, Yangzhou, Jiangsu Province, P.R. China. chengyilab@hotmail.com

This study was conducted to detect polymorphisms in intron 1 of porcine POU1F1
(POU domain, class 1, transcription factor 1, Pit1, renamed as POU1F1) by
comparative sequencing. Within the intron, 23 sites of variation were identified,
including 16 single-nucleotide substitutions, 4 single-nucleotide indels, 2 short
(3-bp and 17-bp), and one long (313-bp) indels. Several important regulatory
motifs were found within the 313-bp indel by in silico analysis. The 313-bp indel
was next genotyped in 11 Chinese native pig breeds and 4 western meat-type pig
breeds. The appearance of genotypes varied between breeds: among Chinese native
breeds, no AA and AB genotypes were found in Tibetan, Lingao, Min, Rongchang, and
Songliao Black pigs, no AA genotype was found in Fenjing and Leping Spotted pigs,
whereas in Pietrain and Landrace there were no BB genotypes, and all 19 Duroc
pigs were AA homozygotes. The western meat-type pigs had high A allele
frequencies and the Chinese pigs had more B alleles, except Jianquhai pigs. A
positive association of the AA genotype with birth weight was observed in a
commercial pig line. This paper demonstrated that the genetic variation in intron
1 of the pig POU1F1 gene was high and these polymorphisms may provide useful
makers for QTL analysis.

PMID: 17998594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2008 Jan 2;280(1-2):20-9. Epub 2007 Sep 8.

Involvement of mPOU (Brn-5), a class VI POU protein, in the gene expression of
Pit-1 as well as PRL.

Toda K(1), Yamamoto D, Fumoto M, Ikeshita N, Herningtyas EH, Iida K, Takahashi Y,
Kaji H, Chihara K, Okimura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Allied Medicine, Kobe University School of Medicine,
7-10-2, Tomogaoka, Suma-ku, Kobe 654-0142, Japan.

PRL is mainly expressed in the pituitary and its gene expression is regulated by 
a variety of transcription factors including Pit-1. Brn-5 is a transcription
factor that binds to Pit-1 binding elements and stimulates PRL reporter gene
expression. In this study, the role of Brn-5 was examined. RNA interference
(RNAi) against Brn-5 leaded to reduction in PRL content of GH3 cells, indicating 
endogenous Brn-5 may play a role in PRL gene expression. Furthermore Brn-5 RNAi
decreased Pit-1 mRNA. Transfection of expression vectors for mPOU (human ortholog
of Brn-5) modestly but significantly stimulated activities of PRL-Luc and
Pit-1-Luc reporter genes in GH3 and HEK 293 cells. In addition, mPOU showed
synergistic action with Pit-1 and CBP on PRL-Luc expression. mPOU-FL, a splicing 
variant of mPOU, showed weaker activity than mPOU. Chip assay suggested binding
of mPOU to PRL and Pit-1 promoters of genomic DNA. Taken together, these results 
suggest that mPOU (Brn-5) enhances PRL gene expression directly in association
with Pit-1 and CBP, and indirectly via the activation of Pit-1 gene expression.

PMID: 17933456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Eur J Endocrinol. 2007 Aug;157 Suppl 1:S3-14.

Hypothalamic and pituitary development: novel insights into the aetiology.

Kelberman D(1), Dattani MT.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Endocrine Research Group, Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford
Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

The anterior pituitary gland is a central regulator of growth, reproduction and
homeostasis, and is the end-product of a carefully orchestrated pattern of
expression of signalling molecules and transcription factors leading to the
development of this complex organ secreting six hormones from five different cell
types. Naturally occurring and transgenic murine models have demonstrated a role 
for many of these molecules in the aetiology of combined pituitary hormone
deficiency (CPHD). These include the transcription factors HESX1, PROP1, POU1F1, 
LHX3, LHX4, TBX19, SOX2 and SOX3. The expression pattern of these transcription
factors dictates the phenotype that results when the gene encoding the relevant
transcription factor is mutated. The highly variable phenotype may consist of
isolated hypopituitarism, or more complex disorders such as septo-optic dysplasia
and holoprosencephaly. Since mutations in any one transcription factor are
uncommon, and since the overall incidence of mutations in known transcription
factors is low in patients with CPHD, it is clear that many genes remain to be
identified, and the characterization of these will further elucidate the
pathogenesis of these complex conditions and also shed light on normal pituitary 
development.

PMID: 17785694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Pak J Biol Sci. 2007 Aug 1;10(15):2575-8.

Polymorphism of the bovine POU1F1 gene: allele frequencies and effects on milk
production in three Iranian native breeds and Holstein cattle of Iran.

Zakizadeh S(1), Reissmann M, Rahimi G, Javaremi AN, Reinecke P, Mirae-Ashtiani
SR, Shahrbabak MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Hasheminejad High Education Center, Mashhad,
Iran.

The aim of this study was to estimate the allele frequencies in polymorphic site 
of exon six of POU1F1 gene in three Iranian native and Holstein cattle. Genomic
DNA was extracted from 3 Iranian native cattle breeds, including 97 Mazandarani, 
87 Sarabi, 112 Golpaygani and also 110 Holstein cattle. A 451 bp fragment of
intron 5 and exon 6 were amplified and digested with HinfI restriction enzyme.
Frequencies of allele A were 0.37, 0.27, 0.34 and 0.21 for Mazandarani, Sarabi,
Golpaygani and Holstein cattle, respectively. Significant differences in genotype
frequencies were found between Mazandarani or Golpaygani and Holstein cattle. No 
significant differences in genotype frequencies were found between Sarabi and
Holstein cattle. Transition A to G in nucleotide 1256 is responsible for HinfI(-)
allele. No significant association was observed between POU1F1 polymorphism and
milk production. Differences in allelic frequency between native Bos indicus
breeds (Mazandarani, Golpaygani) and Holstein at the present study might be due
to differences in origin breeds, low number of samples and/or as the effect of
natural selection in native breeds.

PMID: 19070133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2007 May;20(5):587-96.

MRI findings and genotype analysis in patients with childhood onset growth
hormone deficiency--correlation with severity of hypopituitarism.

Zimmermann A(1), Schenk JP, Grigorescu Sido P, Pfaffle R, Lazea C, Zimmermann T, 
Heinrich U, Weber MM, Bettendorf M.

Author information: 
(1)1st Clinic of Internal Medicine, Department of Endocrinology and Diabetology, 
Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz, Germany. zimmeran@uni-mainz.de

AIM: To evaluate the relationship between pituitary size, PIT1 and PROP1
genotype, and the severity of childhood onset growth hormone deficiency (coGHD).
PATIENTS: Forty-four patients with coGHD (34 M; 9.7 +/- 4.1 years): severe
isolated (SI) GHD (n = 14); partial isolated (PI) GHD (n=13); multiple pituitary 
hormone deficiencies (MPHD) (n=17).
RESULTS: Pituitary abnormalities were found in 7/14 patients with SIGHD (50%),
16/17 patients with MPHD (94.1%), and no patient with PIGHD. Mean pituitary
height (PHT SDS) was significantly lower in MPHD than in SIGHD and PIGHD.
Pituitary height SDS and pituitary volume (PV) SDS correlated with IGF-I SDS and 
stimulated GH peaks in the SIGHD and MPHD groups. No PIT1 mutation was
identified. The PROP1 AG deletion (301-302) was present in five related patients 
with MPHD and more severe phenotype than the other patients with MPHD.
CONCLUSIONS: Pituitary abnormalities corresponded to the severity of coGHD.
Genetic alterations were identified in five related patients with MPHD.

PMID: 17642419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2007 Jul;16(4):325-8.

Sodium-dependent phosphate cotransporters and vascular calcification.

Li X(1), Giachelli CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195-5061, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Vascular calcification is associated with cardiovascular
events in patients with end-stage renal disease and diabetes. Hyperphosphatemia
is a risk factor for vascular calcification in these patients. Sodium-dependent
phosphate cotransporters are required for cellular phosphate uptake. This review 
focuses on the potential role of phosphate transport and type III
sodium-dependent phosphate cotransporters in the process of vascular
calcification.
RECENT FINDINGS: Consistent with clinical and animal studies, elevated phosphate 
induces mineralization of cultured smooth muscle cells in vitro. Calcification is
concomitant with osteochondrogenic phenotype change in smooth muscle cells
characterized by induction of osteochondrogenic differentiation marker, Runx2,
and inhibition of smooth muscle cell lineage marker, SM22. Inhibition of the type
III sodium-dependent phosphate cotransporter, Pit-1, blocks phosphate-induced
smooth muscle cell calcification. Moreover, the phosphate-induced
osteochondrogenic phenotype modulation is also abrogated by Pit-1 inhibition.
Pit-1 is upregulated by several calcification-promoting factors, including tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha, bone morphogenetic protein 2, platelet-derived growth
factor and elevated calcium.
SUMMARY: Phosphate uptake via Pit-1 is required for osteochondrogenic phenotypic 
change and calcification of vascular smooth muscle cells in vitro. Modulation of 
Pit-1 expression or its transport activity may provide a novel therapeutic target
for intervention of vascular calcification.

PMID: 17565274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Ann Med. 2006;38(8):560-77.

The role of transcription factors implicated in anterior pituitary development in
the aetiology of congenital hypopituitarism.

Kelberman D(1), Dattani MT.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry, Endocrinology and Metabolism Unit, Institute for Child Health,
London, UK.

The anterior pituitary gland is a central regulator of growth, reproduction and
homeostasis, and is the end-product of a carefully orchestrated pattern of
expression of signalling molecules and transcription factors leading to the
development of this complex organ secreting six hormones from five different cell
types. Naturally occurring and transgenic murine models have demonstrated a role 
for many of these molecules in the aetiology of combined pituitary hormone
deficiency (CPHD). These include the transcription factors HESX1, PROP1, POU1FI, 
LHX3, LHX4, TBX19 (TPIT), SOX3 and SOX2. The expression pattern of these
transcription factors, their interaction with co-factors and their impact on
target genes dictate the phenotype that results when the gene encoding the
relevant transcription factor is mutated. The highly variable phenotype may
consist of isolated hypopituitarism, or more complex disorders such as
septo-optic dysplasia (SOD) and holoprosencephaly. Since mutations in any one
transcription factor are uncommon, and since the overall incidence of mutations
in known transcription factors is low in patients with CPHD, it is clear that
many genes remain to be identified, and characterization of these will further
elucidate the pathogenesis of these complex conditions, and also shed light on
normal pituitary development.

PMID: 17438671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2007 Mar;36(1):17-36.

Genetics of growth hormone deficiency.

Mullis PE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology and Metabolism, University Children's
Hospital, University of Berne, Inselspital, CH-3010 Bern, Switzerland.
primus.mullis@insel.ch

When a child is not following the normal, predicted growth curve, an evaluation
for underlying illness and central nervous system abnormalities is required and
appropriate consideration should be given to genetic defects causing growth
hormone (GH) deficiency. This article focuses on the GH gene, the various gene
alterations, and their possible impact on the pituitary gland. Transcription
factors regulating pituitary gland development may cause multiple pituitary
hormone deficiency but may present initially as GH deficiency. The role of two
most important transcription factors, POU1F1 (Pit-1) and PROP 1, is discussed.

PMID: 17336732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Jan;20(1):27-36.

Panhypopituitarism: genetic versus acquired etiological factors.

Coya R(1), Vela A, Pérez de Nanclares G, Rica I, Castaño L, Busturia MA, Martul
P; GEDPIT group.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Paediatric Endocrinology, Hospital de Cruces, Barakaldo-Bizkaia,
Basque Country, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Mutations in the genes encoding pituitary transcription factors
(mainly PROP1, POUF1 and HESX1) are responsible for familial combined pituitary
hormone deficiency (CPHD) and septo-optic dysplasia (SOD) while only a low
percentage of mutations are the cause of sporadic forms. Indeed, it has been
suggested that environmental rather than genetic factors could be important in
the pathogenesis of CPHD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Thirty-six sporadic patients diagnosed with CPHD or SOD
were included in the study. All coding exons and intron-exon boundary regions of 
PROP1, POUF1 and HESX1 were amplified by PCR and subsequently sequenced.
RESULTS: Two novel missense mutations in the HESX1 gene (Q117P, K176T) were
identified in two patients. Polymorphisms in PIT1 and PROP1 were also detected. A
higher percentage of breech delivery in male patients with CPHD versus females
was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The low percentage of mutations found in the most common
transcription factors involved in CPHD show that a better characterization of
hormonal and morphological phenotypes is necessary for patients with CPHD
included in genetic studies, and other genetic or non-genetic factors have to be 
taken into account.

PMID: 17315526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Physiol Genomics. 2007 May 11;29(3):267-79. Epub 2007 Jan 30.

Pre- and postnatal hepatic gene expression profiles of two pig breeds differing
in body composition: insight into pathways of metabolic regulation.

Ponsuksili S(1), Murani E, Walz C, Schwerin M, Wimmers K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Functional Genomics, Research Institute for the Biology of Farm
Animals, FBN, Dummerstorf, Germany.

The liver plays a central role in the regulation of the metabolic status,
partitioning of nutrients, and expenditure of energy. To gain insight into
hepatic metabolic pathways and key transcripts affecting traits related to body
composition, liver expression profiles were compared of pigs of two breeds, the
obese German Landrace (DL) and the lean Pietrain (Pi). Porcine oligonucleotide
microarray were hybridized with liver cRNAs obtained at peripubertal age (180
days of age) and prenatal stages (35, 63, and 91 days postconception) that
represent three developmental stages of liver, i.e., period of differentiation,
period of metabolic activity, and period of glycogen accumulation. In terms of
the number of genes regulated between DL and Pi, the most striking distinctions
were found at peripubertal age with upregulation of key genes of lipid metabolism
pathways (FASN, ACSS2, ACACA) in obese DL pigs and upregulation of genes of cell 
growth and/or maintenance, and protein syntheses, as well as cell proliferation
pathways (PPARD, POU1F1, IGF2R), in lean Pi pigs. Moreover, time course analysis 
of breed-dependent expression profiles revealed breed-typical temporal regulation
from prenatal stages to peripubertal age of genes assigned to biological
processes involving lipid pathways and cell activity, i.e., breed differences are
already initiated during early prenatal development. Information about mRNA
expression levels of the two breeds differing in body composition, partitioning
and utilization of nutrients and energy reveals functional candidate genes for
traits related to obesity and leanness.

PMID: 17264241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Yi Chuan. 2006 Nov;28(11):1371-5.

[Analysis of POU1F1 gene polymorphisms in Qinchuan cattle and Chinese Holstein
cattle].

[Article in Chinese]

Yan LJ(1), Liu B, Fang XT, Chen H, Zhang RF, Bao B, Zhang HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Xuzhou Normal University, Xuzhou 
221116, China. ylj_23@sohu.com

PCR-RFLP was applied to analyze the polymorphisms of POU1F1 gene in 218 Qinchuan 
cattle (QQ) and Chinese Holstein cattle (HC). Results demonstrated Hinf I
polymorphisms in the 451 bp PCR product in the two populations. The frequencies
of alleles A/B in QQ and HC populations were 0.232/0.768 and 0.132/0.868,
respectively. The frequencies of three genotypes AA, AB and BB were
0.030/0.403/0.567 and 0.007/0.251/0.742, respectively. Qinchuan cattle population
was at Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium at this locus, but Chinese Holstein cattle
population was not. The gene heterozygosity/effective allele gene number/Shannon 
information entropy/polymorphism information content of Qinchuan cattle and
Chinese Holstein cattle populations were listed for 0.356/1.553/0.541/0.292 and
0.229/1.297/0.390/0.203, respectively. All indices were higher in the Qinchuan
cattle population.

PMID: 17098704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Yi Chuan Xue Bao. 2006 Oct;33(10):901-7.

Effect of genetic variations of the POU1F1 gene on growth traits of Nanyang
cattle.

Xue K(1), Chen H, Wang S, Cai X, Liu B, Zhang CF, Lei CZ, Wang XZ, Wang YM, Niu
H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, China.

PCR-RFLP was applied to analyze the effect of the genetic variations of the
POU1F1 gene on growth traits of 100 Nanyang cattle. The results showed that the
451 bp PCR product digested with Hinf I demonstrated polymorphism in the
population, which was at Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Moreover, the frequencies of
alleles A/B in the Nanyang population were 0.465/0.535. The association of the
variations of the POU1F1 gene with the growth traits in the population was
analyzed. The following parameters were greater in individuals with a genotype BB
than in those with an genotype AB: birth weight, average weight increase before
ablactation, body height at 12 months, body weight, body length, and chest girth 
at 6 months and 12 months (P<0.05). The body weight at 12 months was higher in
the BB individuals than in the AA individuals (P <0.05). The body weight and body
sizes also showed a trend of allele B> allele A in the other age groups.
Therefore, the genotype BB maybe a dominant genotype and the allele B may be a
dominant allele. These results imply that the allele B of the POU1F1 gene is
likely to positively affect the growth traits.

PMID: 17046590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Dec;91(12):4981-7. Epub 2006 Sep 12.

Identification and functional analysis of the novel S179R POU1F1 mutation
associated with combined pituitary hormone deficiency.

Miyata I(1), Vallette-Kasic S, Saveanu A, Takeuchi M, Yoshikawa H, Tajima A, Tojo
K, Reynaud R, Gueydan M, Enjalbert A, Tajima N, Eto Y, Brue T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Jikei University School of Medicine, 3-25-8
Nishi-shinbashi, Tokyo 105-8461, Japan. i-miyata@jikei.ac.jp

CONTEXT: The pituitary-specific transcription factor 1 plays a key role in the
development and differentiation of three pituitary cell types: somatotrophs,
lactotrophs, and thyrotrophs. Several mutations of the human gene (called POU1F1)
have been shown to be responsible for a phenotype of combined pituitary hormone
deficiency involving GH, prolactin (PRL), and TSH.
OBJECTIVE: We have identified a novel homozygous C to G mutation in exon 4 of the
POU1F1 gene (S179R) in a patient with this rare phenotype. We analyzed the
functional consequences of this S179R mutation associated with a single-amino
acid change in the POU-specific domain.
METHODS: Consequences of this mutation on transcriptional activities by
transfection studies in alphaT3 cells, DNA binding ability by EMSA, structural
properties, and nuclear accumulation of POU1F1 were investigated.
RESULTS: The transactivation capacity of this mutant was markedly decreased on
the GH1, PRL, TSHbeta, and POU1F1 genes. Interestingly, this mutation abolished
the functional interaction of POU1F1 on the PRL promoter with the coactivator
cAMP response element-binding protein-binding protein but not with the
transcription factor LIM homeodomain transcription factor 3. The S179R mutant
displayed normal nuclear accumulation but a markedly decreased binding to a DNA
response element in keeping with crystallographic data, suggesting that the S179R
mutation might interfere with DNA binding.
CONCLUSIONS: Together with previous data, our study indicates that both DNA
binding and interaction with cofactors like cAMP response element-binding
protein-binding protein are critical for POU1F1 function and that functional and 
structural properties of abnormal POU1F1 proteins are variously influenced by the
type of mutations.

PMID: 16968807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Gene. 2006 Nov 1;382:12-9. Epub 2006 Jun 15.

Identification and characterization of four splicing variants of ovine POU1F1
gene.

Bastos E(1), Avila S, Cravador A, Renaville R, Guedes-Pinto H, Castrillo JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Genética e Biotecnologia (CGB-UTAD), Universidade de Trás-os-Montes 
e Alto Douro, Apdo. 1013, 5001-801 Vila Real, Portugal. ebastos@utad.pt

Expression of POU1F1 gene, a member of the POU homeodomain family of
transcription factors, is necessary for normal differentiation, development and
survival of three anterior pituitary cell types (thyrotrophs, somatotrophs and
lactotrophs) and for the proper expression of growth hormone (GH), prolactin
(PRL), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) genes and POU1F1 gene itself.
Alternative splicing forms of this gene have been reported in different species, 
with few functional studies. Apart from the POU1F1-Wild-type with the expected
length, in this work we isolated three additional splicing variants: POU1F1-beta,
with a 78 bp insert in the trans-activation domain; POU1F1-gamma that lacks exon 
3 and POU1F1-delta that lacks exons 3, 4 and 5. Four different protein isoforms
were also detected by Western blot in the sheep pituitary tissue. Functional
assays were performed to study the trans-activation of GH and PRL promoters by
the splicing variants. Regarding the PRL promoter, the beta variant presented
only 12% of the Wild-type trans-activation capacity. Variants gamma and delta
showed no capacity to trans-activate PRL promoter. Both gamma and delta variants 
acted as repressors of Wt, reducing significantly the trans-activation made by Wt
alone (p<0.05). Concerning the GH promoter, the beta variant presented a
trans-activation capacity 10% higher than Wt. Wt and beta variants strongly
interact in the activation of GH promoter doubling the trans-activation potential
of Wt. Variants gamma and delta showed no capacity to trans-activate the GH
promoter and both acted as repressors, reducing significantly (p<0.001) the
trans-activation performed by Wt. This work presents, for the first time, the
characterization of four splicing forms of Ovis aries POU1F1 gene.

PMID: 16942842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Sep;26(17):6535-46.

A single base difference between Pit-1 binding sites at the hGH promoter and
locus control region specifies distinct Pit-1 conformations and functions.

Shewchuk BM(1), Ho Y, Liebhaber SA, Cooke NE.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 415 Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, 
PA 19103, USA.

Activation of the human growth hormone (hGH-N) gene in pituitary somatotropes is 
mediated by a locus control region (LCR). This LCR is composed of DNase
I-hypersensitive sites (HS) located -14.5 kb to -32 kb relative to the hGH-N
promoter. HSI, at -14.5 kb, is the dominant determinant of hGH-N expression and
is essential for establishment of a 32-kb domain of histone acetylation that
encompasses the active hGH locus. This activity is conferred by three binding
sites for the POU domain transcription factor Pit-1. These Pit-1 elements are
sufficient to activate hGH-N expression in the mouse pituitary. In contrast,
Pit-1 sites at the hGH-N promoter are consistently unable to mediate similar
activity. In the present study, we demonstrate that the functional difference
between the promoter-proximal and the HSI Pit-1 binding sites can be attributed
in part to a single base difference. This base affects the conformation of the
Pit-1/DNA complex, and reciprocal exchange of the divergent bases between the two
sets of Pit-1 elements results in a partial reversal of their transgenic
activities. These data support a model in which the Pit-1 binding sites in the
hGH LCR allosterically program the bound Pit-1 complex for chromatin activating
functions.

PMCID: PMC1592842
PMID: 16914737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 May 28;Suppl 1:206-11.

[Disorders of pituitary gland development].

[Article in Japanese]

Migita O(1), Umezawa A.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Child Health and Development.

PMID: 16776128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Sep;91(9):3329-36. Epub 2006 May 30.

Genetic screening of combined pituitary hormone deficiency: experience in 195
patients.

Reynaud R(1), Gueydan M, Saveanu A, Vallette-Kasic S, Enjalbert A, Brue T,
Barlier A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Hôpital de la Conception,
13385 Marseille Cedex 5, France.

CONTEXT: Mutations in transcription factors result in combined pituitary hormone 
deficiency (CPHD).
OBJECTIVE: A genetic screening strategy, based on endocrine and neuroradiological
phenotype according to published knowledge, was applied to establish the
prevalence of gene defects in each category of patients and provide a useful
framework for clinicians to determine the genetic etiology and recurrence risks
for individuals and families.
DESIGN: One hundred ninety-five CPHD patients from the international GENHYPOPIT
network were studied, according to their phenotype, for POU1F1, PROP1, LHX3,
LHX4, and HESX1.
PATIENTS: Patients selected had two pituitary hormone deficiencies or at least
one deficiency with intracerebral malformations.
RESULTS: Total prevalence of mutations was 13.3 and 52.4% in 20 patients with
familial CPHD history. No mutation of HESX1 was observed in 16 patients harboring
septooptic dysplasia. A mutation of LHX4 gene, previously reported, was found in 
one familial case from 39 patients bearing pituitary stalk interruption syndrome.
In 109 patients without extrapituitary abnormalities, 20 had PROP1 mutations,
including eight patients with a family history of CPHD. Among 20 patients without
pituitary stalk interruption syndrome, no LHX3 gene defect was found, even with a
neck rotation deficit. One POU1F1 gene defect was found in one patient presenting
the rare postpubertal association of thyrotroph (TSH deficiency) and somatotroph 
(GH deficiency) deficits.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutation of PROP1 gene remains the first to be looked for, and
POU1F1 mutations should be sought in GH deficiency and TSH deficiency
postpubertal population without extrapituitary malformations. Identification of
gene defects allows early treatment of any deficit and prevention of their
potentially fatal consequences. Genotyping appears highly beneficial at an
individual and familial level.

PMID: 16735499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Endocrinol Invest. 2006 Mar;29(3):208-13.

Congenital adenohypophysis aplasia: clinical features and analysis of the
transcriptional factors for embryonic pituitary development.

Arrigo T(1), Wasniewska M, De Luca F, Valenzise M, Lombardo F, Vivenza D, Vaccaro
T, Coradi E, Biason-Lauber A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.

Anterior pituitary agenesis (APA) has very rarely been reported. Therefore, its
phenotypical and genotypical features are not well known. The aim of this study
was to ascertain whether the clinical picture in 4 subjects with APA and multiple
pituitary hormone deficiencies (MPHD) was different compared to the one observed 
in a selected control group consisting of 7 MPHD individuals with hypoplastic
(and not aplastic) adenohypophysis and pituitary stalk interruption syndrome.
Another goal was to investigate genetic basis of APA by analyzing for the first
time in this condition many of the transcriptional factors which are required for
both structural development and cellular differentiation of hypophysis. Age at
diagnosis was significantly lower in APA children than in controls (1.5+/-2.3 vs 
11.1+/-7.6 yr, p<0.0005). Microphallus and neonatal cholestasis were observed
only in APA subjects (chi-squared=4.3, p<0.05) and also neonatal hypoglycemia was
more frequent in APA patients than in controls (X2=4.05, p<0.05). Molecular
analyses of the genes of the transcriptional factors POU1F1, PROP1, LHX3, LHX4,
ISL1 and HESX1 detected no mutations in APA patients.CONCLUSIONS: a) if compared 
with a selected cohort of MPHD patients with both adenohypophysis hypoplasia and 
pituitary stalk interruption syndrome, the ones with APA show an earlier and more
severe picture of hypopituitarism; b) mutations in several transcription factors 
that are known to be essential for the development of Rathke's pouch are not
necessarily found in humans with APA.

PMID: 16682832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Genetica. 2006 Mar;126(3):303-14.

Ovis aries POU1F1 gene: cloning, characterization and polymorphism analysis.

Bastos E(1), Santos I, Parmentier I, Castrillo JL, Cravador A, Guedes-Pinto H,
Renaville R.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Genética e Biotecnologia, Universidade de Trás-os-Montes e Alto
Douro, Apdo. 1013, 5000-911, Vila Real, Portugal. ebastos@utad.pt

POU1F1 (PIT-1/GHF-1) is a transcription factor with critical role in the
transcriptional regulation of multiple genes in the pituitary and also important 
for the survival, differentiation and proliferation of three pituitary cell
types. To understand the regulation of POU1F1 gene in Ovis aries we report its
cloning, sequencing and characterization. The sequenced 5787 bp included six
exons and two complete introns. Ovine POU1F1 gene has a high level of
conservation with its bovine, human and rat counterparts showing 98.2%, 91.2% and
86.2% of similarity at the coding level, respectively. All six exons were
analyzed for polymorphism detection in 100 animals of the Portuguese indigenous
ovine breed 'Churra da Terra Quente'. One polymorphism was found at codon 58 in
exon 2, in one allele of 4 animals leading to a change from cysteine to tyrosine 
(2% allelic frequency). In exon 3 two polymorphisms were detected: a G to A
transition altering a glycine to an asparagine at codon 89 in one allele of one
animal (0.5% allelic frequency) and another G to A transition at codon 105
converting an alanine into a threonine in one allele of 3 animals (1.5% allelic
frequency). These polymorphisms might change the structure of the POU1F1 protein 
and modify gene-expression. In intron 4, an A to G transition was detected in one
allele of six animals (3% allelic frequency). Exons 1, 4 and 6 showed no
polymorphisms.

PMID: 16636924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Apr 1;15(7):1237-43. Epub 2006 Feb 27.

Positive association between POU1F1 and mental retardation in young females in
the Chinese Han population.

Sun Y(1), Zhang F, Gao J, Gao X, Guo T, Zhang K, Shi Y, Zheng Z, Tang W, Zheng Y,
Li S, Li X, Feng G, Shen X, He L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Genetic defects attributable to the genes involved in the
hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) gland axis can cause abnormal thyroid
hormone function and mental retardation (MR). Pit-1, encoded by the POU1F1 gene
on human chromosome 3p11, is a pituitary-specific transcription factor
responsible for the expression of several pituitary hormones. Thyrotropin is one 
of these hormones and is an important regulator in the HPT axis. One of the
symptoms of patients with POU1F1 mutations is hypothyroidism and abnormalities of
the nervous system early in the period after birth. We performed a case-control
association study and a quantitative analysis of IQ to investigate the possible
genetic contribution of POU1F1 in the Chinese Han population. Pairwise linkage
disequilibrium (LD) analysis showed that rs300996, snp-7057 and rs300977 were in 
strong LD. There were significant differences of allele, genotype and haplotype
frequencies of these three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) between cases
and controls. When we conducted a breakdown comparison between cases and controls
within different gender groups, no positive results in males were found. In
females, however, we found significant differences between cases and controls in 
allele frequency distribution of rs300996 (P=0.0003), snp-7057 (P=0.0001) and
rs300977 (P=0.0005) and in the distributions of common haplotypes combined by
these SNPs (global P=0.0050). The P-value was 0.0301 for rs300996 and 0.0397 for 
the haplotype combination of rs300996-snp-7057-rs300977 in the analysis of the
quantitative effects of the alleles and haplotypes on IQ in females. Our data
suggest that POU1F1 may affect MR through a gender-specific mechanism.

PMID: 16505001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Acta Neuropathol. 2006 Jan;111(1):84-5. Epub 2005 Nov 23.

Subtyping does matter in pituitary adenomas.

Kleinschmidt-DeMasters BK.

Comment on
    Acta Neuropathol. 2006 Jan;111(1):1-7.

PMID: 16328517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2005 Oct;14(10):2316-25.

Genetic variation in the growth hormone synthesis pathway in relation to
circulating insulin-like growth factor-I, insulin-like growth factor binding
protein-3, and breast cancer risk: results from the European prospective
investigation into cancer and nutrition study.

Canzian F(1), McKay JD, Cleveland RJ, Dossus L, Biessy C, Boillot C, Rinaldi S,
Llewellyn M, Chajès V, Clavel-Chapelon F, Téhard B, Chang-Claude J, Linseisen J, 
Lahmann PH, Pischon T, Trichopoulos D, Trichopoulou A, Zilis D, Palli D, Tumino
R, Vineis P, Berrino F, Bueno-de-Mesquita HB, van Gils CH, Peeters PH, Pera G,
Barricarte A, Chirlaque MD, Quirós JR, Larrañaga N, Martínez-García C, Allen NE, 
Key TJ, Bingham SA, Khaw KT, Slimani N, Norat T, Riboli E, Kaaks R.

Author information: 
(1)Hormones and Cancer Team, International Agency for Research on Cancer, 150
cours Albert-Thomas, F-69372 Lyon, France.

Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) stimulates cell proliferation and can
enhance the development of tumors in different organs. Epidemiologic studies have
shown that an elevated level of circulating IGF-I is associated to increased risk
of breast cancer as well as other cancers. Genetic variants affecting the release
or biological action of growth hormone (GH), the main stimulator of IGF-I
production, may predict circulating levels of IGF-I and have an effect on cancer 
risk. We tested this hypothesis with a large case-control study of 807 breast
cancer patients and 1,588 matched control subjects nested within the European
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition. We genotyped 22 common
single nucleotide polymorphisms in 10 genes involved in GH production and action 
(GHRH, GHRHR, SST, SSTR1-SSTR5, POU1F1, and GH1), and in parallel, we measured
serum levels of IGF-I and IGFBP-3, its major binding protein, in samples of cases
and controls. SST and SSTR2 polymorphisms showed weak but statistically
significant associations with breast cancer risk. SSTR5 polymorphisms were
associated with IGF-I levels, whereas one polymorphism in GHRHR and one in POU1F1
were associated with IGFBP-3 levels. Our conclusion is that common genetic
variation in the GH synthesis pathway, as measured by single nucleotide
polymorphisms selected in the present study, is not a major determinant of IGF-I 
and IGFBP-3 circulating levels, and it does not play a major role in altering
breast cancer risk.

PMID: 16214911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Horm Res. 2005;64(4):175-9. Epub 2005 Oct 4.

Absent or delayed adrenarche in Pit-1/POU1F1 deficiency.

Taha D(1), Mullis PE, Ibáñez L, de Zegher F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Centre-Jeddah, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. dtaha@kfshrc.edu.sa

Mutations of the PIT1/POU1F1 gene are responsible for a rare variant of anterior 
hypopituitarism, including deficiency of growth hormone, prolactin and
thyrotropin. In 8 ethnically diverse POU1F1-deficient patients (4 different
mutations) with normal circulating levels of cortisol and adrenocorticotropic
hormone, and with spontaneous onset and progression of puberty, we observed an
absence or delay of adrenarche (median circulating dehydroepiandrosterone-sulfate
-6.2 SD); in each of the 4 postmenarcheal females, pubarche (i.e. appearance of
pubic hair) was also absent or delayed. The absence/delay of adrenarche in
POU1F1-deficient patients and the absence/delay of pubarche in POU1F1-deficient
females suggest that a POU1F1-dependent factor contributes to the normal
development of adrenarche and female pubarche.

(c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16210857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Eur J Endocrinol. 2005 Sep;153(3):389-96.

Auxological and endocrine phenotype in a population-based cohort of patients with
PROP1 gene defects.

Lebl J(1), Vosáhlo J, Pfaeffle RW, Stobbe H, Cerná J, Novotná D, Zapletalová J,
Kalvachová B, Hána V, Weiss V, Blum WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, 3 Faculty of Medicine, Charles University Parague, 
Czech Republic. lebl@fnkv.cz

OBJECTIVE: Multiple pituitary hormone deficiency (MPHD) may result from defects
of transcription factors that govern early pituitary development. We aimed to
establish the prevalence of HESX1, PROP1, and POU1F1 gene defects in a
population-based cohort of patients with MPHD and to analyse the phenotype of
affected individuals.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Genomic analysis was carried out on 74 children and adults
with MPHD from the Czech Republic (including four sibling pairs). Phenotypic data
were collected from medical records and referring physicians.
RESULTS: One patient carried a heterozygous mutation of POU1F1 (71C > T), and 18 
patients (including three sibling pairs) had a PROP1 mutation (genotypes
150delA/301delGA/9/, 301delGA/301-delGA/8/, or 301delGA/349T > A/1/). A detailed 
longitudinal phenotypic analysis was performed for patients with PROP1 mutations 
(n = 17). The mean ( +/-s.d.) birth length SDS of these patients (0.12 +/- 0.76) 
was lower than expected based on their mean ( +/-s.d.) birth weight SDS (0.63 +/-
1.27; P = 0.01). Parental heights were normal. The patients' mean ( +/-s.d.)
height SDS declined to -1.5 +/- 0.9, -3.6 +/- 1.3 and -4.1 +/- 1.2 at 1.5, 3 and 
5 years of age, respectively. GH therapy, initiated at 6.8 +/- 3.2 years of age
(mean dose: 0.022 mg/kg per day), led to substantial growth acceleration in all
patients. Mean adult height (n = 7) was normal when adjusted for mid-parental
height. ACTH deficiency developed in two out of seven young adult patients.
CONCLUSIONS: PROP1 defects are a prevalent cause of MPHD. We suggest that testing
for PROP1 mutations in patients with MPHD might become standard practice in order
to predict risk of additional pituitary hormone deficiencies.

PMID: 16131601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Endocrinol Invest. 2005;28(5 Suppl):30-7.

Genetic basis of short stature.

Castro-Feijóo L(1), Quinteiro C, Loidi L, Barreiro J, Cabanas P, Arévalo T,
Diéguez C, Casanueva FF, Pombo M.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology, Growth and Adolescence Unit, Department of
Pediatrics, Clinical University Hospital and University of Santiago de
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. licafe@usc.es

Growth in humans is a complex process controlled by many genetic and non-genetic 
factors. It is influenced by endogenous factors like genetics, hormones and
metabolism as well as exogenous ones like nutrition, physical activity and
psychosocial status. Growth is one of the most sensitive markers of children's
health, their nutritional status and genetic background. Besides, deviation from 
normality may be the first manifestation of an underlying congenital or acquired 
pathology. Thus, it is important to know the growth process and the disorder that
can disturb it. Short stature is defined as a condition in which the height of an
individual is more than 2 SD below the corresponding mean height for a given age,
sex and population group. This disorder is a major concern for patients and their
parents, and represents a diagnostic challenge to the clinician. A correct
diagnosis is particularly important in view of the availability of effective, but
costly, therapy in a small subset of cases. Cytogenetic and molecular analysis
can be of great value in this diagnostic process. Emphasis can be made on the
advances of molecular genetics, which have characterized human genes involved in 
the hypothalamus-pituitary-GH axis such as GH, POU1F1, PROP1, GHRHR, GHR, IGF,
IGFR, HESX1, LHX3, LHX4, among others. Our current line of investigation is
related to the study of some of these genes and the genotype-phenotype relation
with the aim of identifying features that add some more light on the genetic
origins of short stature.

PMID: 16114273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Appl Genet. 2005;46(3):285-9.

MspI polymorphisms in the 3rd intron of the swine POU1F1 gene and their
associations with growth performance.

Song C(1), Gao B, Teng Y, Wang X, Wang Z, Li Q, Mi H, Jing R, Mao J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou City, 
12 Wenhui East Road, Jiangsu Province 225009, P.R. China. schengyi@hotmail.com

The study aimed to compare MspI polymorphisms in the 3rd intron of the porcine
gene encoding the pituitary-1 transcription factor (Pit-1, renamed as POU1F1)
among 5 breeds and to determine the associations between its genotypes and growth
performance in a commercial pig population by using the PCR-RFLP technique.
Significant differences in genotypic and allelic frequencies were found between
the meat-type and fat-type breeds (P < 0.05), and between miniature pigs and
others (P < 0.05). No breed deviated from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium
(verified by chi-square test). The general linear model analysis revealed that
higher body weight on day 180 (BW180) and average daily gain (ADG) were
significantly associated with POU1F1 DD genotype (P < 0.05). The differences in
BW180 and ADG between DD pigs and both CD and CC pigs were significant (P <
0.05), and the DD pigs had a significantly higher body weight on day 45 (BW45)
and on day 70 (BW70) than CC pigs (P < 0.05). All measured growth traits, except 
for body weight at birth (BWB), showed higher values in DD pigs. The D allele had
a favorable positive effect on growth traits. Thus POU1F1 is a potential major
gene or marker for growth traits.

PMID: 16110185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Eur J Endocrinol. 2005 Aug;153(2):335-44.

Pit-1 is expressed in normal and tumorous human breast and regulates GH secretion
and cell proliferation.

Gil-Puig C(1), Seoane S, Blanco M, Macia M, Garcia-Caballero T, Segura C,
Perez-Fernandez R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor pituitary-1 (Pit-1) is mainly expressed in
the pituitary gland, where it has critical roles in cell differentiation and as a
transcriptional factor for GH and prolactin (PRL). It is also expressed in human 
extrapituitary tissues (placenta, lymphoid and haematopoietic tissues) and cell
lines (human breast adenocarcinoma cells, MCF-7). Despite the widely suggested
roles of GH and PRL in the progression of proliferative mammary disorders, Pit-1 
expression in human mammary gland has not yet been reported.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the expression of Pit-1 in human breast and, using the
MCF-7 cell line, to investigate whether Pit-1 overexpression regulates GH
expression and increases cell proliferation.
METHODS: Using real-time RT-PCR, western blotting and immunohistochemistry, we
evaluated the expression of Pit-1 mRNA and protein in seven normal human breasts 
and 14 invasive ductal mammary carcinomas. GH regulation by Pit-1 in MCF-7 cells 
was evaluated using RT-PCR, western blotting, ELISA and transfection assays. Cell
proliferation was evaluated using bromodeoxyuridine.
RESULTS: We found expression of Pit-1 mRNA and protein in both normal and
tumorous human breast. We also found that Pit-1 mRNA levels were significantly
increased in breast carcinoma compared with normal breast. In MCF-7 cells, Pit-1 
overexpression increased GH mRNA and protein concentrations and significantly
increased cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that Pit-1 is expressed in human breast,
that it regulates endogenous human mammary GH secretion, and that it increases
cell proliferation. This suggests that, depending on its level of expression,
Pit-1 may be involved in normal mammary development, breast disorders, or both.

PMID: 16061841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2005 Aug;63(2):121-30.

Growth hormone deficiency and combined pituitary hormone deficiency: does the
genotype matter?

Dattani MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry, Endocrinology and Metabolism Unit, Institute for Child Health,
London, UK. mdattani@ich.ucl.ac.uk

The past 12 years have witnessed an explosion in our understanding of the
development of the anterior pituitary gland, and of mechanisms that underlie the 
diagnosis of growth hormone deficiency (GHD) and combined pituitary hormone
deficiency (CPHD). The anterior pituitary is the end-product of a carefully
orchestrated pattern of expression of signalling molecules and transcription
factors that leads to the development of this complex organ secreting six
hormones from five different cell types. Naturally occurring and transgenic
murine models have demonstrated a role for many of these molecules in the
aetiology of GHD/CPHD. These include the transcription factors HESX1, PROP1,
POU1F1, LHX3, LHX4, GLI2 and SOX3. Depending upon the expression patterns of
these molecules, the phenotype may consist of isolated hypopituitarism, or more
complex disorders such as septo-optic dysplasia (SOD) and holoprosencephaly. The 
phenotype and the mode of inheritance can be highly variable. Novel mutations
within the GH-1 and GHRHR genes have also shed light on the phenotype and
pathogenesis of isolated GHD (IGHD). To date, genetic mutations have been
identified in a modest proportion of patients with IGHD/CPHD and associated
syndromes such as SOD. It is, however, clear that many genes remain to be
identified, and characterization of these will further elucidate the pathogenesis
of these complex conditions.

PMID: 16060904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Neuroendocrinology. 2005;81(4):217-28. Epub 2005 Jul 21.

Stimulatory effect of interleukin-1beta on growth hormone gene expression and
growth hormone release from rat GH3 cells.

Gong FY(1), Deng JY, Shi YF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Beijing Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, China.

Our previous studies demonstrated that interferon gamma increases the human (h)
growth hormone (GH) gene promoter activity in rat pituitary GH3 cells, and its
regulatory mechanism may be different from the classical GH-releasing
hormone-induced regulatory mechanism. Interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) is thought to 
induce the release of GH by pituitary cells, but whether or not and by which
mechanisms IL-1beta regulates GH synthesis remains unclear. The purpose of our
study was thus to investigate the effect of IL-1beta on the hGH gene expression
in GH3 rat pituitary tumor cells using stable transfection of the hGH promoter
fused to a luciferase reporter gene. Our results showed that IL-1beta (10-10(4)
U/ml) increased GH secretion and synthesis and that 10(2) to 10(4) U/ml IL-1beta 
promoted the luciferase expression in stable GH3 cells, with a maximal action of 
1.61 times over that of controls. Among inhibitors of intracellular signaling
transduction pathways, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MAPKK/MEK)
inhibitor PD98059 (40 microM) and p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580 (5 microM)blocked
completely the stimulatory effect of IL-1beta, and the phosphoinositide 3-kinase 
inhibitor LY294002 (10 microM) blocked partially the induction of IL-1beta.
Western blot analysis demonstrated that IL-1beta increased the activation of
phosphorylated MEK and p38 MAPK in GH3 cells. Neither overexpression of Pit-1 nor
inhibiting Pit-1 expression affected IL-1beta induction of hGH promoter activity.
To identify the DNA sequence that mediated the effect of IL-1beta, six deletion
constructs of hGH promoter were created. The stimulatory effect of IL-1beta was
abolished following deletion of the -196- to -132-bp fragment. In conclusion, our
data show that IL-1beta promotes GH secretion and synthesis by rat pituitary GH3 
cells. The stimulatory effect of IL-1beta on the hGH gene promoter appears to
require the activation of MEK, p38 MAPK, and phosphoinositide 3-kinase and a
fragment of promoter sequence that spans the -196- to -132-bp fragment of the
gene, but is unrelated to the Pit-1 protein.

Copyright 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16043966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Sep;90(9):5456-62. Epub 2005 Jul 5.

Functional relationship between LHX4 and POU1F1 in light of the LHX4 mutation
identified in patients with pituitary defects.

Machinis K(1), Amselem S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 654, Hôpital 
Henri Mondor, 94010 Créteil, France.

CONTEXT: Pituitary development depends on the actions of a large number of
transcription factors. Among them, LHX4 is believed to play a crucial role, as
suggested by the dominantly inherited GH deficiency associated with the recently 
identified LHX4 mutation, although the precise mechanism underlying this
phenotype is still to be elucidated.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to gain insight into both the function
of LHX4 and the pathophysiology of the LHX4-related syndrome. We sought potential
targets of this factor and assessed the abilities of various recombinant LHX4
isoforms expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells to bind to and activate the
POUI1F1 upstream regulatory sequence.
RESULTS: We show that normal LHX4 binds to a human-specific element and
subsequently activates transcription from the proximal upstream regulatory
sequence of POUIF1, a gene encoding a POU homeodomain transcription factor known 
as the main regulator of GH expression. As shown in this cell system, the mutant 
LHX4 proteins predicted by the defect identified in patients fail to bind to and 
subsequently activate the POU1F1 regulatory sequence, but do not impair the
ability of normal LHX4 to activate this target.
CONCLUSIONS: Such findings are consistent with the existence, in humans, of an
LHX4-driven pathway leading to the expression of GH through transcriptional
activation of POU1F1. They argue against a dominant-negative effect of the mutant
LHX4 proteins over normal LHX4. Finally, they provide a clear-cut evaluation of
the functional consequences, at the molecular level, of the LHX4 mutation, which,
through disruption of the former pathway, would account for one key feature of
the LHX4-related syndrome.

PMID: 15998782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Aug;90(8):4762-70. Epub 2005 May 31.

Novel mutations within the POU1F1 gene associated with variable combined
pituitary hormone deficiency.

Turton JP(1), Reynaud R, Mehta A, Torpiano J, Saveanu A, Woods KS, Tiulpakov A,
Zdravkovic V, Hamilton J, Attard-Montalto S, Parascandalo R, Vella C, Clayton PE,
Shalet S, Barton J, Brue T, Dattani MT.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry, Endocrinology, and Metabolism Unit and London Centre for
Paediatric Endocrinology, Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom.

CONTEXT: Mutations within the gene encoding the pituitary-specific transcription 
factor POU1F1 are associated with combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD).
Most of the affected individuals manifest GH, prolactin, and TSH deficiency.
OBJECTIVE: We have now screened 129 individuals with CPHD and isolated GH
deficiency for mutations within POU1F1.
RESULTS: Causative mutations were identified in 10 of 129 individuals (7.8%). Of 
these, five patients harbored the dominant negative R271W mutation, which is a
well-recognized mutational hot spot. We have also identified a second frequently 
occurring mutation, E230K, which appears to be common in Maltese patients.
Additionally, we describe two novel mutations within POU1F1, an insertion of a
single base pair (ins778A) and a missense mutation (R172Q). Functional studies
have revealed that POU1F1 (E230K) is associated with a reduction in
transactivation, although DNA-binding affinity is similar to the wild-type
protein. On the other hand, POU1F1 (R172Q) is associated with a reduction in DNA 
binding and transactivation, whereas POU1F1 (ins778A) is associated with loss of 
DNA binding and a reduction in transactivation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the phenotype associated with POU1F1 mutations
may be more variable, with the occasional preservation of TSH secretion.
Additionally, our data revealed POU1F1 mutations in three patients who were
diagnosed as having ACTH deficiency but who, on further evaluation, were found to
have normal cortisol secretion. Hence, elucidation of the genotype led to further
evaluation of the phenotype, with the cessation of cortisol replacement that had 
been commenced unnecessarily. These data reflect the importance of mutational
analysis in patients with CPHD.

PMID: 15928241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Med Wieku Rozwoj. 2004 Jul-Sep;8(3 Pt 2):678-89.

[Molecular-genetic aspects of congenital hypothyroidism].

[Article in Polish]

Lacka K(1), Ogrodowicz A.

Author information: 
(1)Katedra Endokrynologii, Przemiany Materii i Chorób Wewnetrznych, Akademia
Medyczna im. K. Marcinkowskiego, Przybyszewskiego 49, 60-355 Poznan, Poland.
k_lacka@wp.pl

Congenital hypothyroidism manifests a complex of symptoms caused by a total lack 
or significant deficiency of thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3) in foetal
life and in the first years of child's life. The incidence of congenital
hypothyroidism is 1 per 3000-4000 newborns in the world and l per 4800 in Poland.
There are two main causes of congenital hypothyroidism: defects of thyroid
development (about 90%), defects of thyroid hormones biosynthesis (~10%), and the
more seldom occurring defects of the TBG proteins (thyroxine binding globulin) or
resistance. syndrome to thyroid hormones. Defects of thyroid gland development
include ectopia, hypoplasia or complete lack of the thyroid (athyreosis). These
defects are caused by immunological, factors, drugs as well as genetic factors
such as: TSH receptor gene or thyroid transcription factors: PAX 8. TTF l, TTF 2,
Pit 1, Prop 1. Defects of thyroid hormones biosynthesis are inherited as
autosomal recessive. There are 5 main defects of thyroid hormones biosynthesis:
iodide transport (mutation of hNIS gene), iodine oxygenation (mutation of TPO,
THOX, PDS genes), the iodination of the tyrosine of thyroglobulin and their
conjunction (the mutation of TPO TG, PDS genes), the hydrolysis of the T3 and T4 
as well as deiodination. Searching molecular-genetic basis of congenital
hypothyroidism may improve its diagnostics, make possible to introduce genetic
examination among patients with congenital hypothyroidism and their family
members and may make gene therapy possible in the future.

PMID: 15858240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Apr;18(4):385-93.

Three novel mutations in POU1F1 in Israeli patients with combined pituitary
hormone deficiency.

Gat-Yablonski G(1), Klar A, Hirsch D, Eliakim A, Lazar L, Hurvitz H, Phillip M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Endocrinology and Diabetes, National Center for Childhood
Diabetes, Schneider Children 's Medical Center of Israel, Petah Tiqva, Israel.

BACKGROUND: POU1F1, a pituitary-specific transcription factor of the class 1 POU 
family, is crucial for the development and differentiation of the anterior
pituitary gland. Mutations in the POU1F1 gene have been shown to be responsible
for a syndrome of combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD), including
prolactin, growth hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone deficiencies.
METHODS: Five patients with CPHD from three families were evaluated. The clinical
and biochemical data were taken from the medical records. DNA was analyzed by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), 
and sequencing.
RESULTS: Molecular analysis yielded three novel mutations in POU1F1: W193X, Q242R
(-2 bp), and F262L.
CONCLUSIONS: Three novel POU1F1 mutations were detected in Israeli patients with 
CPHD. Two of them, a W193X missense mutation and a deletion of two adenine bases 
at position 242Q, may lead to the production of a truncated protein that lacks
the entire POU homeodomain or part of it, respectively. The third mutation,
F262L, resides in the POU homeodomain and hence might change the activity of the 
protein.

PMID: 15844473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Circ Res. 2005 Apr 15;96(7):717-22.

Regulation of vascular calcification: roles of phosphate and osteopontin.

Giachelli CM(1), Speer MY, Li X, Rajachar RM, Yang H.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Department, University of Washington, Seattle, Wash 98195, USA.
ceci@u.washington.edu

Vascular calcification is prevalent in aging as well as a number of pathological 
conditions, and it is now recognized as a strong predictor of cardiovascular
events in the general population as well as diabetic and end-stage renal disease 
patients. Vascular calcification is a highly regulated process involving
inductive and inhibitory mechanisms. This article focuses on two molecules,
phosphate and osteopontin, that have been implicated in the induction or
inhibition of vascular calcification, respectively. Elevated phosphate is of
interest because hyperphosphatemia is recognized as a major nonconventional risk 
factor for cardiovascular disease mortality in end-stage renal disease patients. 
Studies to date suggest that elevated phosphate stimulates smooth muscle cell
phenotypic transition and mineralization via the activity of a sodium-dependent
phosphate cotransporter. Osteopontin, however, appears to block vascular
calcification most likely by preventing calcium phosphate crystal growth and
inducing cellular mineral resorption.

PMID: 15831823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Endocrinol. 2005 Apr;185(1):173-85.

Pit-1beta reduces transcription and CREB-binding protein recruitment in a DNA
context-dependent manner.

Ferry AL(1), Locasto DM, Meszaros LB, Bailey JC, Jonsen MD, Brodsky K, Hoon CJ,
Gutierrez-Hartmann A, Diamond SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Kentucky College of Medicine,
Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

Many transcription factors are expressed as multiple isoforms with distinct
effects on the regulation of gene expression, and the functional consequences of 
structural differences between transcription factor isoforms may allow for
precise control of gene expression. The pituitary transcription factor isoforms
Pit-1 and Pit-1beta differentially regulate anterior pituitary hormone gene
expression. Pit-1 is required for the development of and appropriate hormone
expression by anterior pituitary somatotrophs and lactotrophs. Pit-1beta differs 
structurally from Pit-1 by the splice-insertion of the 26-residue beta-domain in 
the trans-activation domain, and it differs functionally from Pit-1 in that it
represses expression of the prolactin promoter in a cell-type specific manner. In
order to identify signal and promoter context requirements for repression by
Pit-1beta, we examined its function in the presence of physiological regulatory
signals as well as wild-type and mutant Pit-1-dependent target promoters. Here,
we demonstrate that Pit-1beta impairs recruitment of cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB)-binding protein to the promoters that it
represses. In addition, we show that repression of target promoter activity,
reduction in promoter histone acetylation, and decrease of CREB-binding protein
recruitment all depend on promoter context. These findings provide a mechanism
for promoter-specific repression by Pit-1beta.

PMID: 15817838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Jul;19(7):1904-17. Epub 2005 Feb 24.

Epigenetic mechanisms in the dopamine D2 receptor-dependent inhibition of the
prolactin gene.

Liu JC(1), Baker RE, Chow W, Sun CK, Elsholtz HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 100
College Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1L5.

Transcription of the prolactin gene is dynamically controlled by positive and
negative hormone signals that target the regulatory promoter region. Based on the
inducibility of prolactin gene expression by inhibitors of histone deacetylases
(HDACs), we examined the role of histone acetylation at the genomic prolactin
promoter as a late step in transcriptional regulation. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis of GH4 cells revealed elevated levels of acetylated 
histones in the promoter and enhancer regions of the gene, compared with
downstream intron sequences. 17beta-Estradiol stimulated histone H4 acetylation
in the promoter region by 2- to 3-fold within 30 min. Dopamine inhibited histone 
H4 acetylation by 2-fold in 30 min, an effect mimicked by the MAPK kinase (MEK1) 
inhibitor U0126. In contrast, the synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone, which
inhibits prolactin transcription, failed to alter histone acetylation over the
same time frame. Association of transcription activator Pit-1 with the prolactin 
promoter was unchanged by hormone treatment. However, in response to dopamine,
histone deacetylase HDAC2 and corepressor mSin3A were rapidly recruited to the
prolactin promoter, and association was sustained above basal levels over a 1-h
period. Consistent with this corepressor function, depletion of endogenous mSin3A
by small interfering RNA was sufficient to enhance prolactin gene expression by
70%, comparable to the induction by the HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A. These
studies demonstrate that dopamine D2 receptor activation and inhibition of MAPK
(ERK1/2) signaling lead to rapid deacetylation of histones at the genomic
prolactin promoter. Recruitment of specific HDAC/ corepressor complexes may be an
important mechanism for repression of target gene transcription by Gi/o-coupled
receptors.

PMID: 15731170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2005 Feb;62(2):163-8.

Mutation analysis of POUF-1, PROP-1 and HESX-1 show low frequency of mutations in
children with sporadic forms of combined pituitary hormone deficiency and
septo-optic dysplasia.

Rainbow LA(1), Rees SA, Shaikh MG, Shaw NJ, Cole T, Barrett TG, Kirk JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Mutations in the genes encoding the transcription factors PROP1 and
POUF-1 (Pit-1) have been reported as common causes of combined pituitary hormone 
deficiency (CPHD), and HESX1 mutations have been identified in children with
septo-optic dysplasia (SOD). There are few data on UK children. We have performed
mutation analysis in a large cohort of affected children within the West Midlands
region to assess the feasibility of a screening strategy for molecular diagnosis 
in CPHD and SOD.
DESIGN AND PATIENTS: The three coding exons of PROP1, and six exons of POUF-1 in 
27 children from 26 families with CPHD, and three exons of HESX1 in 23 children
from 22 families with SOD were directly sequenced from a well-characterized
regional cohort.
RESULTS: We identified a C to T transition in exon 6 of POUF-1, resulting in a
known missense mutation (R271W) in a mother and daughter from one family with
CPHD. We also found a novel homozygous T to C transition in exon 6 of POUF-1,
resulting in a missense mutation (F233L) in a twin with CPHD. This mutation was
excluded in 100 ethnically matched control alleles. We did not identify any
mutations in the PROP1 gene or HESX1. The median maternal age at delivery for the
CPHD children was 27 years, compared to 21 years for the mothers of SOD children 
(P = 0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in POUF-1, PROP1 and HESX1 are rare causes of CPHD and
SOD, respectively, in children from the West Midlands. In particular, we did not 
confirm the reported 'hotspot' in PROP1. A screening strategy that targets
familial cases is highly likely to increase the mutation yield. The young
maternal age at conception of children with SOD and potential teratogen exposure 
indicate the predominance of environmental factors in this condition compared
with CPHD.

PMID: 15670191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Yi Chuan. 2004 Nov;26(6):957-61.

[Progress on pituitary-specific transcription factor (POU1F1) in poultry].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang RS(1), Yang N.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100094, China. jrsahpoultry@sina.com

Prolactin (PRL),Growth Hormone (GH), and Thyroid-stimulating
Hormone-beta(TSHbeta), secreting by chicken anterior pituitary, are essential
hormones affecting chicken laying ability, growth rate, and immunity via
regulating chicken broodiness, development, and immune response. Avian
pituitary-specific transcription factor (POU1F1) is one of important
transcription factors of GH, PRL, and TSHbetagene. POU1F1 plays an important role
in avian growth, development and reproduction via regulating the expression of
these genes. The gene organization and the expression characters of poultry Pit-1
were discussed comparing with those of mammals, and the functions of POU1F1 were 
also elucidated in the review. Considering the biological importance of POU1F1
and the results got in our research, we suggested that Pit-1 be a candidate gene 
for growth, egg laying and broodiness research in poultry.

PMID: 15640133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Yi Chuan. 2004 Nov;26(6):815-21.

[Variation and homologous analysis of parts of pig POU1F1 gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Teng Y(1), Jing RB, Song CY, Yang HM.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Yangzhou University,
Yangzhou 225009, China. yteng@hotmail.com

By PCR approach, exon4, exon5 and exon6 of POU1F1 gene of Landrace, Duroc,
Yorkshire, Jiangquhai, Meishan, and w Xiangzhu are amplified, and PCR products
contained exon 4,exon6 and the cloning product of exon5 were sequenced. The
results showed that exon4 of POU1F1 gene had the Nla III polymorphisms
characteristics, the mutation was T-->C. The sequences were digested by Nla III, 
and two different genotypes(GG and HH) were produced; but exon 5 and exon 6 of
POU1F1 gene were high conservation in the six pig breeds. The result of
homologous analysis showed that the homologous rate of nucleotide sequences of
the exon4 in human, pig, mouse and cow was 93.9%,86.7%,92.1% respectively and the
amino acid sequence of POU specific domain encoded by exon4 of POU1F1 gene in
human, pig ,mouse and cow was identical. And the result of homologous analysis of
nucleotide sequences encoding POU1F1 POU-homeo domain in human, pig, mouse, cow
was 91.4%,85.1%,87.9% respectively, the homologous rate of the amino acid
sequence of POU-homeo domain was 96.6%,94.8%,90.2% respectively. This showed that
the sequences of the POU1F1 POU-homeo domain and the POU-specific domain encoded 
by exon4 in mammals were high conservation, pigs could be used to establish
animal models of related diseases, providing scientific foundation and serving
for human medicine.

PMID: 15640109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Apr;19(4):964-71. Epub 2005 Jan 6.

Pituitary transcription factor-1 induces transient differentiation of adult
hepatic stem cells into prolactin-producing cells in vivo.

Lee EJ(1), Russell T, Hurley L, Jameson JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611-2908, USA.

A subset of transcription factors function as pivotal regulators of cell
differentiation pathways. Pituitary transcription factor-1 (Pit-1) is a
tissue-specific homeodomain protein that specifies the development of pituitary
somatotropes and lactotropes. In this study, adenovirus was used to deliver rat
Pit-1 to mouse liver. Pit-1 expression was detected in the majority (50-80%) of
hepatocyte nuclei after tail vein injection (2 x 10(9) plaque forming units).
Pit-1 activated hepatic expression of the endogenous prolactin (PRL), GH, and
TSHbeta genes along with several other markers of lactotrope progenitor cells.
Focal clusters (0.2-0.5% of liver cells per tissue section) of periportal cells
were positive for PRL by immunofluorescent staining. The PRL-producing cells also
expressed proliferating cell nuclear antigen as well as the hepatic stem cell
markers (c-Kit, Thy1, and cytokeratin 14). These data indicate that Pit-1 induces
the transient differentiation of hepatic progenitor cells into PRL-producing
cells, providing additional evidence that transcription factors can specify the
differentiation pathway of adult stem cells.

PMID: 15637144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Apr;19(4):1004-11. Epub 2004 Dec 23.

The zinc finger Ikaros transcription factor regulates pituitary growth hormone
and prolactin gene expression through distinct effects on chromatin
accessibility.

Ezzat S(1), Yu S, Asa SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital and University of Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

The Ikaros transcription factors perform critical functions in the control of
lymphohematopoiesis and immune regulation. Family members contain multiple zinc
fingers that mediate DNA binding but have also been implicated as part of a
complex chromatin-remodeling network. We show here that Ikaros is expressed in
pituitary mammosomatotrophs where it regulates the GH and prolactin (PRL) genes. 
Ikaros was detected by Northern and Western blotting in GH4 pituitary
mammosomatotroph cells. Wild-type Ikaros (Ik1) inhibits GH mRNA and protein
expression but stimulates PRL mRNA and protein levels. Ikaros does not bind
directly to the proximal GH promoter but abrogates the effect of the histone
deacetylation inhibitor trichostatin A on this region. Ikaros selectively
deacetylates histone 3 residues on the proximal transfected or endogenous GH
promoter and limits access of the Pit1 activator. In contrast, Ikaros acetylates 
histone 3 on the proximal PRL promoter and facilitates Pit1 binding to this
region in the same cells. These data provide evidence for Ikaros-mediated histone
acetylation and chromatin remodeling in the selective regulation of pituitary GH 
and PRL hormone gene expression.

PMID: 15618287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2005 Jan 14;229(1-2):127-39.

EGF stimulates Pit-1 independent transcription of the human prolactin pituitary
promoter in human breast cancer SK-BR-3 cells through its proximal AP-1 response 
element.

Manfroid I(1), Van de Weerdt C, Baudhuin A, Martial JA, Muller M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique, Institut de Chimie 
B6, Université de Liège, B-4000 Sart-Tilman, Belgium.

Normal and neoplastic human mammary gland cells are targets for the proliferative
action of prolactin. These cells also synthesize prolactin, thereby inducing an
autocrine/paracrine proliferative loop. We present the first extensive analysis
of the transcriptional regulation of the human prolactin gene (hPRL) in human
mammary tumor cells, SK-BR-3. We show that the pituitary promoter is functional
in these cells in the absence of the pituitary-specific factor Pit-1. Expression 
of exogenous Pit-1 or epidermal growth factor (EGF) treatment stimulates the
transfected hPRL pituitary promoter and the endogenous hPRL expression. EGF
stimulation is mediated by increased synthesis of c-fos and c-jun, resulting in
AP-1 binding to the proximal hPRL pituitary promoter. This regulation involves
the EGF receptor, possibly ErbB2 that is highly expressed in SK-BR-3 cells, and a
PI3K/JNK pathway. The stimulation of hPRL gene transcription by EGF in mammary
cells may include hPRL in a complex regulatory network controlling growth of
human mammary cells.

PMID: 15607537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2004 Dec;14(6):442-8.

Pituitary hormone deficiencies due to transcription factor gene alterations.

Reynaud R(1), Saveanu A, Barlier A, Enjalbert A, Brue T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Timone, Marseille, 
France.

Mechanisms that control pituitary development are gradually better understood.
They involve molecular signals from surrounding structures and the expression of 
a cascade of homeodomain transcription factors. Mutations of these transcription 
factors cause defects of embryologic development of the anterior pituitary
responsible for isolated or multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies
(respectively, IPHD and MPHD) in both rodents and humans. In this review we
emphasize the description of human phenotypes associated with genetic alterations
found in IPHD (e.g. isolated corticotroph deficiency and Tpit mutations) and MPHD
(mutations of POU1F1, PROP1, Hesx1, Lhx3, Lhx4, Ptx2).

PMID: 15519252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Endocrinol Invest. 2004 May;27(5):496-509.

Magnetic resonance imaging of the hypothalamus-pituitary unit in
childrensuspected of hypopituitarism: who, how and when toinvestigate.

Maghnie M(1), Ghirardello S, Genovese E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, IRCCS S. Matteo Policlinic, University of Pavia,
Pavia, Italy. maghnie@smatteo.pv.it

The magnetic resonance (MR) identification of pituitary hyperintensity in the
posterior part of the sella has been the most striking recent finding
contributing to the diagnosis of "idiopathic" and permanent GH deficiency (GHD). 
Moreover, advancements in DNA technology have shed new light on the study of the 
genetic causes of hypopituitarism. Abnormalities in two genes, the GH-N encoding 
the GH and the GHRH receptor (GHRH-R), have been identified, while mutations in
five other gene-encoding transcription factors such as Pit-1, Prop-1, Hesx-1,
Lhx-3 and Lhx-4 involved in anterior pituitary development, have also been
described. MR imaging shows marked differences in pituitary morphology indicating
different GHD etiologies and different prognoses. Ectopic posterior pituitary is 
a specific marker of permanent GHD. These patients do not have Pit-1, Prop-1, or 
Lhx-3 mutations and should be carefully monitored for evolving pituitary hormone 
defects, though they do not require GH re-evaluation in adulthood; selected cases
may have Hesx-1 or Lhx-4 mutations. MR evidence of normal or small anterior
pituitary gland, enlarged empty sella, pituitary hyperplasia and/or intrasellar
or suprasellar mass when associated with combined pituitary hormone deficiency
call for molecular analysis of Pit-1, Prop-1, Hesx-1, or Lhx-3. Limitation of
neck rotation and Chiari-I malformation may suggest Lhx-3 or Lhx-4 mutations
(exceedingly rare). In "idiopathic" isolated GHD, evidence of normal anterior or 
small anterior pituitary size with normal location of posterior pituitary and
normal connection between the hypothalamus and pituitary gland is suggestive of
"transitory" or false positive GHD; patients with such characteristics should be 
re-evaluated well before reaching adult height. In selected cases, anterior
pituitary height that is 2 SD below age-adjusted normal pituitary height could be
suggestive of GHRH-R gene defect; it is worth pointing out that normal pituitary 
MR together with severe GHD has been observed, though rarely, in subjects with a 
genetic origin of GHD.

PMID: 15279086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Anim Genet. 2004 Aug;35(4):344-6.

A new single nucleotide polymorphism in the chicken pituitary-specific
transcription factor (POU1F1) gene associated with growth rate.

Jiang R(1), Li J, Qu L, Li H, Yang N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Genetics and Breeding, China Agricultural University,
Beijing, China.

The pituitary-specific transcription factor (POU1F1) is a protein which binds to 
and transactivates promoters of growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL) and
thyroid-stimulating hormone chain (TSHB)-encoding genes. Ten chicken populations 
(n = 662), including six Chinese indigenous breeds, White Leghorn,
paternal/maternal lines of brown egg layer and a paternal line of broiler, were
used to detect single nucleotide polymorphisms in the pituitary-specific
transcription factor gene (PIT1) by means of PCR-SSCP. A nucleotide transversion 
from adenine (A) to thymidine (T) at position 980 of the open reading frame of
the PIT1 cDNA (GenBank accession no. AF029892) was identified. This nucleotide
transversion results in an alteration of codon 299 from AAC to ATC, which leads
to a change from asparagine (Asn) to isoleucine (Ile) in the POU domain of
POU1F1. The distribution of allele and genotype frequencies differed
significantly between meat-type chickens (higher frequencies of A and A/A) and
layer-type chickens (P < 0.01). Another experimental population with growth
records was used to evaluate the relationship between this polymorphism and
growth rate. The results revealed a positive relationship between genotype A/A
and body weight at 8 weeks of age, indicating that the SNP in PIT1 gene is a
potential molecular marker for early growth rate in chicken.

PMID: 15265078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Endocr J. 2004 Jun;51(3):287-93.

A case of acquired deficiency of pituitary GH, PRL and TSH, associated with type 
1 diabetes mellitus.

Saito T(1), Tojo K, Kuriyama G, Murakawa Y, Fujimoto K, Taniguchi K, Tanii K,
Katakami H, Hashimoto K, Tajima N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Jikei
University School of Medicine, Minato-ku, Tokyo 105-8461, Japan.

A 75-year-old male showed combined anterior pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD). 
Basal and TRH-stimulated PRL levels were undetectable. Basal and GRH-stimulated
GH levels were very low, and could barely be measured by means of an
ultrasensitive enzyme immunoassay. In addition, basal TSH levels were under the
normal limit, and TRH-stimulated TSH secretions were impaired. On the other hand,
the secretions of ACTH, LH and FSH remained intact. There was no mutation of
Pit-1 gene in this patient, and immunohistochemical studies using human pituitary
and the patient's serum showed no positive staining. The HLA types frequently
detected in lymphocytic hypophysitis were recognized, supporting the view that
the CPHD in this case may be caused by lymphocytic hypophysitis, although
magnetic resonance imaging of the pituitary gland showed no specific findings.
Interestingly, a high titer of anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody,
suggested that the patient suffered from type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM). Five
years ago, his thyroid function was normal and the treatment of DM with oral
hypoglycemic agent was effective, indicating that the onset of both diseases at
least occurred within the last half decade. We report here a rare case of SPIDDM 
with CPHD which might be caused by lymphocytic hypophysitis.

PMID: 15256773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Endocr Pract. 1999 May-Jun;5(3):143-7.

Hypopituitarism in two brothers born by breech delivery.

del Rincón JP(1), Lerman I, Vázquez-Lamadrid J, Gómez-Pérez FJ, Granados J,
Morales JJ, Mutchinick O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Instituto Nacional de la Nutrición Salvador
Zubirán, Mexico City, Mexico.

OBJECTIVE: To describe two brothers with hypopituitarism who had been born by
breech delivery and to discuss whether this condition corresponds to a familial
form or to a pituitary stalk section as a result of the breech delivery.
METHODS: We present the clinical, biochemical, and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) characteristics of two Mexican brothers, 19 and 21 years old, with
hypopituitarism and a history of breech delivery.
RESULTS: Physical examination of both patients showed short stature with normal
body proportions, an obviously younger appearance than that expected for their
chronologic age, high-pitched voice, irregularly positioned teeth, no axillary or
pubic hair, and prepubertal genitalia. Biochemical testing showed low thyroxine
and free thyroxine values with inadequate or normal thyrotropin, low basal
testosterone, and mildly increased serum prolactin levels. Stimulation tests
showed a normal and a delayed thyrotropin response to thyrotropin-releasing
hormone, subnormal serum cortisol, considerably blunted growth hormone (GH)
response to insulin-induced hypoglycemia, and absence of GH response to
GH-releasing hormone in both cases. MRI showed an ectopic neuropituitary gland.
In case 1, a caudal portion of a very thin pituitary stalk was observed,
suggesting the preservation of a vascular component of the stalk. Because both
parents of these brothers shared the major histocompatibility complex haplotype
HLA-A*2301, B*3501, DRB1*0407, DQA1*03, DQB1*0201, consanguinity was suggested.
CONCLUSION: The phenotype of these patients differs from that described in
families with POU1F1 (Pit-1) and PROP1 mutations. These cases are most likely
related to an autosomal recessive gene mutation that warrants further research.
To our knowledge, this is the first report of hypopituitarism in two brothers
born by breech delivery.

PMID: 15251687  [PubMed]


179. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Jul 1;92(4):664-78.

Inactivating Pit-1 mutations alter subnuclear dynamics suggesting a protein
misfolding and nuclear stress response.

Sharp ZD(1), Stenoien DL, Mancini MG, Ouspenski II, Mancini MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77003, USA.

Pit-1, a POU-class nuclear DNA-binding transcription factor, specifies three of
the parenchymal cell types in anterior pituitary ontogeny. Using fluorescent
fusions and live cell imaging, we have compared the dynamic behavior of wild-type
and inactivating Pit-1 point mutations. Fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching (FRAP) and real-time extraction data indicate that wild-type Pit-1
has a dynamic mobility profile, with t(1/2s) approximately 5-7 s when expressed
from low to high amounts, respectively. Biochemically, Pit-1 is approximately 50%
retained according to direct observation during extraction, indicating a dynamic 
interaction with nuclear structure. An analysis of transiently expressed Pit-1
carrying two different debilitating mutations reveals that they translocate
normally to the nucleus, but exhibit two different levels of mobility, both
clearly distinguishable from wild-type Pit-1. At low expression levels, the
t(1/2s) of Pit(W261C) and Pit(A158P) are extremely rapid (0.3 and 0.6 s t(1/2s), 
respectively). At higher expression levels, unlike wild-type Pit-1, both mutant
proteins become immobilized and insoluble, and fractionate completely with the
insoluble nuclear matrix. Relative to wild-type, over expression of mutated Pit-1
elicits a nuclear stress response indicated by increased levels of heat shock
inducible heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70), and reorganization of heat shock
factor-1. The decreased mobility of Pit(A158P) relative to Pit(W261C) at low
expression levels correlates with its ability to partially activate when
expressed at low levels and its ability to bind cognate DNA. At high expression
levels, lower Pit(A158P) activation correlates with its immobilization and
insolubility. These data suggest a link between specific rates of intranuclear
mobility and Pit-1 transcription function, perhaps to insure sufficient
interactions with chromatin, or in the case of non-DNA binding Pit-1, interaction
as a repressor. These data imply inactivating mutations can lead to an
intranuclear sorting away from transcription related pathways, and at least in
part to a misfolded protein pathway. Taken together, caution is suggested when
interpreting point (or other) mutational analyses of transactivator function, as 
new compartmentation, especially in the context of expression levels, may cloud
the distinction between defining functional molecular domains and intranuclear
processing of misfolded proteins.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15211565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Presse Med. 2004 Mar 27;33(6):400-5.

[Congenital hypopituitarism: when should transcription factor gene screenings be 
performed?].

[Article in French]

Reynaud R(1), Barlier A, Chadli-Chaieb M, Saveanu A, Simonin G, Enjalbert A, Brue
T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire interactions cellulaires neuro-endocriniennes, CNRS UMR 6544,
Institut fédératif Jean Roche, faculté de médecine, université de la
Méditerranée, Marseille.

THE GENETIC ORIGIN INCREASINGLY INCRIMINATED: Congenital pituitary hormone
deficiencies represent conditions of hypopituitarism resulting from abnormal
pituitary ontogenesis. This group of genetically determined diseases has
considerably widened with the development of molecular biology. Many
transcription factors playing a role in pituitary development have been
identified, and their mutations reported as causes of isolated or multiple
pituitary hormone deficiencies. Isolated pituitary hormone deficiencies may
affect somatotroph, gonadotroph, and corticotroph lineages. They result from
mutations of the genes of hormones (such as growth hormone), of a factor that
regulates their synthesis or secretion (such as TPIT for corticotrophics), or of 
their receptors (GHRH or GnRH receptor genes). Multiple (or combined) pituitary
hormone deficiencies result in the concomitant or sequential onset of several
anterior pituitary hormone deficiencies. They are due to mutations of
transcription factors involved in the early steps of pituitary development (RIEG,
HesX1, LHX4, LHX3, Prop1, POU1F1/Pit-1), and are associated with various
phenotypes. FOR BETTER MANAGEMENT: Long-term follow-up of these patients and
functional studies of the mutations identified in specialized research centers
will help to determine phenotype-genotype correlations, hence providing a
valuable help to the management of these orphan diseases.

PMID: 15105786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Jun;18(6):1558-69. Epub 2004 Mar 18.

Activin inhibits pituitary prolactin expression and cell growth through Smads,
Pit-1 and menin.

Lacerte A(1), Lee EH, Reynaud R, Canaff L, De Guise C, Devost D, Ali S, Hendy GN,
Lebrun JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Royal Victoria Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, H3A 1A1,
Canada.

Activin, a member of the TGFbeta superfamily, is a negative regulator of cell
growth and prolactin (PRL) production in pituitary lactotrope cells. However, the
mechanisms by which this growth factor exerts its growth-inhibitory and
-repressive effect on PRL remain unclear. In this study, we show that activin
negatively regulates PRL expression at the transcriptional level through the Smad
pathway and the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 gene product, menin. Our
results also demonstrate that the tumor suppressor menin is required for
activin-induced growth arrest of somatolactotrope cells. Moreover, we show that
activin represses transcription and expression of Pit-1, a pituitary
transcription factor that is essential for maintenance and development of
lactotrope cells. We defined two Pit-1 DNA-binding sites in the proximal region
of the PRL promoter as critical for the activin-mediated inhibition. Together,
our results highlight the Smad pathway and the tumor suppressor menin as key
regulators of activin effects on PRL and Pit-1 expression, as well as on cell
growth inhibition, and emphasize the critical role of activin in the regulation
of pituitary function.

PMID: 15031321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2003;102(1-4):201-6.

Genetic mapping of GBE1 and its association with glycogen storage disease IV in
American Quarter horses.

Ward TL(1), Valberg SJ, Lear TL, Guérin G, Milenkovic D, Swinburne JE, Binns MM, 
Raudsepp T, Skow L, Chowdhary BP, Mickelson JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary PathoBiology, University of Minnesota, St Paul, MN
55108, USA.

Comparative biochemical and histopathological data suggest that a deficiency in
the glycogen branching enzyme (GBE) is responsible for a fatal neonatal disease
in Quarter Horse foals that closely resembles human glycogen storage disease type
IV (GSD IV). Identification of DNA markers closely linked to the equine GBE1 gene
would assist us in determining whether a mutation in this gene leads to the GSD
IV-like condition. FISH using BAC clones as probes assigned the equine GBE1 gene 
to a marker deficient region of ECA26q12-->q13. Four other genes, ROBO2, ROBO1,
POU1F1, and HTR1F, that flank GBE1 within a 10-Mb segment of HSA3p12-->p11, were 
tightly linked to equine GBE1 when analyzed on the Texas A&M University 5000 rad 
equine radiation hybrid panel, while the GLB1, MITF, RYBP, and PROS1 genes that
flank this 10-Mb interval were not linked with markers in the GBE1 group. A
polymorphic microsatellite (GBEms1) in a GBE1 BAC clone was then identified and
genetically mapped to ECA26 on the Animal Health Trust full-sibling equine
reference family. All Quarter Horse foals affected with GSD IV were homozygous
for an allele of GBEms1, as well as an allele of the most closely linked
microsatellite marker, while a control horse population showed significant
allelic variation with these markers. This data provides strong molecular genetic
support for the candidacy of the GBE1 locus in equine GSD IV.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14970703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2004 Mar;5(1):5-13.

From panhypopituitarism to combined pituitary deficiencies: do we need the
anterior pituitary?

Carrière C(1), Gleiberman A, Lin CR, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Diego, 9500
Gilman Drive, LaJolla, CA, USA.

PMID: 14966385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Endocrinol Invest. 2003 Oct;26(10):957-65.

Human pituitary tumours express the bHLH transcription factors NeuroD1 and ASH1.

Ferretti E(1), Di Stefano D, Zazzeroni F, Gallo R, Fratticci A, Carfagnini R,
Angiulli S, Santoro A, Minniti G, Tamburrano G, Alesse E, Cantore G, Gulino A,
Jaffrain-Rea ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.

Comment in
    J Endocrinol Invest. 2003 Oct;26(10):956.

Among the transcription factors involved in pituitary ontogenesis and physiology,
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) have been poorly studied. Members of bHLH family
include NeuroD1 and ASH1, both involved in neuroendocrine differentiation. We
evaluated their mRNA expression patterns, by semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis
(sq-RT-PCR) and/or Northern blot, in a series of 33 pituitary adenomas (PA),
anterior pituitaries, and pituitary cell lines. Immunohistochemistry for NeuroD1 
was also performed in 25 PA. Low levels of NeuroD1 were observed in normal
pituitaries and in the somatomammotroph cell lines GH3/GH4C1, contrasting with
high levels in corticotroph AtT20 cells. NeuroD1 mRNA was widely expressed in PA 
(82%), with measurable levels found especially in those derived from Pit-1
independent lineages, i.e. corticotroph (5/5) and clinically non-secreting (CNS) 
adenomas (9/11). According to sq-RT-PCR analysis, overexpression of NeuroD1
compared to normal pituitaries was frequent. Variable nuclear NeuroD1
immunopositivity was also present in about 70% of studied cases. ASH1 mRNA was
widely detected in normal pituitaries, in all tumour cell lines and in most PA
(84%), with measurable levels in corticotroph (5/5) and CNS (9/11) adenomas, and 
in a significant subset of PA derived from Pit-1 dependent lineages (9/16). We
conclude that: a) NeuroD1 is differentially expressed in PA and its possible
ontogenetic and/or pathogenetic implications in non-corticotroph PA are
discussed; b) ASH1 is a neuroendocrine marker whose expression is largely
conserved in normal and neoplastic pituitary cells.

PMID: 14759067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Ther. 2004 Jan;9(1):85-92.

Efficient retroviral vector targeting of carcinoembryonic antigen-positive
tumors.

Chowdhury S(1), Chester KA, Bridgewater J, Collins MK, Martin F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Molecular Pathology, Windeyer Institute, London
W1T 2AH, UK.

Many gene therapy approaches require specific, efficient gene delivery to cells
in vivo. To target colorectal tumors we fused a single-chain variable fragment
(scFv) directed against carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) to the amphotropic murine 
leukemia virus envelope. A proline-rich hinge and matrix metalloprotease (MMP)
cleavage site linked the two proteins. Following attachment to CEA, MMP cleavage 
of the envelope at the cell surface removed the scFv and proline-rich hinge,
allowing transduction. This allowed selective targeting of CEA-positive cells in 
vivo after injection of producer cells at the site of the tumor, with up to 10%
of cells within a CEA-positive tumor xenograft becoming transduced.
Intraperitoneal injection of amphotropic producer cells resulted in transduction 
of cells in spleen, liver, and kidney, which was not detected when CEA-targeted
producer cells were used. These results demonstrate the feasibility of using
targeted retroviral vectors for in vivo gene delivery to tumors. Furthermore, the
lack of transduction of host cells eliminates the risk of insertional mutagenesis
leading to transformation of host hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 14741781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Jan 15;292(2):288-94.

Differentiation of skeletal muscle from pituitary folliculo-stellate cells and
endocrine progenitor cells.

Mogi C(1), Miyai S, Nishimura Y, Fukuro H, Yokoyama K, Takaki A, Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regulation Biology, Faculty of Science, Saitama University,
Saitama 338-8570, Japan.

We previously reported the ectopic differentiation of skeletal muscle cells in a 
pituitary gland transplanted beneath a kidney capsule. Morphological observation 
suggested that the skeletal muscle cells may have differentiated from
folliculo-stellate (FS) cells in the anterior pituitary gland. However, at that
time, we did not confirm this directly with an in vitro system. To obtain direct 
evidence, we used the Tpit/F1 cell line. The Tpit/F1 cell line was recently
established from the pituitary gland of a temperature-sensitive T antigen
transgenic mouse and has the characters of pituitary FS cells. Using Tpit/F1
cells, we have found that FS cells of the pituitary are able to differentiate
into muscle cells in vitro. Additionally, we showed that the cells have some
characteristics of pituitary FS cells and also express pituitary endocrine
cell-specific transcription factor (pit-1) and prolactin genes, and can
differentiate into striated muscle cells. The anterior pituitary gland is known
to be of ectodermal origin, so the differentiation of its cells into striated
muscle is completely unexpected. This is the first report of direct evidence of
ectopic differentiation of skeletal muscle cells from pituitary cells.

PMID: 14697336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Appl Genet. 2001;42(3):309-16.

Association of POU1F1/RsaI genotypes with carcass traits in pigs.

Kuryl J(1), Pierzchala M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Jastrzebiec, Wólka Kosowska, Poland.

The objective of this study was to evaluate an association between the
polymorphism of the porcine pituitary-specific transcription factor gene (POU1F1,
previously called PIT1) and carcass quality in F2 animals (grandparents:
Zlotnicka Spotted boars and Polish Large White sows) being a part of experimental
material prepared for a QTL mapping project. The analysis covered a total of 188 
F2 offspring of 13 males and 67 females (F1 generation). The RsaI PCR/RFLP
polymorphism of the POU1F1 gene was identified and the least squares method was
used to evaluate the significance of its effect on the value of carcass quality
traits. Three POU1F1/RsaI genotypes were identified in F2 porkers: EE (n=32), EF 
(n=68) and FF (n=88). Twenty-four carcass quality traits were measured after 24 h
of cooling. The POU1F1/RsaI genotype proved to have a significant effect on the
following traits: weight of ham bone and bacon including ribs, fat thickness at
the lower back (point K3), over the loin, and average fat thickness (mean of five
measurements). These results confirm that the POU1F1 gene may be linked to the
gene/genes affecting fat deposition in the pig carcass. Moreover, pigs with the
EE genotype had a greater loin eye area and showed a higher meat weight and
content of carcass than animals of both EF and FF genotypes (unsignificant
association), which suggests that a further study is necessary to confirm or
exclude the effect of the POU1F1 gene on these traits.

PMID: 14564037  [PubMed]


188. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 21;278(47):46541-8. Epub 2003 Sep 12.

Cytoplasmic IkappaBalpha increases NF-kappaB-independent transcription through
binding to histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and HDAC3.

Viatour P(1), Legrand-Poels S, van Lint C, Warnier M, Merville MP, Gielen J,
Piette J, Bours V, Chariot A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Chemistry and Human Genetics, Center for Cellular and
Molecular Therapy, University of Liège, Sart-Tillman, 4000 Liège, Belgium.

IkappaBalpha is an inhibitory molecule that sequesters NF-kappaB dimers in the
cytoplasm of unstimulated cells. Upon stimulation, NF-kappaB moves to the nucleus
and induces the expression of a variety of genes including IkappaBalpha. This
newly synthesized IkappaBalpha also translocates to the nucleus, removes
activated NF-kappaB from its target genes, and brings it back to the cytoplasm to
terminate the phase of NF-kappaB activation. We show here that IkappaBalpha
enhances the transactivation potential of several homeodomain-containing proteins
such as HOXB7 and Pit-1 through a NF-kappaB-independent association with histone 
deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and HDAC3 but not with HDAC2, -4, -5, and -6. IkappaBalpha
bound both HDAC proteins through its ankyrin repeats, and this interaction was
disrupted by p65. Immunofluorescence experiments demonstrated further that
IkappaBalpha acts by partially redirecting HDAC3 to the cytoplasm. At the same
time, an IkappaBalpha mutant, which lacked a functional nuclear localization
sequence, interacted very efficiently with HDAC1 and -3 and intensively enhanced 
the transactivation potential of Pit-1. Our results support the hypothesis that
the NF-kappaB inhibitor IkappaBalpha regulates the transcriptional activity of
homeodomain-containing proteins positively through cytoplasmic sequestration of
HDAC1 and HDAC3, a mechanism that would assign a new and unexpected role to
IkappaBalpha.

PMID: 12972430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2003 Sep 30;207(1-2):31-8.

Cloning of a protein binding to the most proximal Pit-1 binding element of
prolactin gene from human pituitary cDNA library.

Fumoto M(1), Okimura Y, Sakagami Y, Iguchi G, Kishimoto M, Takahashi Y, Kaji H,
Chihara K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology/Metabolism, Neurology and Hematology/Oncology,
Department of Clinical Molecular Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

A human pituitary cDNA library was screened using a yeast one-hybrid system to
find a factor binding Pit-1 binding elements in the PRL gene other than Pit-1.
Beside colonies containing Pit-1 or Oct-1 cDNA, three colonies contained mPOU
cDNA, a member of the POU protein family. Immunohistochemical analysis showed
mPOU-like immunoreactivity was present in human PRL-producing pituitary tumors
but not in non-functioning pituitary tumors. Mobility shift analysis revealed
that mPOU bound to Pit-1 binding elements of the PRL gene, 1P and 3P. mPOU
activated the expression of 0.6 k PRL and 7x1P reporter genes in the presence of 
Pit-1 and cAMP, although it did not enhance Pit-1-induced expression of 7x3P
reporter gene. These findings suggest that mPOU is involved in the activation of 
the PRL gene by cAMP through 1P in the presence of Pit-1.

PMID: 12972181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2003 Oct;13(5):264-8.

New N-terminal located mutation (Q4ter) within the POU1F1-gene (PIT-1) causes
recessive combined pituitary hormone deficiency and variable phenotype.

Salemi S(1), Besson A, Eblé A, Gallati S, Pfäffle RW, Mullis PE.

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital, Paediatric Endocrinology, Inselspital, Bern
CH-3010, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVE: Growth is an inherent property of life. About 10% of the congenital
forms of growth retardation and short stature are genetically caused. Beside the 
gene involved in direct GH-production, there are different candidate genes
important for appropriate pituitary development causing combined pituitary
hormone deficiency (CPHD). However, severe growth retardation and failure to
thrive remain the leading reason for medical assessment in these patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We report two siblings of a healthy but consanguineous
Malaysian family presenting with severe short stature caused by CPHD with a
variable phenotype. Importantly, at the beginning the girl presented with
isolated GHD, whereas the boy was hypothyroid. As the most common gene
alterations responsible for CPHD are within either the PROP-1- or the POU1F1-
(PIT-1)-gene these two genes were further studied.
RESULTS: Subsequent sequencing of the six exons of the POU1F1-gene allowed the
identification of a new N-terminal mutation (Q4ter) in these two children. A
substitution of C to T induced a change from a glutamine (CAA) to a stop codon
(TAA) in exon 1 of the PIT-1 protein. Both affected children were homozygous for 
the mutation, whereas the mother and father were heterozygous.
CONCLUSION: We describe two children with autosomal recessive inherited CPHD
caused by a new N-terminal located mutation within the PUO1F1-gene. The clinical 
history of these two children underline the phenotypic variability and support
the fact that children with any isolated and/or combined PHD need to be closely
followed as at an any time other hormonal deficiencies may occur. In addition,
molecular analysis of the possible genes involved might be most helpful for the
future follow-up.

PMID: 12932747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2003 Aug;13 Suppl A:S122-9.

DNA testing in patients with GH deficiency at the time of transition.

Dattani MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry, Endocrinology and Metabolism Unit, Institute of Child Health and
Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital, London, UK. M.Dattani@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Over the last 10 years, major advances in the understanding of pituitary gland
development in the mouse have led to the identification of mutations in a number 
of genes that then lead to delineation of the phenotype of growth hormone
deficiency (GHD), either in isolation (IGHD) or in combination with a number of
other hormone deficiencies (CPHD) or syndromic features (e.g., septo-optic
dysplasia, SOD). The genetic abnormalities include mutations within: (1) Hesx1
(IGHD, SOD or CPHD); (2) Lhx3 (CPHD with preservation of cortisol secretion and a
short stiff neck); (3) Lhx4 (GH, TSH and ACTH deficiency with cerebellar
hypoplasia); (4) Prop1 (variable CPHD often associated with pituitary masses);
(5) POU1F1 (GH, prolactin and TSH deficiency); (6) GHRHR (IGHD) and (7) GH1
(IGHD). There can be variations in inheritance, phenotype and penetrance
patterns. Nevertheless, establishing the genetic diagnosis can help in predicting
the evolution of the phenotype and in genetic counselling. Therefore, for these
reasons it is recommended that all patients with GHD should undergo testing for
genetic mutations within the genes associated with IGHD, CPHD and SOD.

PMID: 12914740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Pediatr Res. 2003 Nov;54(5):635-40. Epub 2003 Aug 6.

The de novo Q167K mutation in the POU1F1 gene leads to combined pituitary hormone
deficiency in an Italian patient.

Malvagia S(1), Poggi GM, Pasquini E, Donati MA, Pela I, Morrone A, Zammarchi E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Florence, 50132 Florence, Italy.
zammarchi@unifi.it

The POU1F1 gene encodes a transcription factor that is important for the
development and differentiation of the cells producing GH, prolactin, and TSH in 
the anterior pituitary gland. Patients with POU1F1 mutations show a combined
pituitary hormone deficiency with low or absent levels of GH, prolactin, and TSH.
Fourteen mutations have been reported in the POU1F1 gene up to now. These genetic
lesions can be inherited either in an autosomal dominant or an autosomal
recessive mode. We report on the first Italian patient, a girl, affected by
combined pituitary hormone deficiency. The patient was found to be positive for
congenital hypothyroidism (with low TSH levels) at neonatal screening.
Substitutive therapy was started, but subsequent growth was very poor, although
psychomotor development was substantially normal. Hospitalized at 10 mo she
showed hypotonic crises, growth retardation, delayed bone age, and facial
dysmorphism. In addition to congenital hypothyroidism, GH and prolactin
deficiencies were found. Mutation DNA analysis of the patient's POU1F1 gene
identified the novel Q167K amino acid change at the heterozygous level. The
highly conserved Q167 residue is located in the POU-specific domain. No mutation 
was detected in the other allele. DNA analysis in the proband's parents did not
identify this amino acid substitution, suggesting a de novo genetic lesion. From 
these data it can be hypothesized that the Q167K mutation has a dominant negative
effect.

PMID: 12904605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 10;278(41):39684-96. Epub 2003 Aug 5.

Ras signaling and transcriptional synergy at a flexible Ets-1/Pit-1 composite DNA
element is defined by the assembly of selective activation domains.

Duval DL(1), Jean A, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver,
Colorado 80262, USA. dawn.duval@uchsc.edu

Pit-1 and Ets-1 binding to a composite element synergistically activates and
targets Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling to the rat prolactin
promoter. These transcriptional responses appear to depend on three molecular
features: organization of the Ets-1/Pit-1 composite element, physical interaction
of these two factors via the Pit-1 homeodomain (amino acids 199-291) and the
Ets-1 regulatory III domain (amino acids 190-257), and assembly of their
transcriptional activation domains (TADs). Here we show that the organization of 
the Ets-1/Pit-1 composite element tolerates significant flexibility with regard
to Ras stimulation and synergy. Specifically, the putative monomeric Pit-1
binding site can be substituted with bona fide binding sites for either a Pit-1
monomer or dimer, and these sites tolerated a separation of 28 bp. Additionally, 
we show that the physical interaction of Ets-1 and Pit-1 is not required for Ras 
responsiveness or synergy because block mutations of the Pit-1 interaction
surface in Ets-1, which reduced Ets-1/Pit-1 binding in vitro, did not
significantly affect Ets-1 stimulation of Ras responsiveness or synergy. We also 
show differential use of distinct TAD subtypes and Pit-1 TAD subregions to
mediate either synergy or Ras responsiveness. Specifically, TADs from Gal4, VP16,
or Ets-2 regulatory III domain linked to Ets-1 DNA binding domain constructs
restored synergy to these TAD/Ets-1 DNA binding domain fusions. Conversely,
deletion of the defined Pit-1 TAD (amino acids 2-80) retained synergy, but not
Ras responsiveness. Consequently, we further defined the Pit-1 amino-terminal TAD
into region 1 (R1, amino acids 2-45) and region 2 (R2, amino acids 46-80). R1
appears to regulate basal and synergistic responses, whereas the Ras response was
mapped to R2. In summary, Ras responsiveness and Pit-1/Ets-1 synergy are mediated
through the assembly of distinct TADs at a flexible composite element, indicating
that different mechanisms underlie these two transcriptional responses and that
the Pit-1 R2 subregion represents a novel, tissue-specific Ras-responsive TAD.

PMID: 12902343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Endocr Pathol. 2003 Summer;14(2):145-9.

Change in expression of basic fibroblast growth factor mRNA in a pituitary tumor 
clonal cell line.

Fukuro H(1), Mogi C, Yokoyama K, Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regulation Biology, Faculty of Science, Saitama University,
Saitama, Japan.

To study pituitary tumor formation, we used a rat pituitary tumor cell line,
MtT/E, which was derived from an estrogen-induced rat prolactinoma. MtT/E cells
are known not to produce any pituitary hormone; however, they do produce the
Pit-1 protein, which is known to be a common transcription factor in thyrotropes,
somatotropes, and mammotropes. Although MtT/E is a clonal cell line, it exhibits 
two distinct phenotypes, fibroblastic (F-) and epithelial (E-) cells. We obtained
subclonal cell lines from MtT/E cells with characters similar to those of F- and 
E-cells and called them MtT/E-G1 and MtT/E-B3, respectively. To examine tumor
formation by these cells, we implanted them into female Fischer rats. One month
later, typical pituitary tumors had appeared in MtT/E-B3-implanted rats; however,
tumor formation by MtT/E-G1 was delayed. Interestingly, the tumors formed by
MtT/E-B3 cells were intensely vascularized. To examine changes in tumor cell
morphology, we performed primary culture and found that spindle-shaped cells
appeared. These spindle-shaped cells were immunopositive for the Pit-1 protein,
which suggests that they originated from MtT/E-B3 cells. Interestingly, reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction showed that both tumors and the cells
obtained in primary culture expressed basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). By
contrast, the original MtT/E-B3 cells did not express bFGF. These results
suggested that MtT/E-B3 cells show a change in phenotype during tumor formation; 
that is, epithelial-type cells change into bFGFexpressing fibroblastic cells.
These phenomena, especially the appearance of bFGFexpressing cells in tumor
tissue, may explain the extensive angiogenesis in the tumors formed by MtT/E-B3
cells.

PMID: 12858005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Pituitary. 2002;5(3):163-8.

Adrenocorticotrope deficiency with clinical evidence for late onset in combined
pituitary hormone deficiency caused by a homozygous 301-302delAG mutation of the 
PROP1 gene.

Lamesch C(1), Neumann S, Pfäffle R, Kiess W, Paschke R.

Author information: 
(1)III. Medical Department, University of Leipzig, Germany.

Combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) can be caused by mutation of the
pituitary transcription factors POU1F1 or PROP1. More recently mutations in the
HESX1, the LHX3 and LHX4 transcription factor genes have also been described as a
cause in patients with CPHD. In most patients the disorder is characterized by an
impaired production of GH, TSH, PRL and gonadotropins. In some cases of CPHD
adrenocorticotropin deficiency is also present. We report the progressive CPHD
and its molecular etiology in a woman with CPHD presenting with first symptoms of
ACTH/cortisol deficiency at the age of 48 years. The 49 year old patient's
initial symptoms were growth retardation at the age of 2 years and symptoms of
hypothyroidism at the age of 5 years. The patient never entered puberty
spontaneously. No familial history of delayed puberty, growth retardation or
other symptoms of CPHD were present. At the age of 48 years the patient presented
with the first symptoms of hypocortisolism such as recurring hypoglycaemias and
hyponatriaemia with coma. Cortisol, ACTH, TSH, fT3, fT4 and GH as well as LH, FSH
and PRL were measured in basal conditions. GH, cortisol and ACTH were also
measured in response to an Insulin Tolerance Test. Molecular analysis was
performed by PCR amplification and sequencing of exon 1-3 of the PROP1 gene. The 
patient had insufficiencies of TSH, LH, FSH and GH. PRL was normal. Serum
cortisol was low and basal ACTH was normal. However, there were no responses of
cortisol, ACTH and GH to hypoglycaemia. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a
hypoplastic anterior pituitary lobe. Direct sequencing revealed a homozygous 2
base-pair deletion 301-302delAG in exon 2 of the PROP1 gene. This case suggests
that in patients with CPHD ACTH producing cells may be involved at a rather late 
age.

PMID: 12812307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Endocrinology. 2003 Jul;144(7):2845-55.

Regulation of the intronic promoter of rat estrogen receptor alpha gene,
responsible for truncated estrogen receptor product-1 expression.

Schausi D(1), Tiffoche C, Thieulant ML.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Rennes I, Interactions Cellulaires et Moléculaires, Equipe
Information et Programmation Cellulaires, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 6026, Campus de Beaulieu, 35042 Rennes
Cedex, France.

We have characterized the intronic promoter of the rat estrogen receptor (ER)
alpha gene, responsible for the lactotrope-specific truncated ER product (TERP)-1
isoform expression. Transcriptional regulation was investigated by transient
transfections using 5'-deletion constructs. TERP promoter constructs were highly 
active in MMQ cells, a pure lactotrope cell line, whereas a low basal activity
was detected in alphaT3-1 gonadotrope cells or in COS-7 monkey kidney cells.
Serial deletion analysis revealed that 1) a minimal -693-bp region encompassing
the TATA box is sufficient to allow lactotrope-specific expression; 2) the
promoter contains strong positive cis-acting elements both in the distal and
proximal regions, and 3) the region spanning the -1698/-1194 region includes
repressor elements. Transient transfection studies, EMSAs, and gel shifts
demonstrated that estrogen activates the TERP promoter via an estrogen-responsive
element (ERE1) located within the proximal region. Mutation of ERE1 site
completely abolishes the estradiol-dependent transcription, indicating that ERE1 
site is sufficient to confer estrogen responsiveness to TERP promoter. In
addition, ERalpha action was synergized by transfection of the pituitary-specific
factor Pit-1. EMSAs showed that a single Pit-1 DNA binding element in the
vicinity of the TATA box is sufficient to confer response by the TERP promoter.
In conclusion, we demonstrated, for the first time, that TERP promoter regulation
involves ERE and Pit-1 cis-elements and corresponding trans-acting factors, which
could play a role in the physiological changes that occur in TERP-1 transcription
in lactotrope cells.

PMID: 12810539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Horm Res. 2003;60(1):14-20.

IFN-gamma increases the hGH gene promoter activity in rat GH3 cells.

Gong FY(1), Deng JY, Shi YF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Beijing Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Beijing Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

AIM: To study the effect(s) of interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) on the activity of
human growth hormone (hGH) gene promoter in rat pituitary GH3 cells and the
molecular mechanism underlying the effect(s).
METHODS: Cell transfection and luciferase reporter gene were used.
RESULTS: IFN-gamma (10(2) and 10(3) U/ml) increased the activity of hGH in GH3
cells. The addition of the mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitor PD98059 (40
micromol/l) to the cells blocked the stimulatory effect of IFN-gamma. Neither
overexpression of Pit-1 nor inhibiting Pit-1 expression affected IFN-gamma
induction of hGH promoter activity. To identify the DNA sequence that mediated
the effect of IFN-gamma, four deletion constructs of hGH gene promoter were
created. The stimulatory effect of IFN-gamma was abolished following deletion of 
the -250 to -132 fragment.
CONCLUSIONS: IFN-gamma increases the activity of hGH gene promoter in rat
pituitary GH3 cells. This stimulatory effect of IFN-gamma appears to require the 
intracellular mitogen-activated protein kinase-dependent signaling pathway. The
effect of IFN-gamma requires the promoter sequence that spans the -250 to -132
fragment of the gene, but is unrelated to Pit-1 protein.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12792149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2003 Jun;58(6):785-94.

Combined pituitary hormone deficiency in Australian children: clinical and
genetic correlates.

McLennan K(1), Jeske Y, Cotterill A, Cowley D, Penfold J, Jones T, Howard N,
Thomsett M, Choong C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Mater Children's Hospital and
University of Queensland, South Brisbane, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Mutations in the gene for the POU domain transcription factor POU1F1
(human Pit-1) have been reported in patients with GH, TSH and PRL deficiencies.
PROP1 (Prophet of Pit-1) gene mutations also cause gonadotrophin deficiencies and
in some cases partial ACTH deficiency. This study analyses the POU1F1 and PROP1
genes in a cohort of Australian children with combined pituitary hormone
deficiency (CPHD) and correlates results with patient phenotype.
PATIENTS AND DESIGN: Genomic analysis was carried out on 33 patients with CPHD
referred from centres around Australia. Clinical data were collected from medical
records and referring physicans.
RESULTS: POU1F1 mutations were identified in two of four patients with a
suggestive phenotype. In a female patient, novel compound heterozygous POU1F1
mutations were identified: Arg143Leu in exon 3 and Leu194Gln in exon 4. This
patient presented with failure to thrive at 6 weeks of age and has deficiencies
of TSH and GH. A previously described heterozygous Arg271Trp mutation in exon 6
of the POU1F1 gene was identified in a female infant who presented with growth
failure and was diagnosed with TSH then GH deficiencies. No PROP1 mutations were 
identified; however, we describe a number of previously unreported PROP1
polymorphisms. No patients presenting with deficiencies of all anterior pituitary
hormones early in life had POU1F1 or PROP1 gene mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: In 33 Australian children with CPHD we have identified POU1F1
mutations in two patients and no PROP1 mutations. We speculate that in the
majority of children other genes must be responsible for the CPHD phenotype.

PMID: 12780757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Eur J Endocrinol. 2003 Jun;148(6):619-25.

The R271W mutant form of Pit-1 does not act as a dominant inhibitor of Pit-1
action to activate the promoters of GH and prolactin genes.

Kishimoto M(1), Okimura Y, Fumoto M, Iguchi G, Iida K, Kaji H, Chihara K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology/Metabolism, Department of Clinical Molecular
Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-10-1 Tomogaoka, Suma-ku,
Kobe 654-0142, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic abnormalities of the pituitary specific transcription factor, 
Pit-1, have been reported in several patients with GH, prolactin (PRL) and TSH
deficiencies. The most common is a mutation altering an arginine to a tryptophan 
in codon 271 (R271W) in one allele of the Pit-1 gene. According to the previous
in vitro expression study, R271W acted as a dominant negative inhibitor of the
wild type to activate the GH promoter. However, healthy carriers with this
mutation, who should be affected by the dominant negative effect of R271W, have
also been reported. The aim of this study was to clarify in more detail the
function of this mutant form of Pit-1.
METHODS: Transcriptional activity of R271W for the expression of Pit-1-associated
genes was investigated in COS7 cells with the aid of transient transfection
assays. The 1.8 kb rat GH, 0.6 kb rat PRL or 1.9 kb rat PRL 5'-flanking regions
were inserted upstream of the luciferase reporter gene and were used for
functional analysis of R271W. Another reporter gene containing seven Pit-1
responsive elements was also used. The same experiments were also performed using
JEG3 and CHO cells.
RESULTS: We could not confirm the dominant negative effect of R271W on wild type 
Pit-1. Furthermore, our expression study revealed that R271W could activate the
promoters of GH and PRL genes to levels similar to the wild type.
CONCLUSION: Taken together with the evidence that phenotypically normal cases
have been reported with this mutation, our results deny the relationship between 
R271W and combined pituitary hormone deficiency.

PMID: 12773133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Minerva Endocrinol. 2003 Jun;28(2):123-33.

Cellular determination in the anterior pituitary gland: PIT-1 and PROP-1
mutations as causes of human combined pituitary hormone deficiency.

Rodriguez R(1), Andersen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697-4075, USA.

In the anterior pituitary gland, five distinct hormone producing cell types are
generated from common epithelial progenitor cells. This process of cellular
determination is controlled by signaling molecules acting on transcription
factors, which in turn regulate genes critical for the appearance of hormone
producing cells. Two pituitary specific transcription factors, Pit-1 and Prop-1, 
which are required for generation of hormone producing cells in the anterior
pituitary gland, have proved to be important in the cause of hypopituitarism in
humans. Mutations in the human PIT-1 gene lead to a combined pituitary hormone
deficiency characterized by lack of GH, PRL and TSH. Mutations in the PROP-1
gene, which are a more common cause of hypopituitarism, lead to a clinical
phenotype characterized by GH, PRL, TSH, LH and FSH deficiency, and sometimes
ACTH deficiency as well.

PMID: 12717343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Sheng Wu Hua Xue Yu Sheng Wu Wu Li Xue Bao (Shanghai). 2003 Apr;35(4):375-80.

[The Effect of Cytokines on Expression of Growth Hormone Gene in Rat Pituitary
GH(3) Cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Gong FY(1), Deng JY, Shi YF, Zhang DX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy Medical Sciences Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, China.
dengjy@csc.pumch.ac.cn

To study the effect of interleukin-11(IL-11), ciliary neurotropic factor (CNTF)
and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) on the hGH gene promoter activity 
in rat pituitary GH(3) cells and the interaction with pituitary-specific
transcription factor Pit-1, firstly the stable transformed GH(3) cell line which 
contained hGH gene promoter 484-30 bp and luciferase reporter gene was
established, then the concentration of GH in the medium and lysate of GH(3) cells
and luciferase activities in GH(3) cells were measured, after treating these
cells with the above cytokines, the effects of cytokines on secretion and
synthesis of GH, and the promoter activity of the hGH gene were observed. The
results of our experiments showed that IL-11(20 nmol/L), CNTF(10 nmol/L) and
TGF-beta(5 nmol/L) regulated secretion and synthesis of GH, and the luciferase
expression in stable-transformed GH(3) cells. IL-11 and CNTF had a stimulatory
effect, whereas TGF-beta had an inhibitory one. Neither overexpression of Pit-1
nor inhibition of Pit-1 expression could affect the regulatory role of these
cytokines. In conclusion, IL-11, CNTF and TGF-beta regulated the GH production in
pituitary GH(3) cell line by regulating the hGH gene promoter activity, while
Pit-1 might not be involved in the roles.

PMID: 12673394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mol Cells. 2003 Feb 28;15(1):114-21.

Effects of Aroclor 1254 on the expression of rat placental PRL-family genes.

Lee CK(1), Lee CU, Kim JH, Son BC, Kim DH, Lee CH, Kim HD, Kim JW, Yoon YD, Kang 
SG, Moon DH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Industrial Medicine, Inje University, Busan 614-735, Korea.

This study was performed to investigate the effects of Aroclor 1254 (A1254), a
commercial polychlorinated biphenyl mixture, on the expression of rat placental
prolactin (PRL) family genes and reproductive activity. Placental lactogen-Iv and
-II, and prolactin-like protein-A and -C mRNA levels were significantly decreased
in the placentas of A1254-treated rats in a dose-dependent manner. The mRNA
levels of Pit-1alpha and beta isotypes, which are involved in the regulation of
PRL family gene expression, were also decreased in the A1254-treated rat
placenta. In the rat placental junctional zone, high-dose A1254 (25 mg/kg B.W.)
treatment reduced the number of spongiotrophoblasts, cells in which the PRL
family genes are expressed. Finally, maternal exposure to A1254 was shown to have
significant toxic effects on reproductive activity, including embryonic and
placental growth retardation, delay of parturition, and reduction of the number
of pups per litter. The results of the present study indicated that A1254 has an 
inhibitory effect on PRL family, Pit-1alpha, and beta gene expression in the rat 
placenta, leading to significant toxic effects on reproductive activity in rats.

PMID: 12661770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Mar;88(3):1241-7.

A novel nonsense mutation in the Pit-1 gene: evidence for a gene dosage effect.

Hashimoto Y(1), Cisternino M, Cohen LE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The POU transcription factor Pit-1 functions in the development of somatotrophs, 
lactotrophs, and thyrotrophs of the anterior pituitary gland. It also plays a
role in cell-specific gene expression and regulation of the gene products from
these cell types, GH, prolactin, and TSH, respectively. In the present report we 
studied a patient with severe growth failure. Provocative studies revealed
undetectable GH, prolactin, and TSH levels, and her pituitary gland was
hypoplastic on magnetic resonance imaging. She had a novel homozygous nonsense
mutation in the 3' end of the first alpha-helix of the POU-specific domain of the
Pit-1 gene. This mutation results in a truncated protein with loss of most of the
Pit-1 DNA-binding domains. Interestingly, her parents, who each have one mutant
allele, have evidence of mild endocrine dysfunction. Thus, two normal copies of
the Pit-1 gene appear necessary for full Pit-1 gene function.

PMID: 12629113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Mar;17(3):333-45. Epub 2002 Dec 12.

Imaging the localized protein interactions between Pit-1 and the CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein alpha in the living pituitary cell nucleus.

Day RN(1), Voss TC, Enwright JF 3rd, Booker CF, Periasamy A, Schaufele F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center,
Charlottesville, Virginia, 22908, USA. rnd2v@virginia.edu

The homeodomain protein Pit-1 cooperates with the basic-leucine zipper protein
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha) to control pituitary-specific
prolactin gene transcription. We previously observed that C/EBPalpha was
concentrated in regions of centromeric heterochromatin in pituitary GHFT1-5 cells
and that coexpressed Pit-1 redistributed C/EBPalpha to the subnuclear sites
occupied by Pit-1. Here, we used fluorescence resonance energy transfer
microscopy to show that when C/EBPalpha was recruited by Pit-1, the average
distance separating the fluorophores labeling the proteins was less than 7 nm. A 
mutation in the Pit-1 homeodomain, or truncation of the C/EBPalpha
transactivation domain disrupted the redistribution of C/EBPalpha by Pit-1.
Fluorescence resonance energy transfer analysis revealed that the mutant Pit-1
still associated with C/EBPalpha, and the truncated C/EBPalpha still associated
with Pit-1, but these interactions were preferentially localized in regions of
centromeric heterochromatin. In contrast, a truncation in C/EBPalpha that
prevented DNA binding also blocked its association with Pit-1, suggesting that
the binding of C/EBPalpha to DNA is a critical first step in specifying its
association with Pit-1. These findings indicated that the protein domains that
specify the interaction of Pit-1 and C/EBPalpha are separable from the protein
domains that direct the positioning of the associated proteins within the
nucleus. The intimate association of Pit-1 and C/EBPalpha at certain sites within
the living cell nucleus could foster their combinatorial activities in the
regulation of pituitary-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2910340
PMID: 12554785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Feb;17(2):209-22.

A PIT-1 homeodomain mutant blocks the intranuclear recruitment of the
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha required for prolactin gene transcription.

Enwright JF 3rd(1), Kawecki-Crook MA, Voss TC, Schaufele F, Day RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville,
Virginia 22908-0578, USA.

The pituitary-specific homeodomain protein Pit-1 cooperates with other
transcription factors, including CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha
(C/EBPalpha), in the regulation of pituitary lactotrope gene transcription. Here,
we correlate cooperative activation of prolactin (PRL) gene transcription by
Pit-1 and C/EBPalpha with changes in the subnuclear localization of these factors
in living pituitary cells. Transiently expressed C/EBPalpha induced PRL gene
transcription in pituitary GHFT1-5 cells, whereas the coexpression of Pit-1 and
C/EBPalpha in HeLa cells demonstrated their cooperativity at the PRL promoter.
Individually expressed Pit-1 or C/EBPalpha, fused to color variants of
fluorescent proteins, occupied different subnuclear compartments in living
pituitary cells. When coexpressed, Pit-1 recruited C/EBPalpha from regions of
transcriptionally quiescent centromeric heterochromatin to the nuclear regions
occupied by Pit-1. The homeodomain region of Pit-1 was necessary for the
recruitment of C/EBPalpha. A point mutation in the Pit-1 homeodomain associated
with the syndrome of combined pituitary hormone deficiency in humans also failed 
to recruit C/EBPalpha. This Pit-1 mutant functioned as a dominant inhibitor of
PRL gene transcription and, instead of recruiting C/EBPalpha, was itself
recruited by C/EBPalpha to centromeric heterochromatin. Together our results
suggest that the intranuclear positioning of these factors determines whether
they activate or silence PRL promoter activity.

PMCID: PMC2900764
PMID: 12554749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Dec;15 Suppl 5:1427-8.

Molecular mechanisms responsible for combined pituitary hormone deficiency.

Radovick S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago,
Children's Hospital, Chicago, IL 60637-1470, USA. sradovic@peds.bsd.uchicago.edu

PMID: 12510998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Horm Res. 2002;58 Suppl 3:2-6.

Isolated growth hormone deficiency and the GH-1 gene: update 2002.

Binder G(1).

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital, Tübingen, Germany.
gdbinder@med.uni-tuebingen.de

This short review will focus on the mechanisms which are thought to be directly
involved in GH expression and particularly on the monogenetic disorders which
were shown to cause isolated growth hormone deficiency (IGHD) due to insufficient
expression of GH. The overwhelming majority of genetic defects detected in
isolated growth hormone deficiency (IGHD) are mutations of the coding region of
the GH-1 gene which belongs to a five genes containing gene cluster located on
17q22-24. Depending on the type of the GH-1 gene mutation, the mode of
inheritance is recessive or dominant. The promotor region of the GH-1 gene which 
encompasses the 300 bp of the 5' flanking region is highly polymorphic, but the
functionally important cis-acting elements are conserved. This sequence is
sufficient to control GH expression in cultured cells, but not in transgenic
mice: the human GH locus control region, an enhancer region of the GH-1 gene
located approximately 15-32 kB upstream of the GH-1 coding region was shown to
direct pituitary-specific, high-level GH expression in vivo. Promotion of the GH 
expression needs the coordinate binding of pituitary-specific (i.e., POU1F1) and 
ubiquitous trans-acting factors to the cis-acting elements. The mutational
analysis of trans-acting factors and cis-acting elements of the GH-1 gene has so 
far not established any defect outside the coding region as the genetic basis of 
IGHD except for POU1F1 mutations which cause multiple pituitary hormone
deficiency including GHD. Several mutations of the GHRH-receptor gene were shown 
to result in severe IGHD. In the future, the discovery of new defects of the GH
expression machinery will add to our understanding of how GH is sufficiently
supplied to the organism and will hopefully simplify and improve the diagnostic
approach in a subset of children with IGHD.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12435888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Mod Pathol. 2002 Oct;15(10):1102-5.

A case of Cushing's disease caused by pituitary adenoma producing
adrenocorticotropic hormone and growth hormone concomitantly: aberrant expression
of transcription factors NeuroD1 and Pit-1 as a proposed mechanism.

Tahara S(1), Kurotani R, Ishii Y, Sanno N, Teramoto A, Osamura RY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

A 53-year-old Japanese woman was diagnosed with Cushing's disease caused by a
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-secreting pituitary adenoma on the basis of
clinical an imaging data. The surgically resected tumor tissue was investigated
histopathologically using immunohistochemical analysis of pituitary hormones. Our
study revealed that the adenoma expressed not only ACTH but growth hormone (GH)
in the tumor cells. Furthermore, immunohistochemical double staining showed that 
some adenoma cells were positive for both ACTH and GH. In situ hybridization for 
GH mRNA revealed that the adenoma cells produced GH as opposed to simply storing 
it. Although many pituitary adenomas produce multiple pituitary hormones,
pituitary adenoma producing both ACTH and GH in the same adenoma cells, such as
seen in this case, is extremely rare. To elucidate the molecular mechanism
involved, we investigated the expression of transcription factors NeuroD1 and
Pit-1 and found that both transcription factors were expressed in many tumor
cells. This case report describes a very rare case of pituitary adenoma that
produced both ACTH and GH. We propose a hitherto undescribed translineage
expression of transcription factors as the basic mechanism of this unique
functional differentiation.

PMID: 12379758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Oct 1;99(20):12657-62. Epub 2002 Sep 19.

Structural characterization of the PIT-1/ETS-1 interaction: PIT-1 phosphorylation
regulates PIT-1/ETS-1 binding.

Augustijn KD(1), Duval DL, Wechselberger R, Kaptein R, Gutierrez-Hartmann A, van 
der Vliet PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, University Medical Center Utrecht and
Center for Biomedical Genetics, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

The POU-domain transcription factor Pit-1 and Ets-1, a member of the ETS family
of transcription factors, can associate in solution and synergistically activate 
the prolactin promoter by binding to a composite response element in the
prolactin promoter. We mapped the minimal region of Ets-1 required for the
interaction with the Pit-1 POU-homeodomain. Here, we describe a detailed NMR
study of the interaction between the POU-homeodomain of Pit-1 and the minimal
interacting region of Ets-1. By using heteronuclear single quantum coherence
titration experiments, we were able to map exact residues on the POU-homeodomain 
that are involved in the interaction with this minimal Ets-1 interaction domain. 
By using our NMR data, we generated point mutants in the POU-homeodomain and
tested their effect on the interaction with Ets-1. Our results show that
phosphorylation of Pit-1 can regulate the interaction with Ets-1.

PMCID: PMC130516
PMID: 12242337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 15;277(46):44408-16. Epub 2002 Sep 9.

Pitx factors are involved in basal and hormone-regulated activity of the human
prolactin promoter.

Quentien MH(1), Manfroid I, Moncet D, Gunz G, Muller M, Grino M, Enjalbert A,
Pellegrini I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire ICNE, CNRS UMR 6544-Université de la Méditerranée, Marseille,
France.

The pituitary-specific POU homeodomain factor Pit-1 likely interacts with other
factors for cell-specific expression of prolactin. Here we identify the
paired-like homeobox transcription factors Pitx1 and Pitx2 as factors
functionally activating the proximal human prolactin promoter (hPRL-164luc).
Using in vitro binding assays and a series of site-specific mutations of the
proximal hPRL promoter, we mapped the B1 and B2 bicoid sites involved in
Pitx-mediated transactivation of the hPRL-164luc construct. In somatolactotroph
GH4C1 cells, basal proximal hPRL promoter activity was inhibited by a Pitx2
dominant-negative form in a dose-dependent manner, whereas binding disruptive
mutations in the Pitx sites significantly reduced basal activity of the promoter.
We also show that synergistic activation of hPRL-164luc by Pitx2 and Pit-1
requires the integrity of the B2 Pitx binding site, and at least one of the P1
and P2 Pit-1 response elements. In addition, mutation in the B2 Pitx site results
in attenuation of the promoter's responsiveness to forskolin,
thyrotropin-releasing hormone, and epidermal growth factor. Conversely, Pitx1 or 
Pitx2 overexpression in GH4C1 cells leads to an enhancement of the drugs
stimulatory effects. Altogether, these results suggest that full responsiveness
to several signaling pathways regulating the hPRL promoter requires the B2 Pitx
binding site and that Pitx factors may be part of the proteic complex involved in
these regulations. Finally, in situ hybridization analysis showing coexpression
of the PRL and Pitx2 genes in rat and human lactotroph cells corroborates the
physiological relevance of these results.

PMID: 12223489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Biochem Pharmacol. 2002 Sep;64(5-6):979-84.

Differential activity by DNA-induced quarternary structures of POU transcription 
factors.

Reményi A(1), Tomilin A, Schöler HR, Wilmanns M.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL, Hamburg Outstation, c/o DESY, Notkestrasse 85, D-22603 Hamburg, Germany.

Recent structural studies on transcription factors from the POU family in complex
with multiple cognate DNA enhancer elements have established a novel concept in
DNA-mediated formation of distinct conformations of transcription regulator
assemblies. Two crystal structures of the Oct-1 transcription factor in the
presence of two different DNA sites have demonstrated how its POU DNA-binding
segment is capable in forming two unrelated dimer arrangements, which is DNA
motif dependent. While one arrangement allows binding of the Oct-1 specific
coactivator OBF-1, binding of this coactivator is blocked in the second
arrangement because the binding site is involved in its own dimer assembly.
Conversely, two crystal structures of another POU transcription factor, Pit-1,
have demonstrated how the same overall assembly is maintained in the presence of 
two different DNA response elements. However, since the distance of the two Pit-1
half-binding sites on these elements differ by two base pairs, the overall
dimensions of the two complexes vary, allowing binding of a specific represssor
(N-CoR) in one conformation but not in the other. Thus, despite the occurrence of
different DNA-mediated molecular mechanisms, the net result,
conformation-dependent binding of further regulators, is equivalent. These data
introduce a concept where the DNA motif not only serves as binding site for
specific transcription factors but also regulates their function by mediating
specific transcription factor assemblies, which determine binding to
conformation-dependent coregulators.

PMID: 12213595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 22;277(47):45141-8. Epub 2002 Aug 27.

Novel function of the transactivation domain of a pituitary-specific
transcription factor, Pit-1.

Kishimoto M(1), Okimura Y, Yagita K, Iguchi G, Fumoto M, Iida K, Kaji H, Okamura 
H, Chihara K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology/Metabolism, Neurology and Hematology/Oncology,
Department of Clinical Molecular Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kobe University School of Medicine, 7-10-2, Tomogaoka, Suma-ku, Kobe
654-0142, Japan.

Pit-1 stimulates the expression of growth hormone, prolactin, and thyrotropin
beta subunit genes. Consequently, abnormality of the Pit-1 gene results in
combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD). In this study, we analyzed the
function of Pit-1 with a mutation (proline to leucine at codon 24) in the
transactivation domain, P24L, which has a normal POU domain important for binding
to DNA, because this mutation had been reported in a patient with CPHD. We found 
that codon 24 proline in the transactivation domain as well as the POU domain of 
Pit-1 was crucial to recruit coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP) in the
cultured cells. P24L completely lost the responsiveness to cAMP to stimulate the 
expression of the Pit-1-targeted genes. Furthermore, CBP and Pit-1, but not P24L,
markedly enhanced the expression of the Pit-1-targeted gene to cAMP, and
adenovirus E1a that binds to CBP and abrogates its function blocked the induction
by cAMP of Pit-1-stimulated gene transcription in the pituitary-derived GH3
cells. These results suggest that CBP and proline at codon 24 in the
transactivation domain of Pit-1 are important for the cAMP-induced activation of 
Pit-1-targeted genes. However, P24L maintained basal transcriptional activity,
suggesting that CBP is unlikely to be an essential coactivator for Pit-1.

PMID: 12200420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Sheng Wu Hua Xue Yu Sheng Wu Wu Li Xue Bao (Shanghai). 2002 Sep;34(5):619-24.

[The mechanism of interferon-gamma increases growth hormone expression in rat
pituitary GH(3) cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Gong FY(1), Shi YF, Deng JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy Medical Science Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, China.
dengjy@csc.pumch.ac.cn

The method of luciferase reporter gene was used to investigate the effect of
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) on the activity of human growth hormone (hGH) gene
promoter in rat pituitary GH(3) cells, to elucidate the post-receptor signal
transduction pathway and the key promoter sequence which mediated the action of
IFN-gamma. The luciferase expression plasmid pGL(3)-484-Luc containing hGH gene
promoter (-484-2 bp) and luciferase reporter gene were transfected alone or
cotransfected with pituitary specific transcription factor Pit-1 expression
plasmid (PcDNA-Pit-1-cDNA) or Pit-1 antisense oligonucleotide (Pit-1 OND) into
rat GH(3) cells. The changes of luciferase expression in the GH(3) cells were
determined, after treatment with IFN-gamma or IFN-gamma plus inhibitors of
intracellular signaling pathways, to observe the effect of IFN-gamma and these
inhibitors on the activity of hGH gene promoter. The various deletion constructs 
of Luc reporter: pGL(3)-380-Luc, pGL(3)-250-Luc, pGL(3)-132-Luc and
pGL(3)-66-Luc, which contained the -380-2 bp, -250-2 bp, -132-2 bp and -66-2 bp
sequences of hGH gene promoter, respectively, were transfected into GH(3) cells, 
then the changes of luciferase expression in the GH(3) cells were assayed, after 
treatment with IFN-gamma, to find out the key sequence which mediated the action 
of IFN-gamma. Our results showed that IFN-gamma (10(5) u/L, 10(6) u/L) could
increase luciferase expression in GH(3)cells transfected with pGL(3)-484-Luc
alone, the maximal action being 131% of the control (P<0.001). Among the
inhibitors of intracellular signaling transduction pathways, only mitogen
activated protein kinases (MAPK) inhibitor PD98059 (40 micromol/L) could
completely blocked the stimulatory effect of IFN-gamma on hGH gene promoter
activity. Pit-1 overexpression or inhibited Pit-1 expression, both had no effect 
on IFN-gamma-induced hGH gene promoter activity. When various deletion constructs
of Luc reporter were transfected into GH(3) cells, only pGL(3)380-Luc and
pGL(3)250-Luc still responded to IFN-gamma. In conclusion, IFN-gamma could
increase the activity of hGH gene promoter in rat pituitary GH(3) cells. This
stimulatory effect of IFN-gamma may be associated with the intracellular MAPK
signaling pathway and with -252--132 bp sequence in hGH gene promoter, but had no
relationship with pituitary specific transcription factor Pit-1.

PMID: 12198566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Histochem J. 2001 Nov-Dec;33(11-12):675-83.

Behaviour of a somatotroph population under a growth hormone releasing peptide
treatment.

Bonaterra M(1), De Paul AL, Pellizas CG, Aoki A, Torres AI.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Neuroendocrinology, Electron Microscopy Centre, Córdoba
National University, Argentina.

In this investigation, we studied the effects of Momany peptide (GHRP-5), on
somatotroph secretory activity. Acute and chronic administration of GHRP-5
provokes a significant release of growth hormone that can be closely correlated
with ultrastructural changes in somatotroph populations. After 3,5 and 7 days of 
GHRP-5 treatment, two somatotroph cell subpopulations coexist. One of them has an
enhanced secretory activity and the other presents a quiescent appearance.
Therefore, pituitary growth hormone content was not affected in the first seven
days of GHRP-5 treatment. After 14 days, there was a significant depletion of
growth hormone pituitary content coincident with the highest levels of serum
growth hormone. These results concur with the surge of a new hyperactive
somatotroph subtype characterised by numerous immature secretory granules that
are discharged bypassing the maturation step. Acute and chronic treatments caused
no changes in somatotroph cell density, the area immunostained for growth hormone
and the levels of total mRNA for transcription factor pit-1. The results of
pituitary cell cultures incubated with specific blockers for different signalling
pathways demonstrated an involvement of the phospholipase C-inositol phosphate
system in GHRP-5 stimulated somatotroph secretion. GHRP-5 treatment enhanced
significantly the release of growth hormone, thereby eliciting ultrastructural
modifications in somatotrophs that can be correlated with an increased secretory 
activity devoid of cell density changes.

PMID: 12197676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Sep 3;99(18):11784-9. Epub 2002 Aug 20.

Specification of unique Pit-1 activity in the hGH locus control region.

Shewchuk BM(1), Liebhaber SA, Cooke NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

The human GH (hGH) gene cluster is regulated by a remote 5' locus control region 
(LCR). HSI, an LCR component located 14.5 kb 5' to the hGH-N promoter,
constitutes the primary determinant of high-level hGH-N activation in pituitary
somatotropes. HSI encompasses an array of three binding sites for the
pituitary-specific POU homeodomain factor Pit-1. In the present report we
demonstrate that all three Pit-1 sites in the HSI array contribute to LCR
activity in vivo. Furthermore, these three sites as a unit are fully sufficient
for position-independent and somatotrope-restricted hGH-N transgene activation.
In contrast, the hGH-N transgene is not activated by Pit-1 sites native to either
the hGH-N or rat (r)GH gene promoters. These findings suggest that the structures
of the Pit-1 binding sites at HSI specify distinct chromatin-dependent activities
essential for LCR-mediated activation of hGH in the developing pituitary.

PMCID: PMC129346
PMID: 12189206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Ann Med. 2002;34(3):179-91.

Genetic defects in the development and function of the anterior pituitary gland.

Cushman LJ(1), Showalter AD, Rhodes SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis,
46202-5132, USA.

Genetic defects affecting the hypothalamic-pituitary-target organ axes can cause 
a variety of diseases involving restricted or broad disruptions of human
development and physiology. At the level of the anterior pituitary gland,
mutations in the genes encoding key transcription factors, hypothalamic releasing
and inhibiting hormone receptors, and the pituitary hormones themselves, can all 
result in the loss of action of one or more of the specialized hormone-secreting 
cell types. This article focuses on the effects of inherited and sporadic
mutations on the development and function of the anterior pituitary. Mutations in
the genes encoding the HESX1, PITX2, LHX3, LHX4, PROP1, PIT1, SF1, and TPIT
developmental transcription factors are associated with combined pituitary
hormone deficiency diseases. By contrast, deleterious alterations in the genes
that encode hypothalamic releasing hormone receptors or pituitary hormones, such 
as the growth hormone releasing hormone receptor or growth hormone genes, usually
result in phenotypes that reflect specific defects in the hormone-secreting
capacities of individual anterior pituitary cell types.

PMID: 12173688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Endocr Pathol. 2002 Summer;13(2):83-98.

Expression of Pit-1 and growth hormone-releasing hormone receptor mRNA in human
pituitary adenomas: difference among functioning, silent, and other
nonfunctioning adenomas.

Kobayashi I(1), Oka H, Naritaka H, Sato Y, Fujii K, Kameya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kitasato University School of Medicine,
Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan.

We analyzed the expression of Pit-1 and growth hormone-releasing hormone receptor
(GHRH-R) mRNA in various types of functioning and nonfunctioning adenomas using a
quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method.
Among clinically nonfunctioning adenomas, tumors considered as silent adenomas
were reclassified on a pathologic basis. Competitive RT-PCR showed that the
levels of Pit-1 and GHRH-R mRNA expression in silent somatotroph adenomas and
silent prolactinomas were similar to those in the corresponding functioning
adenomas. In silent thyrotroph adenomas, both mRNAs showed high levels of
expression that were similar to those in functioning and silent somatotroph
adenomas. The results suggest that the cause of the silence in these tumors seems
to be in the downstream to transcription of Pit-1 gene in the signaling pathway
leading to hormone secretion. Competitive RT-PCR assay could distinguish silent
adenomas of the Pit-1 group from the other nonfunctioning adenomas in the
expression levels of Pit-1 and GHRH-R mRNAs. In the future, precise diagnosis of 
various adenomas may become possible by assaying transcription factors such as
steroidogenic factor-1 and thyrotroph embryonic factor, which are thought to be
related to adenohypophyseal cytodifferentiation.

PMID: 12165656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Gene Ther. 2002 Jul;9(14):922-31.

Apical barriers to airway epithelial cell gene transfer with amphotropic
retroviral vectors.

Wang G(1), Williams G, Xia H, Hickey M, Shao J, Davidson BL, McCray PB.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Gene Therapy, Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa College 
of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Gene transfer to airway epithelia with amphotropic pseudotyped retroviral vectors
is inefficient following apical vector application. To better understand this
inefficiency, we localized the expression of Pit2, the amphotropic receptor, in
polarized human airway epithelia. Pit2 was expressed on both the apical and
basolateral surfaces of the cells, suggesting that factors other than receptor
abundance may limit apical gene transfer efficiency. Binding studies performed
with radiolabeled amphotropic MuLV suggested that the apically applied virus
binds to Pit2. Hypothetical barriers to retroviral gene transfer include the
apical glycocalyx and other secreted products of epithelia. In this study, we
demonstrated that sialic acid, keratan sulfate and collagen type V are present on
the apical surface of well-differentiated human airway epithelia. While enzyme
treatment reduced the abundance of these components, the treatment also decreased
the transepithelial resistance to approximately 35% of the controls, suggesting
that the epithelial integrity was impaired. To attain an airway epithelial
culture with a modified apical surface and intact epithelial integrity, we
utilized 100 mM 2-deoxy-D-glucose, a glycosylation inhibitor, to prevent the
glycocalyx from reforming following enzyme treatment. This approach allowed the
resistance, but not the apical glycocalyx to recover. Despite this physical
modification of the cell surface, the amphotropic retroviral vector failed to
transduce airway epithelia following apical application. These results suggest
that factors other than apical receptor abundance and the glycocalyx inhibit
amphotropic retroviral gene transfer in human airway epithelia.

PMID: 12085240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Am J Pharmacogenomics. 2002;2(2):93-111.

Genetic characterization of growth hormone deficiency and resistance:
implications for treatment with recombinant growth hormone.

Baumann G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Northwestern University Medical Schoo1, and Veterans Administration
Chicago Health Care System, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.
gbaumann@northwestern.edu

Growth failure can be caused by deficient growth hormone production or action.
The genes involved in pituitary development, somatotrope function, as well as
growth hormone synthesis, secretion, and action have recently been characterized 
in considerable detail. Familial growth failure has played an important role in
identifying these genes, and a large number of mutations adversely affecting the 
development and function of the growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor axis
have been discovered. Inactivating mutations leading to growth retardation in
humans have been identified in several pituitary transcription factor genes
(HESX1, PITX2, LHX3, PROP1, POU1F1) as well as in genes encoding the growth
hormone-releasing hormone receptor (GHRH-R), the G(s) protein alpha subunit
(GNAS1), growth hormone itself (GH-1), the growth hormone receptor (GHR), and in 
a single case each, the insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and the IGF-I
receptor. Mutations in pituitary transcription factors cause developmental
abnormalities of the pituitary and deficiency of multiple pituitary hormones
[growth hormone (GH), prolactin (Prl), thyrotropin (TSH) and lutropin/follitropin
(LH/FSH)]. Most of the syndromes respond well to therapy with recombinant GH;
exceptions are antibody-mediated resistance in GHD type IA (not all patients) and
cases of Laron syndrome (GHR deficiency). Such patients respond to IGF-I therapy.
This review summarizes the molecular genetics, functional defects, phenotypes,
diagnostic considerations and therapeutic aspects of syndromes associated with
mutations in the relevant genes.

PMID: 12083945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2002 Mar 28;189(1-2):11-23.

Trout GH promoter analysis reveals a modular pattern of regulation consistent
with the diversification of GH gene control and function in vertebrates.

Argenton F(1), Vianello S, Bernardini S, Lopreiato R, Colombo L, Bortolussi M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Università degli Studi di Padova, Università di
Padova, Via Ugo Bassi 58/B, 35131, Padova, Italy.

In vertebrates, growth hormone (GH) gene expression requires the
pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1/GHF1 but is differently regulated
by a variety of factors in different vertebrate species. Here, we have studied
the transcriptional activity of the trout GH (tGH) promoter, which is
synergistically stimulated by cAMP and glucocorticoid. Gel shift assays indicated
that Pit-1 binds as a dimer to three high affinity sites in the -226/+24 tGH
region, and that recombinant cAMP response element (CRE)-binding protein (CREB)
binds to a CRE situated between the two distal Pit-1 sites. Deletional and
mutational transfection experiments, performed in pituitary Pit-1-expressing GC
cells, showed that the different Pit-1 sites play distinct roles and are
obligatory elements in the mechanisms mediating cAMP and glucocorticoid
responses. Remarkably, the results suggest a hierarchical modular model of
regulation of the tGH promoter, according to which a critical module, triggered
by Pit-1 bound to the proximal Pit-1 site, is necessary and sufficient to turn on
and drive basal levels of transcription. The latter may be stimulated
synergistically by two Pit-1-dependent reciprocally non-cooperative auxiliary
modules, activated by cAMP and glucocorticoid, respectively. Such modularity
explains, in evolutionary terms, the crucial role played by Pit-1 in
transcriptional activation and the emergence of the wide variety of mechanisms
regulating transcriptional levels of GH, prolactin and other Pit-1-target genes
in vertebrates.

PMID: 12039061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2001;14 Suppl 5:1263-9; discussion 1297-8.

Central hypothyroidism: consequences in adult life.

Asteria C(1), Persani L, Beck-Peccoz P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Endocrine Sciences, Ospedale Maggiore IRCCS, University of Milan,
Italy.

Central hypothyroidism (CH) is a rare cause of hypothyroidism, generally due to
either pituitary or hypothalamic defects. On the basis of its etiology, it is
possible to distinguish acquired and hereditary forms. Hereditary CH can be
isolated or associated with combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD). In the 
former case, alterations of only two genes, TSHbeta and the TRH receptor, have so
far been described as responsible for the disorder. In hereditary CH associated
with CPHD, inactivating mutations of different pituitary transcription factors
(HESX1, PROP-1, POU1F1) have been found involved in the pathogenesis of the
disease. Finally, an association between CH and severe obesity has been described
in patients with leptin receptor (Leptin-R) mutations. The clinical consequences 
of CH in adult life vary greatly depending on the etiology, the severity of the
thyroid impairment, the extent of the associated hormone deficiencies, and the
age of the patient at the time of the onset of the disease. In general, acquired 
CH is less severe than the congenital form because of the constitutive activity
of the wild-type TSH-receptor. Symptoms and signs of thyroid insufficiency are
usually milder than those of primary hypothyroidism, and goiter is always absent.
In CPHD, most patients have other endocrine manifestations of the disease (growth
failure, delayed puberty, adrenal insufficiency, diabetes insipidus) that lead
them to seek medical attention before the hypothyroidism becomes severe. Early
diagnosis of the congenital form by neonatal screening for hypothyroidism is
strongly recommended in order to avoid cretinism. Replacement therapy with
L-thyroxine administration has to be established as soon as possible.

PMID: 11964021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Mar;15(3):325-30.

A novel mutation in PIT-1: phenotypic variability in familial combined pituitary 
hormone deficiencies.

Gat-Yablonski G(1), Lazar L, Pertzelan A, Phillip M.

Author information: 
(1)Felsenstein Medical Research Center and Institute for Endocrinology and
Diabetes, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel, Petah Tikva.
gyablonski@clalit.org.il

Mutations in PIT-1 have been described in several cases of familial combined
pituitary hormone deficiencies. This study describes a novel PIT-1 mutation that 
was found in two siblings of a highly consanguineous family of Israeli-Arab
origin. The missense mutation (G688A) causes a lysine (K) to glutamic acid (E)
substitution at codon 230. This codon resides in the first helix of the
POU-homeodomain, which is directly involved in DNA binding. This amino acid is
conserved in most homeodomain proteins, suggesting that the substitution disrupts
the DNA-binding activity of the mutant protein. Two main observations are
described: 1. The clinical presentation of the mutation involves intrauterine
growth retardation. 2. One sibling had full deficency of growth hormone and
thyroid stimulating hormone, whereas the other had only growth hormone
deficiency. This is, to the best of our knowledge, a unique expression of a novel
PIT-1 mutation.

PMID: 11924936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2002 Feb 25;188(1-2):75-83.

Characterization of the human somatostatin receptor type 4 promoter.

Petersenn S(1), Rasch AC, Presch S, Beil FU, Schulte HM.

Author information: 
(1)IHF Institute for Hormone and Fertility Research, University of Hamburg, 22529
Hamburg, Germany. stephan.petersenn@uni-essen.de

Somatostatin (SRIF) exerts inhibitory effects on virtually all endocrine and
exocrine secretions. Five distinct SRIF receptor subtypes (sst 1-5) have been
identified. In contrast to the other subtypes, very little is known about
specific functions of sst4. We investigated structure and regulation of the human
sst4 gene. A genomic clone containing the 5' region of the sst4 gene was
isolated. 1.5 kb of the promoter was sequenced and putative transcription factor 
binding sites were identified. The transcription start site was located 88
nucleotides upstream of the translation start site. A -984 sst4 promoter directed
significant levels of luciferase expression in GH4 rat pituitary cells, Skut-1B
endometrium cells, and BEAS-2B human bronchial epithelial cells, whereas only low
activity was detected in JEG3 chorion carcinoma cells or COS-7 monkey kidney
cells. A minimal -209 promoter allowed cell specific expression, its activity in 
COS-7 cells is not enhanced by co-transfection of the pituitary-specific
transcription factor Pit-1. An enhancer element was localized between nt -459 and
-984. We did not find any regulation of the sst4 promoter region analyzed by
SRIF, forskolin, TPA, IGF-1, EGF, T3, glucocorticoids or 17beta-estradiol. These 
studies identify the 5' region of the sst4 gene. Furthermore, specific activity
of the promoter in various cell lines is demonstrated.

PMID: 11911948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 24;277(21):18501-9. Epub 2002 Mar 12.

Cross-repression, a functional consequence of the physical interaction of
non-liganded nuclear receptors and POU domain transcription factors.

Gonzalez MM(1), Carlberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Kuopio, FIN-70211 Kuopio, Finland.

Nuclear receptors (NRs) and POU domain factors form two important transcription
factor families for which several levels of functional interference have been
described. In this study, the adopted orphan receptors constitutive androstane
receptor (CAR) and pregnane X receptor (PXR) were found to perform direct
protein-protein interactions with Pit-1, a representative POU domain factor. The 
ligand-dependent interaction profile of Pit-1 with CAR, PXR, and the vitamin D
receptor in solution was shown to be that of a corepressor. In the absence of
receptor agonist Pit-1 inhibited the complex formation of NRs with the retinoid X
receptor on DNA. Also in living cells, Pit-1 and Oct-1, another POU domain
factor, behaved like corepressors of NR signaling, and Pit-1-mediated repression 
was found to involve histone deacetylases. Conversely vitamin D receptor, CAR,
and PXR were shown to act as repressors of Pit-1 signaling in different cell
lines (MCF-7, HaCaT, and GH4C1). This repression was found to be independent of
histone deacetylases and seems to be based on a competition of NRs with
coactivator and corepressor proteins for overlaying interaction interfaces on the
surface of Pit-1. Taken together this study suggests that cross-repression should
occur in all tissues in which POU domain factors and non-liganded NRs meet each
other.

PMID: 11891224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Mar;16(3):450-8.

Decreased expression of the GHRH receptor gene due to a mutation in a Pit-1
binding site.

Salvatori R(1), Fan X, Mullis PE, Haile A, Levine MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, and the Ilyssa Center for Molecular and Cellular
Endocrinology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21287, USA. salvator@jhmi.edu

A variety of mutations in the gene encoding the GHRH receptor (GHRHR) that are
predicted to alter protein structure or function have been recently described in 
patients with isolated GH deficiency type IB. In the present report we describe a
patient with isolated GH deficiency type IB who was heterozygous for two novel
mutations in this gene: a missense mutation in codon 329 that replaces lysine
with glutamic acid (K329E) and an A-->C transversion (position -124) in one of
the two sites of the promoter region that binds the pituitary-specific
transcription factor Pit-1, which is required for GHRHR expression. Chinese
hamster ovary cells that were transfected with a cDNA encoding the K329E GHRHR
expressed the receptor but failed to show a cAMP response after treatment with
GHRH, confirming the lack of functionality. To test the effect of the A-->C
mutation at position -124 of the promoter, we transfected rat GH3 pituitary
cells, which express endogenous Pit-1, with plasmids in which the luciferase
reporter gene was under the control of either the wild-type or the mutant
promoter. GH3 cells expressing the mutant promoter showed significantly less
luciferase activity than cells expressing the wild-type promoter. DNA-binding
studies confirmed that the A-->C base change markedly reduces DNA binding to the 
Pit-1 protein. These results demonstrate that mutations in the GHRHR are not
limited to the coding sequence and that promoter mutations that impair Pit-1
binding can reduce expression of the GHRHR gene.

PMID: 11875102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Endocrinol. 2002 Mar;172(3):477-87.

Exogenous expression of Pit-1 in AtT-20 corticotropic cells induces endogenous
growth hormone gene transcription.

Kurotani R(1), Yoshimura S, Iwasaki Y, Inoue K, Teramoto A, Osamura RY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Boseidai,
Isehara, Kanagawa 259-1193, Japan.

The pituitary-specific POU-homeodomain transcription factor, Pit-1, is known to
regulate the expression of the GH gene in somatotropes, prolactin (PRL) in
lactotropes, and TSH in thyrotropes. It is not normally expressed in
corticotropes or gonadotropes. We addressed the question of whether exogenous
Pit-1 was sufficient to induce ectopic transcription of the GH gene in the
corticotropic cell line, AtT-20, or the gonadotropic cell line, alpha T3-1. A
fusion gene composed of enhanced green fluorescent protein gene and human Pit-1
cDNA was transfected into AtT-20 and alpha T3-1 cells. The endogenous mouse GH
mRNA was induced in three of nine AtT-20 cell lines and one of three alpha T3-1
cell lines containing the fusion gene. A small amount of GH protein was also
detected in these cell lines. These data indicate that transfected Pit-1 is
capable of inducing transcription of the GH gene in AtT-20 cells and alpha T3-1
cells. These data also suggest that synergistic co-factors might be required to
transcribe the GH gene effectively for translation into GH protein. Furthermore, 
our findings support the hypothesis that the function of anterior pituitary cells
is determined by the combinatorial action of specific transcription factors.

PMID: 11874696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Cell. 2002 Feb;9(2):291-302.

A defined locus control region determinant links chromatin domain acetylation
with long-range gene activation.

Ho Y(1), Elefant F, Cooke N, Liebhaber S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

Gene activation in higher eukaryotes is often under the control of regulatory
elements quite distant from their target promoters. It is unclear how such
long-range control is mediated. Here we show that a single determinant of the
human growth hormone locus control region (hGH LCR) located 14.5 kb 5prime prime 
or minute to the hGH-N promoter has a critical, specific, and nonredundant role
in facilitating promoter trans factor binding and activating hGH-N transcription.
Significantly, this same determinant plays an essential role in establishing a 32
kb acetylated domain that encompasses the entire hGH LCR and the contiguous hGH-N
promoter. These data support a model for long-range gene activation via
LCR-mediated targeting and extensive spreading of core histone acetylation.

PMID: 11864603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Neurooncol. 2001 Dec;55(3):185-93.

Role of transcription factors in the pathogenesis of pituitary adenomas: a
review.

Suhardja A(1), Kovacs K, Rutka J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurosurgery, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The diversity inherent in every organ has its roots in gene-expression variation 
and is revealed through distinctions in the molecular profile and hence the
identity of individual cell type. Study into the molecular mechanisms of the
development of individual cell type within the pituitary, which is under the
control of transcription factors, has provided a basis for a deeper insight into 
the molecular mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of a variety of
hormone-producing pituitary tumors. Identification of some of these transcription
factors in pituitary adenomas further supports their role in the pathogenesis of 
pituitary adenomas. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of regulation of
proliferation of pituitary cell types by transcription factors offers a basis for
hope that rational genetic or pharmacologic therapies for pituitary tumors can be
designed in the future.

PMID: 11859974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Anim Genet. 2002 Feb;33(1):61-4.

Lack of association of GH1 and POU1F1 gene variants with meat production traits
in Piemontese cattle.

Di Stasio L(1), Sartore S, Albera A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Zootecniche, Facoltà di Agraria, 10095 Grugliasco,
Italy. liliana.distasio@unito.it

Growth hormone (GH) and the Pit-1 transcription factor have been shown to be
involved in the physiological mechanisms related to growth. The present study was
carried out to investigate the possible association of the polymorphism at GH1
and POU1F1 loci with meat production traits in Piemontese cattle. Fourteen traits
were considered, expressing growth (weight at 5, 7 and 11 months, daily gain),
size [withers height (WH), trunk length (TL), chest girth (CG) at 12 months] and 
meat conformation [withers width (WW), shoulder muscularity (SM), loin width
(LW), loin thickness (LT), thigh muscularity (TM), thigh profile (TP), bone
thinness (BT)]. Data were analysed with a mixed model procedure to estimate the
allele substitution and the dominance effects. The results did not provide
evidence of association of GH1 and POU1F1 polymorphisms with the evaluated
traits.

PMID: 11849139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Horm Res. 2001;56(3-4):81-6.

A new C-terminal located mutation (V272ter) in the PIT-1 gene manifesting with
severe congenital hypothyroidism. Possible functionality of the PIT-1 C-terminus.

Blankenstein O(1), Mühlenberg R, Kim C, Wüller S, Pfäffle R, Heimann G.

Author information: 
(1)Kinderklinik, Universitätsklinikum der RWTH Aachen, Deutschland.
oblankenstein@post.klinikum.rwth-aachen.de

OBJECTIVE: We describe a newborn with clinical signs of severe hypothyroidism and
combined pituitary hormone deficiency due to a new mutation in the PIT-1 gene.
PATIENT AND METHODS: Endocrine stimulation test revealed a deficiency for PRL,
TSH and GH, suggesting a defect in the pituitary transcription factor PIT-1.
Genetic analysis of the PIT-1 gene was performed by exon-specific PCR, followed
by SSCP mutation screening and DNA sequencing of the abnormal migrating
fragments.
RESULTS: DNA sequencing revealed a new mutation (V272ter) in direct neighborhood 
to a known mutational hot spot (R271W) in the C-terminal part of the PIT-1
molecule.
CONCLUSIONS: Whereas the R271W mutation has a dominant negative effect on the
mutant protein, the newly described mutation is inherited in an
autosomal-recessive way. The biological consequences of these two different
mutations are discussed.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11847467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Anim Reprod Sci. 2002 Feb 15;69(3-4):223-37.

Neonatal Meishan pigs show POU1F1 genotype effects on plasma GH and PRL
concentration.

Sun HS(1), Anderson LL, Yu TP, Kim KS, Klindt J, Tuggle CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011-3150, USA.

Chinese Meishan pigs develop rapidly with onset of puberty at less than 100 days 
of age, and have a smaller placental size and larger litter size as compared with
British/Continental breeds. POU1F1 is a member of the POU-domain family gene and 
is a positive regulator for growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL), and
thyroid-stimulating hormone beta (TSHbeta) in several mammalian species. To
investigate the role of POU1F1 in controlling pig growth and reproduction traits,
Meishan (MS) pigs segregating a MspI POU1F1 polymorphism were used to determine
differences of GH and PRL at both mRNA and circulating hormone concentrations.
Animals from nine litters were used to collect pituitary (n=60) and/or blood
samples (n=80) at day 0, 15, and 30 after birth, and all animals were genotyped
(CC, CD, DD) for the MspI POU1F1 polymorphism. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) with standard curve quantification was used to quantify
mRNA levels for GH, PRL, and two alternative POU1F1 transcripts, POU1F1-alpha,
and POU1F1-beta. Radioimmunoassays were done to determine the circulating
concentration of GH and PRL in blood plasma. Our results indicated a significant 
effect of POU1F1 genotype on circulating levels of both GH and PRL at birth, but 
not thereafter. The DD neonates had lower levels of GH, but higher levels of PRL,
than other genotypes. POU1F1-alpha mRNA decreased (P<0.05) from days 0 to 30,
which paralleled decreases (P<0.05) in GH mRNA as well as PRL and GH plasma
levels over the same period. POU1F1-beta mRNA levels did not significantly change
over this period. Correlations were significant between POU1F1-alpha mRNA and
both GH mRNA and GH plasma concentration levels, as well as between the two
POU1F1 mRNA isoforms. Results from this study add to our understanding of the
role of POU1F1 in controlling pig development and reproduction.

PMID: 11812632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mod Pathol. 2002 Jan;15(1):11-7.

Expression of GATA-2 in human pituitary adenomas.

Umeoka K(1), Sanno N, Osamura RY, Teramoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

Transcription factor GATA-2 contains two copies of a highly conserved zinc finger
domain and plays unique roles at an early stage of hematopoietic differentiation.
In the mouse pituitary gland, Pit-1-GATA-2 protein-protein interaction has been
shown to lead to gene-specific actions to obtain cell-specific roles. In this
study, we investigated the expression of GATA-2 and Pit-1 in human pituitary
adenomas using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
immunohistochemical techniques. By immunohistochemical analysis, GATA-2 was
detected in all of the gonadotropin-subunit (Gn-su)-positive adenomas (n = 8) and
in four of five thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)-secreting adenomas, but its
incidence was low in the other types of adenomas. Pit-1 protein was detected in 4
of 5 TSH-secreting adenomas and in 10 of 10 growth hormone (GH)-secreting
adenomas. By RT-PCR analysis, GATA-2 was detected in all Gn-su-positive adenomas 
and TSH-secreting adenomas, and Pit-1 was detected in all TSH-secreting adenomas 
and GH-secreting adenomas. These results suggested that GATA-2 contributes to the
functional expression and the differentiation of Gn-su-positive adenomas and the 
TSH-secreting adenomas and that the interaction between GATA-2 and Pit-1 can lead
to gene-specific action and differentiation of TSH-secreting adenomas. It is
further speculated that GATA-2 and transcriptional interaction with Pit-1 play
roles in the functional differentiation of specific pituitary adenomas.

PMID: 11796836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2001 Dec 15;145(50):2425-7.

[From gene to disease; POU1F1- and PROP1-mutations in pituitary hormone
deficiency].

[Article in Dutch]

Wit JM(1), Vulsma T, de Vijlder JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Leids Universitair Medisch Centrum, afd. Kindergeneeskunde, Leiden.

Multiple pituitary hormone deficiency can be caused by mutations in at least
three pituitary transcription factors: POU1F1 (formerly called PIT1), PROP1 or
HESX1. The role of the various pituitary transcription factors in pituitary
ontogeny has been elucidated in part for the mouse. In humans, mutations in
POU1F1 result in a total deficiency of growth hormone and prolactin, and a
variable deficiency of TSH. Cases of mutations in PROP1 exhibit the same
deficiencies, with additional deficiencies of gonadotrophins and a variable
deficiency of ACTH. In the Netherlands, cases of multiple pituitary hormone
deficiency are not only detected on the basis of the classical signs and symptoms
of pituitary deficiency, but also by means of screening on congenital
hypothyroidism with an incidence of approximately 1:20,000.

PMID: 11776668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Hum Mutat. 2001 Nov;18(5):361-74.

Missense mutations of human homeoboxes: A review.

D'Elia AV(1), Tell G, Paron I, Pellizzari L, Lonigro R, Damante G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Università di Udine, Udine,
Italy.

Erratum in
    Hum Mutat 2002 Apr;19(4):457.

The homeodomain (encoded by the homeobox) is the DNA-binding domain of a large
variety of transcriptional regulators involved in controlling cell fate decisions
and development. Mutations of homeobox-containing genes cause several diseases in
humans. A variety of missense mutations giving rise to human diseases have been
described. These mutations are an excellent model to better understand
homeodomain molecular functions. To this end, homeobox missense mutations giving 
rise to human diseases are reviewed. Seventy-four independent homeobox mutations 
have been observed in 17 different genes. In the same genes, 30 missense
mutations outside the homeobox have been observed, indicating that the
homeodomain is more easily affected by single amino acids changes than the rest
of the protein. Most missense mutations have dominant effects. Several data
indicate that dominance is mostly due to haploinsufficiency. Among proteins
having the homeodomain as the only DNA-binding domain, three "hot spot" regions
can be delineated: 1) at codon encoding for Arg5; 2) at codon encoding for Arg31;
and 3) at codons encoding for amino acids of recognition helix. In the latter,
mutations at codons encoding for Arg residues at positions 52 and 53 are
prevalent. In the recognition helix, Arg residues at positions 52 and 53
establish contacts with phosphates in the DNA backbone. Missense mutations of
amino acids that contribute to sequence discrimination (such as those at
positions 50 and 54) are present only in a minority of cases. Similar data have
been obtained when missense mutations of proteins possessing an additional
DNA-binding domain have been analyzed. The only exception is observed in the
POU1F1 (PIT1) homeodomain, in which Arg58 is a "hot spot" for mutations, but is
not involved in DNA recognition.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11668629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2001 Sep;123(3):244-53.

The turkey transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1 can activate the turkey prolactin and
growth hormone gene promoters in vitro but is not detectable in lactotrophs in
vivo.

Weatherly KL(1), Ramesh R, Strange H, Waite KL, Storrie B, Proudman JA, Wong EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Poultry Sciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia
24061-0306, USA.

The transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1 plays an important role in regulating the
prolactin (Prl) and growth hormone (GH) genes in mammals. In this study, the role
that Pit-1 plays in regulating the prolactin and growth hormone genes in avian
species was examined by cotransfection assays and immunofluorescence staining of 
pituitary sections. In cotransfection assays, turkey Pit-1 activated the turkey
Prl, turkey GH, and rat Prl promoters 3.8-, 3.7-, and 12.5-fold, respectively.
This activation was comparable to rat Pit-1 activation of these same promoters. A
point mutation in the turkey Pit-1 cDNA, which changed leu-219 to ser-219,
resulted in a 2-, 2-, and 10-fold reduction in the activation of the turkey Prl, 
turkey GH, and rat Prl promoters, respectively. Unexpectedly, coexpression of
tPit-1 (leu-219) and tPit-1(ser-219) activated turkey Prl and rat Prl promoters
9.4- and 35.9-fold, respectively, but had no effect on the turkey GH promoter.
Dual-label immunofluorescence analysis of turkey pituitary sections revealed that
Pit-1 was not detectable in prolactin-staining cells but was detectable in
GH-staining cells. Taken together, these data indicate that in the domestic
turkey, Pit-1 can activate the turkey Prl promoter in vitro, but does not appear 
to play a role in regulating Prl gene expression in vivo. Pit-1, however, still
likely plays a role in regulating GH gene expression.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11589626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Virol. 2001 Oct;75(19):8888-98.

Specificity in receptor usage by T-cell-tropic feline leukemia viruses:
implications for the in vivo tropism of immunodeficiency-inducing variants.

Lauring AS(1), Anderson MM, Overbaugh J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, 
USA.

Cytopathic, T-cell-tropic feline leukemia viruses (FeLV-T) evolve from FeLV-A in 
infected animals and demonstrate host cell specificities that are distinct from
those of their parent viruses. We recently identified two cellular proteins,
FeLIX and Pit1, required for productive infection by these
immunodeficiency-inducing FeLV-T variants (M. M. Anderson, A. S. Lauring, C. C.
Burns, and J. Overbaugh, Science 287:1828-1830, 2000). FeLV-T is the first
example of a naturally occurring type C retrovirus that requires two proteins to 
gain entry into target cells. FeLIX is an endogenous protein that is highly
related to the N-terminal portion of the FeLV envelope protein, which includes
the receptor-binding domain. Pit1 is a multiple-transmembrane phosphate transport
protein that also functions as a receptor for FeLV-B. The FeLV-B envelope gene is
derived by recombination with endogenous FeLV-like sequences, and its product can
functionally substitute for FeLIX in facilitating entry through the Pit1
receptor. In the present study, we tested other retrovirus envelope surface units
(SUs) with their cognate receptors to determine whether they also could mediate
infection by FeLV-T. Cells were engineered to coexpress the transmembrane form of
the envelope proteins and their cognate receptors, or SU protein was added as a
soluble protein to cells expressing the receptor. Of the FeLV, murine leukemia
virus, and gibbon ape leukemia virus envelopes tested, we found that only those
with receptor-binding domains derived from endogenous FeLV could render cells
permissive for FeLV-T. We also found that there is a strong preference for Pit1
as the transmembrane receptor. Specifically, FeLV-B SUs could efficiently mediate
infection of cells expressing the Pit1 receptor but could only inefficiently
mediate infection of cells expressing the Pit2 receptor, even though these SUs
are able to bind to Pit2. Expression analysis of feline Pit1 and FeLIX suggests
that FeLIX is likely the primary determinant of FeLV-T tropism. These results are
discussed in terms of current models for retrovirus entry and the
interrelationship among FeLV variants that evolve in vivo.

PMCID: PMC114457
PMID: 11533152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Sep;15(9):1484-95.

Regulation of Pit-1 expression by ghrelin and GHRP-6 through the GH secretagogue 
receptor.

García A(1), Alvarez CV, Smith RG, Diéguez C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Santiago de
Compostela, Spain.

GH secretagogues are an expanding class of synthetic peptide and nonpeptide
molecules that stimulate the pituitary gland to secrete GH through their own
specific receptor, the GH-secretagogue receptor. The cloning of the receptor for 
these nonclassical GH releasing molecules, together with the more recent
characterization of an endogenous ligand, named ghrelin, have unambiguously
demonstrated the existence of a physiological system that regulates GH secretion.
Somatotroph cell-specific expression of the GH gene is dependent on a
pituitary-specific transcription factor (Pit-1). This factor is transcribed in a 
highly restricted manner in the anterior pituitary gland. The present experiments
sought to determine whether the synthetic hexapeptide GHRP-6, a reference GH
secretagogue compound, as well as an endogenous ligand, ghrelin, regulate pit-1
expression. By a combination of Northern and Western blot analysis we found that 
GHRP-6 elicits a time- and dose-dependent activation of pit-1 expression in
monolayer cultures of infant rat anterior pituitary cells. This effect was
blocked by pretreatment with actinomycin D, but not by cycloheximide, suggesting 
that this action was due to direct transcriptional activation of pit-1. Using an 
established cell line (HEK293-GHS-R) that overexpresses the GH secretagogue
receptor, we showed a marked stimulatory effect of GHRP-6 on the pit-1 -2,500 bp 
5'-region driving luciferase expression. We truncated the responsive region to
-231 bp, a sequence that contains two CREs, and found that both CREs are needed
for GHRP-6-induced transcriptional activation in both HEK293-GHS-R cells and
infant rat anterior pituitary primary cultures. The effect was dependent on PKC, 
MAPK kinase, and PKA activation. Increasing Pit-1 by coexpression of pCMV-pit-1
potentiated the GHRP-6 effect on the pit-1 promoter. Similarly, we showed that
the endogenous GH secretagogue receptor ligand ghrelin exerts a similar effect on
the pit-1 promoter. These data provide the first evidence that ghrelin, in
addition to its previously reported GH-releasing activities, is also capable of
regulating pit-1 transcription through the GH secretagogue receptor in the
pituitary, thus giving new insights into the physiological role of the GH
secretagogue receptor on somatotroph cell differentiation and function.

PMID: 11518797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Cell. 2001 Mar;7(3):551-8.

CREB binding protein recruitment to the transcription complex requires growth
factor-dependent phosphorylation of its GF box.

Zanger K(1), Radovick S, Wondisford FE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, The University of Chicago, Illinois
60637, USA.

Growth factors such as epidermal growth factor (EGF) and insulin regulate
development and metabolism via genes containing both POU homeodomain (Pit-1) and 
phorbol ester (AP-1) response elements. Although CREB binding protein (CBP)
functions as a coactivator on these elements, the mechanism of transactivation
was previously unclear. We now demonstrate that CBP is recruited to these
elements only after it is phosphorylated at serine 436 by growth factor-dependent
signaling pathways. In contrast, p300, a protein closely related to CBP that
lacks this phosphorylation site, binds only weakly to the transcription complex
and in a growth factor-independent manner. A small region of CBP (amino acids
312-440), which we term GF box, contains a potent transactivation domain and
mediates this effect. Direct phosphorylation represents a novel mechanism
controlling coactivator recruitment to the transcription complex.

PMID: 11463380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Anim Biotechnol. 2001 May;12(1):1-19.

Cloning of the full length pig PIT1 (POU1F1) CDNA and a novel alternative PIT1
transcript, and functional studies of their encoded proteins.

Yu TP(1), Sun HS, Wahls S, Sanchez-Serrano I, Rothschild MF, Tuggle CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames 50011, USA.

PIT1 is an essential regulatory gene of growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL) and 
thyrotropin beta subunit (TSHbeta). Previously, a partial pig PIT1 cDNA and a
genomic clone of the entire 3' end of the PIT1 gene was isolated, and
polymorphisms at PIT1 were associated with several performance traits in the pig.
In order to understand the biological function of the pig PIT1 gene and its
possible application in swine genetics, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) was used to complete the cloning of the full length cDNA for
pig PIT1. The pig PIT1 cDNA and its deduced protein sequence have approximately
90% and 95% identity, respectively, with the PIT1 cDNA and protein of other
mammals (human, bovine, sheep and rodents). Surprisingly, sequence comparison to 
other pig PIT1 sequences indicated only approximately 93% identity. Additional
sequencing confirmed our sequence, and identified a new polymorphism in exon 4.
Phylogenetic analysis of several mammalian PIT1 sequences indicates sequencing
errors may account for the discrepancies observed in the other pig sequences
reported. Several PIT1 alternative spliced forms were also identified by RT-PCR. 
They were the delta3PIT1 (missing entire exon 3), delta4PIT1 (missing entire exon
4) and PIT1beta (additional 26 amino acids inserted in front of exon 2)
transcripts. The delta4PIT1 and PIT1beta transcripts have been found to encode
functionally different proteins in rodents. The delta3PIT1 transcript is a novel 
isoform of PIT1. Potentially different functions between pig delta3PIT1 and PIT1 
were analyzed by expressing these proteins in bacteria. The E. coli-expressed
PIT1 and delta3PIT1 proteins were used with rat growth hormone (rGH) and rat
prolactin (rPRL) promoter DNA in DNA mobility shift assays. The results showed
that pig PIT1 can specifically bind rGH and rPRL promoter regions, but that the
pig delta3PIT1 cannot, even at very high protein concentrations. Possible
protein-protein interactions between delta3PIT1 and PIT1 were tested by mixing
protein extracts before the gel shift assay, and the results showed that
delta3PIT1 protein did not affect PIT1 binding to its target DNA. These data
demonstrate the functionality of the PIT1 cDNA cloned in this study, and identify
a novel delta3PIT1 transcript which encodes a protein that cannot bind rGH/rPRL
target sequences.

PMID: 11370678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Endocrinology. 2001 Jun;142(6):2649-59.

Genomic structure and transcriptional regulation of the human growth hormone
secretagogue receptor.

Petersenn S(1), Rasch AC, Penshorn M, Beil FU, Schulte HM.

Author information: 
(1)IHF Institute for Hormone and Fertility Research, University of Hamburg,
Germany. petersenn@uni-essen.de

Synthetic GH secretagogues stimulate GH release through binding to a recently
cloned specific GH secretagogue receptor (GHS-R). The endogenous ligand of this
receptor may be part of a new endocrine pathway controlling GH secretion. Two
different receptor variants, type 1a and 1b, have been described that differ in
their 3'-terminal amino acids. We investigated the genomic structure and
transcriptional regulation of the human GHS-R. An 18-kb genomic clone including
sequences encoding for the two GHS-R variants was isolated. Sequencing revealed
that the two variants originate from specific RNA processing of a single gene
that spans approximately 4.1 kb. The transcription start site was defined by
5'-inverse PCR analysis at position -227. RT-PCR analysis points to differential 
transcriptional initiation and processing. Type 1a is encoded by two exons; 2152 
bp of intronic sequence are removed by splicing at position 796/797 relative to
the translation start site. Type 1b is encoded by a single exon. A putative
polyadenylation signal consensus motif was identified at position +4118; 2.7 kb
of the 5'-flanking region were sequenced, and putative transcription factor
binding sites were identified. Transcriptional regulation was investigated by
transient transfections using promoter fragments ranging in size from 168-1745
bp; 1745 bp of the GHS-R promoter directed significant levels of luciferase
expression in GH(4) rat pituitary cells, whereas no activity was detected in
monkey kidney COS-7 cells, human endometrium Skut-1B cells, mouse hypothalamic
LHRH neuronal GT1-7 cells, or mouse corticotroph pituitary AtT20 cells. A minimal
309-bp promoter allowed pituitary-specific expression. Its activity in COS-7
cells was enhanced by cotransfection of the pituitary-specific transcription
factor Pit-1. We did not find any regulation of the GHS-R promoter by forskolin, 
somatostatin, insulin-like growth factor I, or 12-O-tetraphorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate. Thyroid hormone and estrogen lead to a significant stimulation;
glucocorticoids lead to a significant inhibition. Further mapping suggests a
thyroid hormone-responsive element, an estrogen-responsive element, and a
glucocorticoid-responsive element located between -309 and the translation start 
codon. These studies demonstrate the nature of the human GHS-R gene and identify 
its 5'-flanking region. Furthermore, pituitary-specific activity of the promoter 
and regulation by various hormones are demonstrated.

PMID: 11356716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 22;276(25):23034-41. Epub 2001 Apr 11.

Identification of a dominant negative homeodomain mutation in Rieger syndrome.

Saadi I(1), Semina EV, Amendt BA, Harris DJ, Murphy KP, Murray JC, Russo AF.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Program, Departments of Pediatrics, Biochemistry, Biological
Sciences, and Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa
52242, USA.

Mutations in the PITX2 bicoid-like homeobox gene cause Rieger syndrome. Rieger
syndrome is an autosomal-dominant human disorder characterized by glaucoma as
well as dental hypoplasia, mild craniofacial dysmorphism, and umbilical stump
abnormalities. PITX2 has also been implicated in the development of multiple
organs and left-right asymmetry in the body plan. The PITX2 homeodomain has a
lysine at position 50, which has been shown to impart the bicoid-type (TAATCC)
DNA binding specificity to other homeodomain proteins. A mutation (K88E), found
in a Rieger syndrome patient, changes this lysine to glutamic acid. We were
intrigued by the relatively pronounced phenotypic consequences of this K88E
mutation. In the initial analyses, the mutant protein appeared to simply be
inactive, with essentially no DNA binding and transactivation activities and,
unlike the wild type protein, with an inability to synergize with another
transcription factor, Pit-1. However, when the K88E DNA was cotransfected with
wild type PITX2, analogous to the patient genotype, the K88E mutant suppressed
the synergism of wild type PITX2 with Pit-1. In contrast, a different PITX2
homeodomain mutant, T68P, which is also defective in DNA binding,
transactivation, and Pit-1 synergism activities, did not suppress the wild type
synergism with Pit-1. These results describe the first dominant negative missense
mutation in a homeodomain and support a model that may partially explain the
phenotypic variation within Rieger syndrome.

PMID: 11301317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Apr;86(4):1545-50.

Combined pituitary hormone deficiency caused by compound heterozygosity for two
novel mutations in the POU domain of the Pit1/POU1F1 gene.

Hendriks-Stegeman BI(1), Augustijn KD, Bakker B, Holthuizen P, van der Vliet PC, 
Jansen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, University Medical Center, 3508 AB
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The POU homeodomain containing transcriptional activator POU1F1, formerly called 
Pit1 or GHF-1, is required for the embryological determination and postnatal
secretory function of the GH-, PRL-, and TSH-producing cells in the anterior
pituitary. Several mutations in the gene encoding POU1F1 have been described,
resulting in a syndrome of combined pituitary hormone deficiency involving these 
three hormones. Most of the patients with this phenotype have either a dominant
negative mutation in codon 271 (R271W) or are homozygous for a recessive mutation
in the POU1F1 gene; to date only one case has been reported with compound
heterozygosity for two point mutations. Here, we describe a boy with severe
deficiencies of GH, PRL, and TSH who had compound heterozygosity for two novel
point mutations in the POU1F1 gene: a 1-bp deletion frameshift mutation
(747delA), the first one described to date in this gene, which leads to a
nonfunctional truncated protein lacking the entire DNA recognition helix of the
POU homeodomain, and a missense mutation in the C-terminal end of the fourth
alpha-helix of the POU-specific domain (W193R),which causes a 500-fold reduction 
in the ability to bind to DNA and activate transcription.

PMID: 11297581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 1;276(22):19020-6. Epub 2001 Mar 15.

A point mutation in the LIM domain of Lhx3 reduces activation of the glycoprotein
hormone alpha-subunit promoter.

Howard PW(1), Maurer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland, Oregon 97201, USA.

Lhx3, a member of the LIM homeodomain family of transcription factors, is
required for development of the pituitary in mice. A recent report has described 
a point mutation in the human LHX3 gene that is associated with a combined
pituitary hormone disorder. The mutation is predicted to lead to the replacement 
of a tyrosine residue with a cysteine in the second LIM domain of LHX3. We have
characterized the effects of this point mutation (Y114C) when analyzed in the
context of the mouse Lhx3 coding sequence. Mobility shift assays demonstrated
that the Lhx3 Y114C mutant is capable of binding DNA, although a decrease in the 
formation of a specific complex was observed. Transfection assays using an
expression vector for either full-length Lhx3 or a GAL4-Lhx3 LIM domain fusion
provided evidence that the Lhx3 Y114C mutant has a decreased ability to stimulate
transcription. In particular, a GAL4-Lhx3 Y114C LIM mutant was unable to support 
Ras responsiveness of a modified glycoprotein hormone alpha-subunit reporter
gene. Protein interaction studies suggest that the Y114C mutation may modestly
reduce binding to the POU transcription factor, Pit-1. Interestingly, the Y114C
mutation essentially abrogated binding to the putative co-activator/adapter,
selective LIM-binding protein. The findings provide insights into the mechanisms 
mediating transcriptional activation by Lhx3 and suggest that the observed
phenotype of the human mutation probably involves reduced transcriptional
activity of the mutant LHX3.

PMID: 11279219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Apr;15(4):625-37.

Inhibition of protein phosphatase PP1 in GH3B6, but not in GH3 cells, activates
the MEK/ERK/c-fos pathway and the human prolactin promoter, involving the
coactivator CPB/p300.

Manfroid I(1), Martial JA, Muller M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique, Université de
Liège, Institut de Chimie B6, B-4000 Sart-Tilman, Belgique.

The human (hPRL) PRL gene proximal promoter (-164/+15) is the target for numerous
signal transduction pathways involving protein kinases. The inhibitor of
Ser/Thr-protein phosphatases okadaic acid (OA) was shown to induce this promoter 
in rat pituitary GH3B6 through a synergism between increased amounts of the
ubiquitous factor AP-1 and the pituitary-specific factor Pit-1. Here we show that
this activation results mainly from transcriptional stimulation of the c-fos
promoter leading to increased AP-1 activity. We report the surprising absence of 
the hPRL and c-fos promoter stimulation by OA in GH3 cells, closely related to
GH3B6 cells, and we use this discrepancy to dissect the precise mechanism of
action. c-fos gene activation involves the mitogen-activated kinase
(MAPK)-ternary complex factor (TCF) pathway and can be obtained by expressing
active V12ras in both cell lines. We show that OA acts by inhibiting protein
phosphatase PP1, thereby protecting MAPK kinase (MEK)1/2 and/or a MEK1/2-kinase
from dephosphorylation. PP1 inhibition of MEK activation by V12ras does not occur
in GH3 cells, indicating that a distinct, PP1-sensitive phosphorylation site is
used in GH3B6 cells to activate the TCF pathway in GH3B6 cells. Finally, we show 
that the synergistic OA activation of the hPRL promoter by Pit-1 and AP-1 is
independent of the Pit-1 transactivation domain and is mediated by the general
coactivator (CRE-binding protein)-binding protein (CBP)/p300.

PMID: 11266513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Poult Sci. 2001 Mar;80(3):284-8.

Genetic variation among chicken lines and mammalian species in specific genes.

Zhou H(1), Liu W, Lamont SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames 50011-3150, USA.

Thirteen gene-specific primer sets provided by the U.S. Poultry Genome
Coordinators were used to investigate DNA polymorphisms between two highly inbred
chicken lines of Leghorn and Fayoumi origin. Nucleotide and predicted amino acid 
sequences were then compared among these chicken lines and the Genbank sequences 
of chicken, mouse, and human. The following genes were selected as candidates for
immune response or transcription activation: B2M, DAD1, IAP1, IL2, IREB1, LAP18, 
MAFL, POU1F1, RREB1, TAD, TBP1, TCRG, and ZOV3. Total cDNA was obtained from the 
spleens of Leghorn and Fayoumi lines by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) and was used as a template to PCR-amplify gene-specific products. 
All primers except POU1F1 and TCRG generated single PCR products of the predicted
325- to 667-bp size, confirming the efficacy of these gene-specific primers in
the chicken. Three and seven of the 11 amplified gene fragments yielded
line-specific nucleotide polymorphisms between the Leghorn and Fayoumi sequences 
and between the Leghorn and Genbank chicken sequences respectively. Similarities 
between inbred Leghorn and mammalian species were 36 to 86% for nucleotides and
25 to 96% for predicted amino acid sequence. The polymorphisms of some gene
fragments between the Leghorn and Fayoumi lines will allow for investigation of
associations of these genes with immune response and other biological traits.

PMID: 11261557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Mar;15(3):411-20.

Combined pituitary hormone deficiency due to the F135C human Pit-1
(pituitary-specific factor 1) gene mutation: functional and structural
correlates.

Vallette-Kasic S(1), Pellegrini-Bouiller I, Sampieri F, Gunz G, Diaz A, Radovick 
S, Enjalbert A, Brue T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory ICNE UMR 6544, IFR Jean-Roche Faculté de Médecine Nord 13916
Marseille Cedex 20, France.

The pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1 (pituitary-specific factor 1)
is known to play a key role in the differentiation of PRL-, GH-, and
TSH-secreting cells, and in the regulation of expression of the corresponding
genes. In recent years, 12 distinct mutations of the Pit-1 gene have been shown
to be responsible for a phenotype of multiple congenital pituitary hormone
deficiency involving PRL, GH, and TSH. We had previously identified, in four
siblings with GH, PRL, and TSH deficiencies, a mutation (F135C) resulting in a
single amino acid change within the POU-specific binding domain of the Pit-1
molecule. In the present report, we have explored the functional effect of the
F135C mutation. In vitro activity tests performed by transfection in human HeLa
cells showed decreased transactivation capacity on the PRL, GH, and Pit-1 genes. 
The DNA binding experiments performed by gel shift showed that the F135C mutation
generated a protein capable of binding to DNA response elements. To analyze how
the F135C mutation might affect functionality of the transcription factor despite
a normal DNA binding, we used a structure modelization approach and also analyzed
two other Pit-1 mutant proteins (F135A and F135Y). The loss of functionality in
these two mutants was similar to that of F135C. This finding was in keeping with 
our molecular modeling studies. According to structural data derived from the
crystallographic analysis of the DNA/Pit-1 POU domain complex, the conformation
of the first helix of the F135C-mutated POU-specific domain could be perturbed to
such an extent that any interaction with other transcription cofactors might be
definitively prevented.

PMID: 11222742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Mol Biol. 2000 Oct 6;302(5):1023-39.

The virtuoso of versatility: POU proteins that flex to fit.

Phillips K(1), Luisi B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
katheryn@cryst.bioc.cam.ac.uk

During the evolution of eukaryotes, a new structural motif arose by the fusion of
genes encoding two different types of DNA-binding domain. The family of
transcription factors which contain this domain, the POU proteins, have come to
play essential roles not only in the development of highly specialised tissues,
such as complex neuronal systems, but also in more general cellular housekeeping.
Members of the POU family recognise defined DNA sequences, and a well-studied
subset have specificity for a motif known as the octamer element which is found
in the promoter region of a variety of genes. The structurally bipartite POU
domain has intrinsic conformational flexibility and this feature appears to
confer functional diversity to this class of transcription factors. The POU
domain for which we have the most structural data is from Oct-1, which binds an
eight base-pair target and variants of this octamer site. The two-part
DNA-binding domain partially encircles the DNA, with the sub-domains able to
assume a variety of conformations, dependent on the DNA element. Crystallographic
and biochemical studies have shown that the binary complex provides distinct
platforms for the recruitment of specific regulators to control transcription.
The conformability of the POU domain in moulding to DNA elements and
co-regulators provides a mechanism for combinatorial assembly as well as
allosteric molecular recognition. We review here the structure and function of
the diverse POU proteins and discuss the role of the proteins' plasticity in
recognition and transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 11183772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Nippon Med Sch. 2001 Feb;68(1):69-73.

[Pituitary tumors from molecular-biological aspects].

[Article in Japanese]

Sano N(1), Umeoka K, Ooyama K, Tahara S, Takumi I, Teramoto A, Osamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nippon Medical School Tamanagayama Hospital.
sanno_naoko/neurosurg@nms.ac.jp.

PMID: 11180706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2000 Dec;78(12):1013-28.

Pituitary and extrapituitary growth hormone: Pit-1 dependence?

Harvey S(1), Azumaya Y, Hull KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
steve.harvey@ualberta.ca

Growth hormone (GH) is primarily produced in pituitary somatotrophs. The
synthesis of this hormone is thought to be dependent upon a pituitary-specific
transcription factor (Pit-1). However, many extrapituitary tissues are now known 
to express GH genes. The extrapituitary production of GH may therefore indicate
an extrapituitary distribution of the Pit-1 gene. The extrapituitary production
of GH may, alternatively, indicate that GH expression occurs independently of
Pit-1 in extrapituitary tissues. These possibilities are considered in this brief
review.

PMID: 11149379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Cell. 2000 Dec 8;103(6):853-64.

Synergism with the coactivator OBF-1 (OCA-B, BOB-1) is mediated by a specific POU
dimer configuration.

Tomilin A(1), Reményi A, Lins K, Bak H, Leidel S, Vriend G, Wilmanns M, Schöler
HR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Transgenesis and Germ Cells Research New Bolton Center
School of Veterinary Medicine Department of Animal Biology University of
Pennsylvania 19348, Kennett Square, PA, USA.

POU domain proteins contain a bipartite DNA binding domain divided by a flexible 
linker that enables them to adopt various monomer configurations on DNA. The
versatility of POU protein operation is additionally conferred at the
dimerization level. The POU dimer formed on the PORE (ATTTGAAATGCAAAT) can
recruit the transcriptional coactivator OBF-1, whereas POU dimers formed on the
consensus MORE (ATGCATATGCAT) or on MOREs from immunoglobulin heavy chain
promoters (AT[G/A][C/A]ATATGCAA) fail to interact. An interaction with OBF-1 is
precluded since the same Oct-1 residues that form the MORE dimerization interface
are also used for OBF-1/Oct-1 interactions on the PORE. Our findings provide a
paradigm of how specific POU dimer assemblies can differentially recruit a
coregulatory activity with distinct transcriptional readouts.

PMID: 11136971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2000 Nov;53(5):645-7.

Placental growth hormone and IGF-I in a pregnant woman with Pit-1 deficiency.

Verhaeghe J(1), Bougoussa M, Van Herck E, de Zegher F, Hennen G, Igout A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven,
Belgium. johan.verhaeghe@uz.kuleuven.ac.be

The respective contributions of pituitary and placental GH to circulating IGF-I
in pregnant women have not been well established. We measured the serum
concentrations of placental growth hormone (PGH) and IGF-I in a woman with pit-1 
deficiency before, during and after pregnancy, resulting in the birth of a
healthy child (not pit-1 deficient). Both PGH and IGF-I concentrations were below
the assay detection limit before and after pregnancy. During pregnancy, PGH and
IGF-I levels increased steadily; the concentrations of PGH and IGF-I in late
pregnancy were comparable with levels previously measured in normal pregnancies. 
PGH and IGF-I concentrations were strongly correlated throughout pregnancy (r =
0.90; P = 0.002). PGH was undetectable in cord serum, whilst the IGF-I
concentration was within the normal range. The findings of this case study
corroborate the notion that PGH is the prime regulator of maternal serum IGF-I
during pregnancy.

PMID: 11106927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2000 Oct;57(11):1652-66.

Rieger syndrome: a clinical, molecular, and biochemical analysis.

Amendt BA(1), Semina EV, Alward WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Tulsa, Oklahoma
74104-3189, USA. brad-amendt@utulsa.edu

Rieger syndrome (RIEG 1; MIM 180500) is an autosomal dominant disorder of
morphogenesis. It is a phenotypically heterogeneous disorder characterized by
malformations of the eyes, teeth, and umbilicus. RIEG belongs to the
Axenfeld-Rieger group of anomalies, which includes Axenfeld anomaly and Rieger
anomaly (or Rieger eye malformation), which display ocular features only.
Recently, mutations in the homeodomain transcription factor, PITX2, have been
shown to be associated with Rieger syndrome. This review discusses the clinical
manifestations of Rieger syndrome and how they correlate with the current
molecular and biochemical studies on this human disorder.

PMID: 11092457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Pituitary. 1999 May;1(3-4):269-71.

Pit-1 positive alpha-subunit positive nonfunctioning human pituitary adenomas: a 
dedifferentiated GH cell lineage?

Osamura RY(1), Tahara S, Komatsubara K, Itoh Y, Kajiwara H, Kurotani R, Sanno N, 
Teramoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.
osamura@is.icc.u-tokai.ac.jp

Pit-1 is a transcription factor which has been reported to regulate
differentiation toward GH, PRL and TSH in the anterior pituitary glands. In the
human pituitary adenomas, Pit-1 is highly expressed in GH secreting and TSH
secreting adenomas as it can well be anticipated. Interestingly, human
non-functioning pituitary adenomas also express Pit-1, especially it was
expressed in all alpha SU positive nonfunctioning adenomas. The human anterior
pituitary cells are special in comparison with rodents in a finding that alpha SU
is frequently colocalized with GH. As alpha SU is the first hormone appearing
during fetal development in the rodent pituitary glands, it may be postulated
that alpha SU Pit-1 positive cells undergo differentiation in the GH cell
lineage. From this background, this paper proposes that "alpha SU positive Pit-1 
Positive" cells are the ones in the GH cell lineage, more specifically a
dedifferentiated cell lineage toward alpha SU/GH/Pit-1.

PMID: 11081207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Pituitary. 1999 May;1(3-4):159-68.

Molecular determinants of pituitary cytodifferentiation.

Asa SL(1), Ezzat S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The pituitary is a complex gland and is composed of several cell types, each
responsible for the production of specific hormones. In the past, it was thought 
that one cell could make only one hormone; the concept of plurihormonality was
poorly understood. Plurihormonal adenomas were thought to be either composed of
multiple cell types, each producing one hormone (plurimorphous adenomas) or
composed of poorly differentiated cells that exhibited abnormal production of
multiple hormones. However, the molecular factors that determine hormone
production have now been identified as transcription factors that target specific
hormone genes. These factors have clarified three main pathways of cell
differentiation. ACTH-producing corticotrophs are determined by corticotropin
upstream transcription-binding element (CUTE) proteins including neuroD1/beta 2. 
Bihormonal gonadotrophs require expression of steroidgenic factor (SF)-1. The
complex family of Pit-1 expressing cells can mature into somatotrophs,
mammosomatotrophs, lactotrophs or thyrotrophs with the additional expression of
estrogen receptor (ER) alpha, which enhances PRL secretion, or thyrotroph
embryonic factor (TEF) which stimulates TSH-beta production. The recognition of
these molecular determinants of adenohypophysial cytodifferentiation has
clarified the patterns of plurihormonality which have been recognized in
pituitary adenomas and provide a framework for classification of these tumors.

PMID: 11081194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Pituitary. 1999 Nov;2(3):217-24.

Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction analysis of pituitary hormone,
Pit-1 and steroidogenic factor-1 messenger RNA expression in pituitary tumors.

McDermott MT(1), Haugen BR, Gordon DF, Wood WM, Brown NS, Bauer CA, Garrity MJ,
Kleinschmidt-DeMasters BK, Lillehei KO, Samuels MH, Bright TM, Ridgway EC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver 80262, USA. michael.mcdermott@UCHSC.edu

Pit-1 is a transcription factor that appears early in embryonic pituitary gland
formation and is necessary for the development of somatotropes, lactotropes and
thyrotropes. Steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) is another early appearing
transcription factor that is involved in the development of gonadotropes. In this
study we have compared RT-PCR analysis of hormone mRNA with traditional IHC for
classification of 27 pituitary tumors and have evaluated the correlation of Pit-1
and SF-1 mRNA with hormone mRNA. RT-PCR detected concordant hormone mRNA in 100% 
of GH IHC positive, 100% of PRL IHC positive, 33% of TSH IHC positive, and 93% of
gonadotropin IHC positive tumors. IHC, however, was concordant in only 71% of GH 
mRNA positive, 78% of PRL mRNA positive, 17% of TSH beta mRNA positive, and 76%
of FSH beta mRNA positive tumors. Pit-1 mRNA was positive in 87% of tumors in
which mRNA for GH, PRL or TSH beta was detected and in only 17% of GH, PRL and
TSH beta mRNA negative tumors. SF-1 mRNA was positive in 94% of tumors in which
mRNA for FSH beta was present and in no FSH beta mRNA negative tumors. We
conclude that RT-PCR analysis of hormone mRNA may be more sensitive than
traditional hormone IHC for classification of pituitary tumors. Furthermore,
tumor Pit-1 mRNA positively correlates with GH, PRL and TSH beta mRNA while tumor
SF-1 mRNA correlates well with FSH beta mRNA. Combined analysis of hormone and
transcription factor mRNA in pituitary tumor tissue may therefore be a more
meaningful approach to pituitary tumor characterization.

PMID: 11081157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Science. 2000 Nov 10;290(5494):1127-31.

Allosteric effects of Pit-1 DNA sites on long-term repression in cell type
specification.

Scully KM(1), Jacobson EM, Jepsen K, Lunyak V, Viadiu H, Carrière C, Rose DW,
Hooshmand F, Aggarwal AK, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Reciprocal gene activation and restriction during cell type differentiation from 
a common lineage is a hallmark of mammalian organogenesis. A key question, then, 
is whether a critical transcriptional activator of cell type-specific gene
targets can also restrict expression of the same genes in other cell types. Here,
we show that whereas the pituitary-specific POU domain factor Pit-1 activates
growth hormone gene expression in one cell type, the somatotrope, it restricts
its expression from a second cell type, the lactotrope. This distinction depends 
on a two-base pair spacing in accommodation of the bipartite POU domains on a
conserved growth hormone promoter site. The allosteric effect on Pit-1, in
combination with other DNA binding factors, results in the recruitment of a
corepressor complex, including nuclear receptor corepressor N-CoR, which,
unexpectedly, is required for active long-term repression of the growth hormone
gene in lactotropes.

PMID: 11073444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Endocrine. 2000 Aug;13(1):71-9.

Insulin-like growth factor-1 causes a switch-like reduction of endogenous growth 
hormone mRNA in rat MtT/S somatotroph cells.

Voss TC(1), Mangin TM, Hurley DL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA
70118-5698, USA.

Reduction of mRNA expression from the endogenous GH gene by insulin-like growth
factor 1 (IGF-1) in somatotroph-like rat MtT/S cells was measured. GH mRNA levels
were reduced by 65 nM IGF-1 treatment in a time-dependent manner over 5 d of
culture with a calculated GH mRNA half-life of 50 h, in line with previous values
from primary cultures. Inhibition of inositol 3-phosphate kinase by wortmannin or
LY-294,002 treatment was ineffective in blocking IGF-1 decreases in GH mRNA, as
was inhibition of MAP kinase activity by PD 098059. The inhibition by IGF-1 also 
did not regulate Pit-1 (GHF-1) mRNA levels, which were constant during 65 nM
IGF-1 treatment. MtT/S cells were shown to have both IGF-1 and insulin receptors 
as detected by Western blotting. There was also shown to be the suggestion of
"hybrid" receptors containing different beta chains from each of these related
heterotetrameric receptors. Analysis of the effects of IGF-1 and insulin on MtT/S
cells showed that each reduced GH mRNA in a dose-dependent manner gave a
calculated EC50 of 15.5 nM for IGF-1 and 0.6 nM for insulin, suggesting that the 
respective receptors for each hormone were activated. However, GH mRNA response
to IGF-1 treatment was "ultrasensitive," exhibiting a switch-like effect; below
10 nM IGF-1, there was no decline in GH mRNA, but then maximal reduction occurred
at IGF-1 concentrations above 20 nM. The degree of this ultrasensitive effect was
calculated from the Hill equation for cooperativity, with a Hill coefficient of
-4.1, greater than the classic cooperativity exhibited by hemoglobin binding to
oxygen. The ultrasensitive response was specific for IGF-1, as insulin did not
display this effect. These results suggest that the response evoked by the IGF-1 
receptor could act as a binary molecular switch controlling GH mRNA expression in
somatotrophs.

PMID: 11051049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Blood. 2000 Oct 1;96(7):2432-9.

Efficient retrovirus-mediated gene transfer to transplantable human bone marrow
cells in the absence of fibronectin.

Hennemann B(1), Oh IH, Chuo JY, Kalberer CP, Schley PD, Rose-John S, Humphries
RK, Eaves CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency and the Departments of
Medical Genetics and Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada.

The low frequency of transplantable hematopoietic stem cells in adult human bone 
marrow (BM) and other differences from cord blood stem cells have impeded studies
to optimize the retroviral transduction of stem cells from adult sources. To
address this problem, first a cytokine combination was defined that would both
maximize the kinetics of adult BM CD34(+)CD38(-) cell mitogenesis and minimize
the period of prestimulation required for the transduction of these cells by a
MSCV-GFP/neo(r) virus in tissue culture dishes in the absence of fibronectin.
Three days of stimulation with flt3-ligand, Steel factor, interleukin (IL)-3, and
hyper-IL-6 proved both necessary and sufficient to obtain 83% +/- 2% GFP(+)
CD34(+)CD38(-) cells, 75% +/- 10% G418-resistant clonogenic progenitors, and 50% 
+/- 20% transduced long-term culture-initiating cells as recovered 48 hours after
a single exposure to virus. Moreover, this was accompanied by a several-fold
increase in viral receptor (pit-1) messenger RNA transcripts in the target cells.
Using this prestimulation protocol, repeated daily exposure to new virus (3x) did
not alter the proportion of transduced cells over that obtained with a single
exposure. Adult human BM cells able to engraft immunodeficient
(NOD/SCID-beta(2)M(-/-)) mice were also efficiently transduced (10%-20% GFP(+)
human lymphoid and myeloid cells present 6-8 weeks after transplant) using a
6-day prestimulation and infection protocol. A clinically useful efficiency of
retrovirus-mediated gene transfer to transplantable adult human BM stem cells can
thus be obtained with a protocol that allows their semisynchronous activation
into cycle and concomitant increased expression of virus receptor transcripts
before virus exposure.

PMID: 11001895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Matrix Biol. 2000 Sep;19(5):395-407.

Parathyroid hormone regulation of bone sialoprotein (BSP) gene transcription is
mediated through a pituitary-specific transcription factor-1 (Pit-1) motif in the
rat BSP gene promoter.

Ogata Y(1), Nakao S, Kim RH, Li JJ, Furuyama S, Sugiya H, Sodek J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
271-8587, Chiba, Japan. ogata@mascat.nihon-u.ac.jp

Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is a mineralized tissue-specific protein expressed by
differentiated osteoblasts that appears to function in the initial mineralization
of bone. Parathyroid hormone (PTH), which regulates serum calcium through its
actions on bone cells, increases the expression of BSP in the rat osteosarcoma
cell line (ROS 17/2.8). At 10(-8) M PTH (human 1-34 PTH), stimulation of BSP mRNA
was first evident at 3 h ( approximately 3.8-fold), reached maximal levels at 6 h
( approximately 4.7-fold), and declined slowly thereafter. The effects of PTH,
which were abrogated by cycloheximide (28 microg/ml), did not alter the stability
of the BSP mRNA. The increased transcription was mimicked by both forskolin
(10(-6) M) and isoproterenol (10(-7) M), and was also increased by
3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX; 10(-5) M), while the transcriptional activity 
induced by PTH was inhibited by the protein kinase A inhibitor, H89 (5x10(-6) M).
From transient transfection assays using various BSP promoter-luciferase
constructs, a pituitary-specific transcription factor-1 (Pit-1) regulatory
element (nts -111 to -105) was identified as the target of transcriptional
activation by PTH. Thus, transcriptional activity of constructs including the
Pit-1 was enhanced approximately 4.7-fold by 10(-8) M PTH while 5'-ligation of
the Pit-1 element conferred PTH regulation in an SV40 promoter construct. Binding
of a nuclear protein, recognized by anti-Pit-1 antibodies, to a radiolabelled
Pit-1-BSP probe was decreased in nuclear extracts prepared from PTH, forskolin
and isoproterenol-stimulated ROS 17/2.8 cells. Moreover, co-transfection of ROS
cells with a double-stranded Pit-1 oligonucleotide also increased luciferase
activity. Collectively, these results indicate that PTH acts through a protein
kinase A pathway involving cAMP to stimulate BSP transcription by blocking the
action of a Pit-1-related nuclear protein that suppresses BSP transcription by
binding a cognate element in the BSP promoter. Thus, we have identified a novel
Pit-1 suppressor element in the rat BSP gene promoter that is the target of
PTH-stimulated transcription of the BSP gene.

PMID: 10980416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Aug;85(8):2701-8.

Molecular analysis of LHX3 and PROP-1 in pituitary hormone deficiency patients
with posterior pituitary ectopia.

Sloop KW(1), Walvoord EC, Showalter AD, Pescovitz OH, Rhodes SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University, Indianapolis
46202-5132, USA.

The cause of posterior pituitary ectopia associated with anterior pituitary
hormone deficiencies is unknown. We describe children with combined pituitary
hormone deficiency (CPHD) or isolated GH deficiency. In all cases, magnetic
resonance imaging examination revealed abnormal pituitary gland development
featuring ectopic posterior lobe location and frequently hypoplastic anterior
lobes. Embryonic development of the pituitary requires the coordinated expression
of specific transcription factors. Mutations of the PIT-1 and PROP-1
transcription factors are responsible for CPHD in some patients with normally
positioned posterior pituitaries. In mice, the Lhx3 LIM homeodomain transcription
factor is required for both structural development and cellular differentiation
of the pituitary gland. Thus, we hypothesized that mutations in one or both of
the two human LHX3 isoforms are responsible for posterior pituitary ectopia
associated with anterior pituitary hypopituitarism. Comprehensive molecular
analysis of the LHX3 isoforms was performed to test this hypothesis. No loss of
function mutations in the LHX3 gene were detected. In addition, analysis of
PROP-1 did not reveal mutations that might cause this phenotype. These studies
suggest that the abnormal processes leading to the development of CPHD or GH
deficiency associated with posterior pituitary ectopia are not a result of
aberrant LHX3 or PROP- 1 function, but may be caused by defects at other gene
loci.

PMID: 10946868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2000 Aug;119(2):208-16.

Molecular cloning of the chicken prolactin gene and activation by Pit-1 and
cAMP-induced factor in GH3 cells.

Ohkubo T(1), Tanaka M, Nakashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology and Genetics, Mie University, Tsu, Mie, 514-8507,
Japan.

Transcription of the prolactin (PRL) gene has been reported to be activated by a 
nuclear factor, Pit-1. However, the precise molecular mechanisms of the
Pit-1-mediated PRL gene activation are still unclear. We have cloned the chicken 
PRL (cPRL) gene and its 5'-flanking region to analyze their structure and
transcription-initiating mechanism. In luciferase assay, forskolin activated the 
proximal promoter region between -248 and -76 to transcribe the cPRL gene in GH3 
cells, although there is no canonical cyclic AMP-responsive element in the
promoter region. In gel mobility shift assay, a DNA fragment between -104 and -76
containing a putative Pit-1 binding site was bound by nuclear factors from the
GH3 cells. Furthermore, it was observed that Pit-1 protein specifically bound to 
the DNA fragment in the supershift assay. These results indicate that both Pit-1 
and cAMP-induced factor(s) associated with the cis element on the proximal
promoter region to activate cPRL gene expression in GH3 cells.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10936041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 27;275(43):33365-72.

cAMP response element-binding protein-binding protein mediates
thyrotropin-releasing hormone signaling on thyrotropin subunit genes.

Hashimoto K(1), Zanger K, Hollenberg AN, Cohen LE, Radovick S, Wondisford FE.

Author information: 
(1)Thyroid Unit, Division of Endocrinology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center 
and Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215,
USA.

Transcription of pituitary alpha-glycoprotein hormone subunit (alpha-GSU) and
thyrotropin beta subunit (TSH-beta) genes is stimulated by thyrotropin-releasing 
hormone (TRH). Since cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB)-binding protein
(CBP) integrates a number of cell signaling pathways, we investigated whether CBP
is important for TRH stimulation of the TSH subunit genes. Cotransfection of E1A 
in GH(3) cells completely blocked TRH stimulation of the TSH subunit genes,
suggesting that CBP is a key factor for TRH signaling in the pituitary. CBP and
Pit-1 acted synergistically in TRH stimulation of the TSH-beta promoter, and
amino acids 1-450 of CBP were sufficient for the TRH effect. In contrast, on the 
human alpha-GSU promoter, CREB and P-Lim mediated TRH signaling. Intriguingly,
CREB was phosphorylated upon TRH stimulation, leading to CBP recruitment to the
alpha-GSU promoter. CBP also interacted with P-Lim in a TRH-dependent manner,
suggesting that P-Lim is an important factor for non-cAMP response
element-mediated TRH stimulation of this promoter. Distinct domains of CBP were
required for TRH signaling by CREB and P-Lim on the alpha-GSU promoter, amino
acids 450-700 and 1-450, respectively. Thus, the amino terminus of CBP plays a
critical role in TRH signaling in the anterior pituitary via both Pit-1-dependent
and -independent pathways, yielding differential regulation of pituitary gene
products.

PMID: 10931853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 6;275(40):30977-86.

The Pit-1beta domain dictates active repression and alteration of histone
acetylation of the proximal prolactin promoter.

Diamond SE(1), Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, 
Program in Molecular Biology and Colorado Cancer Center, University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado 80262, USA.

A critical problem in current molecular biology is to gain a detailed
understanding of the molecular mechanisms by which related transcription factor
isoforms with identical DNA sequence specificity mediate distinct transcription
responses. Pit-1 and Pit-1beta constitute such a pair of transcription factor
isoforms. Pit-1 enhances the Ras signaling pathway to the prolactin promoter, and
Pit-1beta represses basal prolactin promoter activity as well as Ras signaling to
the prolactin promoter in pituitary cells. We have previously demonstrated that
the beta-domain amino acid sequence dictates the transcriptional properties of
Pit-1beta. Here, we show that five hydrophobic beta-domain residues are required 
for Pit-1 isoform-specific repression of Ras signaling, and we demonstrate that
sodium butyrate and trichostatin A, pharmacological inhibitors of histone
deacetylation, as well as viral Ski protein, a dominant-negative inhibitor of
recruitment of N-CoR/mSin3 histone deacetylase complexes, specifically reverse
beta isoform-specific repression of Ras signaling. Moreover, we directly
demonstrate, with a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, that the Pit-1beta
isoform alters the histone acetylation state of the proximal prolactin promoter. 
This differential analysis of Pit-1/Pit-1beta isoform function provides
significant insights into the structural determinants that govern how different
transcription factors with identical DNA sequence specificity can display
opposite effects on target gene activity.

PMID: 10921928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Endocr J. 2000 Feb;47(1):13-20.

Immunoreactive pit-1 protein in hyperplastic pars intermedia induced by
calcitonin of the rat pituitary gland.

Murakoshi M(1), Ikeda R, Horiuchi T, Nakayama K, Kurotani R, Osamura RY.

Author information: 
(1)Safety Research Department, Teikoku Hormone Mfg. Co., Ltd., Kawasaki, Japan.

To elucidate the effects of synthetic salmon calcitonin (sCT) on the cells in the
rat pituitary gland, we histopathologically and immunohistochemically examined
the early changes after 4 or 13 weeks treatment with sCT 120 IU/kg. Focal
proliferative lesions of the anterior pituitary glands were consistently found
after treatment with sCT for 13 weeks. Histologically, the cells with the focal
proliferative lesions were classified into the following three groups: 1)
enlarged basophilic cell focus, 2) vacuolated cell focus and 3) chromophobe cell 
focus. These focal proliferative lesions had positive staining only for the
alpha-subunit and failed to show Pit-1 protein immunoreactivity. The sCT
treatment also increased the thickness of the pars intermedia. Hypertrophy of the
pars intermediate cells was characteristically seen. Furthermore, Pit-1 protein
immunoreactivity was clearly detected in the nuclei of the hyperplastic pars
intermediate cells. All pars intermediate cells were equally stained by alpha- or
beta-MSH and beta-endorphin in both vehicle- and sCT-treatment. No difference was
seen. These findings strongly suggest a very close relationship between Pit-1
protein immunoreactivity and cellular proliferation induced by sCT.

PMID: 10811288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Biol Chem. 2000 May 19;275(20):15407-12.

Estrogen-modulated estrogen receptor x Pit-1 protein complex formation and
prolactin gene activation require novel protein synthesis.

Ying C(1), Lin DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Soochow University, Taipei, Taiwan 111, Republic
of China. cying@mail.scu.edu.tw

Both estrogen receptor (ER) and Pit-1 proteins are essential for the
estrogen-activated expression of the rat prolactin gene. Our results show that
ER.Pit-1 protein complex formation is reduced by estrogen in GH3 and PR1 rat
pituitary tumor cells. In the latter, this decrease was blocked by cycloheximide,
a protein synthesis inhibitor. On the other hand, the direct addition of estrogen
to PR1 cell lysates had no effect on the formation of ER.Pit-1 complexes.
Estrogen-activated prolactin gene expression was also inhibited by cycloheximide,
suggesting that some form of protein synthesis is involved in ER.Pit-1 complex
formation and subsequent prolactin gene activation. In support of this notion, we
showed that estrogen-induced regulation of ER.Pit-1 complex formation could be
transferred from cell lysates prepared from estrogen-treated PR1 cells to control
cell lysates. This is not true for GH3 cells; instead, direct administration of
estrogen to GH3 cell lysates readily abolished ER.Pit-1 protein complex formation
in a dose-dependent manner, and such estrogen-induced regulation was blocked by
the antiestrogen ICI 182,780. These findings thus indicate that 1) interaction
between ER and Pit-1 proteins is estrogen-regulated in ways specific to different
cell types, and 2) auxiliary protein factor synthesis may be involved in this
process.

PMID: 10809776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Endocrinol Invest. 2000 Feb;23(2):125-34.

Genetic aspects of central hypothyroidism.

Collu R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, University of Ancona, Torrette Hospital, Italy.

Central hypothyroidism, characterized by insufficient TSH secretion in the
presence of low levels of thyroid hormones, is a rare disorder. It has recently
been found that, although mainly due to tumors or infiltrative diseases of the
hypothalamo-pituitary area or to pituitary atrophy, central hypothyroidism may be
caused by inactivating mutations in several of the genes that code for the
various proteins involved in the regulation of the hypothalamo-pituitary-thyroid 
axis (HPTA). These experiments of nature allow us to better understand the
pathophysiology but also the normal physiology of the HPTA. This review will
analyze reports of mutations that affect the HPTA and result in either isolated
central hypothyroidism or in the syndrome of combined pituitary hormone
deficiency (CPHD). Mutations have been identified in the genes for the TRH
receptor, the transcription factors Pit-1 and PROP1, and the TSH beta-subunit.

PMID: 10800768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2000 May;52(5):661-5.

Combined pituitary hormone deficiency and pituitary hypoplasia due to a mutation 
of the Pit-1 gene.

Frisch H(1), Kim C, Häusler G, Pfäffle R.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Department, University Vienna, Austria.
Herwig.Frisch@akh-wien.ac.at

Several mutations of the pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1 have been 
identified. We describe a girl with a mutation of the Pit-1 gene leading to a
complete lack of GH, TSH and prolactin and a marked hypoplasia of the anterior
pituitary gland. The patient had a homozygous nonsense-mutation at position 172
(CGA to TGA), converting arginine into a stop codon, leading to an early
termination of protein translation. During the infancy period the girl had very
conspicuous symptoms of hypothyroidism and the diagnosis of thyroid insufficiency
preceded the diagnosis of GH-deficiency by 1.5 years. Treatment with thyroxine
and GH resulted in excellent catch-up growth.

PMID: 10792348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2000;88(1-2):140-4.

Cloning, characterization, and physical mapping of the canine Prop-1 gene
(PROP1): exclusion as a candidate for combined pituitary hormone deficiency in
German shepherd dogs.

Lantinga-van Leeuwen IS(1), Kooistra HS, Mol JA, Renier C, Breen M, van Oost BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Abnormalities in the genes encoding Pit-1 and Prop-1 have been reported to cause 
combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) in mice and humans. In dogs, a
similar phenotype has been described in the German shepherd breed. We have
previously reported that the Pit-1 gene (POU1F1) is not mutated in affected
German shepherd dogs. In this study, we report the isolation and mapping of the
canine Prop-1 gene (PROP1), and we assessed the involvement of PROP1 in German
shepherd dog dwarfism. The canine PROP1 gene was found to contain three exons,
encoding a 226 amino acid protein. The deduced amino acid sequence was 79% and
84% homologous with the mouse and human Prop-1 protein, respectively. Using
fluorescence in situ hybridization, PROP1 was mapped to canine chromosome 11.
Further mapping with a canine radiation hybrid panel showed co-localization with 
the polymorphic DNA marker AHT137. Sequence analysis of genomic DNA from dwarf
German shepherd dogs revealed no alterations in the PROP1 gene. Moreover, linkage
analysis of AHT137 revealed no co-segregation between the PROP1 locus and the
CPHD phenotype, excluding this gene as candidate for canine CPHD and providing a 
new spontaneous model of hypopituitarism.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 10773688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Neuroimmunomodulation. 2000;7(3):126-34.

Characterization of the promoter-directing expression of growth hormone in a
monocyte cell line.

Weigent DA(1), Vines CR, Long JC, Blalock JE, Elton TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Alabama 35294-0005, USA. weigent@uab.edu

Previous work from our laboratory has shown that cells of the immune system
produce a growth hormone (GH) molecule similar to that produced by the pituitary.
In the present study, using Southern analysis of RT-PCR products and sequencing
of cloned cDNA molecules, we demonstrate that lymphoid cell lines utilize the
same promoter and first exon as the pituitary somatotrope. To identify the
cis-elements involved in transcriptional regulation of immune cell-derived GH, we
have coupled rat GH promoter fragments to a luciferase reporter gene and
transfected a monocyte cell line (P-388) by electroporation. The results suggest 
the presence of both positive (-299/-193 bp) and negative (-193/-107 bp)
regulatory elements. The same constructs transfected in the pituitary cell line, 
GH3, in contrast to the monocyte cell line, showed a gradual decrease in
luciferase expression. The overexpression of GHF-1 or GHF-2 resulted in a modest 
but significant reduction in rat GH promoter activity in the P-388 cell line.
Taken together, the data suggest that immune cells utilize the same first exon
and promoter sequence for the expression of monocyte GH as that reported for the 
expression of pituitary GH. Further, it appears that sequences between -299 and
-107 bp are important in the regulation of the promoter where different
transcription factors may be recruited to promote GH expression in a monocyte
cell line.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 10754400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Mol Biol. 2000 Feb 25;296(3):743-56.

Ligand-triggered stabilization of vitamin D receptor/retinoid X receptor
heterodimer conformations on DR4-type response elements.

Quack M(1), Carlberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie I and Biomedizinisches Forschungszentrum,
Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Düsseldorf, D-40001, Germany.

Nuclear receptors integrate an incoming signal in the form of a nuclear hormone
by undergoing a conformational change that results via co-activator proteins in
an activation of the basal transcriptional machinery. The vitamin D(3) receptor
is the nuclear receptor for 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3
)(1alpha,25(OH)(2)D(3)) and is known to function as a heterodimer with the
retinoid X receptor on DR3-type 1alpha,25(OH)(2)D(3) response elements. Here, it 
could be demonstrated that DR4-type response elements are at least as effective
as DR3-type 1alpha,25(OH)(2)D(3) response elements. Gel shift clipping analysis
showed that vitamin D(3) receptor-retinoid X receptor heterodimers form in
response to 1alpha, 25(OH)(2)D(3) and retinoid X receptor ligands, the
pan-agonist 9-cis retinoic acid (9cRA) and the retinoid X receptor-selective
retinoid CD2425, different conformations on the DR4-type element of the rat Pit-1
gene. Interestingly, on this response element the heterodimeric complexes of
retinoid X receptor with the thyroid hormone receptor, the retinoic acid receptor
and the benzoate ester receptor also displayed characteristic individual
ligand-dependent complex formation. On the level of complex formation, utilizing 
DNA affinity and functional assays, only vitamin D(3) receptor-retinoid X
receptor heterodimers showed a synergistic interaction of both ligands. However, 
the sensitivity of vitamin D(3) receptor-retinoid X receptor heterodimers to
1alpha,25(OH)(2)D(3) was found to be much higher than to retinoid X receptor
ligands. Taken together, this study demonstrates a unique interaction potential
of vitamin D(3) receptor and retinoid X receptor but also establishes DR4-type
response elements as multi-functional DNA binding sites with a potential to
integrate various hormone signalling pathways.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10677278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Apr;12 Suppl 1:319-27.

Development of the pituitary and its abnormalities.

Bozzola M(1), Rognone F, Zecca M, Calligaro A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, I.R.C.C.S., University of Pavia, Italy.

The embryology of the pituitary gland and its normal development is described,
including the importance of Pit-1. Congenital abnormalities of the
hypothalamo-pituitary region are discussed.

PMID: 10698596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Apr;12 Suppl 1:311-7.

GH transcription factors.

Pfaffle RW(1), Kim C, Blankenstein O, Kentrup H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital Aachen, Germany.

The pituitary transcription factor Pit-1 is expressed during the later
differentiation stages of anterior pituitary development and Pit-1 mutations have
been identified as the cause of a combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD)
for GH, prolactin and TSH. Mutations within the human Pit-1 gene can either
impair the DNA binding of this transcription factor, or while leaving DNA binding
capabilities unimpaired, decrease its function within the transactivation
complex. Approximately half of all patients with this phenotype do not show any
defect within the Pit-1 gene. Prop-1, a recently discovered transcription factor 
of anterior pituitary development, seemed a likely candidate for such mutations. 
Prop-1 mutations, however, have been found so far to induce a combined pituitary 
hormone deficiency for GH, prolactin, TSH and gonadotropins. We describe here a
group of patients with isolated and combined pituitary hormone deficiencies who
were screened for Pit-1 and Prop-1 mutations to characterize the phenotypic
spectrum of defects within these two genes.

PMID: 10698595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Anim Sci. 2000 Jan;78(1):242-3.

Rapid communication: localization of POU1F1 to bovine, ovine, and caprine
1q21-22.

Woollard J(1), Tuggle CK, Ponce de León FA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames 50011, USA.

PMID: 10682827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Feb;14(2):255-71.

Dual regulation of somatostatin receptor subtype 1 gene expression by pit-1 in
anterior pituitary GH3 cells.

Baumeister H(1), Wegner M, Richter D, Meyerhof W.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Molekulare Genetik, Deutsches Institut für Ernährungsforschung und
Universität Potsdam, Potsdam-Rehbrücke, Germany.

Somatostatin represents a major release inhibiting factor for hypophyseal
hormones and mediates its action via five receptor subtypes, sst1-sst5, that are 
all present in the anterior pituitary. The pituitary specific transcription
factor Pit-1 is essential for the pituitary development and pituitary-specific
gene expression. Here the transcriptional regulation of the sst1 gene, which
contains putative Pit-1-binding sites, was studied in anterior pituitary GH3
cells. We found that a fragment of 2 kb suffices to drive the expression of a
reporter gene specifically in this cell line. Positive and negative
cis-regulatory elements contributed to the promoter activity. Among these
elements two functional binding sites for Pit-1 were identified. While the
proximal site mediated transcriptional activation, the distal site attenuated
transcription of reporter gene constructs. Mutations of the proximal Pit-1 site
prevented expression of the reporter gene. Targeting Pit-1 mRNA by antisense
oligonucleotides caused inhibition of transcription of reporter gene constructs
containing the proximal Pit-1-binding site. Moreover, the expression of the
endogenous sst1 gene in GH3 anterior pituitary cells was blocked. This resulted
in reduced sst1 levels at the plasma membrane. Reduced sst1 levels were
associated with a diminished antisecretory response to the sst1-specific agonist 
CH-275 and somatostatin. These results demonstrate the importance of Pit-1 for
the expression of the sst1 gene, which hence is placed under common genetic
control with the genes for hypophysiotropic hormones and the gene for the
receptor of GH-releasing hormone.

PMID: 10674398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Mol Cells. 1999 Dec 31;9(6):646-51.

Effects of dopamine and melatonin on the regulation of the PIT-1 isotype,
placental growth hormone and lactogen gene expressions in the rat placenta.

Lee CK(1), Kang HS, Lee BJ, Kang HM, Choi WS, Kang SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Inje University, Kimhae,
Korea.

Rat placenta produces several members of the placental prolactin-growth hormone
(PRL-GH), including placental lactogen (PL) and placental prolactin like protein 
(PLP), during pregnancy. It is important to study placental local regulators that
control the expression of PRL-GH genes. We have previously reported that dopamine
(DA) can regulate Pit-1 and PL-II gene expressions. In this study we aimed to
investigate the local expression of melatonin receptor 1a (Mel1a) and the effects
of DA and melatonin on the expressions of PL-Iv, PL-II, PLP-C genes and Pit-1
gene that are involved in the expression of PRL-GH genes in the rat pituitary and
placenta. According to the Northern blot analysis, DA receptor 2 (D2) was
expressed in the rat placenta. We also report on the local expression of Mel1a in
the rat placenta for the first time. Injected DA agonist, bromocriptine (in vivo)
decreased PL-Iv, PLP-C and Pit-1 mRNA levels in the rat placenta. The melatonin
agonist, chloromelatonin in culture media also decreased the levels of PL-Iv,
PL-II and PLP-C mRNA. However, melatonin does not affect the Pit-1 mRNA level.
These data suggest that D2 and Mel1a may control the expression of PRL-GH genes
in the rat placenta and its response to the extracellular changes of DA and
melatonin secreted from the maternal organ. However, Pit-1 may not be involved in
the Mel1a induced inhibition of PRL-GH gene expressions in the rat placenta.

PMID: 10672932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 4;275(5):3100-6.

The Pit-1 homeodomain and beta-domain interact with Ets-1 and modulate
synergistic activation of the rat prolactin promoter.

Bradford AP(1), Brodsky KS, Diamond SE, Kuhn LC, Liu Y, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver, Colorado 80262, USA. Andy.Bradford@uchsc.edu

Pit-1/GHF-1 is a pituitary-specific, POU homeodomain transcription factor
required for development of somatotroph, lactotroph, and thyrotroph cell lineages
and regulation of the temporal and spatial expression of the growth hormone,
prolactin (PRL), and thyrotropin-beta genes. Synergistic interaction of Pit-1
with a member of the Ets family of transcription factors, Ets-1, has been shown
to be an important mechanism regulating basal and Ras-induced lactotroph-specific
rat (r) PRL promoter activity. Pit-1beta/GHF-2, an alternatively spliced isoform 
containing a 26-amino acid insert (beta-domain) within its
transcription-activation domain, physically interacts with Ets-1 but fails to
synergize. By using a series of Pit-1 internal-deletion constructs in a transient
transfection protocol to reconstitute rPRL promoter activity in HeLa cells, we
have determined that the functional and physical interaction of Pit-1 and Ets-1
is mediated via the POU homeodomain, which is common to both Pit-1 and Pit-1beta.
Although the Pit-1 homeodomain is both necessary and sufficient for direct
binding to Ets-1 in a DNA-independent manner, an additional interaction surface
was mapped to the beta-domain, specific to the Pit-1beta isoform. Thus, the
unique transcriptional properties of Pit-1 and Pit-1beta on the rPRL promoter may
be due to the formation of functionally distinct complexes of these two Pit-1
isoforms with Ets-1.

PMID: 10652292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Acta Paediatr Suppl. 1999 Dec;88(433):33-41.

Combined pituitary hormone deficiency: role of Pit-1 and Prop-1.

Pfäffle RW(1), Blankenstein O, Wüller S, Kentrup H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, RWTH Aachen School of Medicine, Germany.
rpfaeffle@post.klinikum.rwthaachen.de

During fetal development of the anterior pituitary gland, a number of sequential 
processes occur that affect cell differentiation and proliferation. Molecular
analyses have revealed several steps that are required for pituitary cell line
specification and have identified specific factors that control these steps. The 
gene encoding the pituitary transcription factor 1 (Pit-1) is expressed during
differentiation steps that take place quite late in the development of the
anterior pituitary gland. Clinically, patients with mutations of the PIT1 gene
are characterized by severe deficiencies in growth hormone (GH) and prolactin
(PRL), and often develop secondary hypothyroidism. A second pituitary
transcription factor is known as Prophet of Pit-1 (Prop-1), and a mutation of the
Prop1 gene has been detected in Ames dwarf mice. Several Prop1 mutations have
been identified that structurally affect the 'paired-like' DNA-binding domain of 
the Prop-1 protein molecule. Patients with PROP1 mutations show combined
pituitary hormone deficiency. These patients exhibit secondary hypogonadism in
addition to the deficiencies of GH, PRL and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
also seen in patients with PIT1 mutations. Although all are in the subnormal
range, the levels of GH, PRL and TSH in patients with PROP1 mutations are, on
average, slightly higher than in patients with PIT1 mutations. Some degree of
hypocortisolism may necessitate cortisol substitution in patients with PROP1
mutations.

PMID: 10626543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. DNA Cell Biol. 1999 Nov;18(11):863-73.

Transforming growth factor-beta1 inhibits rat prolactin promoter activity in GH4 
neuroendocrine cells.

Farrow KN(1), Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Program in Molecular Biology, Colorado Cancer Center, 
University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 80262, USA.

The prototypic member of the transforming growth factor beta family is TGFbeta1, 
which is known to be important in extracellular matrix production, cell
proliferation, and cell differentiation. Specifically in the pituitary
lactotroph, TGFbeta1 inhibits prolactin (PRL) peptide secretion, PRL mRNA levels,
and PRL gene transcription. To further elucidate the molecular details by which
TGFbeta1 modulates PRL gene transcription, we used a transient transfection
approach to characterize and to map the TGFbeta1 inhibitory response element of
the rat (r) PRL promoter. Here, we show that TGFbeta1 selectively inhibits basal 
rPRL promoter activity in GH4 cells in a dose-responsive fashion, with an IC50 of
6 pM, and that this inhibition occurs within 6 h after TGFbeta1 addition. Using a
series of 5' deletion promoter mutants, the TGFbeta1 inhibitory response was
found to be unaffected by deletion to position -116 and was abrogated by further 
deletion to -54 in the rPRL promoter. However, on the basis of data from
site-specific and linker-scanning mutants of the rPRL promoter, it appears that
no single element is sufficient to mediate the TGFbeta1 inhibitory effect.
Sequence analysis of the -116/-54 region failed to reveal any sequence homology
to previously characterized TGFbeta response elements. Finally, TGFbeta1 failed
to alter significantly the endogenous levels of the cell-specific activator
protein GHF-1/Pit-1, indicating that the TGFbeta1 inhibitory effect is not
attributable to diminished levels of GHF-1/Pit-1. Taken together, these data
indicate that the TGFbeta1 inhibitory response is more complex than previously
appreciated, requiring more than one cis-acting element and not always acting via
TTGG or GTCTAGAC sites.

PMID: 10595400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 10;274(50):35725-33.

Pit-1 binding sites at the somatotrope-specific DNase I hypersensitive sites I,
II of the human growth hormone locus control region are essential for in vivo
hGH-N gene activation.

Shewchuk BM(1), Asa SL, Cooke NE, Liebhaber SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

The human growth hormone gene cluster is composed of five closely related genes. 
The 5'-most gene in the cluster, hGH-N, is expressed exclusively in somatotropes 
and lactosomatotropes of the anterior pituitary. Although the hGH-N promoter
contains functional binding sites for multiple transcription factors, including
Sp1, Zn-15, and Pit-1, predictable and developmentally appropriate expression of 
hGH-N transgenes in the mouse pituitary requires the presence of a previously
characterized locus control region (LCR) composed of multiple chromatin DNase I
hypersensitive sites (HS). LCR determinant(s) necessary for hGH-N transgene
activation are largely conferred by two closely spaced HS (HS I,II) located 14.5 
kilobase pairs upstream of the hGH-N gene. The region sufficient to mediate this 
activity has recently been sublocalized to a 404-base pair segment of HS I,II
(F14 segment). In the present study, we identified multiple binding sites for the
pituitary POU domain transcription factor Pit-1 within this segment. Using a
transgenic founder assay, these sites were shown to be required for high level,
position-independent, and somatotrope-specific expression of a linked hGH-N
transgene. Because the Pit-1 sites in the hGH-N gene promoter are insufficient
for such gene activation in vivo, these data suggested a unique
chromatin-mediated developmental role for Pit-1 in the hGH LCR.

PMID: 10585453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 1999 Nov;116(2):261-71.

Regulatory regions in the promoter and third intron of the growth hormone gene in
rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss walbaum.

Bernardini S(1), Argenton F, Vianello S, Colombo L, Bortolussi M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Universit¿a di Padova, Via Bassi 58/B, Padova,
I-35131, Italy.

The mechanisms involved in the transcriptional regulation of the rainbow trout
(Oncorhynchus mykiss) growth hormone (tGH) gene have been investigated. Transient
transfection assays, using deletion mutants of the tGH promoter, demonstrated
that the -226/+24 5'-flanking region, bearing three binding sites for the
pituitary-specific transcription factor GHF1/Pit1 and a cAMP-response element, is
necessary and sufficient to confer strong tissue-specific and cAMP-stimulated
expression to a luciferase reporter gene. This region is also upregulated by the 
synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone (DEX), the combined effects of cAMP, and
DEX being synergistic. Footprinting and gel shift assays revealed that GHF1 binds
to a recognition element in the third intron of the tGH gene, suggesting that
GHF1 can affect the expression of this gene by interacting with response elements
in the transcription unit. These results may be exploited to design tGH gene
constructs for the production of autotransgenic fish, in which the expression of 
the isospecific transgene driven by a constitutive proximal promoter is
specifically targeted to the pituitary and physiologically controlled.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10562456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Growth Horm IGF Res. 1999 Jun;9 Suppl B:18-22; discussion 23.

PIT1 abnormality.

Tatsumi K(1), Amino N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, Japan.
tatsumi@labo.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

The PIT1 gene product, Pit-1/GHF-1, binds to and transactivates the promoter
sequences of the growth hormone, prolactin, and thyroid-stimulating hormone beta 
(also called thyrotropin) subunit genes. Abnormalities of the PIT1 gene, which
encodes a pituitary-specific POU-domain DNA binding factor, cause a combined
deficiency of growth hormone, prolactin, and thyrotropin (PIT1 abnormality). PIT1
abnormality is a typical 'transcription factor disease (abnormality)', as
DNA-binding studies and transactivation studies with mutant Pit-1/GHF-1 protein
and its target sequences made clear how the mutated protein causes the
abnormality. PIT1 abnormality occurs both recessively and dominantly, according
to the function of the mutated protein. Furthermore, observation of patients of
different ages with the same mutation showed progressive phenotype as the
patients grow old.

PMID: 10549301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Growth Horm IGF Res. 1999 Jun;9 Suppl B:12-7.

Gene analysis of PROP1 in dwarfism with combined pituitary hormone deficiency.

Takamura N(1), Fofanova OV, Kinoshita E, Yamashita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of International Health and Radiation Research, Nagasaki University
School of Medicine, Japan. takamura@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

The prophet of Pit-1 gene (PROP1), a novel pituitary-specific homeodomain factor,
has been proved to be one of the causative genes for combined pituitary hormone
deficiency (CPHD). Recently, PROP1 mutations have been identified in CPHD
families, including our Russian cohort. The 2-bp deletion, 296delGA
(A301G302del), is the most common mutational hot spot. Furthermore, in our
cohort, PROP1 mutations are more common in comparison with human POU1F1 gene
mutations. Here we review the gene analysis of PROP1 in patients with CPHD.

PMID: 10549300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Growth Horm IGF Res. 1999 Jun;9 Suppl B:2-8; discussion 8-11.

Transcription factors regulating pituitary development.

Parks JS(1), Brown MR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. jparks@emory.edu

This review will address contributions of nuclear transcription factors to the
embryologic development and definitive function of the anterior pituitary gland. 
The HESX1, PITX1, PITX2, PROP1 and POU1F1 genes are of particular interest
because of their recognized or potential associations with human disease.
Mutations of any of the first three genes produce complex disease phenotypes such
as septo-optic dysplasia, Treacher Collins Franceschetti syndrome or Rieger
syndrome that may include deficiency of one or more pituitary hormones. Mutations
in PROP1 or POU1F1, or their mouse homologous, result in severe hypopituitarism
as well as morphological abnormalities of the pituitary gland.

PMID: 10549299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Clin Invest. 1999 Oct;104(8):1123-30.

CREB-independent regulation by CBP is a novel mechanism of human growth hormone
gene expression.

Cohen LE(1), Hashimoto Y, Zanger K, Wondisford F, Radovick S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. COHEN_L@A1.TCH.HARVARD.EDU

Hypothalamic growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) stimulates growth hormone
(GH) gene expression in anterior pituitary somatotrophs by binding to the GHRH
receptor, a G-protein-coupled transmembrane receptor, and by mediating a
cAMP-mediated protein kinase A (PKA) signal-transduction pathway. Two
nonclassical cAMP-response element motifs (CGTCA) are located at nucleotides
-187/-183 (distal cAMP-response element; dCRE) and -99/-95 (proximal
cAMP-response element; pCRE) of the human GH promoter and are required for cAMP
responsiveness, along with the pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1
(official nomenclature, POU1F1). Although a role for cAMP-response element
binding protein (CREB) in GH stimulation by PKA has been suggested, it is unclear
how the effect may be mediated. CREB binding protein (CBP) is a nuclear cofactor 
named for its ability to bind CREB. However, CBP also binds other nuclear
proteins. We determined that CBP interacts with Pit-1 and is a cofactor for
Pit-1-dependent activation of the human GH promoter. This pathway appears to be
independent of CREB, with CPB being the likely target of phosphorylation by PKA.

PMCID: PMC408577
PMID: 10525051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Regul Pept. 1999 Aug 31;83(1):31-8.

Quantitative analysis of growth-related factors in human pituitary adenomas.
Lowered insulin-like growth factor-I and its receptor mRNA in growth
hormone-producing adenomas.

Otsuka F(1), Tamiya T, Yamauchi T, Ogura T, Ohmoto T, Makino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, Okayama University Medical School, Japan.

To elucidate the contribution of growth factors to the development, growth and
behavior of human pituitary adenomas, the authors used competitive reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reactions to quantify expression of mRNAs for
growth factors extracted from pituitary adenomas. As previously diagnosed by
endocrinologic evaluation, the pituitary adenomas in this study consisted of six 
prolactin-producing, six growth hormone (GH)-producing, four follicle-stimulating
hormone producing and six nonfunctioning adenomas. The mRNAs examined included
those for platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) B-chain, transforming growth
factor (TGF)-beta1, epidermal growth factor (EGF), basic fibroblast growth factor
(bFGF) and insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I and -II; proliferating cell nuclear
antigen (PCNA) as an indicator of cell proliferation; and pituitary-specific
transcription factor-1 (Pit-1) which is a nuclear transcription factor expressed 
in the anterior pituitary. All factors except the last were expressed in all
adenomas, and expression of PDGF B-chain, TGF-beta1, EGF, bFGF and IGF-II did not
differ between the four adenoma varieties. Pit-1 was expressed only in GH- and
prolactin-producing adenomas. PCNA expression also showed no differences.
However, IGF-I mRNA in GH-producing adenomas was significantly lower than in
prolactin-producing and nonfunctioning adenomas despite high serum IGF-I levels
(1121+/-253 ng/ml). The analysis on IGF-I receptor mRNA was significantly lowered
in GH-producing adenoma compared with the other types of adenoma. These findings 
suggest that the attenuation of negative feedback through the pituitary GH-IGF-I 
axis may be involved in development of GH-producing adenoma.

PMID: 10498342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Oct;19(10):7001-10.

Multifunctional role of the Pitx2 homeodomain protein C-terminal tail.

Amendt BA(1), Sutherland LB, Russo AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa
52242, USA. brad-amendt@utulsa.edu

Pitx2 is a newly described bicoid-like homeodomain transcription factor that is
defective in Rieger syndrome and shows a striking leftward developmental
asymmetry. We have previously shown that Pitx2 (also called Ptx2 and RIEG)
transactivates a reporter gene containing a bicoid enhancer and synergistically
transactivates the prolactin promoter in the presence of the POU homeodomain
protein Pit-1. In this report, we focused on the C-terminal region which is
mutated in some Rieger patients and contains a highly conserved 14-amino-acid
element. Deletion analysis of Pitx2 revealed that the C-terminal 39-amino-acid
tail represses DNA binding activity and is required for Pitx2-Pit-1 interaction
and Pit-1 synergism. Pit-1 interaction with the Pitx2 C terminus masks the
inhibitory effect and promotes increased DNA binding activity. Interestingly,
cotransfection of an expression vector encoding the C-terminal 39 amino acids of 
Pitx2 specifically inhibits Pitx2 transactivation activity. In contrast, the
C-terminal 39-amino-acid peptide interacts with Pitx2 to increase its DNA binding
activity. These data suggest that the C-terminal tail intrinsically inhibits the 
Pitx2 protein and that this inhibition can be overcome by interaction with other 
transcription factors to allow activation during development.

PMCID: PMC84695
PMID: 10490637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Eur J Endocrinol. 1999 Sep;141(3):211-3.

Combined pituitary hormone deficiency - lessons from the murine models.

Yeap BB(1), Leedman PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cancer Medicine and University Department of Medicine, Royal
Perth Hospital, Perth, Western Australia, Australia.

PMID: 10474115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Anim Genet. 1999 Aug;30(4):313-5.

Effect of genetic variability of the porcine pituitary-specific transcription
factor (PIT-1) on carcas traits in pigs.

Stanceková K(1), Vasícek D, Peskovicová D, Bulla J, Kúbek A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Animal Production, Nitra, Slovak Republic.

Pituitary transcription factor (PIT-1) has been shown to be a positive regulatory
factor of growth hormone, prolactin, and thyrotrophin-beta-subunit (TSH-beta) in 
the mammalian pituitary. Therefore, the gene encoding PIT-1 (POU1F1) was chosen
as a candidate gene to investigate its association with growth and carcass traits
in pigs. The purpose of this study was to analyse porcine POU1F1 genetic
variability in populations of Large White and Large White x landrace pigs, by
using PCR-RFLP analysis and to determine its possible associations with two
carcass traits (backfat and percentage of lean content). Two different
POU1F1-PCR-RFLP (POU1F1/RsaI and POU1F1/MspI) tests were applied to genomic DNA
isolated from porcine blood (120 pigs) and hair roots (10 pigs). The present
results clearly indicated that the MspI DD genotype was the fattest compared with
both other genotypes (CC, CD) in analyzed swine population. For POU1F1/RsaI
polymorphism no significance differences were seen for lean-to-fat ratio.

PMID: 10467708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1999;85(3-4):273-8.

Human chromosome 3 and pig chromosome 13 show complete synteny conservation but
extensive gene-order differences.

Sun HF(1), Ernst CW, Yerle M, Pinton P, Rothschild MF, Chardon P, Rogel-Gaillard 
C, Tuggle CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA.

A comparative map of human chromosome 3 (HSA 3) and pig chromosome 13 (SSC 13)
was constructed using physically assigned pig sequence-tagged sites (STSs). Pig
STSs representing 11 HSA 3 genes, including v-Raf-1 murine leukemia viral
oncogene homolog 1 (RAF1), retinoic acid beta receptor (RARB), cholecystokinin
(CCK), pituitary transcription factor 1 (POU1F1), ceruloplasmin (CP), guanine
nucleotide binding protein, alpha-inhibiting polypeptide 2 (GNAI2),
sucrase-isomaltase (SI), rhodopsin (RHO), dopamine receptor D3 (DRD3),
growth-associated protein 43 (GAP43), and somatostatin (SST), were developed. Ten
pig STSs were regionally mapped using a somatic cell hybrid panel (SCHP) to SSC
13 with 80-100% concordance. Large-insert probes were obtained by screening a pig
yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) library with primers for each STS. Several YACs
were identified for DRD3, GAP43, POU1F1, RHO, SI, and SST for fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH) mapping. Single gene and bi-color FISH with each
pairwise combination were used to further define the gene order on SSC 13. While 
these data confirm chromosome painting results showing that HSA 3 probes
hybridize to a major portion of SSC 13, they also demonstrate extensive
gene-order differences between man and pig within this large conserved synteny
group. Interestingly, several conserved chromosomal regions have been detected
between pig and mouse that are not conserved between man and mouse, suggesting
that the SSC 13 gene arrangement may be the closest to that of the ancestral
eutherian chromosome.

PMID: 10449917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Aug;13(8):1249-66.

A role for A/T-rich sequences and Pit-1/GHF-1 in a distal enhancer located in the
human growth hormone locus control region with preferential pituitary activity in
culture and transgenic mice.

Jin Y(1), Surabhi RM, Fresnoza A, Lytras A, Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.

A region located remotely upstream of the human pituitary GH (GH-N) gene and
required for efficient GH-N gene expression in the pituitary of transgenic mice
was cloned as a 1.6-kb Bg/II (1.6G) fragment. The 1.6G fragment in the forward or
reverse orientation increased -496GH-N promoter activity significantly in
pituitary GC and GH3 cells after gene transfer. The 1.6G fragment was also able
to stimulate activity from a minimal thymidine kinase (TK) promoter which, unlike
-496GH-N, lacked any Pit-1/GHF-1 element. Enhancer activity was localized by
deletion analysis to a 203-bp region in the 3'-end of the 1.6G fragment and was
characterized by the presence of a diffuse 136-bp nuclease-protected site,
observed with pituitary (GC) but not nonpituitary (HeLa) cell nuclear protein. A 
major low-mobility complex was observed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA) with GC cell nuclear protein, and the pattern was distinct from that seen 
with a HeLa cell extract. The nuclease-protected region contains three A/T-rich
Pit-1/ GHF-1-like elements, and their disruption, in the context of the 203-bp
region fused to the TK promoter, reduced enhancer activity significantly in
pituitary cells in culture. A mutation in this region was also shown to decrease 
enhancer activity in transgenic mice and correlated with a decrease in the 203-bp
enhancer region complex observed by EMSA. The participation of Pit-1/GHF-1 in
this complex is indicated by competition studies with Pit-1/GHF-1 elements and
antibodies, and direct binding of Pit-1/GHF-1 to the A/T-rich sequences was shown
by EMSA using recombinant protein. These studies link the A/T-rich sequences to
the distal enhancer activity associated with the GH locus control region in vitro
and in vivo.

PMID: 10446901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Aug;84(8):2759-65.

Impact of gsp oncogene on the expression of genes coding for Gsalpha, Pit-1,
Gi2alpha, and somatostatin receptor 2 in human somatotroph adenomas: involvement 
in octreotide sensitivity.

Barlier A(1), Pellegrini-Bouiller I, Gunz G, Zamora AJ, Jaquet P, Enjalbert A.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 6544, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université de la
Méditerranée, Institut Jean Roche, Faculté de Médecine Nord, Marseille, France.
barlier.a@jean-roche.univ-mrs.fr

The impact of the gsp oncogene on the expression of genes engaged in the
somatotroph cell phenotype remains poorly understood in human somatotroph
adenomas. As the gsp oncogene is associated with an increased octreotide
(somatostatin agonist) sensitivity, a group of 8 somatotroph adenomas bearing the
gsp mutation (gsp+) and another group of 16 adenomas without the mutation (gsp-) 
were analyzed, all of them presenting variable octreotide sensitivities. The
expressions of genes encoding for G(s)alpha, Pit-1, G(i2)alpha, and SSTR2,
involved in the regulation of secretory activity in somatotroph cells, were
assessed by Northern blot. A decreased expression of the G(s)alpha gene was found
in gsp + tumors, suggesting the existence of a negative feedback of the oncogenic
protein upon its own messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA). In contrast, G(i2)alpha, 
Pit-1, and GH messengers were not significantly different in the groups. A
positive correlation between the in vitro and in vivo GH octreotide-induced
secretory inhibition and the expression of SSTR2 mRNA was found. However, the
expression of the gene for SSTR2 appeared not to be different between gsp + and
gsp-, even when the octreotide sensitivity was significantly higher in the
adenomas carrying the mutation. Interestingly, the SSTR2 gene expression was
significantly correlated to those of G(i2)alpha and Pit-1. In the same way, the
G(s)alpha mRNA expression was positively correlated with those of Gi2alpha and
Pit-1. Such correlations strongly suggest a concerted dysregulation of the
expression of these genes in both categories of adenomas. The loss of the
octreotide sensitivity represents one aspect of the dysregulation process that
partially results from the decreased SSTR2 expression. However, the improvement
of the sensitivity associated with the presence of the gsp oncogene seems to
proceed in a way different from SSTR2 expression.

PMID: 10443675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1999 Jun 25;152(1-2):111-23.

Pit-1 mediates cell-specific and cAMP-induced transcription of the tilapia GH
gene.

Sekkali B(1), Belayew A, Bortolussi M, Martial JA, Muller M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique, Université de
Liège, Institut de Chimie B6, Sart-Tilman, Belgium.

Expression of the tilapia growth hormone (tiGH) gene is pituitary-specific and
controlled by intracellular cAMP levels. DNaseI protection experiments allowed us
to identify four Pit-1 binding sites in the tiGH - 465/ + 19 region. Deletion and
mutagenesis analysis revealed that the - 131/+ 19 region, containing two Pit-1
sites, or four copies of the most proximal site tiGHF1 fused to the heterologous 
Tk promoter, confer high level expression in rat pituitary cells and direct
transcription in non-pituitary cells only after expression of rat Pit-1. We show 
that a tilapia pituitary factor specifically binds to site tiGHF1 and obtained a 
partial cDNA sequence coding for tilapia Pit-1. The cAMP stimulation is mediated 
by the proximal (- 131/- 31) promoter region. It is Pit-1-dependent and requires 
the tiGHF1 site. In addition, four copies of this site confer cAMP inducibility
to the Tk promoter in GC cells.

PMID: 10432229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Jul;13(7):1141-54.

Synergistic activation of the prolactin promoter by vitamin D receptor and GHF-1:
role of the coactivators, CREB-binding protein and steroid hormone receptor
coactivator-1 (SRC-1).

Castillo AI(1), Jimenez-Lara AM, Tolon RM, Aranda A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas, Madrid, Spain.

PRL gene expression is dependent on the presence of the pituitary-specific
transcription factor GHF-1/Pit-1, which is transcribed in a highly restricted
manner in cells of the anterior pituitary. In pituitary GH3 cells, vitamin D
increases the levels of PRL transcripts and stimulates the PRL promoter. We have 
analyzed the role of GHF-1 and of the vitamin D receptor (VDR) to confer vitamin 
D responsiveness to the PRL promoter. For this purpose we have used nonpituitary 
HeLa cells, which do not express GHF-1. We found that VDR activates the PRL
promoter both in a ligand-dependent and -independent manner through a sequence
located between positions -45/-27 in the proximal 5'-flanking region. This
sequence also confers VDR and vitamin D responsiveness to a heterologous
promoter. In the context of the PRL gene, VDR requires the presence of GHF-1 to
activate the promoter. Truncation of the last 12 C-terminal amino acids of VDR,
which contain the ligand-dependent activation function (AF2), abolishes
regulation by vitamin D, suggesting that binding of coactivators to this region
mediates ligand-dependent stimulation of the PRL promoter by the receptor.
Indeed, expression of the coactivators, steroid hormone receptor coactivator-1
(SRC-1) and CREB-binding protein (CBP), significantly enhances the stimulatory
effect of vitamin D mediated by the wild-type VDR but not by the AF2 mutant
receptor. Furthermore, CBP also increases the activation of the PRL promoter by
GHF-1 and the ligand-independent activation by both wild-type and mutant VDR.

PMID: 10406465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Jul;84(7):2581-4.

Prop-1 gene expression in human pituitary tumors.

Nakamura S(1), Ohtsuru A, Takamura N, Kitange G, Tokunaga Y, Yasunaga A, Shibata 
S, Yamashita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, Japan.

A novel type of pituitary-specific transcription factor, Prophet of Pit-1
(Prop-1) gene (PROP1), expresses in just early embryonic stage in mouse and
closely related as a causative gene in combined pituitary hormone deficiency. We 
studied PROP1 expression to further clarify its correlation with tumorigenesis
and biological behavior in human pituitary adenomas. Eighteen pituitary adenomas 
and three normal pituitary glands were examined for the expression of PROP1 and
POU1F1 by using RT-PCR Pituitary adenomas were diagnosed as non-functioning
adenomas (n = 11), prolactinomas (n=5), GH-producing adenoma (n = 1) and
ACTH-producing adenoma (n = 1). One of non-functioning adenomas was pituitary
carcinoma with cerebellar metastasis and CSF dissemination. Our results
demonstrated PROP1 expression in all pituitary tumors examined, in contrast,
POU1F1 was detected in 14 of pituitary tumors. PROP1 was also expressed in normal
pituitary gland, however, it was not in normal brain tissue, glioblastomas (cell 
lines and tumor tissues) and meningioma. Our data indicated that PROP1 expression
was observed constantly both in the pituitary tumors and normal human adult
pituitary tissues, suggesting that PROP1 is an essential transcriptional factor
for pituitary specific gene expression in human. Therefore, detection of PROP1
might be a useful indicator for differentiating pituitary adenomas, regardless of
their hormonal phenotypes, from other brain tumors.

PMID: 10404841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. DNA Cell Biol. 1999 Jun;18(6):489-502.

Structure and functional analysis of a tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus) growth
hormone gene: activation and repression by pituitary transcription factor Pit-1.

Sekkali B(1), Brim H, Muller M, Argenton F, Bortolussi M, Colombo L, Belayew A,
Martial JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique, Université de
Liège, Institut de Chimie B6, Sart-Tilman, Belgium.

A gene encoding the Tilapia mossambica (Oreochromis mossambicus) growth hormone
(tiGH) was isolated and sequenced. The gene spans 5.6 kb, including 3.7 kb of 5' 
and 0.2 kb of 3' flanking sequences and a 1.7-kb transcription unit comprised of 
six exons and five introns. The gene and the 5' flanking region contain several
potential binding sites for Pit-1, a key transcription activator of mammalian GH 
genes. One of these (-57/-42) is highly conserved in fish GH genes. It activates 
transcription in pituitary cells and binds Pit-1. Transfection of luciferase
reporter plasmids containing either the -3602/+19 tiGH sequence or one of its 5' 
deletion mutants (-2863/, -1292/, and -463/+19) resulted in strong activity in
Pit-1-producing rat pituitary GC cells. A dose-dependent activation of the tiGH
promoter was achieved in nonpituitary fish EPC and monkey COS cells cotransfected
with a rat Pit-1 expression vector, demonstrating the crucial role played by
Pit-1 as an activator of the tiGH gene. Fusion of the tiGH promoter with the
beta-galactosidase gene led to transient expression specifically in the nervous
system of microinjected zebrafish embryos. The activity of the tiGH promoter in
GC and EPC cells was strongly repressed by extending its 3' end from +19 to +40, 
a sequence in which a Pit-1-binding site was identified using gel retardation
assays. Point mutations of the site that suppressed Pit-1 binding in vitro
restored full tiGH promoter activity. Thus, a Pit-1-binding site located in the
5' untranslated region mediates Pit-1-dependent repression of the tiGH gene.

PMID: 10390158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1999 Feb;68(3-4):145-52.

Interaction between estrogen receptor and Pit-1 protein is influenced by estrogen
in pituitary cells.

Ying C(1), Lin DH, Sarkar DK, Chen TT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Soochow University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
cying@mbm1.scu.edu.tw

The estrogen responsiveness of the rat prolactin gene expression requires the
presence of both the estrogen receptor (ER) and the tissue-specific transcription
factor, Pit-1 protein. We performed protein interaction assays using anti-rat
Pit-1 antiserum (a-rPit-1) to investigate the physical interactions which occur
between ER and Pit-1 proteins following estrogen treatment. After fusing maltose 
binding protein (MBP) and Pit-1 protein, we used the resulting MBP Pit-1 fusion
protein to prepare a-rPit-1. Our results show that the estrogen receptor readily 
co-precipitated with the Pit-1 protein drawn from the lysates of two
prolactin-expressing pituitary cell lines GH3 and PR1. The rate of precipitation 
appears to be both estrogen- and time-dependent. Cellular levels of estrogen
receptors and Pit-1 proteins did not show significant changes during the time of 
estrogen treatment. We therefore suggest that an estrogen-dependent physical
interaction between ER and Pit-1 protein exists in vivo, and that this
interaction may play an important role in the regulation of prolactin gene
expression.

PMID: 10369412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Cell. 1999 May 28;97(5):587-98.

Reciprocal interactions of Pit1 and GATA2 mediate signaling gradient-induced
determination of pituitary cell types.

Dasen JS(1), O'Connell SM, Flynn SE, Treier M, Gleiberman AS, Szeto DP, Hooshmand
F, Aggarwal AK, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093-0648, USA.

The mechanisms by which transient gradients of signaling molecules lead to
emergence of specific cell types remain a central question in mammalian
organogenesis. Here, we demonstrate that the appearance of four ventral pituitary
cell types is mediated via the reciprocal interactions of two transcription
factors, Pit1 and GATA2, which are epistatic to the remainder of the cell
type-specific transcription programs and serve as the molecular memory of the
transient signaling events. Unexpectedly, this program includes a DNA
binding-independent function of Pit1, suppressing the ventral GATA2-dependent
gonadotrope program by inhibiting GATA2 binding to gonadotrope- but not
thyrotrope-specific genes, indicating that both DNA binding-dependent and
-independent actions of abundant determining factors contribute to generate
distinct cell phenotypes.

PMID: 10367888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Hum Gene Ther. 1999 May 1;10(7):1163-73.

High-efficiency transduction and long-term gene expression with a murine stem
cell retroviral vector encoding the green fluorescent protein in human marrow
stromal cells.

Marx JC(1), Allay JA, Persons DA, Nooner SA, Hargrove PW, Kelly PF, Vanin EF,
Horwitz EM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology and the Transplantation and Gene Therapy
Program, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Bone marrow stromal cells (MSCs) are unique mesenchymal cells that have been
utilized as vehicles for the delivery of therapeutic proteins in gene therapy
protocols. However, there are several unresolved issues regarding their potential
therapeutic applications. These include low transduction efficiency, attenuation 
of transgene expression, and the technical problems associated with drug-based
selection markers. To address these issues, we have developed a transduction
protocol that yields high-level gene transfer into human MSCs, employing a murine
stem cell virus-based bicistronic vector containing the green fluorescent protein
(GFP) gene as a selectable marker. Transduction of MSCs plated at low density for
6 hr per day for 3 days with high-titer viral supernatant resulted in a gene
transfer efficiency of 80+/-6% (n = 10) as measured by GFP fluorescence. Neither 
centrifugation nor phosphate depletion increased transduction efficiency.
Assessment of amphotropic receptor (Pit-2) expression by RT-PCR demonstrated that
all MSCs expressing the receptor were successfully transduced. Cell cycle
distribution profiles measured by propidium iodide staining showed no correlation
with the susceptibility of MSCs to transduction by the retroviral vector. Human
MSCs sequentially transduced with an adenoviral vector encoding the ecotropic
receptor and ecotropic retroviral vector encoding GFP demonstrated that all MSCs 
are susceptible to retroviral transduction. We further showed that both genes of 
bicistronic vector are expressed for at least 6 months in vitro and that
transgene expression did not affect the growth or osteogenic differentiation
potential of MSCs. Future studies will be directed toward the development of gene
therapy protocols employing this strategy.

PMID: 10340548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Thyroid. 1999 Apr;9(4):411-8.

Tissue-specific differential repression of gene expression by a dominant negative
mutant of thyroid hormone beta1 receptor.

Bhat MK(1), Dace A, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Division of Basic Sciences, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4255, USA.

Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) is a genetic disease caused by the mutations 
of the thyroid hormone beta receptor (TRbeta) gene, producing receptors with a
dominant negative action. The present study addressed the question as to whether 
tissue-specific factors modulate the dominant negative function in different
tissues. We prepared stably transfected pituitary GH3 (GH3-PV) and liver SK-Hep-1
(SK-Hep-1-PV) cell lines with a potent dominant negative mutant, PV. The growth
hormone (GH) and the malic enzyme genes (ME) in GH3 and SK-Hep-1, respectively,
are directly regulated by the thyroid hormone, 3,3,'5-triiodo-L-thyronine (T3).
The ratio of the expressed PV/endogenous TRbeta1 proteins was approximately 20
and 5 for GH3-PV and SK-Hep-1-PV cells, respectively. However, the T3-activated
expression of the GH gene in GH3-PV and ME gene in SK-Hep-1-PV was repressed by
approximately 30% and 90%, respectively, indicating the lack of correlation of
PV/TRpbeta1 protein ratio with the dominant negative potency of mutant PV.
Furthermore, the synergistic effect of the pituitary-specific factor 1 on the
TR-mediated GH promoter activity was not repressed by mutant PV. Taken together, 
these results suggest that the dominant negative effect of mutant TR is variable 
in the tissues studied.

PMID: 10319950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 May;13(5):742-51.

The tissue-specific transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1 binds to the c-fos serum
response element and activates c-fos transcription.

Gaiddon C(1), de Tapia M, Loeffler JP.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 7519 Neurophysiologie Cellulaire et Intégrée CNRS, Université Louis
Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.

Pit-1, a POU domain-containing transcription factor, is involved in two functions
in the pituitary: PRL and GH tissue-specific expression and somatolactotroph
cells expansion. To analyze the molecular basis of the latter function, we tested
whether Pit-1 can directly transactivate expression of an early marker of cell
cycle initiation, the c-fos gene. We show that Pit-1 overexpression in PC12
cells, which do not express Pit-1, increases c-fos expression. Moreover,
cAMP-induced c-fos promoter activity is decreased in the somatolactotroph cell
line GH3 when Pit-1 expression is reduced by hybrid arrest with an antisense
sequence complementary to Pit-1 cDNA. In contrast to hormonal genes regulation,
where it has been shown that any Pit-1 phosphorylation site is involved, we show 
that the Pit-1 phosphorylation sites are required to allow increase of c-fos
promoter activity by Pit-1. We further show, by gel shift analyses, that Pit-1 is
able to specifically bind the serum response element sequence present within the 
c-fos promoter but with a lesser affinity than the Pit-1 response element. Taken 
together, these results demonstrate that the tissue-specific transcription factor
Pit-1 is able to enhance expression of genes involved in cell cycle initiation,
suggesting that this mechanism allows Pit-1 to increase somato-lactotroph cell
proliferation.

PMID: 10319324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 23;274(17):12108-14.

Cloning and characterization of the 5'-flanking region of the human growth
hormone-releasing hormone receptor gene.

Iguchi G(1), Okimura Y, Takahashi T, Mizuno I, Fumoto M, Takahashi Y, Kaji H, Abe
H, Chihara K.

Author information: 
(1)Third Division, Department of Medicine, Kobe University School of Medicine,
7-5-1, Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

We cloned the 5'-flanking region of the human growth hormone-releasing hormone
receptor (GHRH-R) gene and determined the nucleotide sequence of 2.7 kilobases
upstream from the translation start site. RNase protection analysis showed the
major transcription start site is 122 base pairs upstream from the translation
start site. The 5'-end of the longest product of 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA
ends was close to the site. There were no typical TATA homologies but several
putative regulatory elements including Pit-1-binding site-like element. Transient
transfection studies using a luciferase reporter gene demonstrated that
5'-flanking region had promoter activity in GH3 cells (derived from rat pituitary
tumor) but not in nonpituitary cells, BeWo and HeLa cells. However,
co-transfection of Pit-1 expression vector increased luciferase activity in BeWo 
cells. Deletion study showed that the regions from -310 to -130 and from -130 to 
-120 were important for the GHRH-R gene expression in GH3 cells, although the
latter contributed less to the gene expression. In BeWo cells co-transfected with
Pit-1 expression vector, the region from -310 to -130 was essential for the
Pit-1-dependent expression of GHRH-R gene. The region from -310 to -120 has two
putative Pit-1-binding sites, P1 and P2, located from -129 to -123 and from -171 
to -160, respectively. Both mobility shift assay and DNase-I footprint analysis
showed that P2 had much higher Pit-1 binding affinity than P1. Mutation of P2
decreased GHRH-R gene expression in GH3 cells. These findings were consistent
with the results that the region from -310 to -130 is an important element for
Pit-1-dependent expression of GHRH-R gene.

PMID: 10207037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Neuroendocrinol. 1999 Mar;11(3):187-93.

Characterization of TSH-positive cells in foetal rat pars tuberalis that fail to 
express Pit-1 factor and thyroid hormone beta2 receptors.

Sakai T(1), Sakamoto S, Ijima K, Matsubara K, Kato Y, Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regulation Biology, Faculty of Science, Saitama University,
Urawa, Japan. tsakai@seitai.saitama-u.ac.jp

The thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)-immunoreactive cells (TSH cells) in the
pars tuberalis (PT-TSH cell) of the male rat pituitary gland show an intense
spot-like TSH immunoreaction in the paranuclear cytoplasm. However, the ontogenic
origin and characteristics of these spot-like stained PT-TSH cells remain to be
elucidated. The present study was designed to investigate the distribution and
characteristics of PT-TSH cells in the foetal and adult rat pituitary by
immunostaining for Pit-1 factor and thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) and reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). TSH cells first appeared in the
PT at 15.5 days of gestation and were either stained diffusely throughout the
cytoplasm or displayed a strongly stained, spotty appearance in the paranuclear
region. By 15.5 days of gestation, the rostral part of the PT consisted of
columnar epithelium, in which TSH immunoreactivity was spot-like in the apical
region of cytoplasm corresponding to the Golgi apparatus. At the 16.5 days of
gestation, TSH cells were present in the pars distalis (PD); however, the cells
were mostly larger and polygonal with strong staining throughout the cytoplasm.
These differences between the PT and PD were retained throughout foetal and
neonatal rat development. The TSH cells in the PD of the adult or gestational rat
were observed to contain Pit-1 factor by double immunostaining. However, TSH
cells in the PT lacked Pit-1 factor. RT-PCR confirmed the absence of Pit-1 and
TRbeta2 mRNA in the PT of the adult and late gestation rat pituitary gland. These
results suggest that apparently distinct types of TSH cells in the PT develop
independently from TSH cells in the PD.

PMID: 10201814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1999 Jan 25;147(1-2):65-74.

Characterization of the porcine Lhx3/LIM-3/P-Lim LIM homeodomain transcription
factor.

Meier BC(1), Price JR, Parker GE, Bridwell JL, Rhodes SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University at Indianapolis,
46202-5132, USA.

Lhx3/LIM-3/P-Lim is a LIM homeodomain transcription factor which is essential in 
mice for the development of anterior and intermediate lobes of the pituitary
gland. We report the cloning and characterization of porcine Lhx3. The porcine
Lhx3 protein exhibits strong similarity to murine Lhx3 within the amino terminal 
LIM domains and the homeodomain, however, it is diverged in regions outside these
motifs. Expression vectors for porcine Lhx3 activated murine and porcine
alpha-glycoprotein reporter genes in transfection assays, and recombinant porcine
Lhx3 protein specifically bound to a target site within the porcine
alpha-glycoprotein gene upstream sequence. In addition, porcine Lhx3
synergistically induced transcription from prolactin enhancer/promoter reporter
genes in cooperation with the Pit-1 pituitary transcription factor. Porcine Lhx3 
protein interacted with Pit-1 protein in solution and also with the LIM
domain-binding protein NLI/Lbd1/CLIM. Together, these data indicate that many
aspects of Lhx3 function in the mammalian pituitary are conserved and that Lhx3
may be involved in the activation of trophic hormone genes during early and late 
stages of pituitary organogenesis. Divergence in the Lhx3 amino acid sequence
between mammalian species may suggest distinct activities for this protein in
some species and may help identify important functional domains of this key
developmental transcription factor.

PMID: 10195693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Apr;13(4):644-57.

Expression cloning and characterization of PREB (prolactin regulatory element
binding), a novel WD motif DNA-binding protein with a capacity to regulate
prolactin promoter activity.

Fliss MS(1), Hinkle PM, Bancroft C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, New York 10029, USA.

Previous studies have implied that a transcription factor(s) other than Pit-1 is 
involved in homeostatic regulation of PRL promoter activity via Pit-1-binding
elements. One such element, 1P, was employed to clone from a rat pituitary cDNA
expression library a novel 417-amino acid WD protein, designated PREB (PRL
regulatory element binding) protein. PREB contains two PQ-rich potential
transactivation domains, but no apparent DNA-binding motif, and exhibits
sequence-specific binding to site 1P, to a site nonidentical to that for Pit-1.
The PREB gene (or a related gene) is conserved, as an apparently single copy, in 
rat, human, fly, and yeast. A single approximately 1.9-kb PREB transcript
accumulates in GH3 rat pituitary cells, to levels similar to Pit-1 mRNA. PREB
transcripts were detected in all human tissues examined, but the observation of
tissue-specific multiple transcript patterns suggests the possibility of
tissue-specific alternative splicing. RT-PCR analysis of human brain tumor RNA
samples suggested region-specific expression of PREB transcripts in brain.
Western and immunocytochemical analysis implied that PREB accumulates
specifically in GH3 cell nuclei. Transient transfection employing PREB-negative
C6 rat glial cells showed that PREB is as active as, and additive with, Pit-1 in 
transactivation of a PRL promoter construct, and that PREB, but not Pit-1, can
mediate transcriptional activation by protein kinase A (PKA). Expression in GH3
cells of a GAL4-PREB fusion protein both strongly transactivated a 5XGAL
indicator construct and yielded a further stimulation of expression of this
construct by coexpressed PKA, implying that PREB can mediate both basal and
PKA-stimulated transcriptional responses in pituitary cells. These observations
imply that PREB will prove to play a significant transcriptional regulatory role,
both in the pituitary and in other organs in which transcripts of its gene are
expressed.

PMID: 10194769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Mar;13(3):476-84.

Defective retinoic acid regulation of the Pit-1 gene enhancer: a novel mechanism 
of combined pituitary hormone deficiency.

Cohen LE(1), Zanger K, Brue T, Wondisford FE, Radovick S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA. cohenl@a1.tch.harvard.edu

Pit-1 is a pituitary-specific transcription factor responsible for pituitary
development and hormone expression in mammals. Pit-1 contains two protein
domains, termed POU-specific and POU-homeo, which are both necessary for DNA
binding and activation of the GH and PRL genes and regulation of the PRL,
TSH-beta subunit (TSH-beta), and Pit-1 genes. Pit-1 is also necessary for
retinoic acid induction of its own gene during development through a
Pit-1-dependent enhancer. Combined pituitary hormone deficiency is caused by
defective transactivation of target genes in the anterior pituitary. In the
present report, we provide in vivo evidence that retinoic acid induction of the
Pit-1 gene can be impaired by a Pit-1 gene mutation, suggesting a new molecular
mechanism for combined pituitary hormone deficiency in man.

PMID: 10077004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Hum Gene Ther. 1999 Feb 10;10(3):341-53.

Keratinocyte growth factor stimulates transduction of the respiratory epithelium 
by retroviral vectors.

Zsengellér ZK(1), Halbert C, Miller AD, Wert SE, Whitsett JA, Bachurski CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Children's Hospital Research Foundation,
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Cell proliferation is required for transduction by standard retrovirus vectors
derived from viruses in the murine leukemia virus (MuLV) group. Since
proliferation rates are low in the mature pulmonary epithelium, we tested the
hypothesis that the efficiency of retrovirus-mediated transduction of respiratory
epithelial cells can be enhanced by stimulation of cell proliferation with
recombinant human keratinocyte growth factor (rhKGF). A marked increase in
proliferation of bronchiolar and alveolar epithelial cells was observed after
intratracheal administration of rhKGF (30 mg/kg) to adult FVB/N mice. Two days
after rhKGF or saline treatment, 10(7) AP+ FFU of LAPSN, a recombinant
amphotropic retrovirus that expresses human placental alkaline phosphatase (AP), 
was instilled intratracheally into the mice. Transduction efficiency, measured 2 
days after infection, was increased approximately 70-fold by rhKGF pretreatment. 
However, even after KGF treatment the total numbers of AP-expressing cells were
few. Transduction efficiency was similar using either LAPSN packaged by
amphotropic host range packaging cells or LAPSN pseudotyped with 10A1 MuLV
envelope protein (0.091 +/- 0.006 versus 0.094 +/- 0.028 transduction events/mm2,
respectively). Amphotropic vectors use Pit-2 for cell entry, while 10A1 MuLV
vectors can use Pit-1 or Pit-2 for cell entry. By in situ hybridization the
retroviral receptor Pit-2 (Ram-1) mRNA was expressed only in the pulmonary
vasculature, and Pit-1 (Glvr-1) mRNA was expressed at low levels throughout the
lung. In vitro studies demonstrated that retrovirus was inactivated by pulmonary 
surfactant. Stimulating proliferation of the respiratory epithelium increased
retroviral transduction in vivo, but the paucity of retroviral receptors and
inactivation by surfactant are additional barriers to high-level retroviral gene 
transfer in the lung.

PMID: 10048387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Neurosci Lett. 1999 Jan 22;260(1):25-8.

The tissue-specific transcription factor Pit-1 is expressed in the spinal cord of
the lancelet, Branchiostoma lanceolatum.

Candiani S(1), Pestarino M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Comparative Anatomy, University of Genova, Italy.

The spinal cord of the lancelet Branchiostoma lanceolatum was studied by using a 
monoclonal antibody to the rat tissue-specific transcription factor, Pit-1. Our
previous studies have demonstrated Pit-1 immunoreactivity in different nervous
and endocrine structures of the head region of adults and in the rostral central 
nervous system (CNS) of larval lancelet. Our present results show the presence of
Pit-1-like protein in dorso-lateral nerve cells and ependymocytes of the adult
spinal cord. Using double immunofluorescence techniques, we have revealed the
coexistence of the glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) with Pit-1 in groups of
laterally located ependymocytes. The occurrence of GFAP, a specific marker of
mammalian astrocytes and radial glia, in some lancelet ependymocytes confirms
that glial elements are also present in protochordates. Furthermore, other
ependymocytes, located in the roof of the central canal and containing Pit-1-like
protein exclusively, could be considered as ependymal tanycytes.

PMID: 10027691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1998;449:39-53.

POU domain factors in neural development.

Schonemann MD(1), Ryan AK, Erkman L, McEvilly RJ, Bermingham J, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department and School of Medicine, University
of California, San Diego 92093-0648, USA.

Transcription factors serve critical roles in the progressive development of
general body plan, organ commitment, and finally, specific cell types. Comparison
of the biological roles of a series of individual members within a family permits
some generalizations to be made regarding the developmental events that are
likely to be regulated by a particular class of transcription factors. Here, we
evidence that the developmental functions of the family of transcription factors 
characterized by the POU DNA binding motif exerts roles in mammalian development.
The POU domain family of transcription factors was defined following the
observation that the products of three mammalian genes, Pit-1, Oct-1, and Oct-2, 
and the protein encoded by the C. elegans gene unc-86, shared a region of
homology, known as the POU domain. The POU domain is a bipartite DNA binding
domain, consisting of two highly conserved regions, tethered by a variable
linker. The approximately 75 amino acid N-terminal region was called the
POU-specific domain and the C-terminal 60 amino acid region, the POU-homeodomain.
High-affinity site-specific DNA binding by POU domain transcription factors
requires both the POU-specific and the POU-homeodomain. Resolution of the crystal
structures of Oct-1 and Pit-1 POU domains bound to DNA as a monomer and
homodimer, respectively, confirmed several of the in vitro findings regarding
interactions of this bipartite DNA binding domain with DNA and has provided
important information regarding the flexibility and versatility of POU domain
proteins. Overall the crystal structure of a monomer of the Oct-1 POU domain
bound to the octamer element was similar to that predicted by the NMR solution
structures of the POU-specific domain and the POU-homeodomain in isolation, with 
the POU-specific domain consists of four alpha helices, with the second and third
helices forming a structure similar to the helix-turn-helix motif of the lambda
and 434 repressors; several of the DNA base contacts are also conserved. A
homodimer of the Pit-1 POU domain was crystallized bound to a Pit-1 dimer DNA
element that is closely related to a site in the proximal promoter of the
prolactin gene. The structure of the Pit-1 POU domain on DNA is very similar to
that of Oct-1, and the Pit-1 POU-homeodomain/DNA structure is strikingly similar 
to that of other homeodomains, including the Oct-1 POU-homeodomain. The DNA
contacts made by the Pit-1 POU-specific domain are also similar to those of Oct-1
and conserved with many made by the prokaryotic repressors. In the Oct-1 crystal,
the POU-specific domain recognizes a GCAT half-site, while the corresponding
sequence recognized by the Pit-1 POU-specific domain, GTAT, is on the opposing
strand. As a result, the orientation of the Pit-1 POU-specific domain relative to
the POU-homeodomain is flipped, as compared to the Oct-1 crystal structure,
indicating the remarkable flexibility of the POU-specific domain in adapting to
variations in sequence within the site. Also in contrast to the Oct-1 monomer
structure is the observation that the POU-specific and POU-homeodomain of each
Pit-1 molecule make major groove contacts on the same face of the DNA, consistent
with the constraints imposed by its 15 amino acid linker. As a result, the Pit-1 
POU domain homodimer essentially surrounds its DNA binding site. In the Pit-1 POU
domain homodimer the dimerization interface is formed between the C-terminal end 
of helix 3 of the POU-homeodomain of one Pit-1 molecule and the N-terminus of
helix 1 and the loop between helices 3 and 4 of the POU-specific domain of the
other Pit-1 molecule. In contrast to other homeodomain crystal structures, the
C-terminus of helix 3 in the Pit-1 POU-homeo-domain has an extended structure.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED)

PMID: 10026784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Cell Biochem. 1999 Mar 1;72(3):322-38.

Subnuclear partitioning and functional regulation of the Pit-1 transcription
factor.

Mancini MG(1), Liu B, Sharp ZD, Mancini MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, 
USA. mancini@bcm.tmc.edu

Subnuclear compartmentation is postulated to play an important role in many
aspects of nuclear metabolism. To directly test an application of this model to
transcription factor function, we examined the subnuclear partitioning behavior
of Pit-1, a tissue-specific, POU-class transactivator. Biochemical and in situ
assays indicate the nuclear pool of Pit-1 is normally divided between two
compartments: the majority being differentially soluble in detergent, and a
significant insoluble fraction (approximately 20%) bound to the nuclear matrix.
Examination of Pit-1 deletion mutants and chimeric fusions reveal the highly
conserved 66 amino acid POU-specific domain contains a necessary and sufficient
nuclear matrix targeting signal. The nuclear partitioning behavior of several
natural or engineered point mutations of Pit-1 was also examined. Surprisingly,
the inactive point mutants were completely matrix-bound, irrespective of their
ability to bind Pit-1 specific DNA. These results suggest that dynamic
partitioning of Pit-1 is a component of its normal transactivator function that
takes place upon the insoluble nuclear substructure where transcription occurs.

PMID: 10022514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Feb;13(2):268-75.

A novel mechanism for cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate regulation of gene
expression by CREB-binding protein.

Zanger K(1), Cohen LE, Hashimoto K, Radovick S, Wondisford FE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The pituitary-specific transcription factor, Pit-1, is necessary to mediate
protein kinase A (PKA) regulation of the GH, PRL, and TSH-beta subunit genes in
the pituitary. Since these target genes lack classical cAMP DNA response elements
(CREs), the mechanism of this regulation was previously unknown. We show that
CREB binding protein (CBP), through two cysteine-histidine rich domains (C/H1 and
C/H3), specifically and constitutively interacts with Pit-1 in pituitary cells.
Pit-1 and CBP synergistically activate the PRL gene after PKA stimulation in a
mechanism requiring both an intact Pit-1 amino-terminal and DNA-binding domain. A
CBP construct containing the C/H3 domain [amino acids (aa) 1678-2441], but not
one lacking the C/H3 domain (aa 1891-2441), is sufficient to mediate this
response. Neither construct augments PKA regulation of CRE-containing promoters. 
Fusion of either CBP fragment to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain transferred complete
PKA regulation to a heterologous promoter. These findings provide a mechanism for
CREB-independent regulation of gene expression by cAMP.

PMID: 9973256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Feb;13(2):228-38.

Reconstitution of the protein kinase A response of the rat prolactin promoter:
differential effects of distinct Pit-1 isoforms and functional interaction with
Oct-1.

Diamond SE(1), Chiono M, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Colorado Cancer Center, University of Colorado Health 
Sciences Center, Denver 80262, USA.

PRL gene transcription is primarily regulated by dopamine, which lowers cAMP
levels and inhibits protein kinase A (PKA) activity. Current data indicate that
the cAMP/PKA response maps to the most proximal Pit-1/Pit-1beta binding site
footprint I (FP I) on the rat PRL (rPRL) promoter. Pit-1, a POU-homeo domain
transcription factor, is specifically expressed in the anterior pituitary and is 
required both for the normal development of anterior pituitary cell types,
somatotrophs, lactotrophs, and thyrotrophs, and for the expression of their
hormones: GH, PRL, and TSHbeta. Pit-1 has been shown to functionally interact,
via FP I, with several transcription factors, including Oct-1, a ubiquitous
homeobox protein, and thyrotroph embryonic factor, which is found in lactotrophs,
to activate basal rPRL promoter activity. Pit-1beta/GHF-2, a distinct splice
isoform of Pit-1, acts to inhibit Ras-activated transcription from the rPRL
promoter, which is mediated by a functional interaction between Pit-1 and Ets-1
at the most distal Pit-1 binding site (FP IV). In this manuscript we show 1) that
the Pit-1beta isoform not only fails to block PKA activation, but is, in fact, a 
superior mediator of the PKA response; 2) that the PKA response requires intact
POU-specific and POU-homeo domains of Pit-1; and 3) that Oct-1, but not
thyrotroph embryonic factor, functions as a Pit-1-interacting factor to mediate
an optimal PKA response.

PMID: 9973253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1998 Dec 11;865:390-2.

Involvement of a Pit-1 binding site in the regulation of the rat somatostatin
receptor 1 gene expression.

Baumeister H(1), Meyerhof W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, German Institute of Human Nutrition,
Potsdam-Rehbrücke, Germany. baumeist@www.dife.de

It was shown that at least four regions in the 2.2 kb upstream DNA of the sst1
gene are important for the cell type-specific promoter activity in GH3 and RIN
cells. Moreover, the 48 bp region located between -165 to -117 harbors positive
regulatory elements that are active in RIN and GH3 cells. This region is
recognized by the pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1. It is therefore 
concluded that Pit-1 represents a major regulator of GH secretion at the genetic 
level by regulating transcriptional activity not only of the GH gene itself but
also of the genes for the receptors that mediate stimulation and inhibition of GH
secretion.

PMID: 9928036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Endocrinology. 1999 Jan;140(1):260-5.

Construction and in vivo efficacy of a replication-deficient recombinant
adenovirus encoding murine growth hormone.

Marmary Y(1), Parlow AF, Goldsmith CM, He X, Wellner RB, Satomura K, Kriete MF,
Robey PG, Nieman LK, Baum BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Therapy and Therapeutics Branch, National Institute of Dental and
Craniofacial Research, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

We have constructed a recombinant, replication-deficient, first-generation
adenovirus-encoding mouse GH (mGH), AdCMVmGH. This virus directed mGH production 
from an epithelial cell line in vitro in a dose-dependent manner. When injected
into the quadriceps muscle or submandibular ducts of mGH-deficient Snell dwarf
mice, AdCMVmGH resulted in the production of significantly elevated serum mGH
levels. Furthermore, after i.m. injection, dwarf mice increased in weight by 8%
over 4 days and close to 100% by 30 days. When AdCMVmGH was administered to 3- to
4-week-old rats by i.v. injection to assess general metabolic responses, serum
mGH, insulin-like growth factor 1, triglycerides and cholesterol levels were
significantly elevated. AdCMVmGH should be a valuable experimental tool for the
controlled, directed expression of mGH in preclinical mouse model studies.

PMID: 9886833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Neurochem. 1999 Jan;72(1):40-50.

Structural and functional organization of the gene encoding the human
thyrotropin-releasing hormone receptor.

Matre V(1), Høvring PI, Orstavik S, Frengen E, Rian E, Velickovic Z,
Murray-McIntosh RP, Gautvik KM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, University of Oslo, Norway.

The thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) receptor (TRHR) is widely distributed
throughout the central and peripheral nervous systems. In addition to its role in
controlling the synthesis and secretion of thyroid-stimulating hormone and
prolactin from the anterior pituitary, TRH is believed to act as a
neurotransmitter as well as a neuromodulator. We have isolated genomic lambda and
P1-derived artificial chromosome clones encoding the human TRHR. The gene was
found to be 35 kb with three exons and two introns. A 541-bp intron 1 (-629 to
-89 relative to the translation start site) is conserved between human and mouse.
A large intron 2 of 31 kb disrupts the open reading frame (starting in position
+790) in the sequence encoding the supposed junction between the third
intracellular loop and the putative sixth transmembrane domain. A similar intron 
was found in chimpanzee and sheep but not in rat and mouse. Promoter analysis of 
upstream regions demonstrated cell type-specific reporter activation, and
sequencing of 2.5 kb of the promoter revealed putative cis-acting regulatory
elements for several transcription factors that may contribute to the regulation 
of the TRHR gene expression. Functional analysis of potential response elements
for the anterior pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1 revealed cell
type-specific binding that was competed out with a Pit-1 response element from
the GH gene promoter.

PMID: 9886052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 1998 Sep-Oct;11(5):623-30.

Clinical and molecular characterization of a Brazilian patient with Pit-1
deficiency.

Arnhold IJ(1), Nery M, Brown MR, Voss TC, VanderHeyden TC, Adess ME, Hurley DL,
Wajchenberg BL, Parks JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Hospital das Clinicas, University of São Paulo
School of Medicine, Brazil.

We studied a 14 year-old girl with extreme short stature (-9.5 SDS), normal
psychomotor development and signs of progressive hypothyroidism. Basal IGF-I and 
T4 were low. Serum GH was low after insulin-induced hypoglycemia and GH-releasing
hormone administration. Both TSH and prolactin were low and did not rise after
TRH administration. Gonadotropins were normal and cortisol levels were elevated. 
In contrast, DHEA-S levels were low and she did not develop pubic hair until 26
years of age, compatible with deficiency of a putative pituitary adrenal androgen
stimulating hormone. Pituitary size was reduced on magnetic resonance imaging.
Sequencing of the Pit-1 gene revealed a heterozygous C to T transition in codon
271 resulting in substitution of tryptophane for a highly conserved arginine. Her
parents were homozygous normal for this locus indicating a de novo mutation with 
dominant expression. Genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity of patients with Pit-1 
gene mutations, particularly the R271W mutation, may reveal further information
about the nature of genetic silencing, imprinting, and epigenetic inheritance.
The relationship of Pit-1 deficiency to abnormal adrenal secretion remains to be 
elucidated.

PMID: 9829213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Exp Cell Res. 1998 Nov 25;245(1):132-6.

Correlation of Pit-1 gene expression and Pit-1 content with proliferation and
differentiation in human myeloid leukemic cells.

Costoya JA(1), García-Barros M, Gallego R, Señarís R, Arce VM, Devesa J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de
Compostela, 15705, Spain.

The transcription factor pituitary-1 (Pit-1) is a homeodomain-containing protein 
that is expressed mainly in the pituitary, where it drives the expression of
growth hormone, prolactin, and thyroid-stimulating hormone beta chain genes. In
addition, Pit-1 is required for adequate pituitary cell growth and may be
involved in the pathogenesis of pituitary adenomas. Pit-1 expression has been
also reported in nonpituitary tissues, where it might be involved in the control 
of cell proliferation. In order to elucidate such a possibility, we have
investigated the changes in both Pit-1 mRNA and Pit-1 immunoreactivity in HL-60
cells following the addition of several differentiating agents. Our results show 
that while high Pit-1 levels are found in exponentially growing HL-60 cells, a
significant decrease occurs after induction of cells to differentiate along the
macrophage lineage with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). In contrast
no changes were observed when cells were treated with interferon-alpha, which
also induces differentiation of HL-60 cells that, at odds with TPA, is not
accompanied with growth arrest. In all, these findings suggest that Pit-1
expression is specifically associated with proliferation in HL-60 cells, thus
supporting the idea that one of the functions of nonpituitary Pit-1 may be the
control of cell proliferation.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9828108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 27;273(48):31909-15.

Selective inhibition of prolactin gene transcription by the ETS-2 repressor
factor.

Day RN(1), Liu J, Sundmark V, Kawecki M, Berry D, Elsholtz HP.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and Cell Biology, National Science Foundation
Center for Biological Timing, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia
22908, USA. rnd@virginia.edu

Regulation of prolactin gene transcription requires cooperative interactions
between the pituitary-specific POU domain protein Pit-1 and members of the ETS
transcription factor family. We demonstrate here that the ETS-2 repressor factor 
(ERF) is expressed in pituitary tumor cells and that overexpression of
recombinant ERF inhibits prolactin promoter activity, but not the closely related
growth hormone promoter. In non-pituitary cell lines, coexpression of ERF
disrupts the cooperative interactions between Pit-1 and ETS-1 and blocks the
induction of Pit-1-dependent prolactin promoter activity by cAMP. The potential
role of ERF in the inhibitory response of the prolactin promoter to dopamine was 
examined using pituitary tumor cells stably expressing dopamine D2 receptors. The
inhibitory responses of the prolactin promoter to ERF and dopamine are additive, 
suggesting that ERF has a complementary role in this hormonal response. A single 
Pit-1 DNA-binding element from the prolactin promoter is sufficient to
reconstitute the inhibitory response to ERF. DNA binding analysis using either a 
composite Pit-1/ETS protein-binding site or a Pit-1 element with no known
affinity for ETS proteins revealed that ERF interferes with Pit-1 binding.
Together, these results demonstrate that ERF is a specific inhibitor of basal and
hormone-regulated transcription of the prolactin gene and suggest a new level of 
complexity for the interaction of ETS factors with Pit-1 target genes.

PMID: 9822660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Cell Mol Life Sci. 1998 Oct;54(10):1059-66.

Anterior pituitary development and Pit-1/GHF-1 transcription factor.

de la Hoya M(1), Vila V, Jiménez O, Castrillo JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM), Universidad Autónoma de 
Madrid, Spain.

Anterior pituitary differentiation is a well-established paradigm in mammalian
organogenesis. PIT1/GHF1, a homoeotic gene, plays a key role in terminal
pituitary differentiation. Recently, a new set of transcription factors involved 
in early pituitary differentiation have been identified: Lhx-3, Lhx-4, P-OTX and 
Prop1. A pituitary-specific transcriptional cascade regulating a developmental
programme leads to the determination of the mature cell types.

PMID: 9817984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Hum Genet. 1998 Sep;103(3):255-72.

The molecular genetics of growth hormone deficiency.

Procter AM(1), Phillips JA 3rd, Cooper DN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Wales College of Medicine, Heath 
Park, Cardiff, UK.

Although most cases of short stature associated with growth hormone (GH)
deficiency are sporadic and idiopathic, some 5-30% have an affected first degree 
relative consistent with a genetic aetiology for the condition. Several different
types of mutational lesion in the pituitary-expressed growth hormone (GH1) gene
have been described in affected individuals. This review focuses primarily on the
GH1 mutational spectrum and its unusual features, discusses potential mechanisms 
of mutagenesis and pathogenesis, and examines the correlation between mutant
genotype and clinical phenotype. The characterization of pathological lesions in 
several other pituitary-expressed genes that are epistatic to GH1 (POU1F1, PROP1 
and GHRHR) has identified additional causes of GH deficiency, the molecular
genetics of which are also explored.

PMID: 9799079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Endocrinology. 1998 Nov;139(11):4476-82.

The thyrotropin beta-subunit gene is repressed by thyroid hormone in a novel
thyrotrope cell line, mouse T alphaT1 cells.

Yusta B(1), Alarid ET, Gordon DF, Ridgway EC, Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, and Center for Molecular Genetics,
University of California-San Diego, La Jolla 92093-0674, USA.

TSH is expressed in two populations of thyrotropes in the pituitary: one in the
pars distalis and a second in the pars tuberalis. Pars distalis thyrotropes
exhibit classical endocrine inhibition of TSH by thyroid hormone, whereas pars
tuberalis thyrotropes do not. The majority of our understanding of TSH subunit
gene regulation has come from studies conducted in dispersed pituitary, dispersed
thyrotropic tumors, or the GH3 somatolactotrope cell line. However, the dispersed
pituitary model is limited because of its inherent heterogeneity, thyrotropic
tumors are difficult to grow and maintain, and the GH3 cells lack endogenous TSH 
expression. The recent derivation of a clonal thyrotrope cell line, T alphaT1,
that expresses thyrotrope-specific markers, overcomes these limitations. However,
because it was not possible to distinguish whether the tumor from which the T
alphaT1 cells are derived originated in the pars distalis or the pars tuberalis, 
it was necessary to define their cellular origin and thereby establish their
status as representative thyrotrope cells for future molecular studies. In this
study, we demonstrate that the T alphaT1 cells express thyroid hormone receptors 
(beta1 and beta2) and their heterodimeric partner, retinoid X receptor-gamma.
Treatment with T3 causes a dose- and time-dependent decrease in the expression of
the TSH beta-subunit messenger RNA. In contrast to previous reports in rat
pituitary cultures, T3 does not alter TSH beta-subunit messenger RNA stability in
the T alphaT1 cells. Based on these data and the presence of thyrotrope-specific 
isoforms of the transcription factor Pit-1, we conclude that the T alphaT1 cells 
represent differentiated thyrotropes of the pars distalis and will be a useful
model system for future analysis of the cis- and trans-acting factors necessary
for thyrotrope-specific and thyroid hormone-regulated TSH gene expression.

PMID: 9794455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Comp Neurol. 1998 Oct 26;400(3):310-6.

Evidence for the presence of the tissue-specific transcription factor Pit-1 in
lancelet larvae.

Candiani S(1), Pestarino M.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Anatomia Comparata, Università di Genova, Italy.

Recent molecular studies have noted the affinity among cephalochordates and
vertebrates. In particular, a cluster of vertebrate-like homeobox genes regulates
the development of the lancelet Branchiostoma lanceolatum. A previous study has
outlined the expression pattern of the pituitary-specific transcription factor
Pit-1 in adult lancelets. Pit-1 belongs to the POU family of transcription
factors, which, like homeotic proteins, are members of the helix-turn-helix
superfamily of proteins. POU is an acronym for Pit-1, Oct-1 and Oct-2, and
Unc-86. In the present work, we investigated the head region of premetamorphic
larvae of B. lanceolatum, by means of scanning electron microscopy, wholemount
and tissue sections immunocytochemistry, and Western blotting assay, to verify
the presence and distribution of Pit-1. Immunoreactive Pit-1 protein was detected
in the rostral nerves and in a cluster of photoreceptor cells of the frontal eye.
At the same time, an electrophoretic band of 33 kDa was shown from extracts of
premetamorphic larvae and recognized by a monoclonal antibody to rat Pit-1. On
the basis of the immunocytochemical and electrophoretic results, we can assume
that Pit-1 may play a neuromodulatory role in the larval central nervous system. 
Moreover, the spatial and temporal distribution of Pit-1 protein in larva and
adult lancelets agrees only in part with that described in embryonic and adult
mice, suggesting different molecular controls of regional identity in the nervous
system of cephalochordates and vertebrates.

PMID: 9779937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 16;273(42):27541-7.

Role of GHF-1 in the regulation of the rat growth hormone gene promoter by
thyroid hormone and retinoic acid receptors.

Palomino T(1), Barettino D, Aranda A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas, 29029 Madrid, Spain.

In non-pituitary HeLa cells the unliganded thyroid hormone or retinoic acid
receptors cause a strong activation of the rat growth hormone promoter that is
repressed by their ligands. In contrast, after expression of the
pituitary-specific transcription factor GHF-1, thyroid hormone and retinoic acid 
produce a stimulation similar to that found in pituitary cells. Therefore, GHF-1 
changes a ligand-dependent inhibition into a ligand-dependent activation. The
essential role of GHF-1 on the rat growth hormone promoter was also demonstrated 
with AF-2-defective T3 receptor mutants that show a normal activation of this
promoter in the presence of GHF-1. Furthermore, a truncated T3 receptor, which
lacks the N-terminus and the DNA binding domain, was able to stimulate this
promoter in the presence of GHF-1 and exogenous RXR receptors, suggesting the
importance of protein to protein interactions in this regulation. This study
shows that the final transcriptional effect depends not only on the type of
regulatory promoter response elements but also on the presence of other
transcriptional activators, in the case of the growth hormone promoter, the
tissue-specific transcription factor GHF-1, which plays a coactivator-like role
in this promoter.

PMID: 9765286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Nature. 1998 Sep 17;395(6699):301-6.

Signal-specific co-activator domain requirements for Pit-1 activation.

Xu L(1), Lavinsky RM, Dasen JS, Flynn SE, McInerney EM, Mullen TM, Heinzel T,
Szeto D, Korzus E, Kurokawa R, Aggarwal AK, Rose DW, Glass CK, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California at San Diego, La
Jolla 92093-0648, USA.

POU-domain proteins, such as the pituitary-specific factor Pit-1, are members of 
the homeodomain family of proteins which are important in development and
homeostasis, acting constitutively or in response to signal-transduction pathways
to either repress or activate the expression of specific genes. Here we show that
whereas homeodomain-containing repressors such as Rpx2 seem to recruit only a
co-repressor complex, the activity of Pit-1 is determined by a regulated balance 
between a co-repressor complex that contains N-CoR/SMRT, mSin3A/B and histone
deacetylases, and a co-activator complex that includes the CREB-binding protein
(CBP) and p/CAF. Activation of Pit-1 by cyclic AMP or growth factors depends on
distinct amino- and carboxy-terminal domains of CBP, respectively. Furthermore,
the histone acetyltransferase functions of CBP or p/CAF are required for Pit-1
function that is stimulated by cyclic AMP or growth factors, respectively. These 
data show that there is a switch in specific requirements for histone
acetyltransferases and CBP domains in mediating the effects of different
signal-transduction pathways on specific DNA-bound transcription factors.

PMID: 9751061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. FASEB J. 1998 Sep;12(12):1201-9.

A direct protein-protein interaction is involved in the cooperation between
thyroid hormone and retinoic acid receptors and the transcription factor GHF-1.

Palomino T(1), Sánchez-Pacheco A, Peña P, Aranda A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, CSIC, Madrid, Spain.

The nuclear receptors for thyroid hormone (TRs) and retinoic acid (RARs and RXRs)
cooperate with the pituitary-specific transcription factor GHF-1 to activate the 
rat growth hormone (GH) gene. The GH promoter contains a hormone response element
(HRE), which binds TR/RXR and RAR/RXR heterodimers, located close to two binding 
sites for GHF-1. GHF-1 inhibits binding of TR/RXR and RAR/RXR heterodimers to an 
isolated HRE. Similarly, the receptors inhibit binding of GHF-1 to its cognate
site. These results suggest the existence of direct protein to protein
interactions between the receptors and the pituitary transcription factor. This
was confirmed by in vitro binding studies with GST fusion proteins, which
demonstrated a strong association of GHF-1 with RXR and a weaker interaction with
RAR and TR. GHF-1 and the receptor heterodimers form a ternary complex with a
fragment of the rat GH promoter, which contains binding sites for both, and GHF-1
increases receptor binding to the promoter when present in limiting conditions.
These results suggest that the synergistic activation of the rat GH gene involves
protein-DNA interactions as well as a physical association between the nuclear
receptors and the pituitary-specific transcription factor GHF-1.

PMID: 9737723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Neuroendocrinology. 1998 Sep;68(3):152-62.

Cellular composition of the adult rat anterior pituitary is influenced by the
neonatal sex steroid environment.

González-Parra S(1), Argente J, García-Segura LM, Chowen JA.

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Autónoma, Hospital Infantil del Niño Jesús, Madrid, España.

Growth hormone (GH) and prolactin (PRL) secretion differ significantly between
adult males and females and this is due, at least in part, to the postpubertal
hormone environment which affects GH and PRL gene expression, as well as
somatotrope and lactotrope proliferation. However, the role of the neonatal
steroid environment in this phenomenon is less well understood. We have used in
situ hybridization to determine the number of GH and PRL mRNA containing cells,
as well as the level of expression of these two hormones and of the pituitary
transcription factor 1 (Pit-1). Neonatally castrated male rats that had been
exposed to testosterone during the neonatal period, adulthood or during both
periods, males castrated as adults, normal adult males and normal proestrous
females were used. Orchidectomy of adult rats had no effect on the number of
somatotropes or lactotropes, but significantly reduced GH and PRL mRNA levels.
Neonatal castration significantly reduced the percentage of somatotropes and
increased that of lactotropes in the adult male. In addition, GH and Pit-1 mRNA
levels were reduced significantly, but PRL mRNA levels were not modified.
Treatment of neonatally castrated males with testosterone during the neonatal
period significantly increased the percentage of somatotropes and decreased the
percentage of lactotropes compared to vehicle-treated animals. It also increased 
GH and Pit-1 mRNA levels, but did not affect PRL mRNA levels. Adult testosterone 
treatment significantly increased the percentage of both somatotropes and
lactotropes, as well as GH, PRL and Pit-1 mRNA levels. Treatment of neonatally
castrated males with testosterone during both the neonatal and adult periods
returned the percentage of somatotropes and lactotropes, as well as GH, PRL and
Pit-1 mRNA levels, to that of the intact male. These results suggest that,
although the postpubertal steroid environment is important in determining
anterior pituitary hormone synthesis and cellular composition, the neonatal
steroid environment also plays an important role in this phenomenon.

PMID: 9733999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Sep;12(9):1410-9.

Visualization of Pit-1 transcription factor interactions in the living cell
nucleus by fluorescence resonance energy transfer microscopy.

Day RN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Science Foundation Center for Biological
Timing, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center, Charlottesville 22908,
USA. rnd2v@virginia.edu

The pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1 forms dimers when interacting
with specific DNA elements and has been shown to associate with several other
nuclear proteins. Recently, techniques have become available that allow
visualization of protein-protein interactions as they occur in single living
cells. In this study, the technique of fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET) microscopy was used to visualize the physical interactions of Pit-1
proteins fused to spectral variants of the jellyfish green fluorescent protein
(GFP) that emit green or blue light [blue fluorescent protein (BFP)]. An
optimized imaging system was used to discriminate fluorescence signals from
single cells coexpressing the BFP- and GFP-fusion proteins, and the contribution 
of spectral overlap to background fluorescence detected in the FRET images was
established. Energy transfer signals from living cells expressing a fusion
protein in which GFP was tethered to BFP by short protein linker was used to
demonstrate acquisition of FRET signals. Genetic vectors encoding GFP- and
BFP-Pit-1 proteins were prepared, and biological function of the fusion proteins 
was confirmed. FRET microscopy of HeLa cells coexpressing the GFP- and BFP-Pit-1 
demonstrated energy transfer, which required the two fluorophores to be separated
by less than 100 A. Biochemical studies previously demonstrated that Pit-1
physically interacts with both c-Ets-1 and the estrogen receptor. FRET imaging of
cells coexpressing BFP-Pit-1 and GFP-Ets-1 demonstrated energy transfer between
these fusion proteins, a result consistent with their association in the nucleus 
of these living cells. In contrast, there was no evidence for energy transfer
between the BFP-Pit-1 and an estrogen receptor-GFP fusion proteins. It is likely 
that the FRET imaging approach described here can be applied to many different
protein-partner pairs in a variety of cellular contexts.

PMID: 9731708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 4;273(36):23567-74.

Glucocorticoids repress transcription from a negative glucocorticoid response
element recognized by two homeodomain-containing proteins, Pbx and Oct-1.

Subramaniam N(1), Cairns W, Okret S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge University
Hospital, F60 Novum, S-141 86 Huddinge, Sweden.

Several studies have established that the prolactin (PRL) gene is expressed not
only in lactotrophs and somatotrophs of the anterior pituitary but, albeit to a
lesser extent, in non-pituitary cells like human thymocytes, decidualized
endometrium, mammary glands during lactation, and some human non-pituitary cell
lines. Despite the requirement in the pituitary for the pituitary-specific
transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1 for PRL expression, the expression in
non-pituitary cells occurs in the absence of Pit-1/GHF-1 and can be repressed by 
glucocorticoids. This prompted us to investigate the transcription factors in
non-pituitary cells which are involved in controlling expression and
glucocorticoid repression of a previously characterized negative glucocorticoid
response element from the bovine prolactin gene (PRL3 nGRE). Here we have
demonstrated that non-pituitary cells (COS-7 and mouse hepatoma Hepa1c1c7 cells) 
conferred increased expression via the PRL3 nGRE mainly because of the binding of
the ubiquitously expressed POU-homeodomain-containing octamer transcription
factor-1 (Oct-1) to an AT-rich sequence present in the PRL3 sequence. However,
full transcriptional activity required the binding of a second ubiquitously
expressed homeodomain-containing protein, Pbx, previously shown to bind
cooperatively with several homeotic selector proteins. The Pbx binding site in
the PRL3 nGRE, located just upstream of the Oct-1 binding site, showed a strong
sequence similarity with known Pbx binding sites and bound Pbx with an affinity
similar to that of other established Pbx target sequences. Interestingly, both
Oct-1 and Pbx binding to the PRL3 nGRE were found to be required for
glucocorticoid repression. Addition of in vitro translated glucocorticoid
receptor DNA binding domain to the nuclear extract prevented Oct-1 and Pbx from
binding to the PRL element. The involvement of the homeobox protein Pbx in
glucocorticoid repression via an nGRE identifies a new role for this protein.

PMID: 9722596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Histochem Cell Biol. 1998 Aug;110(2):183-8.

Simultaneous localization of Pit-1 protein and gonadotropins on the same cell
type in the anterior pituitary glands of the rat.

Vidal S(1), Román A, Oliveira MC, De La Cruz LF, Moya L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, University of Santiago 
de Compostela, Lugo, Spain. svidal@secuslugo.lugo.usc.es

Pit-1 is a prototypic member of the POU transcription factor family and plays a
critical role in pituitary-specific action of growth hormone (GH), prolactin
(PRL), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) beta-subunit genes. The purpose of
the present study was to elucidate the changes in the expression of the Pit-1
product in the pituitary of pregnant rats employing an improved
double-immunohistochemical method. The positive cells showed nuclear
immunoreactivity and Pit-1 protein was frequently observed in the nuclei of many 
cells which were also immunopositive for GH, PRL, and betaTSH. Unexpectedly, a
significant number of pituitary cells containing both Pit-1 and gonadotropins
were also observed. These cells were usually distributed near blood vessels that 
supply the pituitary. While a prominent increase in the percentage of Pit-1/PRL, 
Pit-1/beta-luteinizing hormone and Pit-1/beta-follicle-stimulating hormone
immunoreactive cells was observed in pregnant rats, the percentage of Pit-1/GH
immunoreactive cells was strongly decreased. In contrast, no significant
differences in the percentage of Pit-1/betaTSH doubly immunolabeled cells were
noticed. Our findings strongly support the hypothesis that PRL could coexist in
the Pit-1 immunopositive gonadotropes. Although Pit-1 protein was not detected in
the nuclei of corticotropes, the existence of these cells in the rat pituitary
cannot be excluded.

PMID: 9720991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Aug;12(8):1215-27.

Transcription factor AP1 is involved in basal and okadaic acid-stimulated
activity of the human PRL promoter.

Caccavelli L(1), Manfroid I, Martial JA, Muller M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'immunopathologie, INSERM U430 Hopital Broussais, Paris, France.

The tumor promoter, okadaic acid (OA), an inhibitor of protein phosphatases,
stimulates the activity of the human PRL (hPRL) proximal promoter. We analyzed in
detail the effects of OA on transcription factor binding to elements P1 and P2 of
this promoter, sequences known to contain at least one Pit-1 binding site each.
OA treatment induces binding of an AP1-related transcription factor to the P1
site. This effect is specific, as protein binding to the P2 site is not altered
by the treatment. Specific antibodies were used to confirm that the OA-induced
complex is related to AP1 and to show that it contains JunD and c-fos, but not
Pit-1. The increase in AP1 binding to P1 and to a canonical AP1 site correlates
to an increase in cellular JunD and c-fos content. Transient transfection
experiments showed that both AP1 and Pit-1 are involved in the regulation of
basal and OA-stimulated promoter activity. Our results demonstrate that a member 
of the AP1 family, containing JunD and c-fos, can bind to the proximal element P1
within the hPRL promoter. In addition, they show that AP1 is involved in both
basal and OA-stimulated expression of the hPRL gene.

PMID: 9717847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. FEBS Lett. 1998 Jul 24;431(3):333-8.

The LIM homeobox protein mLIM3/Lhx3 induces expression of the prolactin gene by a
Pit-1/GHF-1-independent pathway in corticotroph AtT20 cells.

Girardin SE(1), Benjannet S, Barale JC, Chrétien M, Seidah NG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemical Neuroendocrinology, Clinical Research Institute of
Montreal, Qué., Canada. seidahn@ircm.umontreal.ca

mLIM3, a member of the LIM homeobox family, was recently demonstrated to be
critical for proliferation and differentiation of the pituitary cell lineage.
Using a pool of degenerate oligonucleotides we determined the DNA sequence
ANNAGGAAA(T/C)GA(CIG)AA as the set preferentially recognized by mLIM3. A nearly
identical sequence is found in the prolactin (PRL) promoter, within a 15-mer
stretch from nucleotides (nts) -218 to -204 which is highly conserved between
human, rat, and bovine. In order to test the hypothesis of a transcriptional
effect of mLIM3 on the prolactin promoter, stable transfectants of mLIM3 cDNA in 
AtT20 tumor cells revealed that PRL mRNA expression was induced in 3 separate
stable clones. Gel retardation experiments performed using nuclear extracts
isolated from one of the AtT20/mLIM3 stable transfectants revealed affinity
towards the 15-mer element of the PRL promoter. From these results, we propose
that the PRL promoter element (nts -218 to -204) could be functional in vivo.
Finally, we demonstrate that in AtT20 cells prolactin mRNA expression is not
induced by the Pit-1/GHF-1 pathway and that growth hormone mRNA is not detected
concomitantly with prolactin. We conclude that mLIM3 may play a key role in
inducing PRL gene expression in lactotrophs by binding to a conserved motif close
to a Pit-1/GHF-1 site within the proximal PRL promoter.

PMID: 9714537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Cell. 1998 Jul;2(1):33-42.

SAP30, a component of the mSin3 corepressor complex involved in N-CoR-mediated
repression by specific transcription factors.

Laherty CD(1), Billin AN, Lavinsky RM, Yochum GS, Bush AC, Sun JM, Mullen TM,
Davie JR, Rose DW, Glass CK, Rosenfeld MG, Ayer DE, Eisenman RN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98104, USA.

The transcriptional corepressor mSin3 is found in a large multiprotein complex
containing the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2, in addition to at least five
tightly associated polypeptides. We have cloned and characterized a novel
component of the mSin3 complex, SAP30, SAP30 binds to mSin3 and is capable of
mediating transcriptional repression via histone deacetylases. SAP30 also binds
the N-CoR corepressor and is required for N-CoR-mediated repression by
antagonist-bound estrogen receptor and the homeodomain protein Rpx, as well as
N-CoR suppression of transactivation by the POU domain protein Pit-1. However,
SAP30 is not required for N-CoR-mediated repression by unliganded retinoic acid
receptor or thyroid hormone receptor, suggesting that SAP30 is involved in the
functional recruitment of the mSin3-histone deacetylase complex to a specific
subset of N-CoR corepressor complexes.

PMID: 9702189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Neuroendocrinol. 1998 Jul;10(7):493-502.

Sexually dimorphic interaction of insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I and sex
steroids in lactotrophs.

Chowen JA(1), González-Parra S, García-Segura LM, Argente J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal, CSIC, Madrid, Spain.

Anterior pituitary hormone secretion is sexually dimorphic due partially to
gender differences in the postpubertal hormone environment; however, differences 
in the pituitary's responsiveness to these signals may also play a role. We have 
used simple and double in situ hybridization to determine whether lactotrophs and
somatotrophs from male and female rats respond differently in vitro to growth
hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH), somatostatin (SS) or insulin-like growth factor
(IGF)-I and whether sex steroids modulate these responses. Cultures were treated 
with either 17 beta-estradiol (E; 10(-9)M), testosterone (T; 10(-7)M),
dihydrotestosterone (DHT; 10(-7) M) or vehicle in combination with either GHRH
(10(-7)M), SS (10(-7)M), IGF-I (10(-7)M) or vehicle. Basal mRNA levels of GH,
prolactin (PRL) and pituitary transcription factor-1 (Pit-1) did not differ
between the sexes. The responses to peptide hormones alone were similar between
the sexes, but not in the presence of gonadal steroids. In females, DHT reduced
and E increased the stimulatory effect of GHRH and inhibitory effect of SS on GH 
mRNA levels (two-way ANOVA: P < 0.05), while having no effect in males. An
additive effect of E and GHRH on PRL mRNA levels was seen only in males. The E
induced rise in PRL mRNA levels was completely inhibited by SS in females, but
only partially so in males (two-way ANOVA: P < 0.001). IGF-I inhibited the E
induced rise in PRL and lactotroph Pit-1 mRNA levels only in females. These
results suggest that sex steroids modulate the pituitary's response to
hypothalamic and circulating factors differently in males and females and that
this may play a role in generating the sexually dimorphic patterns of pituitary
hormone secretion.

PMID: 9700676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Horm Res. 1998;50(1):11-7.

Expression of Pit-1 mRNA and activin/inhibin subunits in clinically
nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas. In situ hybridization and immunohistochemical 
analysis.

Sanno N(1), Teramoto A, Sugiyama M, Matsuno A, Takumi I, Tahara S, Osamura RY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

The pituitary-specific transcriptional factor Pit-1 is known to play a role in
the development and differentiation of pituitary cells. Recent investigations
have suggested a role for this transcriptional factor in pituitary adenomas,
especially growth hormone (GH)- and prolactin (PRL)-secreting pituitary adenomas.
In this study we analyzed the expression of Pit-1 mRNA and its protein in 24
clinically nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas in comparison with normal pituitary 
glands using in situ hybridization (ISH) and immunohistochemistry (IHC). The
interaction between inhibin/activin, a member of the transforming growth
factor-beta family, and Pit-1 was also studied. Immunohistochemically, Pit-1
protein was detected in 9 of 24 adenomas (37.5 %), and 8 of these 9 were also
positive for the alpha subunit of glycoprotein (alphaSU). The expression of Pit-1
mRNA was detected in 14 of 24 (58.3%) clinically nonfunctioning adenomas, and it 
was found in all cases which expressed the Pit-1 protein. By the combined ISH and
IHC method, Pit-1 mRNA was frequently observed in alphaSU-immunopositive cells in
adenomas. The inhibin/activin alpha subunit was detected in all 24 adenomas and
the betaA subunit was detected in 13 of 24 adenomas. The inhibin/activin betaA
subunit was detected frequently with Pit-1 mRNA. From our observations, the
inhibin/activin betaA subunit in nonfunctioning adenomas may have related the
expression of Pit- mRNA in these adenomas.

PMID: 9691207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;81(1):51-3.

In situ hybridization of five loci to cattle chromosome 1.

Schmutz SM(1), Moker JS, Berryere TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Poultry Science, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan (Canada). schmutz@sask.usask.ca

The genes for pituitary-specific transcription factor (PIT1), propionyl coenzyme 
A carboxylase, beta-polypeptide (PCCB), transferrin (TF), trichohyalin (THH), and
involucrin (IVL) were mapped to cattle chromosome 1 (BTA 1) by isotopic in situ
hybridization. Two of the loci were mapped from cattle PCR products and three
from human ATCC probes. PIT1 localized to segment 1q2; PCCB to 1q3; and TF, THH, 
and IVL to 1q4. These localizations agree with the homology previously shown
between BTA 1 and human chromosome 3 (HSA 3). Some homology with HSA 1 has been
established with the mapping of THH and IVL to BTA 1q4.

PMID: 9691175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 7;273(32):20066-72.

The molecular basis of Rieger syndrome. Analysis of Pitx2 homeodomain protein
activities.

Amendt BA(1), Sutherland LB, Semina EV, Russo AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa
52242, USA. brad-amendt@uiowa.edu

Rieger syndrome is an autosomal-dominant developmental disorder that includes
glaucoma and mild craniofacial dysmorphism in humans. Mutations in the Pitx2
homeobox gene have been linked to Rieger syndrome. We have characterized wild
type and mutant Pitx2 activities using electrophoretic mobility shift assays,
protein binding, and transient transfection assays. Pitx2 preferentially binds
the bicoid homeodomain binding site and transactivates reporter genes containing 
this site. The combination of Pitx2 and another homeodomain protein, Pit-1,
yielded a synergistic 55-fold activation of the prolactin promoter in
transfection assays. Addition of Pit-1 increased Pitx2 binding to the bicoid
element in electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Furthermore, we demonstrate
specific binding of Pit-1 to Pitx2 in vitro. Thus, wild type Pitx2 DNA binding
activity is modulated by protein-protein interactions. We next studied two Rieger
mutants. A threonine to proline mutation (T68P) in the second helix of the
homeodomain retained DNA binding activity with the same apparent KD and only
about a 2-fold reduction in the Bmax. However, this mutant did not transactivate 
reporter genes containing the bicoid site. The mutant Pitx2 protein binds Pit-1, 
but there was no detectable synergism on the prolactin promoter. A second
mutation (L54Q) in a highly conserved residue in helix 1 of the homeodomain
yielded an unstable protein. Our results provide insights into the potential
mechanisms underlying the developmental defects in Rieger syndrome.

PMID: 9685346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Endocrinology. 1998 Aug;139(8):3554-60.

Hypothalamic/pituitary-axis of the spontaneous dwarf rat: autofeedback regulation
of growth hormone (GH) includes suppression of GH releasing-hormone receptor
messenger ribonucleic acid.

Kamegai J(1), Unterman TG, Frohman LA, Kineman RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, 60612, USA.

In this study, the spontaneous dwarf rat (SDR) has been used to examine GHRH
production and action in the selective absence of endogenous GH. This dwarf model
is unique in that GH is not produced because of a point mutation in the GH gene. 
However, other pituitary hormones are not obviously compromised. Examination of
the hypothalamic pituitary-axis of SDRs revealed that GHRH messenger RNA (mRNA)
levels were increased, whereas somatostatin (SS) and neuropeptide Y (NPY) mRNA
levels were decreased, compared with age- and sex-matched normal controls, as
determined by Northern blot analysis (n = 5 animals/group; P < 0.05). The
elevated levels of GHRH mRNA in the SDR hypothalamus were accompanied by a 56%
increase in pituitary GHRH receptor (GHRH-R) mRNA, as determined by RT-PCR (P <
0.05). To investigate whether the up-regulation of GHRH-R mRNA resulted in an
increase in GHRH-R function, SDR and control pituitary cell cultures were
challenged with GHRH (0.001-10 nM; 15 min), and intracellular cAMP concentrations
were measured by RIA. Interestingly, SDR pituitary cells were hyperresponsive to 
1 and 10 nM GHRH, which induced a rise in intracellular cAMP concentrations 50%
greater than that observed in control cultures (n = 3 separate experiments; P <
0.05 and P < 0.01, respectively). Replacement of GH, by osmotic minipump (10
microg/h for 72 h), resulted in the suppression of GHRH mRNA levels (P < 0.01),
whereas SS and NPY mRNA levels were increased (P < 0.05), compared with
vehicle-treated controls (n = 5 animals/treatment group). Consonant with the fall
in hypothalamic GHRH mRNA was a decrease in pituitary GHRH-R mRNA levels.
Although replacement of insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I), by osmotic pump (5 
microg/h for 72 h), resulted in a rise in circulating IGF-I concentrations
comparable with that observed after GH replacement, IGF-I treatment was
ineffective in modulating GHRH, SS, or NPY mRNA levels. However, IGF-I treatment 
did reduce pituitary GHRH-R mRNA levels, compared with vehicle-treated controls
(P < 0.05). These results further validate the role of GH as a negative regulator
of hypothalamic GHRH expression, and they suggest that SS and NPY act as
intermediaries in GH-induced suppression of hypothalamic GHRH synthesis. These
data also demonstrate that increases in circulating IGF-I are not responsible for
changes in hypothalamic function observed after GH treatment. Finally, this
report establishes modulation of GHRH-R synthesis as a component of GH
autofeedback regulation.

PMID: 9681507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 1998 May;48(5):647-54.

Expression of an orphan nuclear receptor DAX-1 in human pituitary adenomas.

Ikuyama S(1), Mu YM, Ohe K, Nakagaki H, Fukushima T, Takayanagi R, Nawata H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Kyushu University Faculty of Medicine, 
Fukuoka, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: An orphan nuclear receptor, DAX-1, is known to be involved in the
development and differentiation of anterior pituitary cells. The present study
aimed to examine 1) whether DAX-1 is expressed in human pituitary adenomas, and
2) if it is expressed, what types of adenoma express the factor.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Adenoma tissues examined included 18 clinically
non-functioning adenomas, 14 GH-secreting adenomas and 7 PRL-secreting adenomas. 
The expression of the following genes were tested by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR): DAX-1, Adrenal-4-binding
protein/steroidogenic factor-1 (Ad4BP/SF-1), Pit-1, LH beta, FSH beta,
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone receptor (GnRH-R), GH, PRL, and TSH beta, as well
as beta-actin as a control.
RESULTS: Eleven clinically non-functioning adenomas expressed DAX-1, 10 of which 
also expressed Ad4BP/SF-1. Nine out of the 11 DAX-1 expressing adenomas also
expressed LH beta, FSH beta and GnRH-R as well, indicating that these adenomas
possessed gonadotrophic properties. Nine clinically non-functioning adenomas
expressed Pit-1 as well as GH, PRL and/or TSH beta, thus having
somatomammotrophic or thyrotrophic properties, 3 of which overlapped with the
above DAX-1-expressing adenomas. One non-functioning adenoma expressed Ad4BP/SF1 
and FSH beta but not DAX-1, and another one expressed DAX-1 and Ad4BP/SF-1 with
PRL. On the other hand, all GH-secreting and PRL-secreting adenomas expressed
Pit-1 and GH and/or PRL, but neither DAX-1 nor Ad4BP/SF-1.
CONCLUSIONS: The results shown here indicate that DAX-1 is expressed in the
majority of human pituitary adenomas of gonadotrophic origin in parallel with
Adrenal-4-binding protein/steroidogenic factor-1.

PMID: 9666878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Endocrinol. 1998 May;157(2):295-303.

Insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-3 protease activity in Snell normal
and Pit-1 deficient dwarf mice.

Koedam JA(1), Hoogerbrugge CM, van Buul-Offers SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, Utrecht University, 
The Netherlands.

Partial proteolysis of insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3)
lowers its affinity for IGFs. Presumably, this leads to destabilization of the
ternary IGF-IGFBP-3-acid-labile subunit complex in the circulation and an
increased bioavailability of IGFs. We investigated the effect of GH on IGFBP-3
proteolysis by comparing serum from normal mice and GH-deficient dwarf mice.
While normal mouse serum degraded 125I-IGFBP-3, this activity declined with age. 
In contrast, serum from dwarf mice displayed strong proteolytic activity at all
ages tested (up to 10 weeks). In dwarf mice of 4 weeks and older, this activity
could not be inhibited by EDTA and 1,10-phenanthroline, indicating the presence
of a divalent cation-independent protease. Prolonged treatment with GH (4 weeks) 
did not decrease the overall potency of the serum to degrade IGFBP-3, but
partially restored the ability of EDTA to inhibit IGFBP-3 protease activity. GH
deficiency therefore appears to induce a new kind of IGFBP-3 protease. Similarly,
serum from hypophysectomized rats displayed enhanced IGFBP-3 protease activity
compared with control rat serum. These results suggest that a protease induced
under conditions of severe GH deficiency may contribute to making IGFs optimally 
available to the tissues.

PMID: 9659293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jun 29;247(3):882-7.

High-affinity binding sites to the vitamin D receptor DNA binding domain in the
human growth hormone promoter.

Alonso M(1), Segura C, Dieguez C, Perez-Fernandez R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, University of Santiago de
Compostela, Spain.

The regulation of the human growth hormone (hGH) gene by 1,25(OH)2D3 is a
mechanism which is poorly understood. The objective of this study was to
investigate whether the hGH gene has DNA recognition elements for the DNA binding
domain of the vitamin D receptor. Using gel retardation assays and footprinting
techniques, two high-affinity binding sites, denominated F1 and F2, were
identified in the 5'-flanking sequence of hGH. The distal site, F1, located at
-59 bp is made up of an imperfect direct repeat separated by 3 bp and showed a
high degree of similarity with other known vitamin D response elements (VDREs).
The proximal site, F2, located at -36 bp showed a single 7-bp sequence, which is 
different from other known VDREs. The location of both sites (F1 near the
GHF-1/Pit-1 response element, F2 contacting the TATA box) suggests that the
vitamin D receptor by itself or through interference with other transcriptional
factors may modulate hGH expression.

PMID: 9647787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Biochem J. 1998 Jul 1;333 ( Pt 1):77-84.

Nuclear factor 1 regulates the distal silencer of the human PIT1/GHF1 gene.

Rajas F(1), Delhase M, De La Hoya M, Verdood P, Castrillo JL, Hooghe-Peters EL.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Department, Medical School, Free University of Brussels (VUB),
Laarbeeklaan 103, B-1090 Brussels, Belgium.

Here we report the characterization of 12 kb genomic DNA upstream of the human
PIT1/GHF1 promoter. Different regions involved in the modulation of human
PIT1/GHF1 gene expression were defined by transient transfection studies. Two
regions, one proximal (-7.1/-2. 3) and one distal (-11.8/-10.9), presented an
enhancer activity in pituitary cells when placed upstream of the SV40 promoter.
The 0.9 kb distal region was analysed further and found to decrease the basal
transcriptional activity of the human PIT1/GHF1 minimal promoter, indicating that
this region behaves as a silencer for its own promoter. Three Pit-1/GHF-1-binding
sites and two ubiquitous nuclear factor 1 (NF-1)-binding sites were identified by
DNase I footprinting in the distal regulatory region. Deletion analysis indicated
that NF-1 or NF-1-related protein(s) participate in the down-regulation of human 
PIT1/GHF1 gene expression by interacting with an NF-1-binding site within the
distal regulatory region.

PMCID: PMC1219558
PMID: 9639565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mol Cells. 1998 Apr 30;8(2):205-11.

Effects of dopamine and estrogen on the regulation of Pit-1 alpha, Pit-1 beta,
and PL-II gene expression in the rat placenta.

Lee CK(1), Kang HS, Lee BJ, Kang HM, Choi WS, Kang SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Inje University, Kimhae,
Korea.

Pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1 regulates growth hormone and
prolactin gene expression in the pituitary. Recently, Pit-1 was shown to be
locally synthesized in the rat placenta and is involved in the regulation of rat 
placental lactogen (PL) gene expression. Pit-1 has three different splicing
variants. They are well known as being biologically active. In the present study,
we found that Pit-1 beta is also synthesized in the rat placenta and we tried to 
examine the effects of dopamine and estrogen on the regulation of Pit-1 alpha,
beta and PL-II genes expression using the reverse transcription-polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) and Northern blot hybridization. A dopamine receptor agonist,
bromocriptine, significantly decreased placental Pit-1 alpha, beta, and PL-II
mRNA levels. To examine the effect of estrogen on the gene expression of Pit-1
beta, pregnant female rats were ovariectomized (OVX) and injected daily with 17
beta-estradiol. OVX markedly lowered the amount of Pit-1 beta mRNA. Estrogen
injection recovered the OVX-induced inhibition of Pit-1 beta mRNA level. Finally,
we investigated the site-specific transcription of Pit-1 alpha and beta mRNA in
the labyrinth zone and junctional zone of the placental in 15 and 20 days of
gestation. The main site of Pit-1 alpha and beta synthesis was shifted from the
junctional zone to the labyrinth zone from 15 to 20 days of gestation. Together, 
these data presume that Pit-1 beta may play a more important role in the placenta
than in the pituitary and that Pit-1 may be involved in the regulation of the PL 
and prolactin-like peptide by estrogen and dopamine in the rat placenta.

PMID: 9638653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Am J Med Genet. 1998 Jun 5;77(5):360-5.

Rarity of PIT1 involvement in children from Russia with combined pituitary
hormone deficiency.

Fofanova OV(1), Takamura N, Kinoshita E, Yoshimoto M, Tsuji Y, Peterkova VA,
Evgrafov OV, Dedov II, Goncharov NP, Yamashita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow,
Russia.

To ascertain the molecular background of combined pituitary hormone deficiency,
screening for mutations in the pituitary-specific transcription factor
(Pit-1/GHF-1) gene (PIT1) was performed on a cohort of 15 children from Russia
with combined growth hormone (GH)/prolactin (Prl)/thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH) deficiency. The group of patients, suspected of PIT1 mutations, consisted
of four familial cases (seven patients) and eight sporadic cases. All had
complete GH deficiency and complete or partial Prl and TSH deficiency. Direct
sequencing of all six exons of PIT1 and its promoter region showed a C to T
transition mutation at codon 14 of exon 1 in a 3 8/12-year-old girl. This novel
PIT1 mutation results in a proline to leucine substitution (P14L). The patient
was heterozygous for mutant and normal alleles. The heterozygous P14L mutation
was also present in her mother as well as in her maternal aunt and grandmother,
all of whom were phenotypically normal. There was no mutation in the father's
DNA, suggesting the need for reevaluation of genomic imprinting. In other
children of our series, no mutation in PIT1 or in its promotor region was
identified. This is the first report on the analysis of PIT1 and its promoter
region in Russian children with GH/Prl/TSH deficiency. However, as the
involvement of PIT1 mutation is rare in Russia, the other negative cases need to 
be analyzed for another candidate gene responsible for combined GH/Pr/TSH
deficiency.

PMID: 9632165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Pediatr. 1998 Jun;132(6):1036-8.

Severe congenital hypopituitarism with low prolactin levels and age-dependent
anterior pituitary hypoplasia: a clue to a PIT-1 mutation.

Ward L(1), Chavez M, Huot C, Lecocq P, Collu R, Décarie JC, Martial JA, Van Vliet
G.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pédiatrie and Imagerie Médicale, Hôpital Sainte-Justine,
Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada.

A 20-month-old boy presented with severe congenital growth hormone, thyrotropin, 
and prolactin deficiencies resulting from a de novo mutation of the PIT-1 gene.
This form of congenital hypopituitarism should be suspected if pituitary anatomy 
is normal, especially if prolactin levels are low and, in boys, if the external
genitalia are normal. Pituitary atrophy appears to be an age-dependent phenomenon
in this condition.

PMID: 9627600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998 Jun;83(6):2079-83.

Pro239Ser: a novel recessive mutation of the Pit-1 gene in seven Middle Eastern
children with growth hormone, prolactin, and thyrotropin deficiency.

Pernasetti F(1), Milner RD, al Ashwal AA, de Zegher F, Chavez VM, Muller M,
Martial JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering, University of Liège, 
Sart Tilman, Belgium.

Pit-1, a member of the POU-homeo domain protein family, is one of the
transcription factors responsible for anterior pituitary development and
pituitary-specific gene expression. Here, we describe seven children with GH,
PRL, and TSH deficiency from three, reportedly unrelated, Middle Eastern
families, harboring a newly recognized Pro- > Ser recessive mutation in codon 239
of the Pit-1 gene. The mutated residue is located at the beginning of the second 
alpha-helix of the POU-homeodomain and is strictly conserved among all POU
proteins. The Pro239Ser mutant binds DNA normally but is unable to stimulate
transcription.

PMID: 9626142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Acta Haematol. 1998;99(3):148-55.

Lack of functional Pit-1 and Pit-2 expression on hematopoietic stem cell lines.

Thomsen S(1), Vogt B, von Laer D, Heberlein C, Rein A, Ostertag W, Stocking C.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für Experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie,
Universität Hamburg, Deutschland. thomsen@hpi.uni-hamburg.de

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) are an important target for retroviral gene
transfer. However, transduction efficiency in these HSC is extremely low compared
to fibroblasts or more mature hematopoietic cells. This infection block was
analyzed in the HSC line FDC-Pmix. The infection frequency with the amphotropic
murine leukemia virus (MLV-A) is more than 100-fold lower in FDC-Pmix cells as
compared to fibroblasts. Pseudotyping with the env of the 10A1 strain (MLV-10A1),
which uses both the amphotropic receptor (Pit-2) and the receptor for gibbon ape 
leukemia virus (Pit-1), did not improve the infection efficiency. Vectors
pseudotyped with VSV G protein were found to overcome the infection block in
FDC-Pmix, confirming that the block is at the level of virus binding and possibly
penetration. Accordingly, we could not detect virus binding of MLV-A or MLV-10A1 
to FDC-Pmix cell lines. Northern blot analysis was performed to detect whether
the defect is at the level of transcription. Surprisingly, similar levels of
Pit-2 receptor transcripts were detected in all cell types. The overexpression of
rat Pit-2 DNA in CHO but not in FDC-Pmix cells improved amphotropic infection
frequency after introducing rat Pit-2 DNA into the cells. Taken together these
results show that the inefficient infection of FDC-Pmix is due to a lack of
functional receptors. Either the receptor protein is incorrectly processed in
these cells or a cofactor is missing in FDC-Pmix cells that is necessary for
efficient binding and/or penetration.

PMID: 9587396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Thyroid. 1998 Apr;8(4):299-304.

Description of a Brazilian patient bearing the R271W Pit-1 gene mutation.

Rodrigues Martineli AM(1), Braga M, De Lacerda L, Raskin S, Graf H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Clinical Hospital of the Federal University
of Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil.

The pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1 is responsible for
pituitary development and expression of somatotrophs and lactotrophs as well as
hormonal regulation of the prolactin (PRL) and thyrotropin (TSH) beta genes by
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) and cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP).
Pit-1 gene mutations result in complete growth hormone (GH) and PRL deficiencies 
and variable degrees of TSH deficiency, producing the clinical syndrome of
combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD). Several cases of mutations in the
Pit-1 gene have been reported; the most common one is a sporadic mutation
altering an arginine (R) to a tryptophan (W) in codon 271, in one allele of the
Pit-1 gene. We describe a case of a 38-year-old woman, born to consanguineous
parents, presenting with growth failure and hypothyroidism. Growth failure was
noted from early infancy, whereas hypothyroidism was only apparent from
adolescence. She had almost undetectable GH and PRL levels and an inappropriate
low TSH for very low triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) levels, while the
remaining pituitary evaluation was normal. The pituitary gland was hypoplastic by
magnetic resonance imaging. A point mutation in exon 6, monoallelic, causing a C 
to T substitution that changes amino acid 271 from Arg (R) to Trp (W) was
identified. Children with Pit 1 mutations and delayed onset of hypothyroidism may
be initially diagnosed as isolated GH deficiency.

PMID: 9588494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Horm Res. 1998;49 Suppl 1:30-6.

The molecular basis of hypopituitarism.

Radovick S(1), Cohen LE, Wondisford FE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass, USA.
radovick@a1.tch.harvard.edu

Pit-1 is a pituitary-specific transcription factor responsible for pituitary
development and hormone expression in mammals. My laboratory and others have
recently described several patients with combined pituitary hormone deficiency
(CPHD) due to point mutations in the pit-1 gene. In addition to pit-1, other
nuclear factors appear to be necessary for full expression of pituitary genes. A 
zinc finger transcription factor, Zn-15, is responsible with pit-1 for
synergistic activation of the GH gene. The Pr1 gene is regulated synergistically 
by pit-1 and the estrogen receptor. Finally, the pit-1 gene itself is regulated
by an enhancer element located > 10 kb upstream of the transcriptional start.
This element contains several pit-1 DNA binding sites and retinoic acid response 
elements (RAREs). On one of these elements, pit-1 and RAR interact functionally
to mediate a synergistic response to RA. Recent data from our laboratory suggests
that RA induction of the pit-1 gene can be impaired by pit-1 gene mutations.
Study of pit-1 mutations and their diverse pathophysiological mechanisms should
increase our understanding of anterior pituitary gland development and gene
regulation in normal and disease states.

PMID: 9554467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Mar;12(3):428-41.

The pan-pituitary activator of transcription, Ptx1 (pituitary homeobox 1), acts
in synergy with SF-1 and Pit1 and is an upstream regulator of the Lim-homeodomain
gene Lim3/Lhx3.

Tremblay JJ(1), Lanctôt C, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, Québec, Canada.

The Ptx1 (pituitary homeobox 1) homeobox transcription factor was isolated as a
transcription factor of the pituitary POMC gene. In corticotrope cells that
express POMC, cell-specific transcription is conferred in part by the synergistic
action of Ptx1 with the basic helix-loop-helix factor NeuroD1. Since Ptx1
expression precedes pituitary development and differentiation, we investigated
its expression and function in other pituitary lineages. Ptx1 is expressed in
most pituitary-derived cell lines and as is the related Ptx2 (Rieger) gene.
However, Ptx1 appears to be the only Ptx protein in corticotropes and the
predominant one in gonadotrope cells. Most pituitary hormone-coding gene
promoters are activated by Ptx1. Thus, Ptx1 appears to be a general regulator of 
pituitary-specific transcription. In addition, Ptx1 action is synergized by
cell-restricted transcription factors to confer promoter-specific expression.
Indeed, in the somatolactotrope lineage, synergism between Ptx1 and Pit1 is
observed on the PRL promoter, and strong synergism between Ptx1 and SF-1 is
observed in gonadotrope cells on the betaLH promoter but not on the alphaGSU
(glycoprotein hormone alpha-subunit gene) and betaFSH promoters. Synergism
between these two classes of factors is reminiscent of the interaction between
the products of the Drosophila genes Ftz (fushi tarazu) and Ftz-F1. Antisense RNA
experiments performed in alphaT3-1 cells that express the alphaGSU gene showed
that expression of endogenous alphaGSU is highly dependent on Ptx1 whereas many
other genes are not affected. Interestingly, the only other gene found to be
highly dependent on Ptx1 for expression was the gene for the Lim3/Lhx3
transcription factor. Thus, these experiments place Ptx1 upstream of Lim3/Lhx3 in
a cascade of regulators that appear to work in a combinatorial code to direct
pituitary-, lineage-, and promoter-specific transcription.

PMID: 9514159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Mol Cells. 1997 Dec 31;7(6):710-4.

Colocalization of dopamine D1 and D2 receptor mRNAs in rat placenta.

Kim MO(1), Kim JH, Choi WS, Lee BH, Cho GJ, Roh SM, Lee BJ, Kang SG, Kim CH, Baik
SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, College of Medicine, Gyeongsang National University,
Chinju, Korea.

Dopamine is present in the human placenta. The major function of dopamine is the 
inhibition of human placental lactogen (hPL) release from human trophoblastic
cells. This effect is mediated by cAMP through dopamine D2 receptors. However,
studies on the effects of cAMP in the control of hPL release have yielded
conflicting results. The purpose of this study is to explore the distribution of 
dopamine receptors in the rat placenta. Dopamine D1 and D2 receptor mRNAs were
colocalized in the rat placenta by in situ hybridization histochemistry using
radiolabeled cRNA probes. Dopamine D1 and D2 receptor mRNAs were detected in
large cells of the endometrium of the uterus on day 10 of gestation. On days
12-16 of gestation, hybridization signals were localized mainly in the
spongiotrophoblast and giant cells of the junctional zone of the placenta. With
the development of the placenta, signals were moving from the junctional zone to 
the labyrinth zone. Pit-1 mRNA was detected in the placental lactotrophs and was 
also colocalized in neighboring placental sections. Our results clearly showed
that dopamine D1 and D2 receptor mRNAs were coexpressed in the placental
lactotrophs that express Pit-1 mRNA.

PMID: 9509409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Horm Res. 1998;49(2):98-102.

Central hypothyroidism reveals compound heterozygous mutations in the Pit-1 gene.

Brown MR(1), Parks JS, Adess ME, Rich BH, Rosenthal IM, Voss TC, VanderHeyden TC,
Hurley DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Ga
30322, USA.

Mutations in the gene encoding the Pit-1 transcriptional activator interfere with
the embryologic determination and ultimate functions of anterior pituitary cells 
that produce growth hormone (GH), prolactin (Prl) and thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH). Central hypothyroidism is often the presenting feature of combined
pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD), but it is not detected in screening programs
that rely upon elevation of TSH. We report a child whose hypothyroidism was
recognized clinically at age 6 weeks, and subsequently found to have GH and Prl
as well as TSH deficiency. With thyroxine and GH replacement he has reached the
70th percentile for height and has normal intelligence. Molecular analysis of
genomic DNA for Pit-1 revealed the presence of compound heterozygous recessive
mutations: a nonsense mutation in codon 172 and a novel missense mutation
substituting glycine for glutamate at codon 174. This case is the first
demonstration of CPHD due to compound heterozygous Pit-1 point mutations, as most
reported cases of the CPHD phenotype involve either the dominant negative R271W
allele or homozygosity for recessive Pit-1 mutations. Therefore, in cases of
CPHD, the possibilities of compound heterozygosity for two different Pit-1
mutations, or homozygosity for mutations in the epigenetic gene, Prop-1, should
be considered.

PMID: 9485179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Feb;12(2):233-47.

Structure and regulation of the human growth hormone-releasing hormone receptor
gene.

Petersenn S(1), Rasch AC, Heyens M, Schulte HM.

Author information: 
(1)IHF Institute for Hormone and Fertility Research, University of Hamburg,
Germany.

The GHRH receptor (GHRH-R) acts as a critical molecule for proliferation and
differentiation of somatotrophic pituitary cells. A role in the pathogenesis of
GH hypersecretion and GH deficiency has been implicated. We investigated
structure and regulation of the human GHRH-R gene. A genomic clone including
approximately 12 kb of 5'-flanking region was isolated. The gene is of complex
structure consisting of more than 10 exons. Two kilobase pairs of the promoter
were sequenced, and putative transcription factor binding sites were identified. 
The transcription start site was defined by ribonuclease protection assay.
Transcriptional regulation was investigated by transient transfections using
promoter fragments ranging in size from 108-1456 bp. GHRH-R promoter (1456 bp)
directed high levels of luciferase expression in GH4 rat pituitary cells whereas 
no activity was detected in JEG3 chorion carcinoma cells or COS-7 monkey kidney
cells. A minimal 202-bp promoter allowed pituitary-specific expression. Its
activity in COS-7 cells is enhanced by cotransfection of the pituitary-specific
transcription factor Pit-1. We did not find any regulation of the GHRH-R promoter
by forskolin, phorbol-myristate-acetate, or T3. Glucocorticoids lead to a
significant stimulation, and estrogen leads to a significant inhibition. Further 
mapping suggests a glucocorticoid-responsive element between -1456 and -1181 and 
an estrogen-responsive element between -202 and -108. These studies demonstrate
the complex nature of the human GHRH-R gene and identify its 5'-flanking region. 
Furthermore, specific activity of the promoter and regulation by various hormones
are demonstrated.

PMID: 9482665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. FEBS Lett. 1998 Jan 23;422(1):103-7.

The transcription factor GHF-1, but not the splice variant GHF-2, cooperates with
thyroid hormone and retinoic acid receptors to stimulate rat growth hormone gene 
expression.

Sánchez-Pacheco A(1), Peña P, Palomino T, Güell A, Castrillo JL, Aranda A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain.

The rat growth hormone (GH) promoter was significantly activated in non-pituitary
cells by the expression of unliganded trioodothyronine (T3) and retinoic acid
(RA) receptors. Furthermore, a strong ligand-dependent activation was found in
the presence of the pituitary-specific transcription factor GHF-1. When compared 
with GHF-1, the splice variant GHF-2 showed a decreased ability to bind the
cognate site in the GH promoter. As a consequence, expression of GHF-2 had little
stimulatory effect on the GH promoter and did not show cooperation with T3 or RA 
receptors even in the presence of ligands. Furthermore, over-expression of GHF-2 
inhibited the response to T3 and RA in pituitary cells. These results show that
alternative splicing of the GHF-1 gene gives rise to two isoforms that differ in 
their transactivating properties and in their ability to synergize with the
nuclear thyroid hormone and retinoic acid receptors on GH gene expression.

PMID: 9475179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. DNA Cell Biol. 1998 Jan;17(1):93-103.

Synthesis of turkey Pit-1 mRNA variants by alternative splicing and transcription
initiation.

Kurima K(1), Weatherly KL, Sharova L, Wong EA.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Department of Animal and 
Poultry Sciences, Blacksburg 24061-0306, USA.

The gene encoding turkey Pit-1/GHF-1 (tPit-1) spans approximately 12 kilobases
(kb) and consists of 7 exons. One exon, which is located between exons 2 and 3,
is designated exon 2a and codes for 38 amino acids not found in mammalian Pit-1. 
Because all tPit-1 variants contain exon 2a, they are denoted with an asterisk
(*) to distinguish them from comparable mammalian Pit-1s. Three tPit-1 variants
are generated by alternative splicing and transcription initiation. Splicing of
exon 1 to an alternative acceptor splice site in exon 2 results in a 28 amino
acid insertion in tPit-1beta* relative to tPit-1*. A transcript unique to the
turkey has been identified by RT-PCR and RNase mapping. This transcript,
designated tPit-1W*, arises following transcription initiation upstream of the
alternative acceptor splice site in exon 2. In turkey pituitary, the mRNA for the
tPit-1* variant is the most abundant, the tPit-1W* variant is intermediate, and
the tPit-1beta* variant is the least abundant.

PMID: 9468226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Nat Genet. 1998 Feb;18(2):147-9.

Mutations in PROP1 cause familial combined pituitary hormone deficiency.

Wu W(1), Cogan JD, Pfäffle RW, Dasen JS, Frisch H, O'Connell SM, Flynn SE, Brown 
MR, Mullis PE, Parks JS, Phillips JA 3rd, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California at San Diego, La
Jolla 92093-0648, USA.

Combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) in man denotes impaired production
of growth hormone (GH) and one or more of the other five anterior pituitary
hormones. Mutations of the pituitary transcription factor gene POU1F1 (the human 
homologue of mouse Pit1) are responsible for deficiencies of GH, prolactin and
thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) in Snell and Jackson dwarf mice and in man,
while the production of adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), luteinizing hormone 
(LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) is preserved. The Ames dwarf (df)
mouse displays a similar phenotype, and appears to be epistatic to Snell and
Jackson dwarfism. We have recently positionally cloned the putative Ames dwarf
gene Prop1, which encodes a paired-like homeodomain protein that is expressed
specifically in embryonic pituitary and is necessary for Pit1 expression. In this
report, we have identified four CPHD families with homozygosity or compound
heterozygosity for inactivating mutations of PROP1. These mutations in the human 
PROP1 gene result in a gene product with reduced DNA-binding and transcriptional 
activation ability in comparison to the product of the murine df mutation. In
contrast to individuals with POU1F1 mutations, those with PROP1 mutations cannot 
produce LH and FSH at a sufficient level and do not enter puberty spontaneously. 
Our results identify a major cause of CPHD in humans and suggest a direct or
indirect role for PROP1 in the ontogenesis of pituitary gonadotropes, as well as 
somatotropes, lactotropes and caudomedial thyrotropes.

PMID: 9462743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Endocrinol Invest. 1997 Nov;20(10):629-33.

Autosomal recessive deficiency of combined pituitary hormones (except ACTH) in a 
consanguineous Brazilian kindred.

Nogueira CR(1), Leite CC, Chedid EP, Liberman B, Pimentel-Filho FR, Kopp P,
Medeiros-Neto GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Sao Paulo Medical School,
Brazil.

Familial hypopituitarism represents a clinically and genetically heterogeneous
disorder. In a subset of these families, defects in Pit-I, a transcription factor
essential for proper pituitary development have been identified as underlying
molecular cause. These patients present extreme short stature, GH, PRL and TSH
deficiency but intact ACTH, LH and FSH secretion. The pituitary is usually
hypoplastic. In this report we describe a consanguineous family (the parents are 
first cousins) with thirteen siblings. Of the ten living siblings, four (two
males and two females) have panhypopituitarism with severe growth failure. They
had evidence of growth hormone, prolactin and gonadotropin deficiencies and
developed central hypothyroidism late in life. ACTH secretion was normal. Bone
age was retarded and dual-photon bone densitometry indicated severe osteoporosis.
Combined provocative tests for pituitary hormones indicated blunted responses for
GH, LH, FSH and a modest rise in serum PRL and TSH. A clonidine-test failed to
induce pituitary GH response. A corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) provocative 
test was conducted after 6 months without the use of prednisone with a normal
ACTH response after CRF in the affected sibling. Plasma IGF-I and IGF-BP3 were
below normal levels. Serum E2 (females) and serum testosterone (males) levels
were very low. MRI evaluation of the pituitary indicated pituitary aplasia in all
subjects. The phenotype described in this kindred is different from families
reported with Pit-1 mutations. However, it resembles previously published
kindreds with similar clinical and biochemical findings. The relative
preservation of ACTH suggests a genetic defect early in pituitary gland
development.

PMID: 9438923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1997 Nov 15;134(2):129-37.

The glucocorticoid receptor inhibits the human prolactin gene expression by
interference with Pit-1 activity.

Nalda AM(1), Martial JA, Muller M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique, Institut de
Chimie-B6, Université de Liège, Belgium.

Glucocorticoids have been shown to inhibit the activity of the human prolactin
(hPRL) promoter. Using transient expression experiments in rat pituitary cells,
we located the sequence conferring glucocorticoid inhibition to a region which
contains Pit-1 binding sites, responsible for pituitary-specific expression, but 
does not seem to contain a glucocorticoid receptor (GR) binding site.
Co-transfection experiments in non-pituitary cell lines, using expression vectors
for Pit-1 and different mutants of the human GR show that inhibition of the hPRL 
gene is seen only in the presence of Pit-1 and GR, and that the DNA binding
function of the receptor is not required. Immunoprecipitation studies show that
either anti-GR or anti-Pit-1 antibodies are able to co-precipitate GR and Pit-1, 
suggesting an interaction between these factors. We conclude that the activated
GR functionally interferes with the pituitary specific factor Pit-1, thereby
leading to the observed transcriptional repression.

PMID: 9426156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1997 Nov 15;134(2):119-27.

Mitogenic effects of nerve growth factor on different cell types in reaggregate
cell cultures of immature rat pituitary.

Proesmans M(1), Van Bael A, Andries M, Denef C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Pharmacology, University of Leuven, School of Medicine,
Campus Gasthuisberg (O&N), Belgium.

Treatment of reaggregate pituitary cell cultures of 14-day-old female rats with
nerve growth factor (NGF) augmented the number of [3H]thymidine
([3H]T)-incorporating lactotrophs in a dose-dependent manner (0.03-3 nM). At
least during short-term treatment NGF increased the total number of cells
expressing prolactin (PRL) mRNA and enlarged the cytoplasmic area occupied by PRL
mRNA but did not affect the number of cells and the cytoplasmic area containing
PRL, suggesting that NGF recruits lactotrophs expressing PRL mRNA but not yet
PRL. NGF also stimulated [3H]T incorporation in ACTH cells but not in
somatotrophs, thyrotrophs and gonadotrophs. In addition, NGF augmented the total 
number of [3H]T-incorporating cells to a much higher extent than was expected
from its effect on lactotrophs and ACTH cells, suggesting NGF also stimulates
[3H]T-incorporation in non-hormone producing cells (progenitors or stem cells?). 
Around 40% of these [3H]T-incorporating cells in both control and NGF treated
cultures showed immunoreactivity for the transcription factor Pit-1 in the
nuclei, which is twice the percentage expected (18%) if these [3H]T-incorporating
cells were the only known Pit-1 expressing cells in the pituitary i.e.
lactotrophs, somatotrophs and thyrotrophs. The present data suggest that NGF has 
a mitogenic effect on several cell lineages in the pituitary: lactotrophs,
corticotrophs and non-hormone-containing cells. The high proportion of mitotic
non-hormone containing cells that express Pit-1 is consistent with the proposed
role of Pit-1 in cell proliferation in the developing lactosomatotroph lineage.

PMID: 9426155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Biol Chem. 1997 Dec 5;272(49):30852-9.

Functional components of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signal transduction in
pituitary cells. Identification of FGF response elements in the prolactin gene.

Schweppe RE(1), Frazer-Abel AA, Gutierrez-Hartmann A, Bradford AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Program in Molecular
Biology, and the Colorado Cancer Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences
Center, Denver, Colorado 80262, USA.

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) have been implicated in pituitary lactotroph
tumorigenesis; however, little is known about the molecular mechanisms of FGF
signal transduction. We used a transient transfection approach, in GH4 cells, to 
identify components of the FGF signaling pathway leading to activation of the rat
prolactin (rPRL) promoter. Using dominant-negative constructs of p21(Ras), Raf-1 
kinase, and mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase, we show that FGF activation
of the rPRL promoter is independent of Ras and Raf-1 but requires MAP kinase.
Furthermore, MAP kinase but not Raf-1 kinase catalytic activity is stimulated by 
FGFs. The rPRL promoter FGF response maps to two Ets binding sites, centered at
-212 (FRE1) and -96 (FRE2), and co-transfection of dominant-negative Ets inhibits
FGF activation. FRE1 co-localizes with a composite, Ets/GHF-1, Ras response
element. However, overexpression of Ets-1 and GHF-1, which potentiate the Ras
response, inhibits FGF stimulation of the rPRL promoter, implying that Ras and
FGF signaling pathways target distinct factors to elicit their effects. These
data suggest that Ets factors serve to sort and integrate MAP kinase-dependent
growth factor signals, allowing highly specific transcriptional responses to be
mediated via the interaction of distinct Ets proteins and cofactors at common
response elements.

PMID: 9388230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Eur J Pediatr. 1997 Nov;156(11):835-7.

Combined pituitary deficiencies of growth hormone, thyroid stimulating hormone
and prolactin due to Pit-1 gene mutation: a case report.

Holl RW(1), Pfäffle R, Kim C, Sorgo W, Teller WM, Heimann G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics I, University Children's Hospital, Ulm/Donau,
Germany.

A child exhibited postnatal obstipation and icterus together with severe growth
failure during the 1st year of life, a small facial skull and a prominent
forehead. Endocrine work-up established the diagnosis of combined pituitary
deficiencies of growth hormone, TSH and prolactin. Subsequently, the Pit-1 gene
was analysed in the patient and both parents. A single point mutation was
detected in exon 6 of the child: a C to G transversion on one allele, causing
arginine in position 271 to be substituted by tryptophan (R271 W). This position 
is known as a "hot spot" for mutations. The inheritance is autosomal-dominant, as
the mutated gene product interferes with DNA-binding of the wild-type protein. In
contrast, other mutations in the PIT-1 gene are inherited in an
autosomal-recessive mode.CONCLUSION: Diagnosing Pit-1 gene mutations as a rare
cause of combined pituitary deficiency is important both for genetic counselling 
as well as for predicting the future course in the patient (spontaneous puberty, 
no glucocorticoid substitution necessary during stress periods).

PMID: 9392393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Eur J Pediatr. 1997 Nov;156(11):829-34.

Pituitary dwarfism in the R271W Pit-1 gene mutation.

Aarskog D(1), Eiken HG, Bjerknes R, Myking OL.

Author information: 
(1)Barneklinikken, Bergen, Norway.

The Pit-1 gene encodes the POU-domain transcription factor Pit-1 which is
important for the differentiation of the anterior pituitary and regulation of the
PRL, GH and TSH genes. As a member of the POU domain transcription factors, Pit-1
contains a DNA-binding region, consisting of a POU-specific domain and a POU
homeodomain. Mutation of the Pit-1 gene causes hypoplasia of the pituitary gland 
and deficiencies of GH, PRL and TSH. In a DNA sample from a 3-month-old girl with
severe growth deficiency from birth, single stranded conformational polymorphism 
analysis of the Pit-1 gene identified a gel shift in exon 6. DNA-sequencing
disclosed a single base mutation in codon 271 (CGG to TGG) that changes arginine 
to tryptophan (R271W) in the POU homeodomain. The patient presented distinct
facial features with prominent forehead, marked mid-facial hypoplasia with
depressed nasal bridge, deep-set eyes and a short nose with anteverted nostrils. 
MRI examination showed a hypoplastic pituitary gland. Low serum GH did not
respond to insulin-arginine provocation or GHRH tests. PRL levels below the
detection limit did not increase in response to a TRH test. T4 and free T4 was
below detection limit (< 20 nmol/l and < 4 pmol/l). TSH was 2.0 mU/l and showed a
blunt response to 6.0 mU/l following TRH test. TBG was normal. In spite of
inappropriately low TSH and very low T4, T3 was in the low normal range (1.4-1.6 
nmol/l) and she was clinically euthyroid. The thyroid function tests are
consistent with increased monodeiodination activity and increased conversion of
T4 to T3, possibly related to the Pit-1 gene mutation. GH and T4 treatment
resulted in catch-up growth continued during 5 years of therapy.CONCLUSION:
Reports of nine other cases of R271W mutations of different populations as well
as the present Norwegian patient suggest codon 271 of exon 6 to be a "hot spot"
for Pit-1 mutations. To enable rapid and simple detection of this type of de novo
mutation we have designed a specific amplification-created-restriction-site assay
to check for the R271W mutation in patients suspected to have this rare form of
genetic defect in growth hormone production.

PMID: 9392392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Endocrinology. 1997 Dec;138(12):5442-51.

Differential regulation of pituitary-specific gene expression by insulin-like
growth factor 1 in rat pituitary GH4C1 and GH3 cells.

Castillo AI(1), Aranda A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientificas, Madrid, Spain.

We have compared the influence of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) on
pituitary gene expression in the rat cell lines GH4C1 and GH3. Incubation with
IGF-1 increased PRL messenger RNA (mRNA) levels in GH4C1 cells by 4- to 5-fold
but decreased the levels of PRL transcripts in GH3 cells. In addition, the levels
of GH-mRNA that were not affected by IGF-1 in GH4C1 cells were significantly
inhibited by the growth factor in GH3 cells. IGF-1 also decreased PRL and GH-mRNA
response to T3, retinoic acid, and Fk in GH3 cells. Stability of PRL or GH
transcripts was not altered by IGF-1 in GH3 cells, suggesting that the inhibitory
effect is exerted at a transcriptional level. The pituitary-specific
transcription factor GHF-1/Pit-1 activates both the GH and PRL promoters. As
analyzed by Western blot, IGF-1 did not alter GHF-1/Pit-1 protein levels in GH4C1
cells but reduced the levels of the transcription factor in GH3 cells. This
decrease is secondary to a reduction of GHF-1/Pit-1 transcripts in IGF-1-treated 
GH3 cells. Thus, a different effect of IGF-1 on the expression of GHF-1/Pit-1 in 
GH3 and GH4C1 cells is likely involved in the different regulation of GH and PRL 
gene in both cell types. IGF-1 increases the activity of the PRL promoter in
transient transfection assays in GH4C1 cells by a Ras-dependent mechanism.
Expression of oncogenic Ras(Val12) mimics the effect of IGF-1, and the dominant
negative Ras(Asn17) blocks IGF-1-mediated stimulation of the PRL promoter in
GH4C1 cells. Although IGF-1 did not stimulate the PRL promoter in GH3 cells,
Ras(Val12) strongly activated the promoter in these cells. Hence, the machinery
to activate Ras-dependent signaling is intact in GH3 cells. Moreover, IGF-1
stimulates the mitogen-activated protein kinase in GH3 cells, showing that the
components linking the IGF-1 receptor to Ras are also active. These results
suggest that, in addition to the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway,
IGF-1 could activate a different pathway and that the combination of both is
required to elicit PRL gene expression by the growth factor. This second pathway 
may be defective in GH3 cells that respond to Ras but not to IGF-1.

PMID: 9389530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Microsc Res Tech. 1997 Oct 15;39(2):168-81.

Transcription factors in normal and neoplastic pituitary tissues.

Lloyd RV(1), Osamura RY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

Transcription factors are proteins that bind to regulatory elements in DNA and
have critical roles in gene regulation during development, in cellular growth and
differentiation. The four major groups of transcription factors have been
classified according to the motif in the DNA-binding domains and include: (1) the
helix-turn-helix group, which includes the Pit-1/GHF-1 (Pit-1) transcription
factor; (2) the zing finger group, which includes estrogen and other steroid
hormone receptors; (3) the leucine zipper group, which includes c-fos
protooncogene, and (4) the helix-loop-helix group, which includes the c-myc
oncogene. Members of all four groups have been described in normal and neoplastic
anterior pituitary gland tissues. Pit-1 has been shown to regulate prolactin
(PRL), growth hormone (GH), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) cells during
development and differentiation. Genetic defects in this transcription factor
have led to specific diseases in rodents and humans such as dwarfism and
cretinism. Estrogen receptor (ER) protein plays a critical role in the regulation
of gene expression in some anterior pituitary cells. There is a differential
distribution of ER in anterior pituitary cells and tumors; PRL, gonadotroph, and 
null cell tumors are the principal adenomas expressing ER. The protooncogene
c-fos is regulated by estrogen in various tissues, linking the regulation of one 
transcription factor by another transcription factor with a different motif. The 
c-myc oncogene has been detected in the pituitary gland and in some pituitary
tumors, although the exact role of this oncogene in pituitary tumor development
is uncertain. Because of the critical role that transcription factors play in
pituitary cell development and differentiation, we can anticipate many more
studies to elucidate their many functions in normal and neoplastic pituitary
tissues.

PMID: 9361268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Endocrinology. 1997 Oct;138(10):4481-4.

Human neutrophils express GH-N gene transcripts and the pituitary transcription
factor Pit-1b.

Kooijman R(1), Berus D, Malur A, Delhase M, Hooghe-Peters EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical School, Free University of Brussels
(V.U.B.), Belgium.

Since GH stimulates the development and function of granulocytes, we investigated
the expression of GH in granulocyte subsets. By immunocytochemistry, 25 +/- 7% of
the human neutrophils were shown to express immunoreactive GH, whereas
eosinophils were negative. Reversed transcription (RT)-PCR analysis demonstrated 
GH mRNA in neutrophils. Restriction analysis revealed that neutrophils express
the GH-N gene but not the GH-V gene. Furthermore, we demonstrated by western blot
analysis that neutrophils express an alternatively spliced variant of the
pituitary transcription factor Pit-1, designated Pit-1b.

PMID: 9322967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Anim Genet. 1997 Aug;28(4):320.

A PstI RFLP at the porcine POU domain class 1 transcription factor 1 (POU1F1)
gene.

Nielsen VH(1), Larsen NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breeding and Genetics, Danish Institute of Agricultural
Sciences, Research Centre Foulum, Tjele, Denmark.

PMID: 9345746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Aug;11(9):1332-41.

Activities in Pit-1 determine whether receptor interacting protein 140 activates 
or inhibits Pit-1/nuclear receptor transcriptional synergy.

Chuang FM(1), West BL, Baxter JD, Schaufele F.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Research Unit, University of California, San Francisco 94143-0540,
USA.

Pituitary-specific transcription of the evolutionarily related rat (r) GH and PRL
genes involves synergistic interactions between Pit-1 and other promoter-binding 
factors including nuclear receptors. We show that Pit-1/thyroid hormone receptor 
(TR) and Pit-1/estrogen receptor (ER) synergistic activation of the rGH and rPRL 
promoters are globally similar. Both synergies depend upon the same activation
functions in Pit-1 and also require activation function-2 conserved in TR and ER.
The activation function-2 binding protein, RIP140, previously thought to be a
nuclear receptor coactivator, strongly inhibits both Pit-1/TR and Pit-1/ER
synergy. RIP140 inhibition is profoundly influenced, in a promoter-specific
fashion, by a synergism-selective function in Pit-1: deletion of Pit-1 amino
acids 72-100 switches RIP140 to an activator of Pit-1/ER and Pit-1/TR synergy at 
the rPRL promoter but not at the rGH promoter. Pit-1 amino acids 101-125 are
required for RIP140 inhibition or activation again only at the rPRL promoter.
Therefore, functions within one factor can determine the activity of a
coactivator binding to its synergistic partner. This promoter context-specific
synergistic interplay between transcription factors and coactivators is likely an
essential determinant of cell-specific transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 9259323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Rinsho Byori. 1997 Jul;45(7):656-9.

[The pituitary specific transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1 and PIT1 abnormality].

[Article in Japanese]

Tatsumi K(1), Amino N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, Suita.

Pit-1/GHF-1 is a pituitary specific POU-domain DNA binding factor, which
transactivates the growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL), thyrotropin beta subunit
(TSH beta) genes, and PIT1 gene itself. It is indispensable for the
differentiation and the proliferation of the cells producing GH, and PRL. Loss of
the PIT1 gene function (PIT1 abnormality) results in combined deficiency of GH,
PRL, and TSH. PIT1 abnormality serves as a model of transcription factor
abnormalities.

PMID: 9256012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Jun;11(7):986-96.

Thyroid hormone inhibits the human prolactin gene promoter by interfering with
activating protein-1 and estrogen stimulations.

Pernasetti F(1), Caccavelli L, Van de Weerdt C, Martial JA, Muller M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique, Université de
Liège, Institut de Chimie B6, Sart Tilman, Belgium.

Transcription of the human PRL (hPRL) gene in the pituitary is subject to
tissue-specific and multihormonal regulation involving two main regulatory
regions, a proximal promoter and a distal enhancer. In this report we show that
thyroid hormone inhibits the expression of the hPRL gene in rat pituitary cells. 
Transient expression experiments show that thyroid hormone regulation involves a 
strong inhibitory element, located in the proximal (-164/-35) promoter, which is 
modulated by a more distal stimulatory response control region. Gel retardation
experiments reveal that the thyroid hormone receptor does not bind to the
proximal negative element. We show the existence of an activating protein-1
(AP-1) response element located at positions -61 to -54 of the proximal promoter,
conferring AP-1 stimulation to the hPRL promoter. This AP-1 induction is
abolished when hormone-bound thyroid hormone receptor is present, indicating that
there is an interference between the thyroid hormone receptor and AP-1 regulatory
pathways. Furthermore, using the complete hPRL upstream region, we show that
estrogen induction is abolished by simultaneous thyroid hormone treatment.

PMID: 9178758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1997 Mar;82(3):800-7.

Pit-1/growth hormone factor 1 splice variant expression in the rhesus monkey
pituitary gland and the rhesus and human placenta.

Schanke JT(1), Conwell CM, Durning M, Fisher JM, Golos TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, USA.

We have examined the expression of Pit-1 messenger RNA (mRNA) splice variants in 
the nonhuman primate pituitary and in rhesus and human placenta. Full-length
complementary DNAs (cDNAs) representing Pit-1 and the Pit-1 beta splice variants 
were cloned from a rhesus monkey pituitary cDNA library and were readily
detectable by RT-PCR with rhesus pituitary gland RNA. The Pit-1T variant
previously reported in mouse pituitary tumor cell lines was not detectable in
normal rhesus pituitary tissue, although two novel splice variants were detected.
A cDNA approximating the rat Pit-1 delta 4 variant was cloned but coded for a
truncated and presumably nonfunctional protein. Only by using a nested RT-PCR
approach were Pit-1 and Pit-1 beta variants consistently detectable in both human
and rhesus placental tissue. The Pit-1 beta variant mRNA was not detectable in
JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cells unless the cells were stimulated with 8-Br-cAMP.
Immunoblot studies with nuclear extracts from primary rhesus syncytiotrophoblast 
cultures or JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cells indicated that although mRNA levels were 
very low, Pit-1 protein was detectable in differentiated cytotrophoblasts, and
levels increased after treatment with 8-Br-cAMP. Two major species of Pit-1
protein were detected that corresponded to the two major bands in rat pituitary
GH3 cell nuclear extracts. Low levels of slightly larger bands also were seen,
which may represent Pit-1 beta protein or phosphorylated species. We conclude
that Pit-1 splice variants expressed in the primate pituitary gland differ from
those in the rodent gland and that the Pit-1 and Pit-1 beta mRNAs expressed in
the placenta give rise to a pattern of protein expression similar to that seen in
pituitary cells, which is inducible by treatment with 8-Br-cAMP.

PMID: 9062486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Endocrinology. 1997 Mar;138(3):1019-28.

Thyrotropin expression in hypophyseal pars tuberalis-specific cells is
3,5,3'-triiodothyronine, thyrotropin-releasing hormone, and pit-1 independent.

Bockmann J(1), Böckers TM, Winter C, Wittkowski W, Winterhoff H, Deufel T, Kreutz
MR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy, University of Münster, Germany.

The expression of TSH subunit genes (TSH alpha and -beta) in pituitary
thyrotropes is primarily regulated via circulating thyroid hormone levels (T3)
and the hypothalamic TRH. Hypophyseal pars tuberalis (PT)-specific cells also
express both hormonal subunits of TSH, but do not resemble thyrotropes of the
pars distalis (PD) with respect to their distinct morphology, secretion, and
direct modulation of TSH expression by photoperiodic inputs and melatonin. To
investigate whether this distinct regulation of TSH is related to a different
molecular structure or different signaling cascades, we analyzed PT-specific TSH 
and its transcriptional regulation in ovine PT-specific cells. After construction
of PT- and PD-specific complementary DNA (cDNA) libraries, the cloning and
sequencing of several TSH alpha and -beta subunit clones revealed identical sizes
and sequences for the translated and untranslated regions in both hypophyseal
compartments. Transcription start site analysis also displayed three identical
start sites for the transcription of TSH beta in PT and PD. After cloning of the 
ovine TRH receptor cDNA and a partial T3 receptor cDNA, in situ hybridization.
Northern blot analysis, and PCR experiments showed that TRH and T3 receptors are 
not expressed in specific cells of the PT. The transcription factor Pit-1 that is
involved in TSH expression of thyrotropes could only be detected in the PD. In
additional experiments rats were treated with T4 or TRH, and subsequent in situ
hybridization studies showed that TSH beta messenger RNA (mRNA) formation was not
altered in the PT. In the PD, however, TSH beta mRNA was significantly reduced in
the T4-treated group, but was enhanced in the TRH-treated group. We conclude that
PT-specific cells of the pituitary are characterized by the transcription of TSH 
subunits that are identical to TSH expressed in thyrotropes of the PD. The
absence of TRH, T3 receptor mRNA, and Pit-1, respectively, as well as the
different reactions compared to PD thyrotropes in in vivo experiments lead to the
conclusion that the expression of TSH in PT-specific cells of the pituitary is
not regulated via the classical thyrotrope receptors and their intracellular
pathways, but through a novel, photoperiod-dependent mechanism.

PMID: 9048604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Mar;17(3):1065-74.

Interaction of Ets-1 and the POU-homeodomain protein GHF-1/Pit-1 reconstitutes
pituitary-specific gene expression.

Bradford AP(1), Wasylyk C, Wasylyk B, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 
80262, USA.

The pituitary-specific, POU-homeodomain factor GHF-1/Pit-1 is necessary, but not 
sufficient, for cell-specific expression of prolactin (PRL), growth hormone (GH),
and thyrotropin. Combinatorial interactions of GHF-1 with other factors are
likely to be required; however, such factors and their mechanisms of action
remain to be elucidated. Here we identify Ets-1 as a factor that functionally and
physically interacts with GHF-1 to fully reconstitute proximal PRL promoter
activity. In contrast, Ets-2 has no effect, and the alternatively spliced
GHF-2/Pit-1beta variant fails to synergize with Ets-1. The Ets-1-GHF-1 synergy
requires a composite Ets-1-GHF-1 cis element and is dependent on an
Ets-1-specific protein domain. Furthermore, the ancestrally related and
GHF-1-dependent GH promoter, which lacks this composite element, does not exhibit
this response. Finally, Ets-1, but not Ets-2, binds directly to GHF-1 and GHF-2. 
These data show that a functional interaction of GHF-1 and Ets-1, acting via a
composite DNA element, is required to establish lactotroph-specific PRL gene
expression, thus providing a molecular mechanism by which GHF-1 can discriminate 
between the GH and PRL genes. These results underscore the importance of
transcription factors that are distinct from, but interact with, homeobox
proteins to establish lineage-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC231831
PMID: 9032233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Dev Biol. 1997 Feb 1;182(1):180-90.

The Pit-1 gene is regulated by distinct early and late pituitary-specific
enhancers.

DiMattia GE(1), Rhodes SJ, Krones A, Carrière C, O'Connell S, Kalla K, Arias C,
Sawchenko P, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department and School of Medicine, University
of California at San Diego, La Jolla 92093-0648, USA.

The differentiation of three anterior pituitary cell types is regulated by the
tissue-specific POU domain factor Pit-1, which is initially expressed on
Embryonic Day 13.5-14 in mice. The Pit-1 gene remains continuously, highly
expressed in the somatotrope, thyrotrope, and lactotrope cells of the adult.
Using the Pit-1-defective Snell dwarf as a genetic background, we demonstrate
that the Pit-1 gene utilizes distinct enhancers for initial gene activation and
for subsequent autoregulation (required for maintenance of expression) and that
Pit-1-dependent activation of the distal enhancer can be mediated in the absence 
of the early enhancer. These two distinct enhancers provide the basis for
temporally specific regulation by discrete pituitary-specific factors, events
likely to be prototypic for regulation of other classes of genes encoding
transcription factors controlling terminal differentiation.

PMID: 9073460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Feb;16(2):153-63.

Studies on the mechanism of glucocorticoid-mediated repression from a negative
glucocorticoid response element from the bovine prolactin gene.

Subramaniam N(1), Cairns W, Okret S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge University
Hospital, Sweden.

Erratum in
    DNA Cell Biol 1997 May;16(5):670.

Several models for repression of transcription by glucocorticoid hormone, some of
which involve so-called negative glucocorticoid response elements (nGRE), have
been suggested. In the cases where nGREs are required, the glucocorticoid
receptor (GR) is thought to bind to the nGRE and interfere with transcriptional
activation by positively acting transactivating factors. We have studied an nGRE 
from the bovine prolactin gene promoter (PRL3), which increases basal expression 
from a heterologous promoter in rat pituitary cells (GH3) and is repressed by
glucocorticoids. Two proteins in addition to the GR were identified in pituitary 
cells to bind specifically to the PRL3 nGRE, one of which was the
pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1. A mutation in the PRL3 nGRE,
which destroyed Pit-1/GHF-1 binding, totally abolished the increased basal
expression as well as glucocorticoid repression in transfected GH3 cells. A
mutation in the binding site for the second protein, termed XTF, partially
impaired basal activity but totally abrogated glucocorticoid repression. The same
mutation had no effect on GR binding to the PRL3 nGRE. Mixing experiments with
whole-cell extracts containing overexpressed GR from COS cells decreased the
binding of both Pit-1/GHF-1 and XTF to the PRL3 element. However, Pit-1/GHF-1
displacement from the PRL3 element by the GR required XTF binding. Furthermore,
GR binding to the PRL3 nGRE was required for glucocorticoid repression to occur, 
because a mutation of the GR binding site abolished the glucocorticoid effect.
Moreover, the PRL3 nGRE was found to contain only half a palindromic GRE,
allowing only one GR moiety to contact the DNA. These data demonstrate that the
PRL3 nGRE is composite in nature and that the ability of the GR to repress
transactivation by displacement requires an intermediary factor, XTF.

PMID: 9052736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Genes Dev. 1997 Jan 15;11(2):198-212.

Structure of Pit-1 POU domain bound to DNA as a dimer: unexpected arrangement and
flexibility.

Jacobson EM(1), Li P, Leon-del-Rio A, Rosenfeld MG, Aggarwal AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, New York 10032, USA.

Pit-1, a member of the POU domain family of transcription factors, characterized 
by a bipartite DNA-binding domain, serves critical developmental functions based 
on binding to diverse DNA elements in its target genes. Here we report a high
resolution X-ray analysis of the Pit-1 POU domain bound to a DNA element as a
homodimer. This analysis reveals that Pit-1 subdomains bind to perpendicular
faces of the DNA, rather than opposite faces of the DNA as in Oct-1. This is
accomplished by different spacing and orientation of the POU-specific domain.
Contrary to previous predictions, the dimerization interface involves the
carboxyl terminus of the DNA recognition helix of the homeodomain, which in an
extended conformation interacts with specific residues at the amino terminus of
helix alpha1 and in the loop between helices alpha3 and alpha4 of the
POU-specific domain of the symmetry related monomer. These features suggest the
molecular basis of disease-causing mutations in Pit-1 and provide potential basis
for the flexible allostery between protein domains and DNA sites in the
activation of target genes.

PMID: 9009203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 1997;105 Suppl 4:1-5.

GH and TSH deficiency.

Pfäffle RW(1), Martinez R, Kim C, Frisch H, Lebl J, Otten B, Heimann G.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pediatrics RWTH Aachen, Germany. pfaeffle@alpha.imib.rwth-aachen.de

Hypothyroidism is a recognised complication of GH therapy in GH deficient
children. The mechanisms involved include direct effects on thyroid function but 
also result from the close interrelationship of pituitary cell-lines that
differentiate during embryonic development of the anterior pituitary gland. Among
numerous pituitary transcriptionfactors that orchestrate pituitary organogenesis 
Pit-1 was the first to be recognised and is the most extensively studied.
Mutations in the Pit-1 gene account for a form of combined pituitary hormone
deficiency for GH, Prolactin (Prl) and TSH (CPHD). Despite the variability of the
clinical presentation of this syndrome at the time of initial diagnosis, all
forms finally result in severe retardation of growth and development due to
GH-deficiency and hypothyroidism. More than half of the families with a combined 
pituitary hormone deficiency have not disclosed any Pit-1 abnormalities. Evidence
is accumulating that Prop-1, a transcriptionfactor expressed temporarily in the
fetal anterior pituitary, could be a candidate for patients with a Pit-1
phenotype without any Pit-1 gene abnormalities.

PMID: 9439906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 1997;105(4):196-203.

Thyrotropin (TSH) beta-subunit gene expression--an example for the complex
regulation of pituitary hormone genes.

Steinfelder HJ(1), Wondisford FE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Göttingen, Germany.
hsteinfe@med.uni-goettingen.de

Synthesis of pituitary hormones was shown to be efficiently regulated at the
transcriptional level. The specialized function of the five cell types in the
anterior pituitary is controlled by ubiquitous as well as cell-specific
transcription factors. Pit-1 is such a cell-specific regulator found only in
lacto-, somato- and thyrotropes which could be shown to be essential for basal
expression of growth hormone (GH) and prolactin (Prl) genes and the regulated
expression of Prl and thyrotropin (TSH) beta-subunit genes. Identification of
distinct binding sites for transcription factors and some of the mechanisms of
transcriptional control shed light on the complex regulation of pituitary hormone
gene expression which is exemplified for the TSH beta gene. The control of basal 
as well as positively and negatively regulated expression of some pituitary
hormone genes becomes fairly well understood by the investigation of the role of 
Pit-1. Identification of different mutations in the human pit-1 gene supported
the role of this protein for combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD)
characterized by the deficiency of GH, prolactin and TSH.

PMID: 9285205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Horm Res. 1997;47(4-6):251-8.

Pit-1 gene expression in human pituitary adenomas.

Pellegrini-Bouiller I(1), Morange-Ramos I, Barlier A, Gunz G, Enjalbert A, Jaquet
P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire ICNE, UMR 9941 CNRS-Université de la Méditerranée, Institut Jean
Roche, Faculté de Médecine Nord, Marseille, France.

The anterior pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1 (also known as GHF-1) 
was initially identified and cloned as a transactivator of the GH and PRL genes, 
and later as a regulator of the TSH beta gene. Analysis of Pit-1 expression
during mouse embryogenesis revealed that initiation of its expression correlates 
both temporally and spatially with activation of its target genes.
Immunocytochemical studies revealed a high expression of Pit-1 protein in the
nuclei of only three cell types: somatotropes, lactotropes and thyrotropes. The
importance of Pit-1 as a regulator of the anterior pituitary development has been
further demonstrated by the absence of somatotropes, lactotropes and thyrotropes 
in the pituitary glands of Pit-1-defective mice and humans. Since Pit-1 is
required for both cell phenotype and proliferation, one may ask if this
transcription factor might be associated with development of pituitary tumors.
Several investigators have reported Pit-1 gene expression in human pituitary
adenomas. These studies, while not in total agreement, show that pituitary
tumorigenesis does not seem to be associated with a gross alteration of Pit-1
gene expression in humans. Pit-1 transcripts, identical in size and sequence to
those observed in normal pituitary, were described in human GH-, PRL- and
TSH-secreting pituitary adenomas and in most cases the presence of Pit-1
transcripts correlated with the localization of Pit-1 protein. The biological
relevance of Pit-1 expression reported in some nonfunctioning adenomas remains to
be clarified. As expression of the PRL and GH genes is ultimately confined to
distinct lactotropic and somatotropic populations despite the presence of Pit-1
protein in both cell types, there must be additional mechanisms that control the 
cell-specific activation of the PRL and GH promoters. The Pit-1 beta isoform,
raised through alternative splicing of exon 2 of the Pit-1 gene, is a more potent
inducer of GH transcription than the major Pit-1 form. This form could, at least 
in part, account for the cell-specific activation of the PRL and GH genes. Pit-1 
beta was invariably found present in all the tumors expressing the Pit-1 major
form, no significant difference in the Pit-1 beta/Pit-1 expression ratio being
observed between tumors identified as pure GH- or PRL-producing tumors. This lack
of selectivity together with its low level of expression is therefore not in
favor of a key role for the beta-isoform in the cell type-specific expression of 
the GH and PRL genes in humans. The failure of somatotropes, lactotropes and
thyrotropes to proliferate in Pit-1-defective mice and humans indicates that
Pit-1 might be competent to activate genes required for cell proliferation or
survival of the three cell types. Recent data indeed suggest that Pit-1 may
directly or indirectly regulate somatotropes and lactotropes through activation
of the receptors for GRF and SRIF on the one hand, and dopamine on the other
hand. Such regulatory mechanisms could contribute to the differentiation of the
somatomammotropic lineage in fully differentiated somatotropic and lactotropic
cells.

PMID: 9167960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jan;17(1):154-62.

The carboxy-terminal transactivation domain of Oct-4 acquires cell specificity
through the POU domain.

Brehm A(1), Ohbo K, Schöler H.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Programme, EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany.

The POU transcription factor Oct-4 is expressed in totipotent and pluripotent
cells of the early mouse embryo and the germ cell lineage. Transactivation
capacities of regions flanking the DNA binding domain of Oct-4 were analyzed in
undifferentiated and differentiated cell lines. The amino- and carboxy-terminal
regions (N domain and C domain) fused to the Gal4 DNA binding domain both
functioned as transactivation domains in all cell lines tested. However, the C
domain failed to activate transcription in some cell lines in the context of the 
native protein. The underlying regulatory mechanism appears to involve the POU
domain of Oct-4 and can discriminate between different POU domains, since
constructs in which the C domain was instead fused to the POU domain of Pit-1
were again equally active in all cell lines. These results indicate that the C
domain is subject to cell-type-specific regulation mediated by the Oct-4 POU
domain. Phosphopeptide analysis revealed that the cell-type-specific difference
of C-domain activity correlates with a difference in Oct-4 phosphorylation
status. Since Oct-4 is expressed in a variety of distinct cell types during
murine embryogenesis, these results suggest an additional regulatory mechanism
for determining Oct-4 function in rapidly changing cell types during development.

PMCID: PMC231739
PMID: 8972195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 13;271(50):32349-58.

AP-1 and Oct-1 transcription factors down-regulate the expression of the human
PIT1/GHF1 gene.

Delhase M(1), Castrillo JL, de la Hoya M, Rajas F, Hooghe-Peters EL.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Department, Medical School, Free University of Brussels (VUB),
Laarbeeklaan 103, B-1090 Brussels, Belgium. mdelhase@ucsd.edu

The pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1 is a member of the POU
domain family of regulatory proteins. It is involved in the commitment and
expansion of the somatotropic cell lineage and activates the transcription of a
set of anterior pituitary genes. We have cloned the human PIT1/GHF1 gene and
characterized the regulatory mechanisms controlling its promoter activation and
regulation. A minimal promoter region (-102 to +15) contains the cis-acting
elements that confer to the human PIT1/GHF1 gene a high basal transcriptional
activity, the tissue-specific expression, and the autoregulation by Pit-1/GHF-1
protein. The upstream promoter region contains a multiplicity of Pit-1/GHF-1
binding sites that do not show any synergistic interaction with the minimal
promoter. The transcriptional activity is negatively regulated by Oct-1 and
mediated by an octamer-binding site (OTF). In addition, we have also identified a
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-responsive element, which overlaps with a
Pit-1/GHF-1 binding site. A mutually exclusive binding of the activator protein-1
(AP-1) and Pit-1/GHF-1 has been observed on this composite site, and AP-1 was
shown to down-regulate PIT1/GHF1 transcription.

PMID: 8943298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Hum Genet. 1996 Dec;98(6):703-5.

Genetic mapping of the human pituitary-specific transcriptional factor gene and
its analysis in familial panhypopituitary dwarfism.

Raskin S(1), Cogan JD, Summar ML, Moreno A, Krishnamani MR, Phillips JA 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Division of Genetics, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232-2578, USA.

We have analyzed the human pituitary-specific transcription factor (Pit-1) gene
using PCR amplification of DNA fragments that span intron III and contain
portions of exons III and IV. A PCR restriction fragment length polymorphism
(PCRFLP) was detected in intron III by RsaI digestion, which was used to assign
the human Pit-1 locus to chromosome 3p by linkage analysis of the CEPH panel.
Analysis of corresponding Pit-1 segments from six nonrelated probands with
familial panhypopituitary dwarfism (FPD) did not reveal any alterations in size
and co-segregation of Pit-1, or a tightly linked microsatellite marker (D3S1559),
and FPD was excluded in all six kindreds. Our data (1) assign Pit-1 to human
chromosome 3p by linkage, (2) provide a PCRFLP and identify a variety of tightly 
linked markers, for analysis of FPD, and (3) exclude Pit-1 defects as the basis
of at least one form of FPD.

PMID: 8931705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1996 Nov 29;124(1-2):163-72.

Function of the conserved Pit-1 gene distal enhancer in progenitor and
differentiated pituitary cells.

Rhodes SJ(1), Krones A, Nelson C, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University at Indianapolis
46202-5132, USA. srhodes@indyvax.iupui.edu

Pit-1 is a homeodomain transcription factor that is required for the function and
survival of the hormone-secreting somatotrope, lactotrope and thyrotrope cells of
the anterior pituitary gland. Within the upstream region of the mouse Pit-1 gene 
at around -10 kb, a complex transcriptional enhancer confers autoregulation and
response to hormones and morphogens upon the gene. We demonstrate that this
enhancer is conserved in both sequence and function and that related sequences
are present in other rodents. Enhancer sequences from mouse, rat and hamster
Pit-1 genes activated transcription from Pit-1 promoter reporter genes in a
pituitary progenitor cell line, in somatolactotrope cells and conferred pituitary
cell-specific activation on heterologous promoters. Elements allowing regulation 
by vitamin D3, pituitary-specific factors and Pit-1-dependent response to
retinoic acid are well conserved. Studies comparing distal enhancer activity with
that of a second proposed enhancer sequence at -3 to -5 kb in the rat Pit-1 gene 
revealed that the distal enhancer has markedly higher activity than the -3 to -5 
kb region in both progenitor and differentiated pituitary cell lines. The
functional conservation of the distal enhancer element suggests that it is
crucial to the maintenance and cell-specific regulation of the Pit-1 gene.

PMID: 9027335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Biol Chem. 1996 Nov 15;271(46):28925-32.

A 26-amino acid insertion domain defines a functional transcription switch motif 
in Pit-1beta.

Diamond SE(1), Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Program in Molecular Biology and Colorado Cancer
Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado 80262,
USA. a.gutierrez-hartmann@UCHSC.edu

Pit-1, a pituitary-specific POU homeodomain transcription factor, specifies three
anterior pituitary lineages; governs growth hormone, prolactin, and thyrotropin
gene expression; and mediates basal and Ras-stimulated prolactin promoter
activity in GH4 pituitary cells. Alternate splicing of the Pit-1 message produces
the Pit-1beta isoform, which contains a 26-amino acid insertion, the beta-domain,
within the amino-terminal transactivation domain. The beta-domain functions as a 
molecular switch, such that Pit-1beta blocks both basal and Ras-stimulated
prolactin promoter activity in GH4 pituitary cells yet preferentially enhances
protein kinase A-stimulated prolactin promoter activity in a HeLa reconstitution 
system. To determine whether the amino acid sequence of the beta-domain dictates 
function, we replaced it with five different 26-amino acid sequences. These
mutants fail to block basal or Ras-stimulated rat prolactin promoter activity and
fail to optimally enhance the protein kinase A response of prolactin promoter.
These data demonstrate that the amino acid sequence of the beta-domain specifies 
its role as a molecular switch. Additionally, the presence of both Pit-1 and
Pit-1beta in pituitary cells allows diverse incoming signals to utilize
structurally different forms of the same gene product, which can interact with
distinct co-factors, integrating multiple signaling pathways at the level of the 
nucleus.

PMID: 8910541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 4;271(40):24639-48.

GHF-1/Pit-1 functions as a cell-specific integrator of Ras signaling by targeting
the Ras pathway to a composite Ets-1/GHF-1 response element.

Bradford AP(1), Conrad KE, Tran PH, Ostrowski MC, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Program in Molecular Biology, and Colorado Cancer
Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, 80262, USA.

Activation of the rat prolactin (rPRL) promoter by Ras is a prototypical example 
of tissue-specific transcriptional regulation in a highly differentiated cell
type. Using a series of site-specific mutations and deletions of the proximal
rPRL promoter we have mapped the major Ras/Raf response element (RRE) to a
composite Ets-1/GHF-1 binding site located between positions -217 and -190.
Mutation of either the Ets-1 or GHF-1 binding sites inhibits Ras and Raf
activation of the rPRL promoter, and insertion of this RRE into the rat growth
hormone promoter confers Ras responsiveness. We show that Ets-1 is expressed in
GH4 cells and, consistent with their functional synergistic interaction, both
Ets-1 and GHF-1 are able to bind specifically to this bipartite RRE. We confirm
that Ets-1 or a related Ets factor is the nuclear target of the Ras pathway
leading to activation of the rPRL promoter and demonstrate that Elk-1 and Net do 
not mediate the Ras response. Thus, the pituitary-specific POU homeodomain
transcription factor, GHF-1, serves as a cell-specific signal integrator by
functionally interacting with an Ets-1-like factor, at uniquely juxtaposed
binding sites, thereby targeting an otherwise ubiquitous Ras signaling pathway to
a select subset of cell-specific GHF-1-dependent genes.

PMID: 8798730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 27;271(39):24213-20.

Thyroid hormone receptor beta2 promoter activity in pituitary cells is regulated 
by Pit-1.

Wood WM(1), Dowding JM, Bright TM, McDermott MT, Haugen BR, Gordon DF, Ridgway
EC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver, Colorado 80262, USA.

There are three known thyroid hormone receptor (TR) isoforms that arise from two 
distinct alpha and beta gene loci. TRalpha1 and TRbeta1 mRNAs are found in many
tissues, whereas mRNA for the N-terminal TRbeta2 variant derived from the beta
locus is readily detectable only in the pituitary gland and derived cell sources 
such as GH3 somatotropes and TtT-97 thyrotropes. We previously isolated the
genomic region governing expression of the TRbeta2 isoform in thyrotropes and
showed that transcription arose from multiple origins within a 400-base pair (bp)
region. We now report that the region extending 500 bp upstream of the putative
AUG codon (A is +1) contains six areas of interaction with the pituitary-specific
transcription factor Pit-1. In addition there are separate areas that bind other 
factors present in thyrotrope cells. Promoter deletions revealed that removal of 
regions containing the Pit-1 sites at -456 to -432, -149 to -127, and -124 to
-102 progressively decreased TRbeta2 promoter activity in thyrotropes. A more
proximal footprinted area from -65 to -19, which accounted for the remaining
promoter activity, contained sites that interacted with recombinant Pit-1;
however, extracts of TtT-97 thyrotropes, which express Pit-1, footprinted this
proximal region with a pattern of protection that differed from that produced by 
Pit-1. A comparative deletional analysis demonstrated that a shorter region
extending only 204 bp from the AUG was sufficient to support TRbeta2 promoter
activity in GH3 somatotropes. The more proximal Pit-1 sites, including the area
from -53 to -19, whose pattern differed from Pit-1 in thyrotrope extracts, showed
protection patterns with GH3 extracts that were indistinguishable from
recombinant Pit-1. Site-directed mutagenesis that abrogated binding of both
recombinant Pit-1 and Pit-1-containing nuclear extracts revealed that the two
Pit-1 sites between -149 and -102 were important for TRbeta2 promoter activity
with the more proximal being most critical. Finally, we showed that TRbeta2
promoter activity in alpha-TSH cells, which do not transcribe the endogenous
TRbeta2 locus or produce Pit-1 protein, could be reconstituted to a level
approaching that seen in expressing TtT-97 thyrotropes by cotransfecting a Pit-1 
expression vector. Activation by Pit-1 was dependent on the same Pit-1 sites
shown to be important for basal TRbeta2 promoter activity in thyrotropes as
constructs lacking them by deletion or mutation were not stimulated by Pit-1.

PMID: 8798664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Sep 17;93(19):10256-61.

Selective constraints on the activation domain of transcription factor Pit-1.

Majumdar S(1), Irwin DM, Elsholtz HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Toronto, ON Canada.

The POU transcription factor Pit-1 activates members of the prolactin/growth
hormone gene family in specific endocrine cell types of the pituitary gland.
Although Pit-1 is structurally conserved among vertebrate species, evolutionary
changes in the pattern of Pit-1 RNA splicing have led to a notable "contraction" 
of the transactivation domain in the mammalian lineage, relative to Pit-1 in
salmonid fish. By site-directed mutagenesis we demonstrate that two splice
insertions in salmon Pit-1, called beta (29 aa) and gamma (33 aa), are critical
for cooperative activation of the salmon prolactin gene. Paradoxically,
Pit-1-dependent activation of the prolactin gene in rat is enhanced in the
absence of the homologous beta-insert sequence. This apparent divergence in the
mechanism of activation of prolactin genes by Pit-1 is target gene specific, as
activation of rat and salmon growth hormone genes by Pit-1 splice variants is
entirely conserved. Our data suggest that efficient activation of the prolactin
gene in the vertebrate pituitary has significantly constrained the pattern of
splicing within the Pit-1 transactivation domain. Rapid evolutionary divergence
of prolactin gene function may have demanded changes in Pit-1/protein
interactions to accommodate new patterns of transcriptional control by
developmental or physiological factors.

PMCID: PMC38371
PMID: 8816787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 1996 Sep;45(3):263-72.

Pit-1 gene expression in human pituitary adenomas using the reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction method.

Yamada S(1), Takahashi M, Hara M, Hattori A, Sano T, Ozawa Y, Shishiba Y, Hirata 
K, Usui M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Toranomon Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Previous studies of Pit-1 expression in human pituitary tumours have
produced conflicting results. We have studied expression of Pit-1 mRNA in human
pituitary adenomas, as well as in normal human and rat pituitaries, and results
were compared with clinical, histological, and immunohistochemical features. In
addition, expression of GH, PRL, and TSH-beta mRNA was also studied and compared 
with Pit-1 gene expression.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The adenomas consisted of 13 GH cell adenomas, 7 PRL cell
adenomas, 3 TSH cell adenomas, 4 ACTH cell adenomas, and 10 clinically
non-functioning adenomas. Expression of the Pit-1, its isoforms, and each
hormone, was studied using the reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Pit-1 mRNA was expressed not only in normal human and rat pituitaries,
but also in all GH, PRL and TSH cell adenomas. There was no correlation between
Pit-1 transcripts and biological behaviour or histological findings in these
three types of adenoma, suggesting that Pit-1 is generally required for the
determination of cell phenotype but is insufficient for the regulation of
hormonal activity and tumour growth in these pituitary adenomas. In addition,
Pit-1 was also expressed in some ACTH cell (2/4) and non-functioning adenomas
(7/10). Although there were no GH, PRL or TSH-beta transcripts in Pit-1
mRNA-negative ACTH cell and non-functioning adenomas, PRL mRNA was detected in
all Pit-1 mRNA-positive ACTH cell adenomas and GH, PRL and/or TSH-beta mRNA were 
found in four of seven Pit-1 mRNA-positive non-functioning adenomas. In contrast,
Pit-1 mRNA was expressed without any GH, PRL, or TSH-beta transcripts in only
three non-functioning adenomas. These data suggest that expression of Pit-1 mRNA 
in these two types of adenomas can be mainly attributed to the presence of GH,
PRL and/or TSH-beta mRNA expressing cells and that true Pit-1 transcripts found
in non-functioning adenomas may be a rare event. Moreover, there were two cases
which expressed Pit-1 alpha mRNA, but failed to show other Pit-1 isoform mRNA.
There were, however, no clinical or histological differences between these two
adenomas showing only Pit-1 alpha mRNA and the others expressing both Pit-1 alpha
mRNA and other Pit-1 isoform mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: Pit-1 mRNA was expressed not only in GH, PRL and TSH cell adenomas
but also in other types of adenoma. However, it is suggested that expression of
Pit-1 mRNA in most ACTH cell and non-functioning adenomas can be attributed to
GH, PRL and/or TSH-beta mRNA expressing cells. Further studies are necessary to
elucidate the role of Pit-1 transcripts in the three non-functioning adenomas
without GH, PRL and/or TSH-beta mRNA expression.

PMID: 8949563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1996 Sep;81(9):3390-6.

Pit-1 gene expression in human lactotroph and somatotroph pituitary adenomas is
correlated to D2 receptor gene expression.

Pellegrini-Bouiller I(1), Morange-Ramos I, Barlier A, Gunz G, Figarella-Branger
D, Cortet-Rudelli C, Grisoli F, Jaquet P, Enjalbert A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Interactions Cellularies Neuroendocriniennes, UMR 9941 Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique-Université de la Méditerranée, Institut
Jean Roche, Faculté de Médecine Nord, Marseille, France.

The expression of the pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1 gene was
analyzed in a series of 30 human lactotroph and somatotroph pituitary tumors.
Northern blot analysis failed to reveal any quantitative differences in Pit-1
gene expression between somatotroph and lactotroph tumors, and reverse
transcription-PCR analysis showed similar patterns of Pit-1 isoforms expression
in both populations of tumors. The expression of the D2 receptor gene was
subsequently analyzed in the same adenomas. In the prolactinomas, which presented
with a variable sensitivity to dopamine agonist treatment, the intensity of the
D2 receptor transcripts (2.8 kilobases) was variable and was related to the
sensitivity to the dopamine agonist treatment. Notably, the individual D2
receptor messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) levels were highly correlated to the
Pit-1 mRNA levels measured in the same tumors (r = 0.90; P < 0.0001). In the
GH-secreting tumors, a significant expression of the D2 receptor gene was
evidenced by Northern blot in all mixed somato-lactotroph adenomas and in some of
the pure somatotroph adenomas; again, a positive correlation was found between D2
mRNA and Pit-1 mRNA levels (r = 0.68; P < 0.01). These results suggest the
existence of mechanisms responsible for a coordinate control of Pit-1 and D2
receptor genes that remain to be determined.

PMID: 8784102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. DNA Cell Biol. 1996 Aug;15(8):679-92.

The tilapia prolactin I gene: evolutionary conservation of the regulatory
elements directing pituitary-specific expression.

Poncelet AC(1), Levavi-Sivan B, Muller M, Yaron Z, Martial JA, Belayew A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique, Université de
Liége, Sart-Tilman, Belgium.

To study the elements involved in the pituitary specific transcriptional
regulation of the tilapia prolactin I gene (tiPRL I), we have cloned and entirely
sequenced a 3.4-kb genomic fragment immediately upstream from the first exon. In 
footprinting experiments, three tilapia sequences are protected from DNase I
digestion by rat pituitary extracts (base pair coordinates -643 to -593, -160 to 
-111, and -73 to -46). Computer analysis of the nucleotide sequence reveals
significant homology to mammalian binding sites for Pit-1, a transcription factor
that is known to mediate pituitary-specific expression of the PRL genes in
mammals. The tiPRL I 5'-flanking sequences can direct transient expression of a
linked luciferase reporter gene in transfected rat pituitary cell lines and
tilapia pituitary primary cell cultures. Transient expression experiments with
5'-deletion mutants reveal three regulatory regions. Two have a stimulatory
effect on transcription and one an inhibitory effect. Electrophoretic
mobility-shift assays (EMSA) demonstrate that the rat Pit-1 factor specifically
binds to tilapia DNA sequences. Several such tilapia Pit-1 binding sites mediate 
activation of a linked heterologous promoter in transfected rat and tilapia
pituitary cells. As evidenced by EMSA, a Pit-1-like protein is present in tilapia
pituitary extracts. All these data point to a high conservation of the molecular 
mechanisms involved in pituitary-specific expression of the PRL genes in
vertebrates.

PMID: 8769570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1996 Aug;81(8):2790-6.

A new mutation of the gene encoding the transcription factor Pit-1 is responsible
for combined pituitary hormone deficiency.

Pellegrini-Bouiller I(1), Bélicar P, Barlier A, Gunz G, Charvet JP, Jaquet P,
Brue T, Vialettes B, Enjalbert A.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 9941, CNRS-Université de la Méditerranée, Institut Jean-Roche, Faculté de 
Médecine Nord, Marseille, France.

The pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1/GHF1 regulates the expression
of PRL, GH, and TSH beta genes through binding to specific regions of the
promoters of these genes. Mutations of the Pit-1 gene have been shown to be
responsible for a syndrome of combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD),
including complete GH and PRL deficiencies and central hypothyroidism. We studied
four siblings presenting with CPHD born to healthy consanguinous parents. All
four affected children had complete GH deficiency diagnosed in early childhood.
They later developed hypothyroidism and were found to have undetectable PRL
levels. The pituitary gland was hypoplastic at magnetic resonance examination in 
one of the patients. Amplification of genomic DNA and subsequent sequencing of
the six exons of the Pit-1 gene allowed identification in the four patients with 
CPHD of an as yet undescribed mutation in exon 3. A substitution of T go G
induced a change from a Phe to a Cys residue at position 135 within the
hydrophobic core of the POU-specific DNA-binding domain of the Pit-1 protein. All
affected children were homozygous for the mutation, whereas the mother was
heterozygous, suggesting a recessive mode of inheritance. Molecular studies in
other affected families will allow instructive genotype-phenotype correlations
concerning the Pit-1 gene.

PMID: 8768831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Aug;16(8):4465-77.

In vivo genomic footprinting of thyroid hormone-responsive genes in pituitary
tumor cell lines.

Kim SW(1), Ahn IM, Larsen PR.

Author information: 
(1)Thyroid Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

We studied the effects of thyroid hormone (T3) on nuclear protein-DNA
interactions by using dimethyl sulfate (DMS) and DNase I ligation-mediated PCR
footprinting. We examined an endogenous gene the growth hormone (GH) gene, and a 
stably transfected plasmid containing the chicken lysozyme silencer (F2) T3
response element (TRE) gene, F2-TRE-TK-CAT, both in pituitary tumor (GC) cells.
The 235-1 cell line, which expresses prolactin (PRL) and Pit-1, but not the T3
receptor (TR) or GH, was used as a control. DMS and DNase I footprinting
identified protected G residues in the Pit-1, Sp1, and Zn-15 binding sites of the
GH gene in GC, but not in 235-1, cells. There was no specific protection of the
tripartite GH TRE at -180 bp against either DMS or DNase I in the absence or
presence of T3 in either cell line. However, T3 increased protection of the Pit-1
and Sp1 binding sites against DMS in GC cells. In GC cells stably transfected
with a plasmid containing F2-TRE-TK-CAT or TRalpha, chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase expression was T3 inducible and DMS footprinting revealed both 
F2 TRE TR-binding half sites in a pattern suggesting the binding of TR homodimers
before and during T3 exposure. We conclude that the GH gene is accessible to
specific nuclear proteins in GC, but not in 235-1, cells and that T3 enhances
this interaction, although there is no evidence of TR binding to the low-affinity
rat GH TRE. The presence of TR binding to the high-affinity F2 TRE before and
during T3 exposure suggests that reversible interaction of T3 with DNA-bound TRs,
rather than transient T3-TR contact with TREs, determines the level of
T3-stimulated transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC231445
PMID: 8754847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jul 26;271(30):17733-8.

An activation function in Pit-1 required selectively for synergistic
transcription.

Chang W(1), Zhou W, Theill LE, Baxter JD, Schaufele F.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Research Unit, University of California, San Francisco, California
94143-0540, USA.

Synergistic transcription activation is a key component in the generation of the 
spectrum of eukaryotic promoter activities by a limited number of transcription
factors. Various mechanisms could account for synergy, but a central question
remains of whether synergism requires transcription factor functions that differ 
from those that direct independent activation. The rat growth hormone promoter is
synergistically activated by the pituitary-specific transcription factor, Pit-1, 
and the thyroid hormone receptor (TR). Mutations that disrupted the previously
described DNA binding and transcriptional activation domains of both Pit-1 and TR
reduced Pit-1/TR synergy in parallel with their effects on the much weaker,
independent Pit-1 and TR activations of the rat growth hormone promoter. Thus,
Pit-1 and TR amplify each other's intrinsic activities. Mutations of Pit-1 that
selectively inhibited synergism with the TR without affecting independent Pit-1
activity were also identified. Pit-1/TR synergy is therefore a consequence of a
novel synergism-selective activity and synergism-independent Pit-1 and TR
functions.

PMID: 8663468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Jul 5;224(1):57-66.

Mechanisms of transcriptional activation of the promoter of the rainbow trout
prolactin gene by GHF1/Pit1 and glucocorticoid.

Argenton F(1), Ramoz N, Charlet N, Bernardini S, Colombo L, Bortolussi M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Padova, Italy.

The transcription factor GHF1/Pit1, required for the expression of the prolactin 
(PRL) and other pituitary-specific genes, is highly conserved from fish to
mammals but the mechanisms by which it activates transcription are poorly
understood. The activity of the promoter (-627/+15 region) of the rainbow trout
PRL (tPRL) gene fused to the luciferase reporter gene was studied using
GHF1-expressing rat pituitary GC cells. Nuclear extracts of GC cells produced
five GHF1-specific footprints in the tPRL promoter, with the position of the two 
most proximal ones being highly conserved in trout and mammalian GHF1-regulated
genes. Deletional and mutational analyses of the tPRL promoter showed that the
most proximal GHF1 site alone is sufficient to confer sub-maximal GHF1-dependent 
transcriptional activity and that a glucocorticoid response element-like motif
mediates dexamethasone stimulation. It is suggested that GHF1 molecules bound to 
different sites of the tPRL promoter cannot interact simultaneously with the
transcriptional apparatus. Moreover, GHF1 and the ligand-bound glucocorticoid
receptor tethered to their cognate elements in the promoter could cooperate to
enhance transcription by interacting simultaneously with different members of the
basal transcriptional complex.

PMID: 8694834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Jun 15;238(3):591-8.

A TGACG motif mediates growth-hormone
factor-1/pituitary-transcriptional-activator-1-dependent cAMP regulation of the
rainbow trout growth-hormone promoter.

Argenton F(1), Bernardini S, Puttini S, Colombo L, Bortolusi M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimenti di Biologia, Università di Padova, Padova, Italy.

The mechanisms involved in the regulation of the rainbow trout growth hormone
(tGH) gene promoter by the pituitary-specific transcription factor GHF1 (growth
hormone factor 1), also called Pit1 (pituitary transcriptional activator 1), and 
cAMP have been investigated in mammalian and fish cells. The -340 to +24
5'-flanking Fegion of the tGH gene focused to the luciferase gene was activated
in rat pituitary GC cells and in HeLa cells cotransfected with an effector
plasmid encoding rat GHFI. GC cell nuclear extracts produced four GHFI-specific
footprints (sites Fl to F4) on the tGH promoter, each containing multiple W4NCAT 
(W, A or T) or closely related motifs. Mutational analysis performed in GC cells 
indicated that the proximal Fl site alone can direct transcription, but that the 
region encompassing the F2 and F3 sites is necessary for optimal activation and
contains a TGACG motif (cAMP-response element, CRE) conferring cAMP
responsiveness. The role of the TGACG motif in mediating cAMP regulation of the
tGH promoter was confirmed in primary cultures of trout pituitary cells.
Cotransfection studies in carp EPC cells using an effector plasmid encoding trout
GHF1 demonstrated the GHF1 dependence of cAMP stimulation. Gel shift and
southwestern experiments revealed nuclear proteins of 43 kDa and 30 kDa in GC and
fish cells, respectively, that bind specifically to the tGH CRE, suggesting the
involvement of CRE-binding-protein/activating-transcription-factor-l-related
peptides in cAMP response. Incidentally, and in contrast with previous reports,
we found the rat GH promoter, that lacks TGACG motifs, unresponsive to cAMP.
Thus, the CAMP stimulation of the tGH gene is more similar to its human
counterpart. that is also GHF1 dependent and mediated by TGACG motifs in the
promoter. It is suggested that control of GH gene expression has evolved
modularly, through various assortments of the same regulatory units, rather than 
molecularly, through innovative units.

PMID: 8706656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1996 Jun;6(3):334-42.

Transcription factors in disease.

Engelkamp D(1), van Heyningen V.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK.
dieter@hgu.mrc.ac.uk

Mutations affecting several predominantly tissue-specific transcriptional
regulators have recently been associated with disease phenotypes. Although the
mutational spectrum is variable, many of the reported cases involve clear
loss-of-function mutations-such as Waardenburg syndrome type 1, aniridia and
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-suggesting that the genetic mechanism involved in
disease is haplo-insufficiency. The high degree of dosage sensitivity often
appears to affect only a subset of the tissues that express the gene. Position
effects with cytogenetic rearrangements well outside the coding region have been 
implicated for four of the genes discussed: POU3F4, SOX9, PAX6, and GL13.

PMID: 8791518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Endocrinol. 1996 Jun;149(3):473-83.

A possible role for D8/PSF-A-like sequences in lactotroph versus somatotroph
expression of the human prolactin gene.

Leite V(1), Cardoso EA, Bock ME, Sobrinho LG, Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.

The transcription factor GHF-1/Pit-1 is essential for the expression of GH and
prolactin (PRL) by somatotrophs and lactotrophs respectively. However, PRL is not
expressed in mature somatotrophs despite the presence of GHF-1/Pit-1. A possible 
mechanism is the presence of a somatotroph-specific repressor in the 5'-flanking 
sequences of the PRL gene. The region -3500/-1750 of the human (h) PRL gene is
associated with negative regulatory activity and contains an element, designated 
D8, that resembles repressor PSF-A sequences which are located in the distal
upstream region of placental members of the human GH family. An internal deletion
of D8 sequences resulted in a significant stimulation of promoter activity in
somatotroph GC (P < 0.005) and somatolactotroph-like GH3 and GH4C1 cells (P <
0.05), but not lactotroph-like 235-1 cells after gene transfer. However, D8
binding was observed by nuclease protection with lactotroph- as well as
somatotroph-like cell nuclear protein. Although proteins that bind to the D8
element appear ubiquitous, this element does yield tissue-specific complexes in
mobility shift assays. Further, competition studies do not suggest an interaction
between GHF-1/Pit-1 and D8 proteins. The hPRL D8 element was inserted upstream of
a thymidine kinase promoter and used to transfect pituitary and non-pituitary
HeLa cells, to assess intrinsic repressor activity and/or promoter specificity.
Although no repression was observed, a significant ninefold increase in
expression was observed in HeLa cells (P < 0.001) which was at least twofold
greater than observed in any of the pituitary cell lines tested. These results
implicate D8 in the somatotroph-specific repression of hPRL; however, they also
suggest that D8 can act as a stimulator as well as a repressor, depending on the 
interaction of a ubiquitous D8 factor forming promoter and cell-specific
complexes with other elements/factors.

PMID: 8691106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Histochem Cytochem. 1996 Jun;44(6):621-7.

Expression of the pituitary transcription factor GHF-1/PIT-1 in cell types of the
adult porcine adenohypophysis.

Malagon MM(1), Garrido JC, Dieulois C, Hera C, Castrillo JL, Dobado-Berrios PM,
Gracia-Navarro F.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Biología Celular, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Córdoba,
Spain.

We describe the expression of the transcription factor GHF-1/PIT-1 in adult
porcine adenohypophysis by a nonradioactive in situ hybridization (ISH) method
using a digoxigenin-labeled cDNA probe corresponding to the entire coding region 
of rat GHF-1. GHF-1 transcripts were found in 71.7% of adenohypophyseal cells. We
also report the simultaneous detection of GHF-1 mRNA and pituitary hormones by
combined ISH and immunocytochemistry (IC) in dispersed adenohypophyseal cells,
detected with an alkaline phosphatase-NBT/BCIP technique and with an
immunoperoxidase-3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole (AEC) method, respectively. The
combination of the two techniques neither abolished nor diminished their
sensitivity or specificity. GHF-1 is expressed in all five of the cell types in
the adult porcine adenohypophysis, showing that this method is suitable for
simultaneous detection of transcripts and proteins at the single-cell level.

PMID: 8666747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Biochem J. 1996 May 15;316 ( Pt 1):107-13.

Transcriptional induction of the human renin gene by cyclic AMP requires cyclic
AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and a factor binding a
pituitary-specific trans-acting factor (Pit-1) motif.

Germain S(1), Konoshita T, Philippe J, Corvol P, Pinet F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 36, Collège de France, Paris, France.

To delineate the cis-acting elements of the proximal promoter responsible for
cyclic AMP (cAMP)-induced human renin gene transcription, 5'-flanking regions of 
the human renin gene were fused to a luciferase reporter gene and transfected in 
chorionic cells. Forskolin treatment induced the expression of luciferase by
2.4-fold when the reporter plasmid contained the promoter region (-582 to + 16). 
Mutation or deletion of the cAMP response element (CRE) diminished (1.7-fold) but
did not abolish cAMP-induced transcription, demonstrating that the (-582 to -145)
region containing the CRE and the region (-145 to -38) containing a Pit-1
(pituitary-specific trans-acting factor) site were both necessary for cAMP
maximal induction. To study the molecular events mediating the cAMP induction,
DNase I footprinting and electromobility shift assays (EMSAs) were performed with
renin-producing chorionic cell and kidney cortex cell nuclear extracts, showing
that the CRE-binding protein (CREB) interacts with the CRE and that
tissue-specific factors, distinct from Pit-1, specifically bind the renin Pit-1
motif. Taken together, these results demonstrate that the cAMP response of the
human renin gene may involve CREB binding the CRE and tissue-specific factors,
different from Pit-1, that interact with the Pit-1 response DNA elements.

PMCID: PMC1217308
PMID: 8645191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Mod Pathol. 1996 May;9(5):526-33.

Expression of Pit-1 and estrogen receptor messenger RNA in prolactin-producing
pituitary adenomas.

Sanno N(1), Teramoto A, Matsuno A, Takekoshi S, Itoh J, Osamura RY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.

The pituitary-specific transcriptional factor, Pit-1, is a member of the
POU-domain family, which has a role in the development and differentiation of
three pituitary cell types: somatotrophs, lactotrophs, and thyrotrophs. Recently,
specific DNA-dependent interactions have been observed between Pit-1 and nuclear 
receptors, including: thyroid hormone receptor; retinoic acid receptor;
glucocorticoid receptor; and estrogen receptor (ER). The cooperative interaction 
between Pit-1 and ER required for prolactin enhancer activity in rat pituitaries 
has been suggested. We analyzed the expression of Pit-1 messenger ribonucleic
acid (mRNA) and ER mRNA in 15 human prolactin-producing adenomas using
nonradioisotopic in situ hybridization. Their products were also studied by
immunohistochemical analysis. Pit-1 mRNA was detected in 12 (80%) of 15
prolactin-producing adenomas. On the other hand, ER mRNA was detected in 14 (94%)
of adenomas studied. mRNAs of Pit-1 and ER were detected more frequently than
immunohistochemical expression of their products. By combined in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemical examination, Pit-1 mRNA and ER mRNA were
often colocalized with prolactin immunoreactivities. The colocalizations of Pit-1
mRNA and ER protein were observed in adenoma cells. The high incidence of the
expression of ER mRNA in prolactin-producing adenomas may suggest cooperative
interactions between Pit-1 and ER in functional differentiation and development
of prolactin-producing adenomas.

PMID: 8733768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 May;16(5):1955-65.

The Oct-1 POU-specific domain can stimulate small nuclear RNA gene transcription 
by stabilizing the basal transcription complex SNAPc.

Mittal V(1), Cleary MA, Herr W, Hernandez N.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, State University of New York at Stony Brook, 
New York 11794, USA.

The RNA polymerase II and III human small nuclear RNA promoters have a common
basal element, the proximal sequence element, which binds the TATA box-binding
protein-containing complex SNAPc. They also contain an enhancer characterized by 
a highly conserved octamer sequence, which constitutes a binding site for the
broadly expressed POU domain transcription factor Oct-1. The POU domain is a
bipartite DNA-binding domain consisting of a POU-homeo (POUH) domain and a
POU-specific (POUs) domain joined by a flexible linker. Here, we show that the
Oct-1 POU domain but not the related Pit-1 POU domain can facilitate the binding 
of SNAPc to the proximal sequence element, and activate transcription. The effect
is probably mediated by protein-protein contacts, and 1 of 30 amino acid
differences between the Oct-1 and Pit-1 POUs domains is the key determinant for
the differential interaction with SNAPc and the ability to activate
transcription. These results show that a function that is the hallmark of
activation domains, namely, recruitment of a basal transcription complex
resulting in activation of transcription, can be performed by a DNA-binding
domain. In this case, subtle changes between activator DNA-binding domains, as
subtle as a single amino acid difference, can profoundly affect interaction with 
the basal transcription machinery.

PMCID: PMC231183
PMID: 8628262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Endocrinology. 1996 May;137(5):1775-84.

Induction of chinook salmon growth hormone promoter activity by the adenosine
3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent pathway involves two cAMP-response elements 
with the CGTCA motif and the pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1.

Wong AO(1), Le Drean Y, Liu D, Hu ZZ, Du SJ, Hew CL.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital for Sick Children, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University of
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

In this study, the functional role of two cAMP-response elements (CRE) in the
promoter of the chinook salmon GH gene and their interactions with the
transcription factor Pit-1 in regulating GH gene expression were examined. A
chimeric construct of the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene
with the CRE-containing GH promoter (pGH.CAT) was transiently transfected into
primary cultures of rainbow trout pituitary cells. The expression of CAT activity
was stimulated by an adenylate cyclase activator forskolin as well as a
membrane-permeant cAMP analog 8-bromo-cAMP. Furthermore, these stimulatory
responses were inhibited by a protein kinase A inhibitor H89, suggesting that
these CREs are functionally coupled to the adenylate cyclase-cAMP-protein kinase 
A cascade. This hypothesis is supported by parallel studies using GH4ZR7 cells, a
rat pituitary cell line stably transfected with dopamine D2 receptors. In this
cell line, D2 receptor activation is known to inhibit adenylate cyclase activity 
and cAMP synthesis. Stimulation with a nonselective dopamine agonist,
apomorphine, or a D2-specific agonist, Ly171555, suppressed the expression of
pGH.CAT in GH4ZR7 cells, and this inhibition was blocked by simultaneous
treatment with forskolin. These results indicate that inhibition of the
cAMP-dependent pathway reduces the basal promoter activity of the CRE-containing 
pGH.CAT. The functionality of these CREs was further confirmed by deletion
analysis and site-specific mutagenesis. In trout pituitary cells, the cAMP
inducibility of pGH.CAT was inhibited after deleting the CRE-containing sequence 
from the GH promoter. When the CRE-containing sequence was cloned into a CAT
construct with a viral thymidine kinase promoter, a significant elevation of cAMP
inducibility was observed. This stimulatory response, however, was abolished by
mutating the core sequence, CGTCA, in these CREs, suggesting that these
cis-acting elements confer cAMP inducibility to the salmon GH gene. The
interactions between CREs and the transcription factor Pit-1 in mediating GH gene
expression were also examined. In HeLa cells, a human cervical cancer cell line
deficient in Pit-1, both basal and cAMP-induced expression of pGH.CAT were
apparent only with the cotransfection of a Pit-1 expression vector. These results
taken together indicate that the two CREs in the chinook salmon GH gene are
functionally associated with the cAMP-dependent pathway and that their promoter
activity is dependent on the presence of Pit-1

PMID: 8612514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1996 Apr 19;118(1-2):9-14.

Local expression of a POU family transcription factor, Pit-1, in the rat
placenta.

Lee BJ(1), Jeong JK, Kim JH, Kang SG, Kim MO, Choi WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Natural Sciences, University of Ulsan, South
Korea.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Endocrinol 1996 Jul 1;120(2):213-4.

A pituitary-specific trans-acting factor, Pit-1 regulates transcriptional
activity of growth hormone (GH) and prolactin (PRL) genes. Pit-1 can bind and
activate the promoters of human chorionic somatomammotropin (hCS-A) and placental
GH variants (hGH-V) as well. However, expression of Pit-1 in the rat placenta has
not yet been elucidated. The present study aims to determine whether the Pit-1
gene is locally expressed in the rat placenta using reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), Northern blot and Western blot 
hybridization, in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. PCR products were 
further analyzed by Southern hybridization and DNA sequencing. The estimated size
of Pit-1 mRNA in placenta was very similar to that in anterior pituitary (AP).
PCR products from placenta were exactly the same size with that from AP and
confirmed as Pit-1-specific by Southern hybridization. The Pit-1 specific
sequence was also confirmed by sequencing of partial amplification fragments.
Immunoreactive 33 kDa Pit-1 was present in the placenta as well as in AP. Pit-1
specific mRNA and protein were localized in the trophoblast cells of placenta.
These data suggest that Pit-1 is locally synthesized in the rat placenta and may 
be involved in the regulation of GH- and/or PRL-like gene expression in the
placenta.

PMID: 8735586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Neuroendocrinology. 1996 Apr;63(4):349-55.

The ontogeny of pit-1 expression in the human fetal pituitary gland.

Puy LA(1), Asa SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Canada.

Pit-1 expression has been reported to be cell-type-specific in the adult human
pituitary and in human pituitary adenomas. In contrast, studies of rodent fetal
adenohypophysial development as well as mature rodent glands have indicated that 
the pit-1 mRNA is ubiquitously expressed and the protein is under translational
control. To determine the ontogeny and localization of Pit-1 expression in the
human fetus, we examined fetal pituitaries (n = 23) at various stages of
gestation from 6 weeks to term using in situ hybridization (ISH) for pit-1 mRNA, 
immunohistochemical localization of Pit-1 protein, and combined ISH for pit-1
mRNA with immunohistochemistry for pituitary hormones. At 6 and 7 weeks of
gestation, the cells surrounding both limbs of Rathke's cleft showed a moderate
specific signal for pit-1 mRNA. At 7 weeks, only a few cells were immunoreactive 
for ACTH and there was no definite colocalization of that hormone with pit-1
mRNA. At 8 and 9 weeks of gestation, there was definite preferential expression
of pit-1 mRNA in cells containing growth hormone (GH) but not ACTH, as well as in
cells with no detectable hormone immunopositivity. At midgestation and after,
there was clear correlation between pit-1 mRNA expression and hormone content;
cells with GH, prolactin and/or thyrotropin immunoreactivity had abundant pit-1
mRNA, whereas those containing ACTH, FSH or LH were negative for pit-1 mRNA by
ISH and its protein by immunohistochemistry. The signal for pit-1 mRNA was
stronger in intensity and present in more cells in fetal than in adult
adenohypophyses. The ontogeny of pit-1 mRNA expression indicates that it precedes
the onset of pituitary hormone detection. Its abundance in the human pituitary
early in gestation may reflect its role in cytodifferentiation and cell
proliferation. The correlation between pit-1 mRNA detection and Pit-1 protein
localization is consistent with a cell-type-specific pretranslational regulatory 
mechanism for Pit-1 expression in the developing human adenohypophysis.

PMID: 8739890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Endocrinology. 1996 Apr;137(4):1326-31.

Developmental regulation of pituitary growth hormone-releasing hormone receptor
gene expression in the rat.

Korytko AI(1), Zeitler P, Cuttler L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
44106, USA.

The mechanisms governing age-dependent patterns of GH secretion are not well
understood. Studies have shown that pituitaries of fetal and neonatal mammals are
highly responsive to the stimulatory effect of GH-releasing hormone (GHRH)
compared to those of mature mammals. Differential pituitary responsiveness to
GHRH may, therefore, contribute to the elevated circulating GH concentrations
characteristic of the perinatal period and the subsequent decline in circulating 
GH late in life. Age-dependent expression of GHRH-receptor (GHRH-R) would provide
a cellular mechanism to direct differential somatotroph responsiveness to GHRH.
Therefore, we determined the ontogeny of rat GHRH-R gene expression. We studied
rats at ages that correspond to major changes in circulating GH levels: embryonic
day 19.5 (of 21.5-day gestation period); postnatal days 2, 12, 30, 45, and 70;
and 1 yr of age. We found that GHRH-R messenger RNA (mRNA) expression was
markedly age dependent (P < 0.0003). The concentration of GHRH-R mRNA was highest
on day 19.5 of gestation, the earliest age studied, and declined during the
perinatal period to reach a nadir at 12 days of age. GHRH-R mRNA levels increased
at 30 days of age, at time corresponding to the onset of sexual maturation, and
then declined later in life. In addition, we assessed the expression of GH and
Pit-1 mRNAs in pituitaries of the same age groups; we found age-dependent
patterns for these transcripts that did not parallel the ontogenic pattern
observed for GHRH-R mRNA. Together, these data indicate that expression of rat
pituitary GHRH-R mRNA is developmentally regulated and suggest that maturation of
GHRH-R may be an important determinant of somatotroph function during early
development.

PMID: 8625907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Endocrinology. 1996 Apr;137(4):1286-91.

Constitutively active G(S) alpha-subunits stimulate Pit-1 promoter activity via a
protein kinase A-mediated pathway acting through deoxyribonucleic acid binding
sites both for Pit-1 and for adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate response
element-binding protein.

Gaiddon C(1), Tian J, Loeffler JP, Bancroft C.

Author information: 
(1)URA 1446 du CNRS, Laboratoire de Physiologie Generale, Universite Louis
Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.

Constitutively active mutations of the G protein alpha(S) subunit are detected at
a high frequency in human pituitary adenomas that secrete GH or PRL. It seems
possible that over-expression of the pituitary cell-specific transcription factor
Pit-1/GHF-1 (Pit-1) gene in response to active alpha(S) subunits contributes to
the formation of these adenomas. We have examined whether expression in pituitary
cells of one of these constitutively active alpha(S) subunits, Q227L-alpha(S),
stimulates expression directed by the Pit-1 promoter. Transient expression of
Q227L-alpha(S) yielded a strong stimulation of a target Pit-1
promoter-chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) construct, (-200)Pit-1-CAT.
Expression of wild-type alpha(S) or an inactive alpha(S) mutant yielded,
respectively, reduced or no stimulation of CAT activity. A dominant inhibitor of 
protein kinase A (PKA), RAB, blocked almost completely either forskolin (FSK) or 
Q227L-alpha(S) stimulation of (-200)Pit-1-CAT expression, implying that PKA is
required for the action of Q227L-alpha(S) on the Pit-1 promoter. The Pit-1
promoter contains a binding site for Pit-1 and two CREB binding sites. Mutation
of the Pit-1 binding site reduced but did not eliminate either FSK or
Q227L-alpha(S) stimulation of Pit-1 promoter activity, implying a partial but
incomplete requirement for this element for a PKA-mediated response to
Q227L-alpha(S). The CREB dominant inhibitor S133A-CREB yielded a partial
reduction in either FSK or Q227L-alpha(S) stimulation of (-200)Pit-1-CAT
expression, implying that one or both of the Pit-1 promoter adenosine
3'5'-monophosphate response element binding protein (CREB) binding sites is/are
also required for a complete PKA-mediated response to Q227L-alpha(S). The
observation that S133A-CREB completely blocked the response to FSK or
Q227L-alpha(S) of a Pit-1 promoter containing a mutated site PitB1 implies that
the binding sites for Pit-1 and CREB account for all of the response elements for
FSK or alpha(S) in the Pit-1 promoter.

PMID: 8625901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Neuroendocrinol. 1996 Mar;8(3):211-25.

Ontogeny of pituitary transcription factor-1 (Pit-1), growth hormone (GH) and
prolactin (PRL) mRNA levels in male and female rats and the differential
expression of Pit-1 in lactotrophs and somatotrophs.

González-Parra S(1), Chowen JA, Garciá Segura LM, Argente J.

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Autónoma, Hospital Infantil Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain.

Pituitary transcription factor-1 (Pit-1 or GHF-1), a transcription factor
specific to the anterior pituitary, is involved in the expression and regulation 
of the growth hormone (GH) and prolactin (PRL) genes. Post-pubertally, the
expression of both GH and PRL becomes sexually dimorphic with males having higher
GH levels and females higher PRL levels; however, little is known about the
postnatal regulation of their common transcription factor. Furthermore, whether
the Pit-1 gene is differentially expressed in somatotrophs and lactotrophs
remains to be elucidated. In this study, we used in situ hybridization
histochemistry to examine Pit-1, GH and PRL mRNA levels in the anterior
pituitaries of male and female rats throughout development (0, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40 
and 60 days of age) to determine when GH and PRL production becomes sexually
dimorphic and if this is accompanied by a dimorphism in Pit-1 gene expression. In
addition, the level of Pit-1 mRNA was determined separately in both GH mRNA and
PRL mRNA containing cells during the various developmental stages. We found that 
in both males and females the mRNA levels of Pit-1, GH and PRL remain relatively 
unchanged until around the time of pubertal onset (30-40 days) when there is a
significant increase in all three mRNA species, which is followed by a decrease
to adult levels. Also around the time of puberty, both GH and PRL mRNA levels
become sexually dimorphic, with males having higher levels of GH mRNA and females
higher PRL mRNA levels. In contrast, at no time during development were overall
Pit-1 mRNA levels found to differ between the sexes. However, when Pit-1 mRNA
content was measured separately in specific cell types, significant differences
between the sexes became evident. Throughout development Pit-1 mRNA levels are
higher in lactotrophs of females than in those of males, whereas in somatotrophs 
males have higher Pit-1 mRNA levels than females. Furthermore, within a sex there
is differential expression of Pit-1 in the two cell types with females having
significantly higher levels of Pit-1 in lactotrophs than in somatotrophs and
males having higher levels in somatotrophs than in lactotrophs. These data
support the hypothesis that a sexual dimorphism exists in the expression and
pituitary specific transcription factor Pit-1; however, this dimorphism is not
manifest as a difference in overall mRNA levels, but in the differential
expression of this gene in lactotrophs and somatotrophs.

PMID: 8730655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Neurosurgery. 1996 Feb;38(2):362-6.

Expression and alternative splicing of Pit-1 messenger ribonucleic acid in
pituitary adenomas.

Hamada K(1), Nishi T, Kuratsu J, Ushio Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kumamoto University Medical School, Kumamoto City,
Japan.

Twenty-eight human pituitary adenomas were analyzed for the expression of Pit-1
messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) by using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction analysis of frozen-section mRNA. Pit-1 mRNA was detected in all
functioning tumors and in 9 of 11 nonfunctioning tumors. Pit-1 beta, which is a
more active isoform of transcriptional factor for growth hormone than Pit- alpha 
and which arises from an alternative splicing mechanism, was detected in 14 of 17
functioning tumors and in 5 of 11 nonfunctioning tumors. The transcript that
corresponds to Pit-1T, which increases thyroid-stimulating hormone beta promoter 
activity in rat thyrotropic tumor cells, was not found. There was no significant 
difference in the total Pit-1 (alpha+beta) mRNA expression level between
functioning tumors and nonfunctioning tumors. Growth hormone-producing tumors and
other pituitary adenomas also showed no significant difference in the Pit-1
beta/Pit-1 alpha expression ratio. Our data suggest that the major role of Pit-1 
gene in pituitary adenoma might not be involved in the regulation of hormone
production.

PMID: 8869065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Neuroendocrinology. 1996 Jan;63(1):3-15.

In vivo and in vitro regulation of pituitary transcription factor-1 (Pit-1) by
changes in the hormone environment.

González-Parra S(1), Chowen JA, García-Segura LM, Argente J.

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Autónoma, Spain.

Pituitary transcription factor-1 (Pit-1 or GHF-1) is a transcription factor
specific to the anterior pituitary and is involved in the expression and
regulation of the growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL) and thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH) beta-subunit genes. The expression of these three genes can be
modulated by changes in the hormone environment and it is thought that some of
these effects are mediated through Pit-1, but little is known about the
physiological regulation of this transcription factor. Therefore, we first asked 
whether Pit-1 gene expression is modified as a result of changes in the in vivo
gonadal steroid environment and if this could be correlated with changes in GH
and/or PRL mRNA levels. Secondly, we sought to determine if sex steroids affect
the mRNA levels of these three peptides by acting at the level of the pituitary
and whether these effects are androgen or estrogen mediated. Finally, how sex
steroids modulate the response of these three genes to the hypothalamic
neuropeptides growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) and somatostatin (SS) was
analyzed. To this end, we compared Pit-1, GH and PRL mRNA levels in the anterior 
pituitary of intact, castrated, and castrated testosterone-replaced adult male
rats. In addition, primary cultures of adult male pituitaries were used to study 
the direct effects of both androgens and estrogens on Pit-1, GH, and PRL mRNA
levels. In situ hybridization histochemistry was used to compare relative levels 
of Pit-1, GH and PRL mRNA. Densitometric analysis of the in vivo studies showed
that castration resulted in a 57, 40 and 55% decline in Pit-1, GH and PRL mRNA
signal levels, respectively. Furthermore, replacement with testosterone (T) at
the time of castration completely prevented the decline in all three mRNA species
(ANOVA: Pit-1 mRNA, p < 0.0001; GH mRNA, p < 0.0001; PRL mRNA, p < 0.0001). In
vivo, both T (10(-7) M) and estradiol (10(-9) M) were capable of stimulating
Pit-1 mRNA and PRL mRNA levels, while dihydrotestosterone (DHT; 10(-7) M) had no 
effect. There was no effect of any of these steroid treatments on GH mRNA levels 
in vitro. Addition of GHRH to the cultures increased GH mRNA levels, as well as
those of Pit-1 and PRL, and SS had the opposite effect on GH mRNA levels. Whereas
the GH response to GHRH was not significantly modified by exposure to sex
steroids, the effect of SS was. The presence of sex steroids was capable of
modifying the Pit-1 and PRL responses to both GHRH and SS. These results clearly 
indicate that changes in circulating levels of sex steroids modulate the
expression of Pit-1 in the anterior pituitary and that these changes can be
correlated with commensurate modifications in GH and PRL mRNA levels.
Furthermore, the effect on both Pit-1 and PRL mRNA levels occurs, at least in
part, at the level of the anterior pituitary and is an estrogen-receptor-mediated
event. In contrast, the effects of gonadal steroids on GH mRNA levels are less
direct and are most likely mediated at the level of the hypothalamus, as well as 
through modulation of the response of the somatotroph to hypothalamic factors. We
conclude that the transcription factor Pit-1 is actively regulated
physiologically and may be involved in mediating some of the effects of sex
steroids and hypothalamic factors on the synthesis of certain anterior pituitary 
hormones.

PMID: 8839350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Acta Neuropathol. 1996;91(3):263-8.

In situ hybridization analysis of Pit-1 mRNA and hormonal production in human
pituitary adenomas.

Sanno N(1), Teramoto A, Matsuno A, Itoh J, Takekoshi S, Osamura RY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.

The pituitary-specific transcriptional factor, Pit-1, is a member of the
POU-domain family which has a role in the development and differentiation of
three pituitary cell types: somatotrophs, lactotrophs, and thyrotrophs. Recent
investigations have suggested the involvement of specific regulation of Pit-1
transcripts in human pituitary adenomas. In this study, we analyzed the
expression of Pit-1 gene and Pit-1 product in various human pituitary adenomas
using in situ hybridization (ISH) and immunohistochemistry (IHC). Northern
hybridization analysis revealed 2.4- and 4.1-kb Pit-1 transcripts in normal
pituitary, growth hormone (GH)-, prolactin (PRL)- and thyrotropin (TSH)-secreting
adenomas. By ISH analysis, Pit-1 mRNA was detected in 42 (84%) of 50 adenomas.
The highest incidence was observed in 15 GH-secreting adenomas and 8
TSH-secreting adenomas, in which Pit-1 mRNA was detected in all cases. Pit-1 mRNA
expression was detected in 11 (85%) of 13 PRL-secreting adenomas. In 12
clinically non-functioning adenomas, Pit-1 mRNA was also present in 8 cases, and 
5 of these were associated with immunohistochemical expression of Pit-1 product. 
By combined ISH and IHC, Pit-1 mRNA was often colocalized with GH, PRL or TSH
beta immunoreactivities and sometimes colocalized with alpha-subunit of
glycoprotein (alpha SU) immunoreactivity. The expression of Pit-1 mRNA in various
cell types of human pituitary adenomas in addition to GH, TSH beta and PRL
immunoreactivities suggests that Pit-1 may play a role in functional development 
of pituitary adenomas, including clinically non-functioning adenomas. However,
some additional transcriptional factors or enhancers may be required.

PMID: 8834538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Horm Res. 1996;45 Suppl 1:25-8.

Pit-1: clinical aspects.

Pfäffle R(1), Kim C, Otten B, Wit JM, Eiholzer U, Heimann G, Parks J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Rheinisch, Westfälische Technische Hochschule
Aachen, Germany.

Pit-1 is a transcription factor which is expressed in the somatotrope,
lactotrope, and thyrotrope cell population of the anterior pituitary gland from
early fetal development throughout life. Mutations in the Pit-1 gene result in
insufficient expression of this factor, accounting for a form of combined
pituitary hormone deficiency for growth hormone (GH), prolactin, and
thyroid-stimulating hormone. Clinical presentation at diagnosis can be variable, 
although all forms finally result in severe growth retardation due to GH
deficiency and hypothyroidism. The clinical variability is due to other factors
than the exact location of the mutation; however, the type of inheritance seems
to correlate well with the genotype. Early detection of Pit-1 abnormalities might
prevent the sequelae associated with some early and severe presentations of this 
disorder.

PMID: 8805025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Recent Prog Horm Res. 1996;51:217-38; discussion 238-9.

Transcriptional control of cell phenotypes in the neuroendocrine system.

Rosenfeld MG(1), Bach I, Erkman L, Li P, Lin C, Lin S, McEvilly R, Ryan A, Rhodes
S, Schonnemann M, Scully K.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, School of Medicine, University of California 
at San Diego, La Jolla 92093-0648, USA.

A fundamental aspect of the development of complex organ systems is a requirement
for precise temporal and spatial coordination in the genesis of tissues of
distinct embryonic origins, in order to form functional units required for
physiological homeostasis and survival. Such a requirement is particularly well
exemplified in mammalian development in the formation of the
hypothalamic-pituitary axis. Neuronally expressed POU domain factors might exert 
effects on terminal differentiation events similar to those of Pit-1 in the
maturation of anterior pituitary gland cell phenotypes. Neurons comprising the
endocrine hypothalamus develop in tandem with their ultimate target, the
pituitary gland, and arise from a primordium in which three related class III POU
domain factors-Brn-2, Brn-4, and Brn-1-are initially co-expressed. These factors 
subsequently exhibit stratified patterns of ontogenic expression, correlating
with the appearance of distinct neuropeptides that define three major endocrine
hypothalamic cell types. Deletion of the Brn-2 genomic locus affects terminal
differentiation and/or maintenance of hypothalamic neurosecretory neurons and
development of the posterior pituitary gland. Thus, both neuronal and endocrine
components of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis are critically dependent upon the
action of specific POU domain factors at a penultimate step in the sequential
events that underlie the appearance of mature cellular phenotypes.

PMID: 8701080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Domest Anim Endocrinol. 1996 Jan;13(1):1-33.

Control of growth hormone synthesis.

Tuggle CK(1), Trenkle A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames 50011, USA.

A large body of research, primarily in the rodent and human species, has
elucidated many of the details regarding the control of GH synthesis and release.
Cell type-specific transcriptional control has been identified as the main
mechanism of the somatotroph-specific expression of GH. The recent detailed
analysis in rodents and humans of a highly specific transcriptional activator
protein, PIT-1, has opened several new areas of study. This is especially true
for research in the farm animal species, where PIT-1 has been cloned and its
binding elements on the GH gene are being investigated in a number of
economically important species. Genetic and biochemical analyses of PIT-1 and
other GH regulators have shown the central role of PIT-1 not only in the
cell-autonomous stimulation of GH gene transcription, but also in the
participation of PIT-1 in the response at the GH gene to exogenous hormones such 
as RA and TH. PIT-1 has been implicated in the proliferative development of the
pituitary itself, in the maintenance of anterior pituitary cell types once cell
types are defined, and in the mechanism by which the hypothalamic signal for GH
release is transduced. However, PIT-1 by itself does not activate the GH gene, so
that additional unknown factors exist that need to be identified to fully
understand the cell type-specific activation of the GH gene. In addition, GH gene
regulatory elements acting through well-characterized systems such as TH have
seemingly different effects; the specific context of the regulatory elements
relative to the promoter elements appear to be crucial. These contextual details 
of GH gene regulation are not well understood for any species and need to be
further studied to be able to make predictions for particular elements and
regulatory mechanisms across species. The regulation of the pulsatile secretion
of GH by GHRH and SRIH is reasonably well understood after the cloning and
analysis of the two releasing factors and their receptors. Modification or
manipulation of the pathways involved in the regulation of GH secretion is a
potential means of enhancing the lean tissue growth of meat animals. However,
further understanding of the systems controlling the in vivo release of GH is
needed before such manipulations are likely to be productive. Several other
research questions regarding the control of GH expression and release remain to
be answered. What is the biochemical connection between exogenous signal
transduction (i.e., GRH/GHRH-R, TR, ER, RAR) and PIT-1 at the GH gene? Are there 
additional coactivators or repressors of GH that respond to cAMP levels? Do
ubiquitous regulatory factors such as GHF-3 and Zn-15, identified thus far only
in the rat, exist in humans or livestock? Zn-15 is expected to be found in many
mammalian species, because its recognition sequence between the PIT-1 binding
sites is highly conserved across mammals (Figure 2). What is the mechanism
causing GH levels to drop during aging? Does PIT-1 expression decrease during the
lifespan of animals? Is it possible to increase GH gene expression within target 
tissues by directing the expression of PIT-1 to these tissues via transgenesis,
or are other factors limiting in peripheral tissues so that the lack of PIT-1
expression is not the deciding factor? Finally, is there genetic variation in the
expression of GHRH and/or SRIH or in their respective receptors? These questions 
are relevant to and could be investigated in several of the livestock species.

PMID: 8625613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 1996 Jan;120(1):73-7.

Expression of human Pit-1 product in the human pituitary and pituitary adenomas. 
Immunohistochemical studies using an antibody against synthetic human Pit-1
product.

Sanno N(1), Teramoto A, Matsuno A, Osamura RY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Pit-1, a member of a family of the POU-domain DNA binding factors, has
been known as a pituitary-specific transcriptional factor that regulates
functional differentiation toward somatotrophs, lactotrophs, and thyrotrophs in
the rodent pituitary gland. The aim of this study is to elucidate the role of
human Pit-1 (hPit-1) protein in the differentiation of human pituitary adenomas, 
using immunohistochemistry.
DESIGN: Anti-human Pit-1 polyclonal antibody against synthetic peptide was
applied to perform the avidin-biotinperoxidase complex method on paraffin
sections of 75 surgically obtained pituitary adenomas and 12 nontumorous human
pituitaries obtained at autopsy.
RESULTS: In normal human pituitary glands, many cells were positive for hPit-1
product in the nuclei of somatotrophs, lactotrophs, and somatomammotrophs. Among 
75 pituitary adenomas, hPit-1 product was expressed in 55 adenomas (73.3%). All
(100%) of the growth hormone-positive and thyrotroph cell adenomas were positive 
for hPit-1 product. Unexpectedly, expression of hPit-1 was found in a limited
number of adrenocorticotropic hormone-producing adenomas and clinically
nonfunctioning adenomas, including gonadotroph cell adenomas, although
localization was found only in occasional cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The invariable expression of hPit-1 protein in growth
hormone-positive adenomas and thyroid-stimulating hormone-positive adenomas may
suggest the role of Pit-1 protein in specific differentiation of the adenoma
cells. The expression of hPit-1 in various other types of adenomas may indicate
the involvement of other unidentified transcription factors or specific mediators
that have roles in these differentiations. Our observation may provide some
insight into the origin of cell types of some clinically nonfunctional adenomas.

PMID: 8554449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Schweiz Med Wochenschr. 1995 Dec 9;125(49):2367-78.

[Molecular endocrinology of thyroid diseases].

[Article in German]

Meier CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unité de recherche thyroïdienne, Hôpital cantonal universitaire de Genève.

Over the last decade it has become possible to investigate the molecular basis of
functional and neoplastic thyroid diseases, leading to the elucidation of various
genetic defects at the level of the pituitary, thyroid and target organs.
Mutations in either the pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1 or its
target gene, TSH beta, lead to rare forms of hereditary congenital
hypothyroidism. However, somatic mutations in thyroid epithelial cells causing an
increase in hormone production and/or cellular proliferation are much more
frequent. Nearly 50% of all toxic adenomas were shown to harbour activating
mutations in either the TSH-receptor or certain G-proteins. In contrast,
follicular and papillary thyroid malignancies are associated with mutations in
the ras and ret genes respectively. Intriguingly, different mutations and
rearrangements in the ret gene were shown to cause medullary thyroid cancer and
MEN2 as well as to be specifically associated with papillary thyroid cancer. In
contrast, mutations in thyroid-specific genes, such as thyroid peroxidase and
thyroglobulin, causing congenital hypothyroidism are extremely rare. Besides the 
molecular abnormalities at the pituitary and thyroidal level leading to altered
hormone secretion, genetic defects impairing thyroid hormone action at the target
level also occur. Specifically, mutations in one of the thyroid hormone receptor 
genes (the proto-oncogene c-erbA beta) were shown to cause the autosomal dominant
syndrome of resistance to thyroid hormone. The quest for a better understanding
of the molecular defects in the pituitary-thyroid axis has led to the cloning of 
some of the key proteins, which can now be used for diagnostic purposes in vivo
and in vitro. The use of recombinant thyroid peroxidase and TSH-receptor proteins
has made possible the development of more sensitive and specific in vitro assays 
for autoantibodies. In addition, recombinant TSH was recently shown to be
effective in stimulating radioiodine uptake in patients with residual
differentiated thyroid cancer who remained on suppressive thyroid hormone
therapy. Recombinant human TSH may therefore become a convenient diagnostic tool 
in the follow-up of patients with thyroid cancer by allowing for thyroglobulin
measurements and radioiodine scanning without the need for the patient to become 
hypothyroid.

PMID: 8848697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Dec;15(12):6694-701.

M-phase-specific phosphorylation of the POU transcription factor GHF-1 by a cell 
cycle-regulated protein kinase inhibits DNA binding.

Caelles C(1), Hennemann H, Karin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, School of
Medicine, La Jolla 92093-0636, USA.

GHF-1 is a member of the POU family of homeodomain proteins. It is a
cell-type-specific transcription factor responsible for determination and
expansion of growth hormone (GH)- and prolactin-expressing cells in the anterior 
pituitary. It was previously suggested that cyclic AMP (cAMP)-responsive protein 
kinase A (PKA) phosphorylates GHF-1 at a site within the N-terminal arm of its
homeodomain, thereby inhibiting its binding to the GH promoter. These results,
however, are inconsistent with the physiological stimulation of GH production by 
the cAMP pathway. As reported here, cAMP agonists and PKA do not inhibit GHF-1
activity in living cells and although they stimulate the phosphorylation of
GHF-1, the inhibitory phosphoacceptor site within the homeodomain is not
affected. Instead, this site, Thr-220, is subject to M-phase-specific
phosphorylation. As a result, GHF-1 DNA binding activity is transiently inhibited
during the M phase. This activity is regained once cells enter G1, a phase during
which GHF-1 phosphorylation is minimal. Thr-220 of GHF-1 is the homolog of the
mitotic phosphoacceptor site responsible for the M-phase-specific inhibition of
Oct-1 DNA binding Ser-382. As this site is conserved in all POU proteins, it
appears that all members of this group are similarly regulated. A specific kinase
activity distinct in its substrate specificity and susceptibility to inhibitors
from the Cdc2 mitotic kinase or PKA was identified in extracts of mitotic cells. 
This novel activity could be involved in regulating the DNA binding activity of
all POU proteins in a cell cycle-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC230922
PMID: 8524234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Biol Chem. 1995 Dec 1;270(48):28733-9.

Activin increases phosphorylation and decreases stability of the transcription
factor Pit-1 in MtTW15 somatotrope cells.

Gaddy-Kurten D(1), Vale WW.

Author information: 
(1)Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, Salk Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037-1099, USA.

Activin is a polypeptide growth factor which exerts endocrine, paracrine, and
autocrine effects in a variety of tissues. In the pituitary somatotrope, activin 
represses proliferation and growth hormone (GH) biosynthesis and secretion. We
previously demonstrated that decreases in GH biosynthesis in MtTW15 somatotrope
cells are due at least in part to decreased binding of the tissue-specific
transcription factor, Pit-1, to the GH promoter, resulting in decreased
transcription of the GH gene. The objective of the current study was to determine
the extent to which activin-mediated decreases in GH transcription were the
result of decreased Pit-1 activity and/or decreased Pit-1 protein content in
MtTW15 cells. Activin caused rapid increases in Pit-1 phosphorylation, which were
temporally correlated with decreases in GH DNA binding. Pit-1 phosphorylation
preceded marked decreases in steady-state levels of Pit-1 protein. The rate of
Pit-1 synthesis was only moderately decreased by activin, with a time-course
similar to that observed for decreases in GH biosynthesis. However, Pit-1
stability was markedly decreased after more than 4 h of activin treatment. These 
data demonstrate that activin decreases GH expression in MtTW15 cells through
multilevel regulation of Pit-1, which may represent a more general mechanism
whereby activin and other transforming growth factor beta family members modulate
gene expression through regulation of transcription factor activity as well as
content.

PMID: 7499395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1995 Nov;80(11):3127-30.

The prenatal role of thyroid hormone evidenced by fetomaternal Pit-1 deficiency.

de Zegher F(1), Pernasetti F, Vanhole C, Devlieger H, Van den Berghe G, Martial
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Leuven, Belgium.

The role of thyroid hormone in the human fetus is uncertain; a significant amount
of T4 is transferred from the maternal to the fetal circulation. A mother-infant 
pair was found to be heterozygotic for a point mutation in codon 271 of the gene 
encoding Pit-1, a pituitary-specific transcription factor regulating somatotrope,
lactotrope, and thyrotrope function. At birth, serum T4 was undetectable in
mother and infant. The newborn presented with a striking delay of respiratory,
cardiovascular, neurological, and bone maturation. Despite replacement therapy
since birth, neurological development of the infant is impaired. Fetomaternal
Pit-1 deficiency resulted in unmitigated fetal hypothyroidism that unmasked
thyroid hormone as a potent endogenous drive of fetal maturation and revealed
placental transfer of maternal T4 as a rescue mechanism for infants with
congenital hypothyroidism, preventing fetal and neonatal symptoms of thyroid
deficiency and safeguarding developmental potential.

PMID: 7593413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Nov;15(11):6322-30.

Negative regulation of expression of the pituitary-specific transcription factor 
GHF-1/Pit-1 by thyroid hormones through interference with promoter enhancer
elements.

Sanchez-Pacheco A(1), Palomino T, Aranda A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas, Madrid, Spain.

Expression of the growth hormone gene is due to the presence of the
pituitary-specific transcription factor GHF-1/Pit-1. The action of the thyroid
hormone T3 is mediated by nuclear receptors that regulate transcription by
interaction with DNA elements located near promoters of the regulated genes. In
this study, we show that T3 inhibits expression of the GHF-1/Pit-1 gene in rat
pituitary GH4C1 cells by a novel mechanism that involves transcriptional
interference with other regulatory elements of the promoter. Sequences between bp
-90 and -200 of the rat GHF-1/Pit-1 gene which do not contain a hormone response 
element but contain two cyclic AMP-responsive elements mediate most of the
repressive effect of T3. The hormone reduces basal levels of GHF-1/Pit-1 promoter
activity and antagonizes its response to cyclic AMP and the tumor promoter TPA
(12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate). A similar repression is found with a
heterologous promoter that contains four copies of the cyclic AMP-responsive
element motif. This regulation provides a novel example of the cross-talk between
the thyroid hormone receptor and the signal transduction pathways used by
different hormones and growth factors. Additionally, T3 interferes with in vitro 
binding of GHF-1/Pit-1 to a positive autoregulatory element located at bp -45 to 
-63 and has a detectable inhibitory effect on the activity of a promoter
construct which extends to bp -90 of 5'-flanking DNA. The regulation of the
transcription factor provides a novel example of negative transcriptional
regulation by thyroid hormones.

PMCID: PMC230884
PMID: 7565785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 27;270(43):25520-5.

In vivo mutational analysis of the DNA binding domain of the tissue-specific
transcription factor, Pit-1.

Liang J(1), Moye-Rowley S, Maurer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland 97201, USA.

Pit-1 is a member of the POU family of transcription factors, which contain a
bipartite DNA binding domain. The DNA binding domain consists of a POU-specific
domain and a POU homeodomain. Each of the subdomains can interact with DNA
independently, but both subdomains are required for high affinity,
sequence-specific DNA binding. To examine the contributions of individual amino
acids to the function of the DNA binding domain of Pit-1, we developed an
approach involving random, in vitro mutagenesis followed by functional screening 
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Using this strategy, we identified a number of point
mutations that altered the function of the Pit-1 DNA binding domain. Mutations
that altered Pit-1 function were found in both the POU-specific and the POU
homeodomain. Most of the mutations involve amino acid residues that are conserved
in POU factors. One of the more frequent kinds of mutation affected residues
located in the hydrophobic core of the protein. Another common mutation involved 
amino acids that are thought to make specific contacts with DNA. These mutations 
define a number of amino acid residues that are important for the function of the
DNA binding domain of Pit-1.

PMID: 7592721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Biol Chem. 1995 Sep 8;270(36):20930-6.

A composite Ets/Pit-1 binding site in the prolactin gene can mediate
transcriptional responses to multiple signal transduction pathways.

Howard PW(1), Maurer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland 97201, USA.

Binding sites for the tissue-specific transcription factor, Pit-1, are required
for basal and hormonally induced prolactin gene transcription. Although Pit-1 is 
phosphorylated in response to several signaling pathways, the mechanism by which 
Pit-1 contributes to hormonal induction of gene transcription has not been
defined. Recent reports suggest that phosphorylation of Pit-1 may not be required
for hormonal regulation of the prolactin promoter. Analysis of the contribution
of individual Pit-1 binding sites has been complicated due to the fact that some 
of the elements appear to be redundant. To better understand the role of Pit-1
sites in mediating hormonal regulation of the prolactin gene, we have performed
enhancer tests using the three most proximal Pit-1 binding sites of the rat
prolactin gene which are designated the 1P, 2P, and 3P sites. The results
demonstrate that multimers of the 3P Pit-1 binding site are much more responsive 
to several hormonal and intracellular signaling pathways than multimers of the 1P
or 2P sites. The 3P DNA element was found to contain a consensus binding site for
the Ets family of proteins. Mutation of the Ets binding site greatly decreased
the ability of epidermal growth factor, phorbol esters, Ras, or the Raf kinase to
induce reporter gene activity. Mutation of the Ets site had little effect on
basal enhancer activity. In contrast, mutation of the consensus Pit-1 binding
site in the 3P element essentially abolished all basal enhancer activity.
Overexpression of Ets-1 in GH3 pituitary cells enhanced both basal and Ras
induced activity from the 3P enhancer. These data describe a composite element in
the prolactin gene containing binding sites for two different factors and the
studies suggest a mechanism by which Ets proteins and Pit-1 functionally
cooperate to permit transcriptional regulation by different signaling pathways.

PMID: 7673116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Endocrinology. 1995 Sep;136(9):3863-70.

Regulation of the pituitary-specific transcription factor GHF-1/Pit-1 messenger
ribonucleic acid levels by growth hormone-secretagogues in rat anterior pituitary
cells in monolayer culture.

Soto JL(1), Castrillo JL, Dominguez F, Dieguez C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Santiago de
Compostela, Spain.

Pituitary-specific expression of the GH gene is dependent on a pituitary-specific
transcription factor GH factor-1 (GHF-1), a homeodomain protein also known as
pituitary-specific transcription factor-1 (Pit-1). The aim of this study was to
investigate the regulation of GHF-1 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels in primary
monolayer cultures of rat anterior pituitary cells. Specifically, in addition to 
direct activators of second messenger signaling systems, we studied the effects
of different hormones, all of which are known to be involved in the regulation of
somatotroph cell function. We found that GH-releasing hormone (GHRH) increased
GHF-1 mRNA levels in a time- and dose-dependent fashion. GHF-1 mRNA levels were
increased 2.5-fold (P < 0.01) after incubation for 2 h with 10(-8) M GHRH. Longer
incubations (6, 12, or 24 h) with GHRH failed to show a similar stimulatory
effect. A significant increase in GHF-1 mRNA concentration (1.7-fold, P < 0.01)
was observed after a 2-h treatment with physiological concentrations (10(-11) M) 
of GHRH. The action of GHRH seems to occur at the transcriptional level without
the need of protein synthesis. Thus, treatment of cells with actinomycin D (5
micrograms/ml) completely abolished GHRH-induced increase in GHF-1 mRNA levels.
Cycloheximide (23 micrograms/ml) alone increased GHF-1 mRNA levels (6-fold
increase after treatment for 12 h, P < 0.01), as well as potentiating
GHRH-induced increase in GHF-1 mRNA concentration (9-fold increase after
treatment with GHRH plus cycloheximide for 12 h, P < 0.01). The effect of GHRH on
GHF-1 mRNA levels could be mimicked by direct activators of second messenger
signaling systems such as forskolin (10(-5) M) or the phorbol ester tumor
promoter tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate (TPA) (10(-6) M). Other peptides such as
pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide-38 (10(-7) M) but not GHRP-6
(10(-10) to 10(-5) M), were also able to increase GHF-1 mRNA levels. Treatment of
the cells with somatostatin (10(-6) M) for either 2 or 48 h failed to modify
basal or GHRH-induced GHF-1 mRNA levels. In contrast, pretreatment of the cells
with insulin-like growth factor-1 (5 nM) inhibited basal GHF-1 mRNA concentration
as well as completely blunting the subsequent response to cells exposed to GHRH
for 2 h. These data demonstrate that GHRH, acting at the transcriptional level
and through a mechanism not dependent on protein synthesis, plays a stimulatory
role on GHF-1 mRNA levels.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 7649093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Genes Dev. 1995 Aug 15;9(16):1992-2006.

Pit-1 binding to specific DNA sites as a monomer or dimer determines
gene-specific use of a tyrosine-dependent synergy domain.

Holloway JM(1), Szeto DP, Scully KM, Glass CK, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla
90293-0648, USA.

Transcriptional activation of the prolactin and growth hormone genes, occurring
in a cell-specific fashion, requires short-range synergistic interactions between
the pituitary-specific POU domain factor Pit-1 and other transcription factors,
particularly nuclear receptors. Unexpectedly, we find that these events involve
the gene-specific use of alternative Pit-1 synergy domains. Synergistic
activation of the prolactin gene by Pit-1 and the estrogen receptor requires a
Pit-1 amino-terminal 25-amino-acid domain that is not required for analogous
synergistic activation of the growth hormone promoter. The action of this Pit-1
synergy domain is dependent on the presence of two of three tyrosine residues
spaced by 6 amino acids and can be replaced by a comparable tyrosine-dependent
trans-activation domain of an unrelated transcription factor (hLEF). The
gene-specific utilization of this tyrosine-dependent synergy domain is conferred 
by specific Pit-1 DNA-binding sites that determine whether Pit-1 binds as a
monomer or a dimer. Thus, the critical DNA site in the prolactin enhancer, where 
this domain is required, binds Pit-1 as a monomer, whereas the Pit-1 sites in the
growth hormone gene, which do not utilize this synergy domain, bind Pit-1 as a
dimer. The finding that the sequence of specific DNA sites dictates alternative
Pit-1 synergy domain utilization based on monomeric or dimeric binding suggests
an additional regulatory strategy for differential target gene activation in
distinct cell types.

PMID: 7649480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1995 Jul;80(7):2021-6.

Expression of pit-1 messenger ribonucleic acid and protein in the human placenta.

Bamberger AM(1), Bamberger CM, Pu LP, Puy LA, Loh YP, Asa SL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

It is well established that the human placenta produces a wide range of hormones 
similar to those secreted by the pituitary and hypothalamus. However, the
physiological role and regulation of placental hormone synthesis and release are 
still largely unknown. GH (GH-N) is expressed in the pituitary, where it requires
the tissue-specific transcription factor Pit-1. Chorionic somatomammotropin A
(CS-A) and CS-B as well as the placental GH variant (GH-V), which also belong to 
the GH gene family and are located in the same chromosomal cluster, are expressed
in the placental syncytiotrophoblast. The presence of Pit-1-binding sites in the 
CS-A and GH-V promoter regions predicts that Pit-1 may be expressed in the
placenta. However, this has not yet been demonstrated. To examine possible
similarities in the regulation of these genes in the pituitary and placenta, we
studied the expression of pit-1 messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) in the human
placenta, transformed human placental cells, and the JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cell
line. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products of the expected size were
amplified from first and third trimester placentas, transformed placental cells, 
and JEG-3 complementary DNA by reverse transcription-PCR. The pit-1-specific
sequence was confirmed by restriction endonuclease digestion, Southern
hybridization, and DNA sequencing. Human pituitary tissue was used as a positive 
control; no PCR product was obtained from hippocampus (negative control). In situ
hybridization of placental tissue sections revealed the presence of pit-1 mRNA in
first and third trimester syncytiotrophoblast. Pit-1 protein was localized by
immunohistochemistry with the same tissue distribution and a nuclear localization
pattern. These data demonstrate expression of pit-1 mRNA and Pit-1 protein in the
human placenta, thus questioning its role as a pituitary-specific regulator of
GH-N gene transcription. The expression of Pit-1 in the placenta, together with
its previously demonstrated capability to bind to and activate the CS-A and the
GH-V promoters, suggests that it may play a role in the regulation of hormones
belonging to the GH gene family in both pituitary and placenta.

PMID: 7608249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Mol Endocrinol. 1995 Jul;9(7):887-901.

Pituitary-type transcription of the human prolactin gene in the absence of Pit-1.

Gellersen B(1), Kempf R, Telgmann R, DiMattia GE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Hormone and Fertility Research, University of Hamburg, Germany.

We describe a human (h) PRL-producing cell line, SKUT-1B-20, which we isolated as
a subclone of a uterine sarcoma cell line. Although this cell line is of uterine 
origin, it does not use the decidual-specific upstream promoter of the hPRL gene,
but transcribes the hPRL gene from the downstream pituitary-type transcription
start site, as determined by Northern blot, reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction and primer extension analyses. This is particularly intriguing
because SKUT-1B-20 cells lack the transcription factor Pit-1. No Pit-1 messenger 
RNA was detectable by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, and
endogenous Pit-1 target genes (GH, PRL, and Pit-1) were refractory to transfected
Pit-1 expression vector, whereas in cotransfection experiments, Pit-1 efficiently
activated reporter gene fusion constructs carrying 5'-flanking sequences of the
human and rat PRL or the mouse Pit-1 genes. By transfecting reporter genes
containing 8.7 kilobases of DNA flanking the hPRL pituitary-specific start site
(hPRL-8700/Luc) and deletions thereof, we located a Pit-1-independent cis-active 
region more than 7 kilobases upstream of the start site. The most distal 1650 or 
880 base pairs of the hPRL genomic fragment (which extends to -8784 base pairs), 
when placed directly upstream of the homologous hPRL or the heterologous
thymidine kinase promoters, conferred transcriptional activation to those
promoters. SKUT-1B-20 cell-specific activation of hPRL-8700/Luc could not be
suppressed by the introduction of an inhibitor of protein kinase A (PKA), PKI.
This is the first demonstration of pituitary-type PRL gene transcription
independent of Pit-1 and activation of the PKA pathway. The SKUT-1B-20 cell line 
was then used in reconstitution experiments to delineate the role of Pit-1 in
modulating the transcriptional effects of phorbol ester, PKA, and estrogen
receptor (ER) on the hPRL gene. The low response of hPRL/luciferase fusion genes 
to phorbol ester was greatly enhanced by cotransfected Pit-1 and was mediated by 
the proximal region between -250 and -38. The catalytic subunit of PKA, C beta,
was able to elicit a moderate induction of hPRL-8700/Luc even in the absence of
Pit-1. A potential estrogen response element has been located in the hPRL gene
sequence at a position similar to that of the estrogen response element of the
rat PRL gene immediately adjacent to the distal enhancer.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT
400 WORDS)

PMID: 7476971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Jun 25;23(12):2236-44.

DNase I-hypersensitive sites in the chromatin of rat growth hormone gene locus
and enhancer activity of regions with these sites.

Aizawa A(1), Yoneyama T, Kazahari K, Ono M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Kitasato University,
Kanagawa, Japan.

In this study, a determination was made of the chromatin structure of the rat
growth hormone (GH) gene locus by DNase I sensitivity analysis using GC [GH+,
prolactin (PRL)-], 235 (GH-, PRL+), GH3 (GH+, PRL+) and liver (GH-, PRL-) cells. 
From 7 kb upstream from the transcription start site to 19 kb downstream from the
polyadenylation site, two major DNase I-hypersensitive sites (M-DHS; UIA, UIIA)
and three M-DHS (DIA, DII, DIII) were found within 2 kb upstream and 7 kb
downstream regions, respectively. Two minor DHS (m-DHS; UIB, UIIB) in the
upstream region and one m-DHS (DIB) downstream were shown to be associated with
M-DHS. Thus, a total of five M-DHS and three m-DHS were mapped on the rat GH gene
locus. Among these, five (UIIB, UIA, UIB, DIB, DIA) including two (UIA, DIA)
M-DHS were specific for GH-producing cells. UIIA and DIII were M-DHS only in
PRL-producing 235 cells while the major hypersensitivity of DII was detected in
GH-producing cells and liver cells. Assessment of the enhancing activity of the
DHS regions indicated novel enhancers in one upstream and two downstream regions 
that function well with the GH promoter in GC cells. These enhancers, each
appearing different, coincided with m-DHS but not M-DHS in GC cells, and were not
activated by Pit-1. Based on these observations, the following functions of five 
M-DHS and three m-DHS regions were defined: enhancer; locus control region (LCR);
switch region serving for conversion from GH/PRL-producing cells to PRL-producing
cells; and a region having a structural function in chromatin.

PMCID: PMC307013
PMID: 7610053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Eur J Endocrinol. 1995 Jun;132(6):771-6.

Changes in mRNA levels of a pituitary-specific trans-acting factor, Pit-1, and
prolactin during the rat estrous cycle.

Lee BJ(1), Kim JH, Lee CK, Kang HM, Kim HC, Kang SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Natural Sciences, University of Ulsan, South
Korea.

The present study examined the changes in mRNA levels of a pituitary-specific
trans-acting factor, Pit-1, and prolactin during the rat estrous cycle. Total
cytoplasmic RNA was analyzed by Northern blot and slot-blot hybridization to
examine the prolactin mRNA level. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was performed to examine the Pit-1 mRNA level. Proestrous and estrous
prolactin mRNA levels were significantly higher than the metestrous and diestrous
levels, whereas Pit-1 mRNA levels of the estrous and metestrous stages were about
two- to threefold higher than those of the proestrous and diestrous stages.
Proestrous Pit-1 mRNA levels increased gradually from 10.00 h to 20.00 h, while
prolactin mRNA levels slightly decreased until 14.00 h but increased later until 
20.00 h. During the rat estrous cycle, especially in the afternoon of the
proestrous day, changes of prolactin mRNA levels seem to follow a prior increase 
of Pit-1 mRNA. Therefore, Pit-1 may be partly involved in the regulation of
prolactin gene expression according to the rat estrous cycle. Estradiol
administration to ovariectomized rats significantly increased both the mRNA
levels of prolactin and Pit-1, which suggests that the gene expression of Pit-1
is regulated by estrogen through indirect extracellular pathways.

PMID: 7788020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Endocr J. 1995 Jun;42(3):351-4.

A novel E250X mutation of the PIT1 gene in a patient with combined pituitary
hormone deficiency.

Irie Y(1), Tatsumi K, Ogawa M, Kamijo T, Preeyasombat C, Suprasongsin C, Amino N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, Japan.

PIT1 abnormality is defined as a genetic abnormality in the PIT1 gene that
encodes a pituitary specific transcription factor, Pit-1/GHF-1. PIT1 abnormality 
indicates combined deficiency of thyrotropin (TSH), growth hormone (GH) and
prolactin (PRL), and has been reported in several cases. We studied the PIT1 gene
in a patient with combined deficiency of TSH, GH and PRL. A novel mutation
substituting a termination codon for Glutamate at 250th codon (E250X) was
identified in the homozygous state in the patient. Both of the healthy parents
harbored this mutation in the heterozygous state. This nonsense mutation results 
in complete loss of helix 3 of the POU homeodomain of Pit-1/GHF-1. As helix 3 of 
the homeodomain is involved directly in DNA binding, the mutant Pit-1/GHF-1 may
lose the DNA binding activity of the POU homeodomain and lose its transcriptional
activation. The E250X mutation is therefore considered to be the cause of the
combined deficiency of TSH, GH and PRL in this patient.

PMID: 7670563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Mol Endocrinol. 1995 Jun;14(3):313-22.

A 33 kDa Pit-1-like protein binds to the distal region of the human thyrotrophin 
alpha-subunit gene.

Kim DS(1), Yoon JH, Ahn SK, Kim KE, Seong RH, Hong SH, Kim K, Ryu K, Park SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National
University, Republic of Korea.

Our previous studies demonstrated that at least two DNA regions with upstream
limits between positions -223 to -190 and positions -151 to -135 of the human TSH
gene are important for transcriptional regulation by TRH in GH3 rat pituitary
cells. The proximal region (-151 to -135 bp) including the cAMP-responsive
element (CRE) was required for the induction of the TSH gene by TRH, while the
distal region (-223 to -190 bp) containing an element similar to the binding site
for the pituitary-specific transcription factor, Pit-1, was necessary to amplify 
the effects of TRH. To determine whether a pituitary-specific nuclear protein, in
addition to the CRE-binding protein, is involved in the molecular mechanism of
TRH regulation, a gel retardation assay and Southwestern blot analysis were
performed on the distal region with GH3 cell nuclear extracts. GH3 extracts
generated a distinct DNA-protein complex that was effectively eliminated in the
presence of excess unlabelled DNA fragment, and TRH treatment increased the
affinity of protein binding remarkably. Excess Pit-1 DNA-binding sequence from
the rat prolactin gene inhibited formation of the complex, but mutation of the
Pit-1 consensus sequence in the distal region did not eliminate the complex. In
addition, Southwestern experiments showed that a 33 kDa nuclear protein present
in GH3 cells bound to this region and its binding affinity was increased slightly
2 h after TRH treatment, with the maximal increase (fivefold) at 3 h, which was
similar to the results when using gel retardation. Phosphatase treatment of
nuclear protein also resulted in a loss of binding affinity. Taken together,
these data indicate that the interaction of a pituitary-specific nuclear protein,
identical or closely related to Pit-1, with the distal region may be involved in 
the TRH stimulation of human TSH gene expression.

PMID: 7669223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1995 Jun;111(2):129-37.

The D2 receptor: blocked transcription in GH3 cells and cellular pathways
employed by D2A to regulate prolactin promoter activity.

Fischberg DJ(1), Bancroft C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, City 
University of New York, NY 10029, USA.

Although the GH3 line of somatolactotropic rat pituitary cells has proven useful 
for many regulation studies, the absence of functional D2 receptors on these
cells long prevented their use in studies of dopaminergic action. However, it is 
now possible to employ GH3 cells expressing recombinant D2 receptors for such
investigations. We have investigated both the level at which expression of
functional D2 receptors in GH3 cells is blocked, and the cellular pathways
employed by the major pituitary D2 receptor isoform, D2A, to inhibit prolactin
(PRL) gene transcription. In run-off transcription assays with nuclei from either
parental GH3 cells or a GH3 cell line stably expressing a D2A expression vector, 
Pit-1 gene transcription was detectable in either cell line, but only the latter 
cell line yielded detectable D2 receptor transcription, implying that the block
in D2 receptor expression by GH3 cells is transcriptional. Further investigations
employed GH3 cells transiently co-transfected with a D2A expression vector plus a
rat PRL promoter construct (-1957)PRL-CAT. Pertussis toxin blocked repression by 
quinpirole, a D2 agonist, of PRL-CAT activity, demonstrating that this action is 
mediated by a pertussis toxin-sensitive G protein. The observations that neither 
of two agents expected to raise intracellular Ca2+, Bay K8644 or
thyrotropin-releasing hormone, prevented quinpirole repression of PRL-CAT
activity, and that the repressive effects on this construct of quinpirole and the
Ca2+ channel antagonist were independent, suggested that regulation of
intracellular Ca2+ levels does not play a major role in D2A-mediated repression
of the PRL promoter.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7556874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 May;15(5):2849-57.

Functional interaction of c-Ets-1 and GHF-1/Pit-1 mediates Ras activation of
pituitary-specific gene expression: mapping of the essential c-Ets-1 domain.

Bradford AP(1), Conrad KE, Wasylyk C, Wasylyk B, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 
80262, USA.

The mechanism by which activation of common signal transduction pathways can
elicit cell-specific responses remains an important question in biology. To
elucidate the molecular mechanism by which the Ras signaling pathway activates a 
cell-type-specific gene, we have used the pituitary-specific rat prolactin (rPRL)
promoter as a target of oncogenic Ras and Raf in GH4 rat pituitary cells. Here we
show that expression of either c-Ets-1 or the POU homeo-domain transcription
factor GHF-1/Pit-1 enhance the Ras/Raf activation of the rPRL promoter and that
coexpression of the two transcription factors results in an even greater
synergistic Ras response. By contrast, the related GHF-1-dependent rat growth
hormone promoter fails to respond to Ras or Raf, indicating that GHF-1 alone is
insufficient to mediate the Ras/Raf effect. Using amino-terminal truncations of
c-Ets-1, we have mapped the c-Ets-1 region required to mediate the optimal Ras
response to a 40-amino-acid segment which contains a putative mitogen-activated
protein kinase site. Finally, dominant-negative Ets and GHF constructs block Ras 
activation of the rPRL promoter, and each blocks the synergistic activation
mediated by the other partner protein, further corroborating that a functional
interaction between c-Ets-1 and GHF-1 is required for an optimal Ras response.
Thus, the functional interaction of a pituitary-specific transcription factor,
GHF-1, with a widely expressed nuclear proto-oncogene product, c-Ets-1, provides 
one important molecular mechanism by which the general Ras signaling cascade can 
be interpreted in a cell-type-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC230516
PMID: 7739565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Gene. 1995 Apr 3;155(2):273-5.

A novel pituitary transcription factor is produced by alternative splicing of the
human GHF-1/PIT-1 gene.

Delhase M(1), Vila V, Hooghe-Peters EL, Castrillo JL.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Department, Medical School, Free University of Brussels (V.U.B.),
Belgium.

An alternative splice acceptor site in intron 1 of the human GHF-1/PIT-1 gene was
sequenced. The use of this splice site is responsible for a 78-bp in-frame
insertion upstream from exon 2 and leads to the hGHF-2/PIT-2 cDNA detected in
normal human pituitary.

PMID: 7721104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Mol Endocrinol. 1995 Apr;9(4):502-12.

Reconstitution of protein kinase A regulation of the rat prolactin promoter in
HeLa nonpituitary cells: identification of both GHF-1/Pit-1-dependent and
-independent mechanisms.

Rajnarayan S(1), Chiono M, Alexander LM, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Colorado Cancer Center, University of Colorado Health 
Sciences Center, Denver 80262, USA.

Expression of the rat PRL (rPRL) gene is highly restricted to pituitary
lactotroph cells and is induced by the cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA)
pathway. Current data indicate that this PKA effect requires at least one of the 
redundant pituitary-specific elements of the proximal rPRL promoter, suggesting
the involvement of the pituitary-specific transcription factor, GHF-1/Pit-1. To
directly determine whether GHF-1 is necessary and sufficient to mediate the PKA
activation of the rPRL promoter, we established a cotransfection reconstitution
assay whereby the activity of an intact and site-specific mutants of the (-425 to
+73) rPRL promoter-luciferase reporter gene was reconstituted by cotransfecting
expression vectors encoding for either the PKA beta catalytic subunit, GHF-1, or 
both, into HeLa nonpituitary cells. Cotransfection of PKA beta alone
significantly stimulated rPRL promoter activity in HeLa cells in a
GHF-1-independent manner, and this PKA beta effect was mapped to the most
proximal GHF-1 site [footprint (FP) I; -67/-36]. Site-specific alterations of
either FP II (-130/-120), or of the basal transcription element (BTE; -112/-80), 
did not significantly affect the PKA beta response. As expected, the
transactivation effect of cotransfected GHF-1 mapped to the GHF-1/Pit-1 binding
sites, FP I and/or FP III, of the rPRL promoter. Finally, cotransfection of PKA
beta and GHF-1 resulted in a marked synergistic response of the rPRL promoter,
and this response also localized to the FP I site. These data confirm not only
that GHF-1/Pit-1 and the FP I site are involved in mediating the PKA response,
but also imply that a distinct and possibly ubiquitous factor is involved by
binding to FP I and functionally interacting with GHF-1 to modulate PKA beta
regulation of the rPRL promoter.

PMID: 7659093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 31;270(13):7156-60.

A dopamine-responsive domain in the N-terminal sequence of Pit-1. Transcriptional
inhibition in endocrine cell types.

Lew AM(1), Elsholtz HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The POU transcription factor Pit-1 activates the prolactin gene in pituitary
lactotrophs and may integrate responses of the gene to external signals. To study
the role of Pit-1 in dopaminergic inhibition of the prolactin gene, we
transiently transfected Pit-1 and dopamine D2 receptor vectors into a series of
heterologous cell lines and examined dopamine regulation of the prolactin gene
promoter. Regulation was Pit-1-dependent in all cell lines tested. Moreover,
dopamine responsiveness was cell type-specific: stimulatory in fibroblasts
(COS-7) and muscle-type cells (P19/Me2SO-induced) and inhibitory in pancreatic
endocrine (RIN, InR1-G9) and neural-like (P19/retinoic acid-induced) cells.
Because dopaminergic responses in Pit-1-transfected RIN cells paralleled those in
pituitary GH4 cells, the islet cell line was used to test for sequences in Pit-1 
that mediate negative hormone signals. Dopamine responsiveness of the Pit-1
transactivation domain (residues 8-80) was examined using a chimeric LexA
construct. LxPit-1, LxSp1, and Lx-glucocorticoid receptor fusions all activated
basal transcription, but only LxPit-1 was regulated by dopamine. Regulatory
responses of LxPit-1 and full-length Pit-1 were quantitatively similar. In
addition, gain-of-function G alpha mutants that inhibit Pit-1-dependent promoters
in GH4 cells also suppressed selectively Pit-1- or LxPit-1-dependent promoters in
RIN cells. This demonstrates that Pit-1 can function as a specific target for
distinct inhibitory G protein signals. Interestingly, Pit-1 sequences N-terminal 
to the DNA-binding POU domain appear to be sufficient in mediating regulation by 
these pathways.

PMID: 7706253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 3;270(9):4484-91.

Pit-1 exhibits a unique promoter spacing requirement for activation and
synergism.

Smith KP(1), Liu B, Scott C, Sharp ZD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Institute of Biotechnology, Department of Cellular and
Structural Biology, San Antonio 78245.

The developmentally regulated Pit-1 transcription factor is involved in the
activation of prolactin, growth hormone, and TSH beta expression. Using templates
with spacing mutations to program an in vitro transcription system, the activity 
of a single Pit-1 proximal binding site within the rat prolactin promoter was
shown to have a unique bimodal distance requirement. Transcription activity
rapidly decreased with each 5-base pair (bp) addition to the spacing between the 
binding site and the TATA box. When positioned 20 bp upstream from its normal -36
position in the prolactin promoter, the activity of the Pit-1 binding site is
reduced to basal levels. Placement of the site at a position 30 bp upstream
resulted in a return of Pit-1-mediated activation. Using transient transfection
assays in GH3 cells, the prime bimodal sites are also a requirement for optimum
expression of chimeric prolactin-luciferase reporter constructs. Interestingly,
optimal synergism of transcription in vivo by the prolactin distal enhancer,
containing four Pit-1 binding sites and an estrogen-responsive element, is also
sensitive to the placement of the proximal Pit-1 binding site. These data have
important implications for Pit-1 activator function in pituitary cells and for
general models of transcription synergism.

PMID: 7876215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1995 Feb 27;108(1-2):95-105.

CpG methylation represses the activity of the rat prolactin promoter in rat GH3
pituitary cell lines.

Ngô VM(1), Laverrière JN, Gourdji D.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de Biologie de la Cellule Neuroendocrine, CNRS URA 1115, Collège de
France, Paris.

In the present report, we have investigated the role of DNA methylation on the
binding and trans-acting properties of transcription factors involved in the
regulation of the rat prolactin (rPRL) gene, specifically Pit-1. To this aim we
took advantage of a model system composed of three GH3 rat pituitary tumor cell
lines that greatly differed in the extent of rPRL gene methylation and in the
level of rPRL gene expression. Northern blot analyses indicated that identical
species of Pit-1 mRNA were present to similar extent in the three GH3 cell lines.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays further demonstrated that Pit-1 was present
in nuclear extracts and displayed equal affinities to bind the 1P responsive
element encompassing the -65 to -38 region of the rPRL promoter, whatever the GH3
cell line tested. These data suggested that differential expression of the rPRL
gene among cell lines did not result from variable amounts of Pit-1. By combining
in vitro methylation and transient transfection experiments with a rPRL
promoter-driven CAT construct, we showed that extensive methylation at CpG sites 
abolished the expression of the reporter gene. Furthermore, in vivo competition
assays demonstrated that CpG methylation inhibited gene expression by preventing 
the binding of transcription factors We propose that related mechanisms linked to
DNA methylation might alter the activity of the endogenous PRL gene in the low
expressing cell line.

PMID: 7538957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Gene. 1995 Feb 14;153(2):267-71.

The regulatory region and transcription factor required for the expression of rat
and salmon pituitary hormone-encoding genes show cell-type and species
specificity.

Ono M(1), Mochizuki E, Mori Y, Aizawa A, Harigai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Kitasato University,
Kanagawa, Japan.

The promoter regions of the genes encoding the rat and chum salmon growth
hormones (GH) and rat prolactin (PRL) were combined with a reporter gene and
introduced into GH- and/or PRL-producing cells from rat. The rat GH and PRL
promoters (pGH and pPRL, respectively) were most active in cells producing GH and
PRL, respectively. The activity of the salmon pGH was much less than that of the 
rat pGH in rat GH-producing cells. The regulatory region required for
cell-type-specific gene expression of pituitary hormones thus contains
information, not only for cell-type specificity, but possibly for species
specificity as well. A reporter plasmid containing the GH or somatolactin (SL)
promoter and an effector plasmid having a gene encoding transcription factor
Pit-1 (rat or salmon) were cotransfected into HeLa (human) or EPC (carp) cells.
Rat and salmon Pit-1 were more active in HeLa and EPC cells, respectively,
indicating that Pit-1 appears to interact species specifically with the
transcription machinery.

PMID: 7875599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1995 Feb;80(2):679-84.

A "hot spot" in the Pit-1 gene responsible for combined pituitary hormone
deficiency: clinical and molecular correlates.

Cohen LE(1), Wondisford FE, Salvatoni A, Maghnie M, Brucker-Davis F, Weintraub
BD, Radovick S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02215.

Pit-1 is a member of the POU family of transcription factors regulating mammalian
development. Pit-1 is thought to be the major cell-specific activator of both the
somatotrophs and lactotrophs in the anterior pituitary. When bound to DNA, Pit-1 
activates GH and PRL gene expression. Pit-1 is also important for hormonal
regulation of the PRL and TSH-beta genes by TRH and cAMP. We studied two
unrelated patients with GH, PRL, and TSH deficiencies. Both patients have the
same point mutation in the POU homeodomain of the Pit-1 gene (R271W). Patient 1
was studied as an adult and had combined deficiencies of GH, PRL, and TSH.
Patient 2, who was studied in infancy, also had GH and PRL deficiencies, but had 
low thyroid hormone levels with a measurable basal level of TSH and a delayed
response of TSH to TRH. Consequently, the current description of Pit-1 gene
mutations leading to complete GH, PRL, and TSH deficiencies needs to be expanded 
to GH and PRL deficiencies associated with a compromise of the thyrotroph's
ability to synthesize TSH.

PMID: 7852536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1995 Feb;107(2):155-64.

Endogenous and exogenous pituitary-specific promoters are differentially
controlled.

Hippenmeyer PJ(1), Rankin AM, Reitz BA, McWilliams DR, Brightwell BB, Wolfe RA,
Warren TG.

Author information: 
(1)G.D. Searle and Company, Research and Development, St. Louis, MO 63198, USA.

We have engineered GH3 cells with reporter genes under control of the growth
hormone and prolactin promoters and measured protein production. The results
indicate very low level production of reporter proteins from the cells regardless
of the promoter used to drive expression. This was surprising in light of the
observation that the cells still produced high levels of endogenous growth
hormone and prolactin. Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells were engineered to
express the Pit-1 transactivator. Transfection of reporter genes under control of
the prolactin promoter demonstrated a clear enhancement of expression levels
compared to the same promoter in parental CHO cells. Pit-1 expression is not
sufficient, however, for high level, stable expression from the growth hormone
promoter. These results indicate that the growth hormone and prolactin promoters 
are not sufficient for high level, stable expression even in normally permissive 
cells and suggest that Pit-1 alone is not sufficient for strong promoter activity
from the integrated plasmids.

PMID: 7768327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Jan 5;206(1):40-5.

Rat Pit-1 stimulates transcription in vitro by influencing pre-initiation complex
assembly.

Sharp ZD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Institute of Biotechnology,
San Antonio 78245.

The anterior pituitary-specific transcription factor, Pit-1, activates prolactin,
growth hormone, TSH beta, growth hormone receptor genes and autoregulates the
pit-1 gene. Its mechanism of transcription activation is unknown. Using
immobilized DNA templates and order-of-addition transcription assays, it is shown
that Pit-1 is required during pre-initiation complex assembly to activate the
prolactin gene in vitro. Using prolactin promoters containing point mutations in 
the distal TATA box, it is also demonstrated that Pit-1 activation in vitro is
not mediated simply by repressing the upstream, alternative promoter. Experiments
show that a preformed class II pre-initiation complex is refractory to Pit-1
influence. The data indicate that Pit-1, and perhaps other members of the
POU-protein family, activate transcription by influencing the type pre-initiation
complex assembled on target promoters.

PMID: 7529501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Mod Pathol. 1994 Dec;7(9):893-9.

Clinical and immunohistochemical studies on TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma: its 
multihormonality and expression of Pit-1.

Sanno N(1), Teramoto A, Matsuno A, Inada K, Itoh J, Osamura RY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.

Eight patients with thyrotropin (TSH)-secreting pituitary adenoma are described. 
Serum TSH levels were inappropriately elevated in spite of elevated thyroid
hormones. The serum-free glycoprotein alpha-subunit level was elevated in all the
patients. The alpha-subunit to TSH molar ratio, a "tumor marker" for
TSH-secreting adenoma, ranged from 1.06 to 6.16. All patients had macroadenoma
and underwent transsphenoidal surgery. Light-microscopic indirect
immunoperoxidase method applied on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded specimens
revealed alpha-subunit and TSH beta immunoreactivity in all adenomas. The
proportion of TSH beta-positive cells ranged from 20% to 75% of adenoma cells.
Six adenomas (75%) were associated with growth hormone (GH) and/or prolactine
(PRL) immunoreactivity. By the double staining method, TSH beta and the
alpha-subunit were frequently colocalized in the same cells, but some cells were 
found to contain either alpha-subunit or TSH beta. We also analyzed the
localization of a pituitary-specific transcriptional factor, Pit-1, which has
been suggested to play a role in functional differentiation toward growth
hormone, prolactine, and TSH. All cases were positive for Pit-1 product using
antibody against human Pit-1 synthesized peptide. Pit-1 product was localized in 
the nuclei of many adenoma cells and was frequently identified in cells that were
positive for both TSH beta and growth hormone or prolactine. From our
investigations, the role of Pit-1 in multidirectional differentiation during the 
development of TSH-secreting adenoma was suggested.

PMID: 7892156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Endocrinol. 1994 Dec;143(3):479-87.

Pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1 in the rdw rat with growth hormone-
and prolactin-deficient dwarfism.

Ono M(1), Harigai T, Furudate S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Kitasato University, Kanagawa, Japan.

The pituitary gland of the rdw rat (gene symbol: rdw) with hereditary dwarfism
expresses 30-100 times less GH and prolactin (PRL) mRNA than normal controls. To 
clarify the features of rdw rats, TSH and the pituitary-specific transcription
factor Pit-1, which is involved not only in the gene expression of GH and PRL but
in somatotroph, lactotroph and thyrotroph development as well, were examined. The
rdw pituitary contained about seven times more TSH beta mRNA than the normal
control, whereas Pit-1 mRNA expression in rdw and control was the same.
Nucleotide sequencing of PCR-amplified Pit-1 cDNA indicated that the deduced
amino acid sequence of rdw Pit-1 was identical with that of the normal rat. Using
an antibody against rat Pit-1 protein produced in E. coli, Western blotting
analysis demonstrated the presence of the same amount of Pit-1 protein in rdw and
normal rat pituitaries. The distribution of Pit-1-positive cells in the anterior 
pituitary was essentially the same in rdw and normal rats. It follows from these 
findings that the defective gene in the rdw rat is unrelated to the Pit-1 gene
and the normal quantity of Pit-1 protein is insufficient to produce normal
amounts of GH and PRL in the rdw pituitary. These and previous results suggest
that the reduction in GH and PRL production in the rdw pituitary might be due to 
that in thyroid hormone production.

PMID: 7836893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Dec;8(12):1742-9.

Multiple Pit-1-binding sites facilitate estrogen responsiveness of the prolactin 
gene.

Nowakowski BE(1), Maurer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Oregon Health Sciences University,
Portland 97201.

Previous studies have shown that estrogen responsiveness of the rat PRL gene
requires the presence of both the estrogen receptor and the tissue-specific
transcription factor, Pit-1. To examine the contribution of individual
Pit-1-binding sites in permitting an estrogen response, we mutated specific sites
in both the proximal and distal regions of the rat PRL gene. The studies reveal
that mutation of Pit-1-binding sites in either the proximal or the distal region 
can have an effect on estrogen responsiveness. The most important Pit-1-binding
site appears to be the site in the distal enhancer, which is adjacent to the
estrogen receptor-binding site. However, mutation of combinations of other
Pit-1-binding sites reveals that these sites also contribute to the estrogen
response of the PRL gene. The binding sequences for another transcription factor 
cannot substitute for Pit-1 sites in bringing about a wild-type estrogen
response, as shown by replacement of Pit-1-binding sites with a consensus
cAMP-responsive element. Conversion of the imperfect palindromic estrogen
response element of the PRL gene to a perfect palindrome eliminated the positive 
effects of an intact 1D Pit-1-binding site. To examine potential physical
interactions between the estrogen receptor and Pit-1, a protein interaction assay
was performed. The results demonstrate that labeled estrogen receptor can bind to
Pit-1 immobilized on glutathione agarose beads. However, most of the interaction 
between Pit-1 and the estrogen receptor appears to be DNA dependent.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7708061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Dec;8(12):1605-17.

Structural and functional characterization of the genomic locus encoding the
murine beta 2 thyroid hormone receptor.

Wood WM(1), Dowding JM, Haugen BR, Bright TM, Gordon DF, Ridgway EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 
80262.

beta 1 and beta 2 are functional thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) that are
generated from the same genomic locus by splicing of a different amino terminus
onto a common carboxyl region containing the DNA and hormone binding domains. TR 
beta 1 is widely expressed whereas TR beta 2 is found primarily in the pituitary 
gland although low levels of expression have been described in other tissues. To 
gain insight into the mechanisms governing expression of this complex
transcriptional unit, we cloned mouse genomic fragments containing the common
carboxyl terminus as well as the unique TR beta 2 amino-terminal sequence that
was located at least 25 kilobases upstream. The DNA and ligand binding exons are 
identical in size and location of their boundaries to those of the human TR beta 
1 gene. To determine whether the region 5' of the TR beta 2 amino terminus
represented the promoter region, we examined it for sites of transcriptional
initiation and for its ability to function as a promoter in TR beta 2-expressing 
thyrotrope cells. Multiple transcriptional start sites extending over 400 base
pairs (bp) were identified with those more proximal showing inhibition by T3.
Transcription was not detected more than 400 bp upstream from the putative AUG
codon, although initiation downstream of this AUG was demonstrated indicating
alternative AUG usage. A fragment containing 500 bp of the TR beta 2 5'-region
exhibited preferential promoter activity when transfected into thyrotrope cells
that express endogenous TR beta 2. Deletion studies demonstrated that removal of 
consensus binding sites for the transcription factor Pit-1 resulted in loss of
this cell specificity. We therefore conclude that the promoter region responsible
for expression of the TR beta 2 isoform in pituitary thyrotropes is distinct from
that described for TR beta 1 and is located many kilobases upstream from their
common exons.

PMID: 7708051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Kidney Int. 1994 Dec;46(6):1513-5.

A Pit-1 binding site in the human renin gene promoter stimulates activity in
pituitary, placental and juxtaglomerular cells.

Catanzaro DF(1), Sun J, Gilbert MT, Yan Y, Black T, Sigmund C, Gross KW.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Center, Cornell University Medical College, New York, New York.

One of the principal aims of our research is to determine the mechanisms which
direct renin gene expression to different sites. We recently demonstrated that
human renin (hRen) 5'-flanking DNA sequences -148 +/- 11 can drive the transient 
expression of a linked luciferase reporter gene transfected into pituitary GC
cells. This activity was found to be dependent on the binding of Pit-1 to a site 
approximately 70 bp upstream from the transcription start site. Pit-1 is a
pituitary-specific transcription factor which is involved in directing the
cell-specific expression of growth hormone (GH) and prolactin (PRL) gene
expression to somatotrope and lactotrope cells of the anterior pituitary. Thus,
Pit-1 may be play a role in directing the expression of renin to primate
lactotrope cells. Renin promoter-driven luciferase or CAT hybrid genes were found
to be expressed following transfection into primary, or early passage cell
cultures of placental chorionic membranes, and the renin-secreting renal tumor
cell line As4.1. As with GC cells, deletion or mutagenesis of the Pit-1 site
reduced activity several-fold in both placental and renal cells. These results
suggest that members of the POU family of transcription factors, or some other
closely related group such as the Hox proteins, participate in directing renin
gene expression to placental and juxtaglomerular cells.

PMID: 7699993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Biol Chem. 1994 Nov 25;269(47):29335-8.

Pit-1 determines cell types during development of the anterior pituitary gland. A
model for transcriptional regulation of cell phenotypes in mammalian
organogenesis.

Andersen B(1), Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Regulatory Biology Program, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla 92093-0648.

PMID: 7961905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Biol Chem. 1994 Nov 11;269(45):28049-54.

Renin gene promoter activity in GC cells is regulated by cAMP and thyroid hormone
through Pit-1-dependent mechanisms.

Gilbert MT(1), Sun J, Yan Y, Oddoux C, Lazarus A, Tansey WP, Lavin TN, Catanzaro 
DF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Center, Cornell University Medical College, New York, New York 
10021.

Transcriptional activity of human renin gene (hREN) 5'-flanking DNA sequences in 
pituitary cells is highly dependent on binding of the pituitary-specific
transcription factor Pit-1. Pit-1 has been implicated in cAMP regulation of a
number of pituitary genes and has also been shown to interact with thyroid
hormone (T3) receptors in mediating T3 responsiveness of the rat growth hormone
gene. In the present study we examine the effects of forskolin and T3 on the
expression of luciferase hybrid genes containing hREN 5'-flanking DNAs (hREN.luc)
transiently transfected into the pituitary cell line GC. Basal activities of all 
hREN.luc constructs transfected into cells grown in media containing serum
stripped of hormones were low. Addition of forskolin stimulated expression up to 
48-fold, depending on the hREN sequences present. The hREN sequence -148 to +18
was sufficient for both maximal expression and maximal stimulation by forskolin. 
Mutagenesis of the Pit-1 site between -82 and -58 reduced forskolin induction
4-5-fold. In addition to the Pit-1 site, the sequence between -148 and -98 was
also required for maximal activity and forskolin induction. T3 on its own had no 
effect on hREN promoter activity in GC cells, but suppressed the effects of
forskolin. Gel mobility shift and Western blot analyses indicated that forskolin 
treatment had no effect on Pit-1 DNA binding or Pit-1 levels. However, T3 reduced
Pit-1 levels which was reflected in lower DNA binding under the conditions
employed. Taken together, these findings emphasize the importance of
cAMP-dependent mechanisms in directing renin gene expression.

PMID: 7961740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Nov;8(11):1566-73.

A Pit-1 phosphorylation mutant can mediate both basal and induced prolactin and
growth hormone promoter activity.

Fischberg DJ(1), Chen XH, Bancroft C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, City 
University of New York, New York 10029.

Comment in
    Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Nov;8(11):1447-9.

The transcription factor Pit-1 has been shown to be important for both the
developmental and homeostatic regulation of expression of the PRL and GH genes in
pituitary cells. However, little is known about possible covalent modifications
in Pit-1 that might mediate its transactivational properties. Previous studies
showing that Pit-1 is a phosphorylation substrate for either protein kinase A or 
C, or their cellular inducers, led us to investigate whether phosphorylation of
Pit-1 is required for its function in either basal or induced cellular activity
of either the PRL or GH promoters. The transactivational properties of wild type 
Pit-1 were compared with those of Pit-1(A3), mutated in the three known
phosphorylation sites. At saturating levels of Pit-1 expression vectors,
activation of transient basal expression in HeLa cells of constructs
(-1957)PRL-CAT or (-244)GH-CAT by RSV-Pit-1(A3) was, respectively, about 50% and 
65% as strong as by RSV-Pit-1. Hence, phosphorylation at the sites mutated in
Pit-1(A3) is not critically required for basal transactivation of either promoter
but may modulate this activity. RSV-Pit-1 and RSV-Pit-1(A3) were equally
effective in mediating estrogen receptor stimulation of (-1957)PRL-CAT expression
in HeLa cells, thus revealing no phosphorylation requirement for the prerequisite
for Pit-1 in estrogen receptor action on the PRL estrogen response
element.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7877625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Nov;8(11):1559-65.

Pit-1 binding sites mediate transcriptional responses to cyclic adenosine
3',5'-monophosphate through a mechanism that does not require inducible
phosphorylation of Pit-1.

Okimura Y(1), Howard PW, Maurer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Oregon Health Sciences University,
Portland 97201.

Comment in
    Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Nov;8(11):1447-9.

The ability of Pit-1 to mediate transcriptional responses to cAMP has been
explored. To test the ability of Pit-1 to mediate transcriptional responses to
cAMP, an expression vector was prepared for a mutant Pit-1 in which the major
sites of phosphorylation by the cAMP-dependent protein kinase were eliminated.
Before using the mutant Pit-1 to study transcriptional regulation, we first
examined the ability of the protein to be phosphorylated in vivo in response to
cAMP. Transfection and in vivo labeling experiments confirmed that the mutant
Pit-1 did not support cAMP-inducible phosphorylation. The ability of the wild
type or mutant Pit-1 to mediate transcriptional responses to cAMP was assessed in
cotransfection experiments using reporter genes containing either the proximal
region of the rat PRL gene or seven copies of a Pit-1 binding site placed
upstream of a minimal promoter. Surprisingly, the wild type and mutant Pit-1
expression vectors supported similar responses to cAMP. To further assess the
ability of Pit-1 to mediate responses to cAMP, a GAL4-Pit-1 fusion gene was
prepared. Although a GAL4-cAMP response element binding protein fusion gene was
found to permit transcriptional responses to cAMP, the GAL4-Pit-1 gene was
unresponsive. These findings demonstrate that although Pit-1 can facilitate the
ability of the PRL promoter to respond to cAMP, phosphorylation of Pit-1 is not
required for this response. It seems likely that additional factors that interact
with Pit-1 binding sites are important for mediating transcriptional responses to
cAMP.

PMID: 7877624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Nov;8(11):1447-9.

INSIGHT: Pit-1/GHF-1: a pituitary-specific transcription factor linking general
signaling pathways to cell-specific gene expression.

Gutierrez-Hartmann A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Biochemistry, University of Colorado Health
Sciences Center, Denver 80262.

Comment on
    Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Nov;8(11):1566-73.
    Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Nov;8(11):1559-65.

PMID: 7877613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Circ Res. 1994 Oct;75(4):624-9.

Pituitary-specific transcription factor (Pit-1) binding site in the human renin
gene 5'-flanking DNA stimulates promoter activity in placental cell primary
cultures and pituitary lactosomatotropic cell lines.

Sun J(1), Oddoux C, Gilbert MT, Yan Y, Lazarus A, Campbell WG Jr, Catanzaro DF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Center, Cornell University Medical College, New York, NY.

Renin gene expression is limited to a number of specific tissues, including the
kidney, adrenal glands, reproductive organs (of particular relevance to this
study, the placenta), and the pituitary gland. In the present study, we
investigated the human renin (hRen) 5'-flanking DNA sequences required to drive
the expression of a luciferase reporter gene in placental and pituitary cells and
in two cell lines, 293 and JEG-3, which have been proposed as model systems with 
which to study transcriptional regulation of renin genes. The activities of
specific sequences in the hRen 5'-flanking DNA sequences in human placental cell 
primary cultures were very similar to those that we previously reported in
pituitary cells, suggesting the involvement of common promoter elements and
related transcription factors. Accordingly, the binding site for the
pituitary-specific transcription factor (Pit-1) was the major determinant of
renin promoter activity in both pituitary and placental cells. Gel mobility shift
analysis showed a placental nuclear factor with a gel mobility different from
that of Pit-1. However, Northern blot analysis failed to demonstrate abundant
Pit-1-related mRNAs in renin-expressing cultures of chorionic and decidual cells,
suggesting that the placental factor is not closely related to Pit-1. Although a 
factor from 293 cells also bound to the Pit-1 site, it had gel mobility shift
characteristics different from Pit-1 and the placental factor. Moreover, the low 
promoter activity in 293 cells was independent of this site or, indeed, of
sequences upstream from the TATA box. In JEG-3 cells, renin 5'-flanking DNA
sequences showed virtually no transcriptional activity.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250
WORDS)

PMID: 7923608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Endocr J. 1994 Oct;41(5):579-84.

Increase in Pit-1 mRNA is not required for the estrogen-induced expression of
prolactin gene and lactotroph proliferation.

Tsukahara S(1), Kambe F, Suganuma N, Tomoda Y, Seo H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Nagoya University, Japan.

Estrogen has been shown to stimulate lactotroph proliferation and expression of
the prolactin (PRL) gene. Recently it has been established that Pit-1, a
pituitary-specific transcription factor, is required for lactotroph
proliferation. Furthermore, in vitro studies showed that an increase in the PRL
promoter activity caused by estrogen was dependent of the amount of cotransfected
Pit-1-expressing plasmid. These findings led us to examine whether the induction 
of Pit-1 mRNA is required for the estrogen-increased PRL gene expression in the
rat anterior pituitary in vivo. Short term estrogen treatment was achieved by
means of a single intramuscular injection of estradiol dipropionate. DNA
synthesis, the levels of PRL and Pit-1 messenger RNAs in the anterior pituitary
were determined. Estradiol dipropionate resulted in a significant increase in DNA
synthesis 24 h after administration and in PRL mRNA after 48 h. In contrast, the 
Pit-1 mRNA level was not altered. Since Pit-1 is expressed not only in lactotroph
but also in somatotroph and thyrotroph, and the lactotroph cell population has
been reported to be less than 10% in the pituitary, the change in the Pit-1 mRNA 
level in lactotrophs was not seen following only short term estrogen treatment.
An increase in the lactotroph cell population was therefore achieved by chronic
estrogen treatment (subcutaneous implantation of a silastic tube containing 17
beta-estradiol powder for 30 days). This treatment resulted in the marked
proliferation of lactotrophs and a 3-fold increase in PRL mRNA. However, no
alteration in Pit-1 mRNA was observed. These results suggest that the increase in
Pit-1 mRNA is not required for the estrogen-induced lactotroph proliferation or
PRL gene expression.

PMID: 7889120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Oct;8(10):1320-7.

A sequence in the rat Pit-1 gene promoter confers synergistic activation by
glucocorticoids and protein kinase-C.

Jong MT(1), Raaka BM, Samuels HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New York University Medical Center, New York 10016.

The 5'-flanking region of the gene for Pit-1, a pituitary-specific transcription 
factor, was isolated from a rat liver genomic library and sequenced. Expression
of a reporter construct containing Pit-1 promoter sequences linked to the
bacterial chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene was assessed by transient 
transfection in rat pituitary GH4C1 cells. Treatment of transfected cells with
either dexamethasone (DEX) for 48 h or the phorbol ester
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA) for the final 20 h of the 48-h
posttransfection period had minimal effects on CAT expression. However, CAT
activity was elevated about 20-fold when transfected cells were treated with both
DEX and TPA. This apparent synergistic activation was lost when DEX treatment was
also limited to the final 20 h of the 48-h posttransfection period, suggesting
that a time-dependent accumulation of a DEX-induced gene product might be
involved. This putative DEX-induced product appeared to be relatively stable,
because synergistic activation was observed in cells treated with DEX alone for
36 h, followed by a 10-h incubation without DEX before the addition of TPA. The
Pit-1 gene promoter region between -210 and -142 from the transcription start
site conferred synergistic regulation by DEX and TPA when placed upstream of
position -105 in the herpes viral thymidine kinase promoter.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED
AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7854349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1994 Oct;4(5):709-17.

Transcriptional mechanisms in anterior pituitary cell differentiation.

Rhodes SJ(1), DiMattia GE, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla.

Development of the anterior pituitary gland involves the establishment of five
distinct cell lineages which are each characterized by the expression of specific
trophic hormone genes. Recent studies of the thyrotrope, somatotrope, and
lactotrope cell types have investigated the molecular decisions responsible for
the commitment and differentiation of these cell types and have characterized the
regulatory mechanisms that govern cell-specific expression of individual hormone 
genes. In particular, elucidation of the molecular basis of heritable dwarf
phenotypes lacking particular pituitary cell lineages, such as the Snell,
Jackson, and little dwarf mice, and studies of the regulation of trans-acting
factors, including Pit-1, involved in pituitary cell restricted gene activation
have begun to delineate the pathways responsible for development of this organ.

PMID: 7849511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Nature. 1994 Sep 8;371(6493):171-5.

c-Fos transcriptional activity stimulated by H-Ras-activated protein kinase
distinct from JNK and ERK.

Deng T(1), Karin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California at San Diego School of
Medicine, La Jolla 92093-0636.

Ras proteins exert their mitogenic and oncogenic effects through activation of
downstream protein kinases. An important question is how Ras-generated signals
reach the nucleus to activate downstream target genes. AP-1, a heterodimeric
complex of Jun and Fos proteins, which activates mitogen-inducible genes, is a
major nuclear target of Ras. Ras can stimulate AP-1 activity by inducing c-fos
transcription, a process which is probably mediated by the ERK1 and -2
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, which phosphorylate the transcription
factor Elk-1/TCF. Besides inducing transcription from fos and jun genes, mitogens
and Ras proteins enhance AP-1 activity through phosphorylation of c-Jun.
Phosphorylation of the c-Jun activation domain leads to c-jun induction through
an autoregulatory loop. Ras- and ultra-violet-responsive protein kinases that
phosphorylate c-Jun on serine residues at positions 63 and 73 and stimulate its
transcriptional activity have been identified. These proline-directed kinases,
termed JNKs, are novel MAP kinases. It is not clear, however, whether c-Jun is
the only recipient and JNK the only transducer of the Ras signal to AP-1
proteins. A short sequence surrounding the major JNK phosphorylation site of
c-Jun is conserved in c-Fos and is part of its activation domain, suggesting that
c-Fos may be similarly regulated. Here we show that Ras does indeed augment the
transcriptional activity of c-Fos through phosphorylation at Thr 232, the
homologue of Ser 73 of c-Jun. However, this is mediated by a novel Ras- and
mitogen-responsive proline-directed protein kinase that is different from JNKs
and ERKs. Therefore, at least three types of proline-directed kinases transmit
Ras- and mitogen-generated signals to the transcriptional machinery.

PMID: 8072547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Hum Mol Genet. 1994 Sep;3(9):1565-8.

Monoallelic expression of normal mRNA in the PIT1 mutation heterozygotes with
normal phenotype and biallelic expression in the abnormal phenotype.

Okamoto N(1), Wada Y, Ida S, Koga R, Ozono K, Chiyo H, Hayashi A, Tatsumi K.

Author information: 
(1)Osaka Medical Center, Japan.

The combined deficiency of thyrotropin, growth hormone and prolactin, caused by
PIT1 abnormality manifests in the homozygous or heterozygous state. We studied a 
patient having an allele with Arg271Trp mutation, which produces clinical
symptoms in heterozygotes by a dominant-negative effect. However, in the family, 
her father, grandmother and aunts had the same mutation without clinical
symptoms, although the proband had typical phenotypic expression. We analyzed the
PIT1 transcript in peripheral lymphocytes by reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction and found monoallelic expression of normal allele in the father
and grandmother and skewed pattern of biallelic expression in the proband. The
phenotypic expression of PIT1 abnormality may depend on different transcription
of the PIT1 gene.

PMID: 7833912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1994 Jul;79(1):189-96.

Pit-1 gene expression in the human pituitary and pituitary adenomas.

Pellegrini I(1), Barlier A, Gunz G, Figarella-Branger D, Enjalbert A, Grisoli F, 
Jaquet P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U297, Marseille, France.

The cellular basis for pituitary neoplasia is poorly understood. The POU domain
protein Pit-1 is a pituitary-specific transcription factor involved in the
generation, differentiation, and proliferation of three pituitary cell types:
lactotrophs, somatotrophs, and thyrotrophs. In this study, we analyzed the
expression of Pit-1 gene in a series of 15 different human pituitary tumors and
compared it with that observed in normal tissue. Pit-1 transcripts, identical in 
size (2.4 and 4.5 kilobases) and sequence to those observed in normal tissue were
evidenced in PRL-, GH-, and TSH-secreting tumors. Pit-1 is overexpressed (2.5- to
5-fold) in the PRL- and GH-secreting tumors, but to an extent consistent with the
predominant cellular type of these adenomas. An isoform of Pit-1, with an
insertion of 26 amino acids in the trans-activation domain as a result of
alternative splicing, is also present in both normal and tumoral tissues. It is
concluded that human pituitary tumorigenesis does not seem to be associated with 
a gross alteration of Pit-1 gene expression.

PMID: 8027225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Nihon Rinsho. 1994 Apr;52(4):957-61.

[Pituitary specific transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1 and combined pituitary
hormone deficiency].

[Article in Japanese]

Tatsumi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Osaka University Medical School, Department of Laboratory Medicine.

Pit-1/GHF-1 is a pituitary-specific POU-domain DNA binding factor, which binds
to, and trans-activates the promoters of both growth hormone (GH) and prolactin
(PRL) genes. It is well conserved among vertebrates and is indispensable for both
differentiation and proliferation of the somatotrophs, lactotrophs and
thyrotrophs. PIT1 abnormality is defined as a genetic abnormality in the PIT1
gene, and results in various types of combined deficiencies of thyrotropin (TSH),
GH, and PRL. PIT1 abnormality was first recognized as an excellent model for
'transcription factor disease'. Recently, we found a novel case whose cannot be
explained by the PIT1 gene mutation alone. Such case will give us precious clue
to identify modifier factors of Pit-1/GHF-1.

PMID: 8196186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1994 Apr;100(1-2):133-42.

The rat prolactin gene: a target for tissue-specific and hormone-dependent
transcription factors.

Gourdji D(1), Laverrière JN.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de Biologie de la Cellule Neuroendocrine, CNRS URA 1115, Collège de
France, Paris.

PMID: 7914498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Apr;8(4):528-36.

Involvement of a cAMP-responsive DNA element in mediating TRH responsiveness of
the human thyrotropin alpha-subunit gene.

Kim DS(1), Ahn SK, Yoon JH, Hong SH, Kim KE, Maurer RA, Park SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Seoul National University, Korea.

TRH is known to stimulate the transcription of the TSH gene in pituitary cells.
To examine TRH-responsive elements of the human TSH alpha-subunit gene, we have
used transient transfection of GH3 rat pituitary tumor cells. Using this system, 
TRH treatment stimulated expression of a reporter gene containing 846 base pairs 
from the 5'-flanking region of the human glycoprotein hormone alpha-subunit gene 
linked to luciferase. Analysis of 5'-deletions of the alpha-subunit sequence
revealed that at least two DNA regions with upstream limits between positions
-223 to -190 and positions -151 to -135 are important for regulation by TRH. The 
more proximal region includes a previously defined cAMP-response element (CRE)
while the more upstream region contains an element with sequence similarity to
the binding site for the pituitary transcription factor, Pit-1. The TRH
responsiveness of each individual region was tested by inserting fragments
upstream of a thymidine kinase-luciferase reporter gene. The -151 to -100 region 
had basal enhancer activity and permitted a 3.4-fold response to TRH. The -223 to
-168 region did not permit a TRH response, but possessed basal enhancer activity.
The combination of both regions resulted in a 5-fold stimulation by TRH. To
assess the contributions of different signal transduction pathways, various
combinations of treatments were examined. Combined treatment with TRH and
forskolin led to an additive activity. Treatment with TRH plus phorbol
12-myristate-13-acetate resulted in the same level of reporter gene activity as
with either agent alone.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7519724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Mar;8(3):374-81.

An alternatively spliced form of Pit-1 represses prolactin gene expression.

Day RN(1), Day KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville 22908.

The pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1 is required for expression of
the PRL gene. Transcription of the PRL gene in the anterior pituitary is both
activated and repressed in response to neuroendocrine signals. The molecular
events that mediate repression are unknown. Transplantation of GH3 pituitary
tumor cells from culture to female Wistar-Furth rats resulted in repression of
PRL gene expression. When the transplanted cells were returned to culture, PRL
gene expression was rapidly activated. We used this model to study potential
mechanisms by which PRL gene expression was silenced. In addition to the
appropriate size Pit-1 proteins of 33 and 31 kilodaltons, smaller forms of the
transcription factor, migrating at approximately 27 and 24 kilodaltons, were
found in transplanted cells in which PRL gene expression was repressed. These
smaller forms of Pit-1 protein were observed to disappear when transplanted cells
were returned to culture, coincident with the activation of PRL gene expression. 
A transcript approximately 170 base pairs shorter than expected for that encoding
full-length Pit-1 was detected in transplanted GH3 cell RNA by polymerase chain
reaction. The shorter Pit-1 transcript was abundant only in GH3 cells after in
vivo passage and was not readily detected in transplanted cells after as little
as 12 h in culture. This shorter transcript was found to result from excision of 
sequence corresponding to exon IV and encodes a Pit-1 protein lacking 54 amino
acids of the POU-specific domain. Gene transfer studies demonstrated this
alternative form of Pit-1 inhibited PRL promoter activity.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 
250 WORDS)

PMID: 8015554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Mar;8(3):356-73.

Nonpituitary human prolactin gene transcription is independent of Pit-1 and
differentially controlled in lymphocytes and in endometrial stroma.

Gellersen B(1), Kempf R, Telgmann R, DiMattia GE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Hormone and Fertility Research, University of Hamburg, Germany.

Expression of the human PRL (hPRL) gene in extrapituitary sites such as the
uterus (decidualized endometrial stroma and myometrium) and cells of the
hematopoietic lineage is directed by an alternative promoter which is located
approximately 6 kilobases (kb) upstream of the pituitary-specific start site. In 
order to delineate the tissue-specific mechanisms governing the control of
nonpituitary PRL gene expression, we have cloned and sequenced 3 kb 5'-flanking
DNA of the upstream decidual/lymphoid (dPRL) promoter. Based on sequence homology
we identified two binding motifs for Pit-1 and seven half-sites for
glucocorticoid receptor/progesterone receptor (PR) binding. We focused our
studies on the role of Pit-1 and of PR as potential transcriptional regulators,
since the POU domain protein Pit-1 is essential in the control of pituitary PRL
expression, and progesterone induces decidual transformation of the endometrial
stroma, a differentiation process during which the decidual PRL gene is
activated. We demonstrate in a variety of cell types, including lymphocytes and
endometrial stroma, that Pit-1 is not involved in the regulation of dPRL
promoter/reporter gene constructs carrying 3 kb 5'-flanking DNA. Our experiments 
also show that activated PR does not confer direct transcriptional control on the
dPRL promoter. When we compared the activity of the transfected dPRL promoter in 
PRL-secreting and nonsecreting lymphoid cells, we found that the 3 kb 5'-flanking
region of the dPRL promoter did not contain elements restricting expression to
only those lymphocytes that produce PRL but allowed expression of fusion reporter
genes irrespective of the status of the endogenous PRL gene. This was in sharp
contrast to endometrial cells where 3 kb 5'-flanking DNA conferred strong
transcriptional activation on the dPRL promoter in decidualized endometrial
stromal cells actively secreting PRL, but did not allow transcription in
undifferentiated non-PRL-secreting endometrial stromal cells. Activation of the
dPRL promoter construct in these undifferentiated cells could however be induced 
by the addition of cAMP, in the absence of progesterone, suggesting that a signal
transduced through the cAMP signaling pathway is a primary inducer of decidual
PRL gene expression.

PMID: 8015553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jan 21;269(3):1804-14.

Two CGTCA motifs and a GHF1/Pit1 binding site mediate cAMP-dependent protein
kinase A regulation of human growth hormone gene expression in rat anterior
pituitary GC cells.

Shepard AR(1), Zhang W, Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905.

We established the cis-acting elements which mediate cAMP responsiveness of the
human growth hormone (hGH) gene in transiently transfected rat anterior pituitary
tumor GC cells. Analysis of the intact hGH gene or hGH 5'-flanking DNA (5'-FR)
coupled to the hGh cDNA or chloramphenicol acetyltransferase or luciferase genes,
indicated that cAMP primarily stimulated hGH promoter activity. Cotransfection of
a protein kinase A inhibitory protein cDNA demonstrated that the cAMP response
was mediated by protein kinase A. Mutational analysis of the hGH promoter
identified two core cAMP response element motifs (CGTCA) located at nucleotides
-187/-183 (distal cAMP response element; dCRE) and -99/-95 (proximal cAMP
response element; pCRE) and a pituitary-specific transcription factor (GHF1/Pit1)
binding site at nucleotides -123/-112 (dGHF1) which were required for cAMP
responsiveness. GHF1 was not a limiting factor, since overexpression of GHF1 in
cotransfections increased basal but not forskolin induction levels. Gel shift
analyses indicated that similar, ubiquitous, thermostable protein(s) specifically
bound the pCRE and dCRE motifs. The CGTCA motif-binding factors were cAMP
response element binding protein (CREB)/activating transcription factor-1
(ATF-1)-related, since the DNA-protein complex was competed by unlabeled CREB
consensus oligonucleotide, specifically supershifted by antisera to CREB and
ATF-1 but not ATF-2, and was bound by purified CREB with the same relative
binding affinity (pCRE < dCRE < CREB) and mobility as the GC nuclear extract. UV 
cross-linking and Southwestern blot analyses revealed multiple DNA-protein
interactions of which approximately 100- and approximately 45-kDa proteins were
predominant; the approximately 45-kDa protein may represent CREB. These results
indicate that CREB/ATF-1-related factors act coordinately with the cell-specific 
factor GHF1 to mediate cAMP-dependent regulation of hGH-1 gene transcription in
anterior pituitary somatotrophs.

PMID: 8294429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Jan;8(1):12-20.

Specific repression of rat prolactin gene expression in transplanted tumor cells.

Day RN(1), Day KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville 22908.

Transplantation of GH3 rat pituitary tumor cells that express both PRL and GH to 
female Wistar-Furth rats results in tumors that secrete only GH. We have used in 
vivo passage of GH3 cells as a model system to study specific repression of PRL. 
RNA blot hybridization revealed that PRL message was repressed 95% in cells
transplanted to host animals compared to that in GH3 cells in culture. In
contrast, there was little change in GH message in the transplanted cells, and
there was a 4-fold increase in insulin-like growth factor-I transcript levels.
When the transplanted cells were returned to cell culture, PRL mRNA levels
increased rapidly, reaching levels similar to those in GH3 cells within 72 h.
Gene transfer studies demonstrated a low level PRL promoter utilization in GH3
cells after in vivo passage, when endogenous PRL was repressed. Transfection of
the transplanted cells maintained in culture for 96 h, when endogenous PRL was
expressed, demonstrated increased PRL promoter activity. Messenger RNA levels for
the transcription factor Pit-1 were equivalent in GH3 cells and cells after in
vivo passage, and the presence of Pit-1 protein in extracts from transplanted
cells was demonstrated by Western blot analysis. Electrophoretic gel mobility
shift assays indicated that protein interactions with the PRL promoter were very 
different for extracts prepared from cells in which PRL was repressed compared to
those from cells maintained in culture until PRL expression had
recovered.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8152427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Jan;8(1):109-15.

Pit-1/GH factor-1 involvement in the gene expression of somatolactin.

Ono M(1), Harigai T, Kaneko T, Sato Y, Ihara S, Kawauchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Kitasato University,
Kanagawa, Japan.

A presumed pituitary hormone, somatolactin (SL), belonging to the GH/PRL family, 
is produced in the intermediate lobe of teleost pituitary. The pituitary-specific
transcription factor, Pit-1, is indispensable not only for the expression of
mammalian GH and PRL genes, but for the development of GH- and PRL-producing
cells present in the anterior lobe of the pituitary as well. Thus, in this study,
examination was made of the possible involvement of Pit-1 in the intermediate
lobe-specific expression of the SL gene. Using antibodies against chum salmon
Pit-1, the presence of the 40-kilodalton Pit-1 protein in anterior and
neurointermediate lobes of rainbow trout pituitary was demonstrated. By
immunohistochemical examination, Pit-1 protein was shown to be located in the
nuclei of SL-producing cells in the intermediate lobe. In experiments of
cotransfection into HeLa cells, rat Pit-1 enhanced the promoter activity of SL
gene, and a 0.5-kilobase upstream region from the transcriptional start site was 
sufficient for this enhancement. It follows from these results that Pit-1 protein
may possibly be involved in SL gene expression as well as the development of
SL-producing cells.

PMID: 8152425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Mol Endocrinol. 1993 Dec;11(3):283-90.

Expression of Pit-1 and related proteins in diverse human pituitary adenomas.

Hoggard N(1), Callaghan K, Levy A, Davis JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Manchester, UK.

Pit-1, a member of the POU family of homeo-domain transcription factors,
activates prolactin and GH gene expression but also has a role in pituitary cell 
differentiation and proliferation. Expression of Pit-1 may therefore be of
central importance in the function and phenotype of human pituitary adenomas. We 
have found evidence that, in addition to Pit-1 mRNA, Pit-1-like immunoreactivity 
and DNA-binding activity are readily detectable in a series of human pituitary
adenomas. Gel mobility shift assays using adenoma protein extracts with two
Pit-1-binding sites from the human prolactin gene promoter demonstrated the
formation of several DNA sequence-specific protein-DNA complexes; some of these
could be accounted for by Oct-1-binding activity. Pit-1 activity was anticipated 
in prolactin- and GH-secreting adenomas, but was also detected in a proportion of
endocrine-inactive (non-secreting) adenomas that did not express Pit-1 target
genes. The data demonstrate the presence of Pit-1 in a range of pituitary
adenomas. Different adenomas generated slightly differing patterns of DNA-binding
activity, though Pit-1 mRNA and protein size appeared normal in all tumours so
far examined.

PMID: 8148036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Endocr Rev. 1993 Dec;14(6):670-89.

Transcriptional control of GH expression and anterior pituitary development.

Theill LE(1), Karin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, California 91320-1789.

PMID: 8119232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Biol Chem. 1993 Nov 5;268(31):23366-75.

An AP-1-like factor and the pituitary-specific factor Pit-1 are both necessary to
mediate hormonal induction of human thyrotropin beta gene expression.

Kim MK(1), McClaskey JH, Bodenner DL, Weintraub BD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology Branch, National Institute of Diabetes
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892.

The human thyrotropin beta (hTSH beta) gene is inducible by various agents
including thyrotropin-releasing hormone, phorbol esters, or the adenylyl cyclase 
activator forskolin. In this study, we have characterized the functional
properties of the TGGGTCA motif at -1/+6 of the hTSH beta gene that is similar to
the consensus phorbol ester response element (TRE) or the consensus cyclic AMP
response element (CRE). We suggest that both protein kinases C and A as well as
TRH share a common mediator which recognizes the TGGGTCA element in activating
the hTSH beta promoter. Following stimulation by phorbol esters, forskolin, or
TRH, the TGGGTCA-specific factor acts together with the pituitary-specific
transcription factor Pit-1 (or GHF-1) bound to upstream sequences at -128 to -61 
to mediate the induction of the hTSH beta promoter. The induction requires that
both factors bind to their own binding sites, but Pit-1 neither increases the
binding of the TGGGTCA-specific factor to its target sequences nor associates
with this factor to form a heterodimer. The TGGGTCA-specific factor is present in
three cell lines tested and is composed of protein(s) immunologically related to 
c-Jun and c-Fos but not to the CRE-binding protein, CREB. By using the hTSH beta 
reporter plasmids in which the TGGGTCA element is converted to consensus TRE or
CRE motifs, we found that, within the context of the hTSH beta promoter, the
TGGGTCA element is a more potent TRE or CRE than the consensus TRE or CRE
sequences. Based upon the results of this study, we propose a model in which the 
TGGGTCA-specific AP-1-like factor functionally cooperates with the
tissue-specific factor Pit-1 to activate the hTSH beta gene.

PMID: 8226861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Lab Invest. 1993 Nov;69(5):570-5.

Pituitary specific transcription factor messenger ribonucleic expression in
adenomatous and nontumorous human pituitary tissues.

Lloyd RV(1), Jin L, Chandler WF, Horvath E, Stefaneanu L, Kovacs K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Surgery (Neurosurgery Section) University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.

BACKGROUND: The pituitary-specific transcription factor, Pit-1/GHF-1 (Pit-1) is a
member of the POU family of homeobox genes. This transacting factor has a role in
the development and expression of selected anterior pituitary cells including
prolactin, growth hormone (GH), and thyrotropin, cell types in rodent pituitary. 
The expression of Pit-1 mRNA in human pituitaries has not been previously
analyzed and the role of specific secretagogues in the regulation of Pit-1
transcripts in human pituitary adenomas has not been examined. Analysis of Pit-1 
expression in normal and neoplastic human pituitaries may provide insight into
the specificity of this transcription factor for pituitary cell types and the
role of Pit-1 in human pituitary function.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: In situ and Northern hybridization analyses were used to
study the expression of Pit-1 mRNA in surgically removed human pituitary adenomas
and nontumorous pituitaries obtained within 6 hours postmortem. A cultured GH
surgically removed adenoma was used to analyze the regulation of GH and Pit-1 in 
vitro.
RESULTS: In situ hybridization localized Pit-1 mRNA in all pituitary adenomas,
although the mRNA levels in GH and prolactin adenomas were significantly higher
than those in ACTH, null cell and gonadotroph tumors. Northern hybridization
analysis revealed a 2.4 and a 1.2 kb mRNA transcript for Pit-1. Although GH mRNA 
transcript was markedly changed by dexamethasone and phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate in vitro, Pit-1 mRNA transcripts were not changed significantly by
these secretagogues.
CONCLUSIONS: Pit-1 mRNA transcripts are expressed mainly in prolactin and GH
pituitary adenomas, but are also found in other adenomas and in the nontumorous
adult human pituitary. Pit-1 mRNA transcript levels are not readily modulated in 
cultured GH adenoma cells by various secretagogues in vitro compared with the
marked modulation of GH mRNA transcripts by these same secretagogues.

PMID: 8246449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1993 Nov;77(5):1281-6.

Pit-1 messenger ribonucleic acid is differentially expressed in human pituitary
adenomas.

Friend KE(1), Chiou YK, Laws ER Jr, Lopes MB, Shupnik MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Virginia Health Sciences
Center, Charlottesville 22908.

Thirty-four human pituitary adenomas were examined for the presence of Pit-1 mRNA
via Northern analysis. All tumors that were immunoreactive with either human (h) 
PRL or hGH antiserum contained Pit-1 mRNA (8 of 8) as did a small percentage of
alpha-subunit only (1 of 3) and null tumors (1 of 9). Two tumors that contained
TSH beta mRNA by RNAse protection assay also contained Pit-1 mRNA. Tumors that
were immunoreactive with antiserum for hACTH, hFSH beta, or hLH beta without
containing PRL, GH, or TSH beta were uniformly Pit-1 negative (0 of 14). Although
RNA from the majority of Pit-1-positive tumors (10 of 11) contained primarily a
2.4-kilobase (kb) Pit-1 mRNA transcript, 1 tumor appeared to contain a 1.6-kb
mRNA. Analysis of human pituitary autopsy specimens revealed no 1.6-kb Pit-1
mRNA, indicating that this variant may be tumor specific. The wide variety of
serum PRL, GH, and insulin-like growth factor-I levels in patients with
Pit-1-positive tumors suggests that although Pit-1 is necessary for PRL and GH
production, it is not uniformly associated with hormone production, as determined
by either immunohistochemistry or elevated serum levels. The expression of Pit-1 
mRNA in a small fraction of null and alpha-subunit only tumors indicates that
there may be a previously unsuspected diversity of origin within these particular
subsets of adenomas.

PMID: 8077322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1993 Nov;77(5):1275-80.

Cell type-specific expression of the pituitary transcription activator pit-1 in
the human pituitary and pituitary adenomas.

Asa SL(1), Puy LA, Lew AM, Sundmark VC, Elsholtz HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Pit-1 is a transcription factor that has been shown to be critical for
pituitary-specific activation of the GH and PRL genes. In rodents and humans,
differentiation and/or maintenance of somatotroph, lactotroph, and thyrotroph
phenotypes are dependent on expression of a functional pit-1 gene. In rodents,
Pit-1 protein is detectable in only these three cell types; however, pit-1 mRNA
transcripts appear to be present at comparable levels in all adenohypophysial
cell types, suggesting that translational controls may dictate the pattern of
Pit-1 expression. We examined the distribution of pit-1 transcripts in the human 
pituitary and pituitary adenomas. All tumors were characterized by
immunocytochemistry, electron microscopy, and tissue culture for accurate
classification. Northern blot analysis demonstrated abundant levels of pit-1 mRNA
in somatotroph, mammosomatotroph, and lactotroph adenomas. Two clinically silent 
adenomas that expressed TSH as well as gonadotropins contained detectable levels 
of pit-1 mRNA. No pit-1 expression was otherwise detected in corticotroph,
gonadotroph, null cell, or oncocytic adenomas. In situ hybridization localized
pit-1 mRNA transcripts in adenomas that contained GH, PRL, or TSH, but not in
adenomas composed of other cell types. Pit-1 mRNA was also localized to selected 
subpopulations of the human nontumorous adenohypophysis that contained
immunoreactivity for GH, PRL, and/or TSH. Pit-1 protein immunoreactivity was
detected in the nuclei of adenomas that expressed pit-1 mRNA, but not in those
that were negative for pit-1 mRNA; it was also localized only in cells containing
GH, PRL, or TSH beta in the nontumorous adenohypophysis. These data demonstrate
selective expression of the human pit-1 gene in adenohypophysial cell types
responsible for GH, PRL, and/or TSH synthesis and are consistent with a
predominantly pretranslational regulatory mechanism for Pit-1 expression in the
human.

PMID: 8077321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Mol Endocrinol. 1993 Oct;11(2):129-39.

Pit-1/GHF-1 expression in pituitary adenomas: further analogy between human
adenomas and rat SMtTW tumours.

Delhase M(1), Vergani P, Malur A, Velkeniers B, Teugels E, Trouillas J,
Hooghe-Peters EL.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Department, Medical School, Free University of Brussels, Belgium.

Adenomas can develop from each cell type of the anterior pituitary. In the normal
pituitary, three of these cells types, the GH-, prolactin- and TSH-secreting
cells, express the transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1 which is responsible for
prolactin and GH (and probably TSH) cell commitment, differentiation, probably
proliferation and gene expression. We have analysed the expression of Pit-1/GHF-1
in a panel of human pituitary adenomas. All GH-, prolactin- and TSH-expressing
adenomas studied expressed the Pit-1/GHF-1 factor, as demonstrated by in-situ
hybridization and immunocytochemistry. The expression was higher in adenomas than
in normal human pituitary. In contrast, ACTH- and LH-FSH-secreting and
non-secreting adenomas were negative. Seven transplants of the spontaneous rat
prolactinoma SMtTW were also investigated and all were found to be positive. This
further stresses the analogy between these tumours and human prolactinomas. Taken
together, the data confirm that Pit-1/GHF-1 expression is restricted to GH-,
prolactin- and TSH-expressing cells, and the increased expression in adenomas is 
compatible with a role of Pit-1/GHF-1 in cell proliferation.

PMID: 8297469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1993 Oct;96(1-2):75-84.

Analysis of Pit-1 in regulating mouse TSH beta promoter activity in thyrotropes.

Gordon DF(1), Haugen BR, Sarapura VD, Nelson AR, Wood WM, Ridgway EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 
80262.

TSH beta gene expression is restricted to pituitary thyrotropes. Since Pit-1 is
present in these cells, we characterized Pit-1 RNA and protein in thyrotropes,
and tested its function in regulating TSH beta promoter activity. We demonstrate 
that both TtT-97 thyrotropic tumors and pituitaries contain four Pit-1
transcripts of 3.2, 2.6, 2.4, and 1.9 kb, respectively. Only two transcripts of
2.7 and 2.1 kb were detected in alpha TSH cells, a thyrotrope derived cell that
no longer expresses TSH beta. Western analysis revealed Pit-1 protein in TtT-97
cells but not in alpha TSH cells. DNase I protection assays localized Pit-1
binding to three areas of the mouse TSH beta promoter. However, basal TSH beta
promoter activity was minimally stimulated when alpha TSH cells or TtT-97
thyrotropes were co-transfected with mouse Pit-1 and a mTSH beta luciferase
construct. These studies suggest that Pit-1 is not limiting for cell-specific
expression of the TSH beta gene in thyrotrope-derived cells and implies that
additional thyrotropic factors are likely required.

PMID: 8276142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Med Assoc Thai. 1993 Oct;76 Suppl 2:232-9.

Congenital complete absence of GH, TSH and PRL in infants: a consequence of Pit-1
gene deletion.

Preeyasombat C(1), Suprasongsin C, Chiranuphab A, Mahachoklertwattana P,
Sriphrapradang A, Choubtum L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

The patient was the first child of a short mother (140 cm) born at term with a
birthweight of 2,700 g. On arrival, she was 1 4/12-year-old, weighed 4,150 g and 
47 cm long. Her bone age was at the 6 month-old level. Endocrine investigation
revealed undetectable plasma growth hormone (GH), thyrotropin (TSH) and prolactin
(PRL) levels. CT scan of ovaries revealed bilateral ovarian agenesis in spite of 
normal, 46 XX karyotype. MRI of the brain did not demonstrate intracranial tumor 
or congenital malformation. Peak plasma GH level after oral clonidine
provocation, insulin induced hypoglycemia, and I.V. GH-RF stimulation were 0.6,
0, and 0 ng/ml respectively. Peak plasma TSH response after I.V. TRH stimulation 
was 0.04 microU/ml. The patient could not secrete PRL at any time after insulin
induced hypoglycemia, TRH and metoclopramide stimulations. On the other hand the 
child had elevated basal plasma cortisol (38 micrograms/dl at 8.00 AM) and raised
24 hr urinary 17 OHCS excretion (50 mg/1 g Cr against normal value of 3 mg/1 g
Cr) without evidence of Cushing syndrome probably indicate partial glucocorticoid
resistance. Peak plasma cortisol responses after intravenous metoclopramide and
insulin induced hypoglycemia were 46 and 42.9 micrograms/dl respectively.
Dexamethasone administration reduced plasma cortisol to 2.9 micrograms/dl. The
child had also elevated basal plasma FSH (36 microU/ml) and LH (5 microU/ml) with
further elevation to the peak of 123 and 99 microU/ml respectively after LHRH
stimulation. All evidence suggested the diagnosis of congenital complete absence 
of GH, TSH, and PRL which is characteristic of Pit-1-gene deletion.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7823001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Genes Dev. 1993 Sep;7(9):1674-87.

Identification of a novel zinc finger protein binding a conserved element
critical for Pit-1-dependent growth hormone gene expression.

Lipkin SM(1), Näär AM, Kalla KA, Sack RA, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Regulatory Biology Program, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla 92093-0648.

The growth hormone (GH) and prolactin genes require the pituitary-specific POU
domain transcription factor Pit-1 for their activation. However, additional
factors are necessary for the effective expression of these genes. Analysis of
evolutionarily conserved sequences in the proximal GH promoter suggests the
critical importance of one highly conserved element located between the two Pit-1
response elements. Mutation of this site decreases expression of a transgene in
mice > 100-fold. We have identified a major activity binding to this site as a
novel member of the Cys/His zinc finger superfamily, referred to as Zn-15. The
Zn-15 DNA-binding domain comprises three zinc fingers separated by unusually long
linker sequences that would be expected to interrupt specific DNA site
recognition. Zn-15 synergizes with Pit-1 to activate the GH promoter in
heterologous cell lines in which this promoter is only minimally responsive to
Pit-1 alone. Our data suggest that functional interactions between the
tissue-specific POU domain factor Pit-1 and this novel zinc finger factor binding
to an evolutionarily conserved region in the GH promoter may constitute an
important component of the combinatorial code that underlies the effective
expression of the GH gene.

PMID: 8370519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Biochemistry. 1993 Aug 31;32(34):8932-8.

Pit-1/GHF-1 binds to TRH-sensitive regions of the rat thyrotropin beta gene.

Mason ME(1), Friend KE, Copper J, Shupnik MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Virginia Medical Center, Charlottesville
22903.

Three regions within the 5'-flanking region of the TSH beta gene have A-T-rich
sequences which have sequence similarity to binding sites for the
pituitary-specific POU domain transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1. These three
regions have been termed TSH A (-274 to -258 bp), TSH B (-336 to -326 bp), and
TSH C (-402 to -384 bp). TSH A and TSH C are able to confer 2-6-fold TRH
stimulation to the heterologous viral thymidine kinase (tk) promoter in transient
expression assays in GH3 pituitary cells; TSH C can confer a 3-10-fold increase
in basal enhancer activity as well. TSH A, B, and C DNAs all bound Pit-1 from GH3
cell nuclear extracts, based on gel mobility shift analysis in which antibody
against Pit-1 prevented the formation of specific DNA-GH3 nuclear protein
complexes. TSH A and TSH C also each formed several additional DNA-nuclear
protein complexes which were not observed with TSH B. Some of these complexes may
contain Pit-1 as their formation was inhibited by the addition of Pit-1 antibody;
other complexes, however, were not altered by antibody treatment. All three
A-T-rich elements bound in vitro translated Pit-1, with calculated affinities of 
360 (A), 125 (B), and 38 (C) nM, respectively.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8364038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Biochemistry. 1993 Aug 17;32(32):8348-59.

Activation of the silent progesterone receptor gene by ectopic expression of
estrogen receptors in a rat fibroblast cell line.

Kaneko KJ(1), Gélinas C, Gorski J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53706.

We describe the construction and characterization of a novel estrogen
(E2)-responsive cell line, Rat1+ER, which ectopically expresses estrogen receptor
(ER). Human ER cDNA was introduced by retrovirus-mediated gene transfer into the 
Rat1 cell line, which does not express functional ER endogenously. Rat1+ER cells 
express functional ER based on radioreceptor assays, immunoblotting, and
transient transfection experiments using E2-responsive reporter plasmids. The
effects of this ectopic ER expression were studied on three endogenous
E2-responsive genes, prolactin (PRL), progesterone receptor (PR), and epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR). PRL, usually expressed in the lactotrophs of the
pituitary, is not expressed at all in Rat1+ER cells, with or without E2 addition,
and appears to require other factors for expression. In contrast, although PR is 
not expressed in Rat1 cells, it is induced in Rat1+ER cells upon the addition of 
E2. This induction appears to occur at the transcriptional level and is
insensitive to cycloheximide treatment. This is one of the few examples where the
expression of one gene activates an otherwise silent gene. Another contrasting
observation is that, although EGFR is basally expressed in Rat1+ER cells, the
addition of E2 has no effect. Our studies paint a complicated picture of E2
regulation of endogenous genes: the activation of the PR gene may only require
the presence of E2 and ER, whereas EGFR and PRL genes require factors in addition
to ER for basal as well as E2-regulated expression.

PMID: 8347631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Endocrinol. 1993 Aug;138(2):307-13.

Expression of mRNA coding for pituitary hormones and pituitary-specific
transcription factor in the pituitary gland of the rdw rat with hereditary
dwarfism.

Shibayama K(1), Ohyama Y, Ono M, Furudate S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Kanagawa,
Japan.

The rdw rat (gene symbol: rdw) with hereditary dwarfism has been shown
immunohistochemically to have subnormal numbers not only of GH- but also of
prolactin- and thyrotrophin-positive cells. To characterize the dwarfism of this 
strain, the expression of pituitary hormone mRNAs was examined by Northern
hybridization. The pituitary gland in the rdw rat expressed 30-100 times less GH 
and prolactin mRNAs than normal controls, whereas mRNAs for pro-opiomelanocortin 
and the alpha subunit of rat glycoprotein hormone revealed a significant
increase. There was a non-significant difference in rat LH-beta subunit and
FSH-beta subunit between normal and rdw rats. The suppressed expression of a
pituitary-specific transcription factor, Pit-1, is considered to cause hereditary
dwarfism in mouse strains Snell and Jackson, whose phenotypes resemble those of
the rdw rat. In this study, however, no difference in mRNA expression for Pit-1
was found between rdw rats and controls. This work indicates that the rdw rat may
not have the same genotype as the phenotypically similar dwarf mice, Snell,
Jackson and Ames.

PMID: 8228739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Jul 25;21(15):3584.

Cloning of a human GHF-1/Pit-1 cDNA variant.

Pernasetti F(1), Wera S, Belayew A, Martial JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique, Université de
Liège, Sart-Tilman, Belgium.

PMCID: PMC331470
PMID: 8346040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Pediatr Endocrinol. 1993 Jul-Dec;6(3-4):245-50.

Regulation of somatotroph cell proliferation.

Dominguez F(1), Lewis MD, Alvarez C, Webster J, Vega FV, Scanlon MF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Neurociencia Ramon Dominguez, Departamento de Fisiologia,
Facultad de Medicina, Santiago, Spain.

PMID: 7920990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Pediatr Endocrinol. 1993 Jul-Dec;6(3-4):229-33.

Pit-1 and pituitary function.

Pfäffle RW(1), Parks JS, Brown MR, Heimann G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322.

Several patients with pituitary dwarfism and a variable degree of hypothyroidism 
have been shown to have mutations in their Pit-1 gene. Pit-1 activates
transcription of the growth hormone and prolactin genes and is necessary for the 
control of the beta-TSH gene transcription. The various mutations have different 
effects on the DNA binding and transactivating properties of Pit-1. Multiple
pituitary hormone deficiency due to Pit-1 mutations is inherited either
dominantly or recessively depending on the DNA binding properties of the mutant
protein. The comparison of pheno- and genotype in patients with multiple
pituitary hormone deficiency provides some insight into the function of the Pit-1
protein.

PMID: 7920987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 May 14;192(3):1360-6.

The transcriptional regulation of the growth hormone gene is conserved in
vertebrate evolution.

Argenton F(1), Vianello S, Bernardini S, Jacquemin P, Martial J, Belayew A,
Colombo L, Bortolussi M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Padova, Italy.

Growth hormone (GH) gene expression in mammals is regulated by the interaction of
the transcription factor Pit-1 with two binding sites within the proximal
promoter. Four sequences, homologous to the mammalian Pit-1 motif occur in the
rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) GHII (rtGH) gene promoter, two of which
partly overlap. The three regions containing these putative Pit-1 binding
sequences were protected from deoxyribonuclease I digestion by nuclear extracts
of GC cells, a rat pituitary tumor cell line producing Pit-1. In gel shift
assays, nuclear proteins from GC cells and from trout pituitaries were found to
interact specifically with one of these protected sites. Transfection experiments
showed that the rtGH promoter is transcriptionally active in GC cells, the
response being strongly enhanced in the presence of a cAMP analogue. The results 
demonstrate that rat Pit-1 binds to and activates the rtGH promoter, indicating
that the basic mechanisms regulating GH gene transcription have been conserved
between fish and mammals.

PMID: 8507204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Rinsho Byori. 1993 May;41(5):533-40.

[Molecular pathology of congenital pituitary hypothyroidism--discovery of new
clinical entities].

[Article in Japanese]

Tatsumi K(1), Amino N, Miyai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, Suita.

Congenital pituitary hypothyroidism (pituitary cretinism) results in severe
mental and growth retardation when it is not treated soon after birth. Since the 
introduction of neonatal mass screening of thyrotropin (TSH), most congenital
hypothyroidism has been detected except for pituitary and hypothalamic
hypothyroidism. In 1971, we reported the first familial case of congenital
isolated TSH deficiency and thereafter began intensively investigating the
molecular pathology of congenital pituitary hypothyroidism. After determining the
entire structure of the human TSH beta gene, we identified the molecular
pathology in this patient. Recently, we reported a familial case of congenital
combined pituitary hormone deficiency (PIT1 abnormality). To examine the PIT1
gene, which encodes pituitary specific transcription factor, Pit-1/GHF-1, we
determined its genomic structure. Sequence comparisons using PCR amplified PIT1
gene sequences revealed only one nonsense mutation in the patient, and
established that this alteration caused the combined deficiencies of TSH, GH and 
PRL. We also discuss other recent progress in molecular pathology of congenital
pituitary hypothyroidism.

PMID: 8350517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Mol Endocrinol. 1993 May;7(5):694-701.

Synergistic interactions between Pit-1 and other elements are required for
effective somatotroph rat growth hormone gene expression in transgenic mice.

Lira SA(1), Kalla KA, Glass CK, Drolet DW, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Regulatory Biology Program, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of California, San Diego 92037-0648.

The role of the pituitary-specific POU-domain protein, Pit-1, in GH gene
activation has been established by in vitro analyses and by the observation that 
mutations affecting the Pit-1 genomic locus result in genetically transmitted
dwarfism. To define the quantitative contribution of the two Pit-1 response
elements and the potential role of other factors in GH gene activation, we
systematically assessed the ability of a series of GH promoter regions to
activate transgenes in the mouse anterior pituitary gland. These studies revealed
that the two GH Pit-1 binding sites are necessary, but not sufficient, for
efficient transcriptional activation. Transgenes containing information including
only these cis-active regions are expressed at extremely low levels in the
pituitary glands of transgenic mice. The addition of 35 base pairs of 5'-flanking
information, contributing other elements including a thyroid hormone/retinoic
acid response element, results in much higher levels of transgene expression.
Sequences located upstream of this segment contribute a further 5- to 10-fold
activation. Thus, while Pit-1 is required for GH gene activation, it alone can
only direct minimal expression in transgenic animals. Rather, synergistic
interactions between other promoter elements and Pit-1 appear to be required for 
expression of the transgenes at approximately the 100-fold higher levels that are
characteristic of somatotrophs, and are therefore likely to be critical
components of somatotroph-specific expression of the GH gene.

PMID: 8316253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Eur J Immunol. 1993 Apr;23(4):951-5.

The transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1 is expressed in hemopoietic and lymphoid
tissues.

Delhase M(1), Vergani P, Malur A, Hooghe-Peters EL, Hooghe RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Department, Medical School, Free University of Brussels (VUB),
Belgium.

The expression of the Pit-1/GHF-1 transcription factor (hereafter Pit-1), which
controls the expression of growth hormone (GH) and prolactin (PRL) in the
pituitary gland, has been documented in human and rat hemopoietic and lymphoid
tissues and cell lines. Pit-1 mRNA was detected by in situ hybridization in about
1% of rat bone marrow cells and in the spleen red pulp and marginal zone. Pit-1
was also expressed in human tonsils (mantle zone), in the thymus (rat and human, 
non-lymphoid cells), in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated rat peritoneal cells and in
non-hepatocyte cells in the liver (rat and human). A detailed investigation of
the rat spleen showed a very similar distribution for Pit-1, GH and PRL mRNA and 
Pit-1, GH and PRL proteins (detected by immunocytochemistry). Using polymerase
chain reaction followed by Southern hybridization, the expression of Pit-1 could 
be confirmed in human and rat spleen, bone marrow and thymus. HL60 and RAJI
leukemic cells were also positive. The sequence of fragments amplified from rat
spleen and from human bone marrow completely matched published sequences of rat
and human pituitary Pit-1, respectively. Expression of GH and PRL in lymphoid
tissues has been documented. The straightforward hypothesis would therefore be
that Pit-1's main function in lymphoid tissues is controlling GH and PRL
expression, as in the pituitary gland. GH and PRL may be hemopoietic and lymphoid
growth and differentiation factors.

PMID: 8458380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Mar;13(3):1719-27.

Ligand-dependent, Pit-1/growth hormone factor-1 (GHF-1)-independent
transcriptional stimulation of rat growth hormone gene expression by thyroid
hormone receptors in vitro.

Suen CS(1), Chin WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

The expression of the rat growth hormone (rGH) gene in the anterior pituitary
gland is modulated by Pit-1/GHF-1, a pituitary-specific transcription factor, and
by other more widely distributed factors, such as the thyroid hormone receptors
(TRs), Sp1, and the glucocorticoid receptor. Thyroid hormone (T3)-mediated
transcriptional stimulation of rGH gene expression has been extensively studied
in vivo and in vitro including the measurements of (i) rGH mRNA by blot
hybridization, (ii) transcriptional rate of rGH gene by nuclear run-on, and (iii)
reporter gene expression in which a chimeric plasmid containing 5'-flanking
sequences of the rGH gene linked to a reporter gene has been transfected either
stably or transiently into pituitary and/or nonpituitary cells. From these
studies, it has been suggested that the Pit-1/GHF-1 binding site is necessary for
full T3 action. We developed a cell-free in vitro transcription system to examine
further the roles of the TRs and Pit-1/GHF-1 in rGH gene activation. Using GH3
nuclear extract as a source of TRs and Pit-1/GHF-1, this in vitro transcription
assay showed that T3 stimulation of rGH promoter activity is dependent on the
addition of T3 to the GH3 nuclear extract. This transcriptional stimulation was
augmented with increasing concentrations of ligand and was T3, but not T4 or
reverse T3, specific. T3-mediated stimulation of rGH promoter activity was
completely abolished by preincubation of the nuclear extract with rGH-thyroid
hormone response element (-200 to -160) but not with Pit-1/GHF-1 (-137 to -65)
oligonucleotides. Further, neither deletion of both Pit-1/GHF-1 binding sites nor
mutation of the proximal Pit-1/GHF-1 binding site from the rGH promoter abrogated
the T3 effect. These results provide evidence that T3-stimulated rGH promoter
activity is independent of Pit-1/GHF-1 and raise the possibility that the
stimulation of rGH gene expression by T3 might involve direct interaction of TRs 
with the general transcriptional apparatus.

PMCID: PMC359484
PMID: 8441408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1993 Mar;92(1):1-7.

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone and epidermal growth factor induce human prolactin 
expression via identical multiple cis elements.

Berwaer M(1), Peers B, Nalda AM, Monget P, Davis JR, Belayew A, Martial JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorie de Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique, Université de
Liège, Sart Tilman, Belgium.

Pituitary GH3 cells were transfected with different deletion mutants of the human
prolactin (hPRL) promoter fused to the CAT reporter gene. The proximal region
(-250 to -42) was sufficient to confer stimulation by both thyrotropin-releasing 
hormone (TRH) and epidermal growth factor (EGF). Further deletion analyses
demonstrated the importance of the three proximal Pit-1 binding sites in this
response. However, Pit-1 binding oligonucleotides confer neither TRH nor EGF
induction to a linked neutral promoter, suggesting that other elements might be
involved. We have previously shown that sequence A (-115 to -85) is needed
together with Pit-1 binding sites for full cyclic AMP response of hPRL-CAT.
Mutation of this sequence strongly affects TRH and EGF induction. On the other
hand, three copies of sequence A confer both TRH and EGF response to a linked
neutral promoter. In conclusion, although TRH and EGF activate mostly different
intracellular pathways, they mediate transcriptional induction of the hPRL
promoter via identical cis elements.

PMID: 8386115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1993 Feb;202(2):193-200.

Effects of estrogen and epidermal growth factor on prolactin and Pit-1 mRNA in
GH3 cells.

Zhang K(1), Kulig E, Jin L, Lloyd RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor
48109.

The effects of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and 17 beta-estradiol (E2) on the
expression of prolactin (PRL), the transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1 (Pit-1), and 
on dopamine D2 receptor mRNA in GH3 cells were analyzed by immunocytochemistry,
in situ hybridization, and Northern analysis in a defined serum-free cell culture
medium. Radioimmunoassay was used to determine PRL secretion. Both EGF and E2
stimulated PRL mRNA and PRL secretion, although the effects of EGF were more
rapid than those of E2. Pit-1 mRNA levels were not significantly changed in spite
of the 2- to 8-fold increases in PRL mRNA levels and significant increases in PRL
secretion. Analysis of dopamine D2 receptor mRNA by in situ hybridization and
Northern hybridization detected expression of dopamine receptor in GH3 cells, but
the receptor mRNA levels were not modified by EGF or E2 treatment in complete
serum or in serum-free media. These observations suggest that EGF and E2 modulate
PRL mRNA levels and PRL secretion significantly in vitro, while the mRNA levels
of Pit-1 do not change significantly in GH3 cells cultured in a defined culture
medium.

PMID: 8424109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Endocr J. 1993 Feb;40(1):133-9.

Immunohistochemical expression of PIT-1 protein in pituitary glands of human GRF 
transgenic mice: its relationship with hormonal expressions.

Osamura RY(1), Oda K, Utsunomiya H, Inada K, Umemura S, Shibuya M, Katakami H,
Voss JW, Mayo KE, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.

It has been suggested that pit-1 protein may play a role in the differentiation
of the anterior pituitary cells. The present immunohistochemical studies were
designed to elucidate the relationship between functional differentiation of
pituitary adenoma and expression of pit-1 protein in human (h) GRF transgenic
mice. Pituitaries from a 10 month old and a 6 month old transgenic mice were
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin. The indirect
immunoperoxidase method was performed using antibodies against hGRF, GH, PRL,
ACTH, alpha subunit (SU), FSH beta SU, LH beta SU, TSH beta SU, and pit-1
protein. Immunohistochemical double staining was performed at light and electron 
microscopic levels. The pituitary glands of hGRF transgenic mice (both 10 month
and 6 month old) demonstrated diffuse hyperplasia of GH positive cells with
coexpression of hGRF within the same cells. There were also scattered cells which
were positive for other hormones and hormone subunits in the hyperplastic
pituitary. Three discrete nodules were found in the pituitary gland of a 10 month
old hGRF transgenic mouse and were identified as adenomas. These adenomas were
composed of enlarged round cells which were positive only for GH, hGRF, PRL and
TSH beta SU. Pit-1 protein was intensely expressed in the nuclei of the adenoma
cells. These results suggest the existence of an autocrine mechanism by hGRF in
the formation of somato-lacto-thyrotroph adenoma via constitutive pit-1
expression.

PMID: 7951487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Biol Chem. 1993 Jan 25;268(3):1505-8.

Promoter activity of human renin 5'-flanking DNA sequences is activated by the
pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1.

Sun J(1), Oddoux C, Lazarus A, Gilbert MT, Catanzaro DF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Center, Cornell University Medical College, New York, New York 
10021.

Although the renal juxtaglomerular cell is the source of circulating renin, the
renin gene is also expressed at a number of extrarenal sites including lactotrope
cells of human and ovine pituitaries. In the present study, we demonstrate that
GC cells, a pituitary lactotrope precursor cell line, efficiently express
transiently transfected hybrid genes containing human renin 5'-flanking DNA
sequences -148/+11. Gel mobility shift competition analyses show that a highly
conserved sequence in human and rodent renin 5'-flanking DNAs (human coordinates:
-80/-58) binds a nuclear factor from GC cells, most likely the pituitary-specific
factor Pit-1. Deletional and mutational analyses demonstrate that this site is a 
major determinant of renin promoter activity in GC cells. Transfection of a Pit-1
expression construct into HeLa cells, where activity of the human renin promoter 
is low, stimulates expression of cotransfected renin-luciferase constructs.
Moreover, activation of the human renin promoter by co-expression of Pit-1 is
dependent on an intact Pit-1 site. Taken together, these data strongly suggest
that Pit-1 activates pituitary renin gene expression. This finding raises the
possibility that member(s) of the POU family of transcription factors, of which
Pit-1 is an archetypal member, may direct renin expression in other tissues,
including the kidney.

PMID: 8420924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Trans Assoc Am Physicians. 1993;106:62-8.

A c-fos/c-jun-like factor and the pituitary-specific factor Pit-1 are both
necessary to mediate induction of the human thyrotropin beta promoter.

Kim MK(1), McClaskey JH, Bodenner DL, Weintraub BD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular and Endocrinology Branch, National Institute of Diabetes
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892.

PMID: 8036746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Nature. 1992 Dec 24-31;360(6406):765-8.

Pit-1-dependent expression of the receptor for growth hormone releasing factor
mediates pituitary cell growth.

Lin C(1), Lin SC, Chang CP, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Regulatory Biology Program, University of California, San Diego.

Comment in
    Nature. 1992 Dec 24-31;360(6406):711-2.

In Snell (dw) and Jackson (dwJ) dwarf mice, mutations in the gene encoding Pit-1,
a tissue-specific POU-domain transcription factor, lead to the absence of
somatotroph, lactotroph and thyrotroph cells. Pre-somatotroph proliferation is
stimulated by increased intracellular levels of cyclic AMP, normally induced by
growth hormone releasing factor (GRF; refs 7-17). Here we report the cloning of
mouse and rat complementary DNAs encoding a new member of the
seven-transmembrane-helix, G-protein-coupled receptor family restricted to the
pituitary gland, which mediates increases in intracellular cAMP and
cAMP-dependent gene transcription in response to GRF. The receptor is expressed
in a spatial and temporal pattern corresponding precisely to growth hormone gene 
expression, and neither is expressed in dw/dw mice. The pituitary hypoplasia in
these mice thus appears to be due, at least in part, to the absence of GRF
receptor, which is in turn due to the absence of functional Pit-1.

PMID: 1334535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Gene. 1992 Dec 15;122(2):387-8.

Characterization of the gene encoding human pituitary-specific transcription
factor, Pit-1.

Ohta K(1), Nobukuni Y, Mitsubuchi H, Ohta T, Tohma T, Jinno Y, Endo F, Matsuda I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, Japan.

Pit-1 is a pituitary-specific transcription factor that binds to and
transactivates promoters of growth hormone- and prolactin-encoding genes. A
chromosomal gene related to human Pit-1 isolated from human gene libraries was
over 14 kb long and split into six exons. All of the splice donor and acceptor
sites conformed to the GT/AG rule. The gene was mapped to human chromosome region
3p11.

PMID: 1487156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1992 Dec 15;189(2):851-5.

Mutations in the Pit-1 gene in children with combined pituitary hormone
deficiency.

Ohta K(1), Nobukuni Y, Mitsubuchi H, Fujimoto S, Matsuo N, Inagaki H, Endo F,
Matsuda I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, Japan.

Pit-1 is a pituitary-specific transcription factor that binds to and
transactivates promoters of growth hormone and prolactin genes. In three
unrelated Japanese children with combined pituitary hormone deficiency, we
identified three point mutations in the Pit-1 gene, Pro24Leu, Arg143Gln, and
Arg271Trp, located on the major transactivation region, POU-specific domain, and 
POU-homeodomain, respectively.

PMID: 1472057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Dec 1;89(23):11451-5.

Activin inhibits binding of transcription factor Pit-1 to the growth hormone
promoter.

Struthers RS(1), Gaddy-Kurten D, Vale WW.

Author information: 
(1)Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, Salk Institute, La Jolla,
CA 92037.

Activin A is a potent growth and differentiation factor related to transforming
growth factor beta. In somatotrophs, activin suppresses the biosynthesis and
secretion of growth hormone (GH) and cellular proliferation. We report here that,
in MtTW15 somatotrophic tumor cells, activin decreased GH mRNA levels and
inhibited expression of transfected GH promoter--chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase fusion genes. Deletion mapping of nucleotide sequences
mediating this inhibition led to the identification of a region that has
previously been characterized as binding the pituitary-specific transcription
factor Pit-1/GHF-1. Characterization of nuclear factor binding to this region
demonstrated that binding of Pit-1 to the GH promoter is lost on activin
treatment. These results indicate that activin-induced repression of GH
biosynthesis is mediated by the loss of tissue-specific transcription factor
binding to the GH promoter and suggest a possible general mechanism for other
activin responses, whereby activin regulates the function of other POU- or
homeodomain-containing transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC50569
PMID: 1454833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Tokai J Exp Clin Med. 1992 Dec;17(5-6):213-22.

Immunohistochemical analysis of GH-producing adenomas--with special emphasis on
plurihormonality of individual tumor cells by double staining.

Inada K(1), Oda K, Utsunomiya H, Itoh J, Osamura RY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.

Forty-four human growth hormone (GH)-producing adenomas were investigated
immunohistochemically for the concomitant localization of GH, prolactin (PRL),
and glycoprotein hormone alpha subunit. Immunoreactivity for GH, PRL, and the
alpha subunit was found in 44, 37, and 36 cases, respectively. By double
immunohistochemical staining, 24 of 27 cases showed colocalization of GH and
alpha subunit, with the numbers of tumor cells showing double staining varying
from case to case. The colocalization of GH and alpha subunit was noted in some
normal pituitary cells. In adenoma cells, the colocalization of GH and PRL, and
PRL and alpha subunit, was observed in 9 and 12 cases, respectively. The normal
pituitary gland showed only occasional colocalization of GH and PRL, or PRL and
alpha subunit. We found that GH-producing adenomas are plurihormonal at the
individual tumor cell level, with coexpression of GH-alpha subunit, GH-PRL, and
PRL-alpha subunit. The colocalization of GH and alpha subunit may be an
expression of a subpopulation of normal anterior pituitary cells (with GH-alpha
subunit coexpression), but the more frequent coexpression of GH-PRL may be
pathological, accompanying tumorigenesis of the anterior pituitary cells, in
which a pituitary-specific transcriptional factor, pit-1, may play a role.

PMID: 1285309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Oct 15;89(20):9939-43.

Selective disruption of growth hormone transcription machinery by viral
infection.

de la Torre JC(1), Oldstone MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropharmacology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA
92037.

Viruses that establish persistent infections may show selective and unique
effects on the host's transcriptional machinery. Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
virus (LCMV), a noncytolytic virus, can persistently infect a rat pituitary cell 
line. Although the infected cells remain free of structural damage, virus
markedly interferes with growth hormone (GH) but only minimally interferes with
prolactin transcription. The study of GH promoter-chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase-transfected cells and GH promoter deletion mutants demonstrates
that the viral effect is at the level of GH promoter and is due to interference
with GH transactivator factor GHF1 (Pit1). Treatment of LCMV-infected cells with 
the antiviral agent ribavirin cures the infection and restores normal GH mRNA
levels. These results illustrate a molecular mechanism by which a virus infection
can disrupt synthesis of a cell's differentiated product without perturbing vital
cellular functions.

PMCID: PMC50249
PMID: 1409723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Sep;12(9):3991-7.

Transcriptional regulation by triiodothyronine requires synergistic action of the
thyroid receptor with another trans-acting factor.

Voz ML(1), Peers B, Wiedig MJ, Jacquemin P, Belayew A, Martial JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique, Institut de Chimie 
B6, Université de Liège, Sart-Tilman, Belgium.

Human placental lactogen B (hCS-B) promoter activity is strongly stimulated by
triiodothyronine (T3) in pituitary GC cells through interaction between the
thyroid receptor and a thyroid receptor-binding element (TBE) spanning
coordinates -67 to -41. This TBE is adjacent to the binding site for pituitary
factor GHF1 (-95 to -68) which seems necessary for T3 stimulation of hCS-B
promoter activity (M. L. Voz, B. Peers, A. Belayew, and J. A. Martial, J. Biol.
Chem. 266:13397-13404, 1991). We here demonstrate actual synergy between the
thyroid receptor and GHF1. Indeed, in placental JEG-3 cells devoid of factor
GHF1, hCS promoter activity is barely stimulated by T3, while a strong response
is observed in pituitary GC cells. In the latter, furthermore, neither the TBE
nor the GHF1-binding site alone is sufficient to render the thymidine kinase
promoter responsive to T3, while in combination they promote strong T3
stimulation. Close proximity between these sites is required for optimal synergy:
T3 stimulation globally decreases with increased spacing. Furthermore, synergy
occurs not only with a GHF1-binding site but also with all other factor
recognition sequences tested (Sp1, NF1, CP1, Oct1, and CACCC boxes) and even with
two other copies of the TBE. Nor is it specific to hCS TBE, since the palindromic
sequence TCAGGTCA TGACCTGA (TREpal) also exhibits cooperativity.

PMCID: PMC360285
PMID: 1324411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Science. 1992 Aug 21;257(5073):1118-21.

Mutation of the POU-specific domain of Pit-1 and hypopituitarism without
pituitary hypoplasia.

Pfäffle RW(1), DiMattia GE, Parks JS, Brown MR, Wit JM, Jansen M, Van der Nat H, 
Van den Brande JL, Rosenfeld MG, Ingraham HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322.

A point mutation in the POU-specific portion of the human gene that encodes the
tissue-specific POU-domain transcription factor, Pit-1, results in
hypopituitarism, with deficiencies of growth hormone, prolactin, and
thyroid-stimulating hormone. In two unrelated Dutch families, a mutation in Pit-1
that altered an alanine in the first putative alpha helix of the POU-specific
domain to proline was observed. This mutation generated a protein capable of
binding to DNA response elements but unable to effectively activate its known
target genes, growth hormone and prolactin. The phenotype of the affected
individuals suggests that the mutant Pit-1 protein is competent to initiate other
programs of gene activation required for normal proliferation of somatotrope,
lactotrope, and thyrotrope cell types. Thus, a mutation in the POU-specific
domain of Pit-1 has a selective effect on a subset of Pit-1 target genes.

PMID: 1509263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Science. 1992 Aug 21;257(5073):1115-8.

A mutation in the POU-homeodomain of Pit-1 responsible for combined pituitary
hormone deficiency.

Radovick S(1), Nations M, Du Y, Berg LA, Weintraub BD, Wondisford FE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Rainbow Babies and Childrens Hospital, Cleveland,
OH.

Pit-1 is a pituitary-specific transcription factor responsible for pituitary
development and hormone expression in mammals. Mutations in the gene encoding
Pit-1 have been found in two dwarf mouse strains displaying hypoplasia of growth 
hormone, prolactin, and thyroid-stimulating, hormone-secreting cell types in the 
anterior pituitary. A point mutation in this gene was identified on one allele in
a patient with combined pituitary hormone deficiency. Mutant Pit-1 binds DNA
normally but acts as a dominant inhibitor of Pit-1 action in the pituitary.

PMID: 1509262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Jul 1;89(13):5942-5.

Hormonal regulation of the thyrotropin beta-subunit gene by phosphorylation of
the pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1.

Steinfelder HJ(1), Radovick S, Wondisford FE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital, Cleveland, OH.

The pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1 is a cell-specific activator of
prolactin and growth hormone gene transcription in the anterior pituitary. Pit-1 
has also been shown to mediate both thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) and cAMP 
stimulation of the prolactin and thyrotropin beta-subunit (TSH beta) genes. The
molecular mechanism by which Pit-1 mediates these stimulatory effects remains
unclear. At least three Pit-1-binding elements within the TSH beta gene mediate
responsiveness to TRH and cAMP. The present studies were designed to test the
hypothesis that phosphorylation is an important modulator of Pit-1 interaction
with the TSH beta gene. TSH beta elements bind less well to nonphosphorylated
Pit-1 than to phosphorylated Pit-1 and are weak activators of gene expression,
unlike high-affinity Pit-1 binding sites in the prolactin and growth hormone
genes. Phosphorylation by protein kinase A or C enhances Pit-1 binding to TSH
beta elements 3- to 8-fold. Conversely, phosphorylation generally reduces binding
of Pit-1 to elements within the prolactin and growth hormone genes. A variation
within the consensus sequence for Pit-1 binding in TSH beta gene elements
[A(A/T)(A/T)AATNCAT in the TSH beta gene versus A(A/T)(A/T)TATNCAT in the
prolactin and growth hormone genes] could explain these differences. These
elements may limit basal activation of the TSH beta gene by binding less well to 
nonphosphorylated Pit-1 while conferring hormonal stimulation through enhanced
binding of phosphorylated Pit-1.

PMCID: PMC402114
PMID: 1321428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. EMBO J. 1992 Jun;11(6):2261-9.

Differential splicing of the GHF1 primary transcript gives rise to two
functionally distinct homeodomain proteins.

Theill LE(1), Hattori K, Lazzaro D, Castrillo JL, Karin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla 92093-0636.

The POU domain protein GHF-1 has a critical role in generation, proliferation and
phenotypic expression of three pituitary cell types. GHF-1 functions in part by
binding to and transactivating the promoters of both the growth hormone (GH) and 
prolactin (PRL) genes and that of the GHF1 gene itself. We describe a naturally
occurring isoform of GHF-1, GHF-2, in which an additional 26 amino acids are
inserted into the activation domain of the protein as a result of alternative
splicing. GHF-2 retains the DNA binding activity of GHF-1 and can activate the GH
promoter but has lost the ability to activate the PRL and GHF1 promoters. These
results suggest that GHF-2 may function in differential target gene activation
during differentiation of the somatotrophic lineage. Both GHF-1 and GHF-2
transcripts are specifically expressed in the anterior pituitary. Analysis of the
genomic GHF1 gene shows that most of the distinct functional domains of GHF-1
(and GHF-2) are encoded by separate exons. Gene segment duplication and exon
shuffling may have contributed to the evolution of this cell type-specific
transcriptional regulatory gene.

PMCID: PMC556693
PMID: 1600947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Mol Endocrinol. 1992 May;6(5):786-92.

Extinction of prolactin gene expression in somatic cell hybrids is correlated
with the repression of the pituitary-specific trans-activator GHF-1/Pit-1.

Supowit SC(1), Ramsey T, Thompson EB.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Medical Branch, Department of Human Biological Chemistry
and Genetics, Galveston 77550.

The tissue-specific expression of the PRL and GH genes is dependent on the
presence of a pituitary-specific trans-activator, GHF-1/Pit-1. Previous studies
indicate that somatic cell hybridization of rat pituitary GH3 cells with LB82
mouse fibroblasts frequently results in the extinction of GH and PRL expression. 
The extinction of the GH gene occurs at the transcriptional level, and is
accompanied by repression of GHF-1/Pit-1 synthesis. To elucidate the mechanism of
PRL extinction we further characterized these same somatic cell hybrid lines as
well as the parental GH3 and LB82 cells. The pattern of PRL extinction and
reexpression paralleled that of GH in the three hybrid lines that were examined. 
Two of these lines extinguished both GH and PRL synthesis, while a third
displayed reexpression of both genes, apparently due to the loss of mouse
chromosomal material. These studies revealed that the extinction of PRL
expression in these hybrid lines occurs at the level of mRNA accumulation and is 
strongly correlated with the loss of GHF-1/Pit-1 mRNA and protein synthesis.
These data suggest that in pituitary x fibroblast hybrids repression of the
trans-activator GHF-1/Pit-1 is a primary mechanism for the extinction of PRL and 
GH gene expression.

PMID: 1603087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Mol Endocrinol. 1992 Apr;6(4):656-65.

Synergistic activation of the rat growth hormone promoter by Pit-1 and the
thyroid hormone receptor.

Schaufele F(1), West BL, Baxter JD.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Research Unit, University of California, San Francisco 94143-0540.

The rat GH (rGH) gene is expressed in the pituitary in a highly tissue-specific
manner. A pituitary-specific transcription factor, Pit-1 (or GHF-1), and other,
more tissue-general factors, including the thyroid hormone receptor (T3R), are
important for regulating rGH promoter activity. The relative roles of Pit-1, T3R,
and protein kinases in the activation of the rGH promoter were studied. Each
component was supplied individually or in combination with the others to human
monocyte U937 cells. The transfected rGH promoter was inactive in these cells
even when it was cotransfected with either Pit-1 or T3R expression vectors. The
rGH promoter carried in a truncated pUC vector could be activated by expression
of the T3R if the cells were cultured with inducers of protein kinase-A
(forskolin) and protein kinase-C [phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)]
activity. By contrast, the PMA- and forskolin-dependent activation of the rGH
promoter by Pit-1 expression was comparatively insignificant unless 1) the
sequences deleted from the pUC vector (including a putative site for the
transcription factor AP1) were restored to the plasmid carrying the rGH promoter;
or 2) the T3R was coexpressed, which led to a marked synergistic response. These 
results indicate the relative inactivity of Pit-1 in isolation from other
factors. Activation by forskolin and PMA did not require de novo protein
synthesis. The synergistic activation by Pit-1 and the T3R was enhanced, but was 
not dependent upon, thyroid hormone (T3). The T3-dependent effect operated
predominately through a thyroid hormone response element located up-stream of the
two Pit-1-binding sites within the rGH promoter, whereas the T3-independent
effect did not require any of the known T3R-binding sites on the rGH promoter.
These results suggest a role for the more tissue-general T3R and protein kinases 
in the activation of the rGH promoter. They demonstrate the synergistic interplay
between the T3R and Pit-1, underscore the dependence of Pit-1 action on other
transcription factors, and implicate Pit-1 as a cofactor, rather than the
dominant factor, influencing the tissue-specific expression of the rGH promoter.

PMID: 1584227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Endocrinol. 1992 Apr;6(4):581-8.

Analysis of functional cooperativity between individual transcription-stimulating
elements in the proximal region of the rat prolactin gene.

d'Emden MC(1), Okimura Y, Maurer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242.

The proximal region of the rat PRL gene contains at least five
transcription-stimulating elements that are located within a 170-basepair region 
up-stream of the TATA box. These cis-acting elements include four binding sites
for the pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1 as well as another site for
an unidentified factor. In this study interactions between different DNA elements
have been examined through the construction of PRL-luciferase fusion genes
containing mutations that disrupt various combinations of the individual DNA
elements. In general, the disruption of multiple factor-binding sites had a much 
more than additive effect on expression of the luciferase constructs.
Interestingly, comparison of the effects of disrupting pairs of binding sites
demonstrated substantial differences in the effects of different combinations of 
mutations, suggesting that cooperative interactions may reflect specific
interactions. Mutations that disrupted all five cis-elements of the PRL proximal 
region essentially abolished transcription from the proximal promoter. This
finding suggests that there are no other DNA elements within the proximal 200
basepairs of the PRL gene that can independently stimulate transcription.
Although there is strong functional cooperativity between different cis-elements 
in the PRL gene, DNase footprint studies failed to detect cooperative binding
between different Pit-1 elements. Overall, the findings demonstrate that the
normal transcription of the PRL gene involves strong cooperative interactions
between individual DNA elements in the proximal region.

PMID: 1584222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Endocrinol. 1992 Apr;6(4):515-22.

Phylogenetic specificity of prolactin gene expression with conservation of Pit-1 
function.

Elsholtz HP(1), Majumdar-Sonnylal S, Xiong F, Gong Z, Hew CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

In mammals, the pituitary POU homeodomain protein, Pit-1, binds to proximal and
distal 5'-flanking sequences of the PRL gene that dictate tissue-specific
expression. These DNA sequences are highly conserved among mammals but are
dramatically different from PRL 5' sequences in the teleost species, Oncorhynchus
tschawytscha (chinook salmon). To analyze the molecular basis for
pituitary-specific gene expression in a distantly related vertebrate, we
transfected CAT reporter gene constructs containing 2.4 kilobases (kb)
5'-flanking sequence from the salmon PRL (sPRL) gene into various cell types.
Expression of the sPRL gene was restricted to pituitary cells, but in rat
pituitary GH4 cells levels of expression were at least 90-fold lower than those
obtained with a -3 kb rat PRL (rPRL) construct. Conversely, in primary teleost
pituitary cells, -2.4 kb sPRL/CAT was expressed at levels about 10-fold higher
than -3 kb rPRL/CAT. To determine whether species-specific transactivation by
Pit-1 was sufficient to explain these species differences in PRL gene expression,
we isolated a cDNA clone encoding the salmon Pit-1 POU domain and constructed a
rat Pit-1 expression vector that contained salmon Pit-1 POU domain sequences
substituted in frame. The chimeric Pit-1 encoded 14 amino acids unique to salmon.
Coexpression of rat Pit-1 with salmon or rat PRL/CAT in transfected HeLa cells
resulted in specific and strikingly comparable levels of promoter activation.
Moreover, the specificity and efficacy of the chimeric salmon/rat Pit-1 was
similar to wild type rat Pit-1 in activating salmon and rat PRL/CAT.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1350055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Nat Genet. 1992 Apr;1(1):56-8.

Cretinism with combined hormone deficiency caused by a mutation in the PIT1 gene.

Tatsumi K(1), Miyai K, Notomi T, Kaibe K, Amino N, Mizuno Y, Kohno H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, Japan.

Cretinism is marked by irreversible mental and growth retardation. We describe
here an entirely new case of cretinism showing combined pituitary hormone
deficiencies of thyrotropin, growth hormone and prolactin that appears to be
caused by homozygosity for a nonsense mutation in the gene for the pituitary
specific transcription activator, Pit-1/GHF-1 (designated PIT1 in humans for
pituitary specific factor 1). This is the first report in humans of a defect in a
transcription activator causing deficiency of multiple target genes.

PMID: 1302000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Mar 25;20(6):1355-61.

An alternatively spliced Pit-1 isoform altered in its ability to trans-activate.

Morris AE(1), Kloss B, McChesney RE, Bancroft C, Chasin LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027.

Although alternative splicing has been shown to give rise to isoforms of a number
of transcription factors, such isoforms have not previously been detected for the
POU homeodomain protein Pit-1. Screening of a rat pituitary GH3 cell cDNA
expression library yielded a clone, termed pCMVPit-1a, encoding a 35.8 kD protein
(Pit-1a) containing a 26 amino acid insert in the Pit-1 trans-activation domain. 
The position of the insert, plus Southern blot analysis, implied that Pit-1a mRNA
arises by alternative splicing of the Pit-1 gene transcript. Pit-1a mRNA was
detected in GH3 rat pituitary tumor cells at levels about 1/7 that of Pit-1 mRNA.
Pit-1a mRNA-specific sequences were also detected in rat and mouse pituitary, and
in mouse thyrotropic tumor TtT cells. DNA mobility shift assays showed that
Pit-1a binds specifically to Pit-1 binding sites in the proximal prolactin
promoter, but produces DNA-protein complexes of markedly different mobilities
than Pit-1. In stably transfected CHO cells which accumulated approximately equal
levels of either of the two proteins, Pit-1 trans-activated a prolactin
promoter-driven CAT construct, while Pit-1a yielded no detectable
transactivation, implying a trans-activation ratio for Pit-1a/Pit-1 of less than 
0.05. Thus, the insertion of 26 amino acids of similar composition into the
activation domain of Pit-1 has at once affected both the mode of binding of this 
protein and its ability to function as a trans-activator.

PMCID: PMC312183
PMID: 1561093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Endocrinol. 1992 Feb;6(2):241-7.

Functional isoforms of Pit-1 generated by alternative messenger RNA splicing.

Konzak KE(1), Moore DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114.

Pit-1 is a pituitary-specific transcription factor that activates expression of
the GH and PRL genes. We have isolated a cDNA encoding a variant isoform of Pit-1
that we term Pit-1 beta. Pit-1 beta contains an insertion of 26 amino acids in
the transactivation domain as a consequence of the utilization of an alternative 
3' splice acceptor at the end of the first intron. Like the previously described 
Pit-1 alpha, Pit-1 beta transactivates both the GH and PRL promoters. However,
the larger isoform acts as a more potent inducer of GH.

PMID: 1569967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Clin Invest. 1992 Feb;89(2):409-19.

Role of a pituitary-specific transcription factor (pit-1/GHF-1) or a closely
related protein in cAMP regulation of human thyrotropin-beta subunit gene
expression.

Steinfelder HJ(1), Radovick S, Mroczynski MA, Hauser P, McClaskey JH, Weintraub
BD, Wondisford FE.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular, and Nutritional Endocrinology Branch, National Institutes
of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

cAMP regulation of the human thyrotropin-beta (TSH beta) gene cAMP was studied in
two heterologous cell lines, a human embryonal kidney cell line (293) and a rat
pituitary cell line (GH3). In 293 cells, human TSH beta gene expression was not
stimulated by the adenylate cyclase activator forskolin or the cAMP analogue
8-bromo-cAMP (8-Br-cAMP). On the other hand, these agents induced human TSH beta 
gene expression 4-12-fold in GH3 cells. Deletion analysis demonstrated that the
regions from +3 to +8 bp and from -128 to -61 bp were both necessary for cAMP
stimulation. The latter region contains three DNA sequences homologous to a
pituitary-specific transcription factor, Pit-1/GHF-1, DNA-binding site.
Gel-mobility assays demonstrated that a radiolabeled human TSH beta probe (-128
to -61 bp) formed five specific DNA-protein complexes with mouse thyrotropic
tumor (MTT) nuclear extract and two specific complexes with in vitro translated
Pit-1/GHF-1. Four of the five MTT complexes and both in vitro Pit-1/GHF-1
complexes were reduced or eliminated by excess of an unlabeled Pit-1/GHF-1
DNA-binding site from the rat growth hormone gene, but not a mutated version of
the same DNA fragment, suggesting that Pit-1/GHF-1 or a closely related
thyrotroph protein binds to these DNA sequences. In 293 cells, co-transfection of
an expression vector containing the Pit-1/GHF-1 cDNA restored cAMP-responsiveness
to the human TSH beta promoter (5.2- and 6.6-fold maximal stimulation by
8-Br-cAMP and forskolin, respectively) but not the herpes virus thymidine kinase 
promoter (1.2-fold maximal stimulation by either agent). Thus we conclude that
the human TSH beta gene is positively regulated by cAMP in GH3 but not 293 cells.
Since the human TSH beta gene contains at least one high-affinity binding site
for Pit-1/GHF-1 in a region necessary for cAMP stimulation and cAMP stimulation
could be restored to the human TSH beta promoter in a previously nonresponsive
cell line by the addition of Pit-1/GHF-1, this suggests that Pit-1/GHF-1, or a
closely related protein in the thyrotroph, may be a trans-acting factor for cAMP 
stimulation of the TSH beta gene.

PMCID: PMC442867
PMID: 1310694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1992 Jan 6;1129(2):231-4.

Nucleotide sequence of the complementary DNA for human Pit-1/GHF-1.

Tatsumi K(1), Notomi T, Amino N, Miyai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, Japan.

Human cDNA clones encoding Pit-1/GHF-1, a pituitary-specific DNA binding factor, 
were obtained by PCR following reverse transcription of human pituitary RNA. It
is approx. 1.3 kb in size with 0.1 kb 5' non-coding region, 0.9 kb protein-coding
region and 0.3 kb 3' non-coding region. The predicted human Pit-1/GHF-1 peptide
structure has 291 amino acids and is highly conserved among mouse, rat and
bovine. In addition, the 5' non-coding region is highly conserved with rat
pit-1/GHF-1 sequence to the transcription start site.

PMID: 1370379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Endocrinol. 1992 Jan;6(1):43-52.

Thyrotropin (TSH)-releasing hormone-responsive elements in the rat TSH beta gene 
have distinct biological and nuclear protein-binding properties.

Shupnik MA(1), Rosenzweig BA, Friend KE, Mason ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Virginia Medical Center, Charlottesville
22903.

Two TRH-responsive elements have been identified in the rat TSH beta gene by
deletion/mutation analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the gene and transfection
of TSH beta-luciferase constructs into the GH3 pituitary cell line. Biological
responsiveness was confirmed by inserting synthetic oligonucleotides next to the 
heterologous viral thymidine kinase (tk) promoter in tk luciferase (tkLUC)
constructs. Both DNA regions, termed TSH A (at -274 to -258 bp) and TSH C (-402
to -385 bp), have a high level of sequence similarity to binding sites for the
POU domain pituitary transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1. In transfection assays,
the TSH A region had no basal enhancer activity, but did confer 3- to 6-fold TRH-
and PMA-stimulated transcriptional responses to the tk promoter. The TSH C region
conferred basal enhancer activity (3- to 10-fold above control tkLUC) as well as 
a 2- to 3-fold TRH or PMA response. Combinations of TSH A and TSH C elements
conferred both enhancer activity and a TRH- or PMA-stimulated response, but more 
than two copies of the regions resulted in no further stimulatory effect. Both
TSH beta gene regions bound to nuclear proteins from GH3 cells, as determined by 
gel retardation analysis. The TSH A region DNA formed three prominent DNA-protein
complexes, ranging from slowly to rapidly migrating bands and with calculated
affinities of 32, 0.5, and 208 nM, respectively. The TSH C region formed two
major complexes, which corresponded on the basis of mobility to the most slowly
and rapidly migrating complexes formed by TSH A, but with calculated affinities
of 3.1 and 33 nM. TSH C also formed a rapidly migrating minor complex unique for 
this gene region. The more rapidly migrating complexes appeared to be specific to
nuclear proteins from GH3 cells. Treatment of cells with TRH did not
significantly alter the affinity of protein binding. Mutation of TSH A and TSH C 
DNA by T to G substitutions abolished the ability of the DNA to confer a TRH
response and severely inhibited the ability of the DNA to bind to GH3 nuclear
proteins. Thus, transcriptional regulation of the rat TSH beta gene by TRH is
correlated with the ability of the two TRH-sensitive elements to bind nuclear
proteins. The differences noted in basal enhancer activity or the degree of TRH
responsiveness may be related to some unique proteins bound to each DNA or to the
differences in affinity of binding of the proteins common to both elements.

PMID: 1738370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Horm Res. 1992;37 Suppl 3:88-92.

Growth hormone gene regulation by trans-acting factors.

Rousseau GG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hormone and Metabolic Research Unit, University of Louvain Medical School,
Brussels, Belgium.

The promoter sequence of the growth hormone (GH) gene binds the ubiquitous
factors nuclear factor 1, activator protein-2, upstream stimulatory factor and
Sp1. A pituitary-specific factor known as growth hormone factor 1 or Pit-1 also
binds to the promoter sequence. This factor is responsible for
somatotroph-specific expression of GH. It is also involved in the effect of
GH-releasing hormone and in the ontogeny of the anterior pituitary.

PMID: 1427648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Biol Chem. 1991 Dec 5;266(34):22919-25.

Inhibitory control of prolactin and Pit-1 gene promoters by dopamine. Dual
signaling pathways required for D2 receptor-regulated expression of the prolactin
gene.

Elsholtz HP(1), Lew AM, Albert PR, Sundmark VC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Canada.

Transcription of the prolactin gene is suppressed by dopaminergic activation of
D2 receptors in pituitary lactotrophs. The mechanism of signal transduction at
the nuclear level and the cell surface was examined in the dopamine-responsive
GH4ZR7 cell line. Dopamine treatment caused a 40-50% decrease in endogenous
prolactin mRNA that was specifically blocked by addition of (-)-sulpiride. To
define dopamine-responsive elements, plasmids containing 5'-regulatory regions of
the prolactin gene fused to the coding sequences for luciferase were transiently 
or stably transfected into GH4ZR7 cells. Chimeric transcripts initiated at the
authentic transcription start site were regulated in a promoter-selective manner;
dopamine or the agonist bromocryptine inhibited prolactin promoter (position
-422) activity by 70%, but had no regulatory effects on other cellular or viral
promoters. A shorter prolactin promoter (position -78) or a prolactin TATAA box
linked to heterologous binding sites for transcription factor Pit-1 was
sufficient to confer dopamine inhibition (40%). In addition to the prolactin
promoter, we found that dopamine inhibited transcriptional activity of the Pit-1 
promoter (positions -258 to +8) by 60%. Surprisingly, deletion of two cAMP
response elements in the Pit-1 promoter only partially eliminated dopamine
responsiveness. These data suggest that sequences in the Pit-1 promoter between
positions -92 and +8, which include an autoregulatory Pit-1-binding site and the 
TATAA box, are sufficient for negative regulation. In this study, we also
examined the signal transduction pathways that link D2 receptor activation and
the inhibition of prolactin gene transcription. We found, as suggested in earlier
studies, that a dopamine-dependent decrease in cAMP may be important for
mediating negative regulation of transcription. However, high extracellular K+
concentrations that prevent dopamine effects on membrane potential and [Ca2+]i,
but not cAMP levels, completely blocked dopamine regulation of the prolactin
promoter. This suggests that two distinct signaling pathways initiated at D2
receptors may be required for transcriptional regulation of the prolactin gene.

PMID: 1835974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Nov 25;19(22):6329.

Cloning of the human cDNA for transcription factor Pit-1.

Lew AM(1), Elsholtz HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

PMCID: PMC329149
PMID: 1956794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Endocrinol. 1991 Nov;5(11):1748-54.

Pit-1 binding sequences permit calcium regulation of human prolactin gene
expression.

Hoggard N(1), Davis JR, Berwaer M, Monget P, Peers B, Belayew A, Martial JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Manchester, United Kingdom.

This study examines the regulation of the human PRL (hPRL) gene promoter by
intracellular calcium. Deletants of the 5'-flanking region of the hPRL gene and
constructs consisting of the thymidine kinase promoter linked to the first or
second proximal Pit-1 binding site were fused to the bacterial chloramphenicol
acetyl transferase (CAT) reporter gene. With the complete 5-kilobase pair (kbp)
hPRL promoter sequence the calcium channel agonist Bay K8644 induced a
significant 2-fold increase in CAT reporter gene expression and the antagonist
verapamil a 4.5-fold reduction, using GH3 cells cultured in physiological levels 
of calcium. The transcriptional response to calcium influx was similar with a
series of 5'-deleted hPRL-CAT constructs including those that comprised the
proximal (up to 740 bp) or distal (-1300- to -1700-bp) sequences alone. When
treating cells cultured in low calcium conditions the induction with the hPRL
promoter increased to 5-fold on the addition of exogenous calcium and Bay K8644. 
The pituitary-specific expression of the hPRL gene is conferred by the
interaction of the pituitary-specific factor Pit-1 with several binding sites
located in the 5'-flanking DNA, of which three are located in the proximal
region. This suggested that Pit-1 binding sites may be involved in the calcium
response.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1779976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Endocrinol. 1991 Nov;5(11):1730-9.

Expression of the growth hormone gene and the pituitary-specific transcription
factor GHF-1 in diabetic rats.

Bedo G(1), Santisteban P, Jolin T, Aranda A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomedicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientificas, Madrid, Spain.

Diabetes in the rat is associated with poor growth and decreased GH in the
pituitary. In this study we have examined whether this reduction reflects an
impairment of GH gene expression. Diabetes was induced by the administration of
streptozotocin (7 mg/100 g BW), and 18 days later, GH content, GH mRNA, and GH
transcription rate were determined. GH mRNA levels were reduced by more than 80% 
in the pituitaries of diabetic rats, which had a similarly reduced GH content.
The differences observed in transcription fully account for the changes in mRNA
concentration, since the transcription rate of the gene was also reduced by a
factor of 10 in the diabetic pituitaries. Insulin therapy (3 U/15 days) partially
restored these parameters. The expression of the specific transcription factor
GHF-1/Pit-1 in diabetic rats was also analyzed. Both GHF-1 mRNA levels and the
binding of nuclear proteins to an oligodeoxynucleotide conforming to the GHF-1
proximal binding site in the promoter of the GH gene were normal in the diabetic 
pituitaries, thus excluding the possibility that decreased availability of this
factor could be responsible for the decreased GH transcription. Since diabetes
produced an approximately 3-fold reduction of circulating T3, the potential role 
of thyroid hormones on GH gene expression was also evaluated in thyroidectomized 
and thyroidectomized diabetic rats. Thyroidectomy decreased GH and GH mRNA to
less than 5% of the values found in intact animals, and a single saturating
injection of T3 (250 micrograms/100 g BW) resulted in a 8- to 10-fold induction
of GH mRNA after 6 h.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1779974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Endocrinol. 1991 Nov;5(11):1716-22.

Inhibition of prolactin gene transcription by transforming growth factor-beta in 
GH3 cells.

Delidow BC(1), Billis WM, Agarwal P, White BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington
06030.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF beta) is a member of a large family of
growth factors, several of which regulate pituitary function. TGF beta has
recently been reported to reduce PRL production by GH4 cells. We have examined
the effect of TGF beta on PRL gene expression in rat pituitary tumor GH3 cells.
TGF beta 1 or TGF beta 2 reduced both basal and Ca(2+)-stimulated PRL mRNA
levels. This inhibition was specific, as the mRNA levels for GH,
glucose-regulated protein 78, and histone-3 were unaffected by TGF beta.
Inhibition of PRL gene expression by TGF beta was dose dependent in the range of 
0.5-10 ng/ml. TGF beta inhibited run-on PRL gene transcription in nuclei from
treated cells to the same extent that it reduced PRL mRNA levels, indicating a
transcriptional mechanism of action. However, TGF beta did not affect Pit-1 mRNA 
levels or run-on transcription of the Pit-1 gene. Thus, TGF beta does not appear 
to act through modification of Pit-1 gene expression. The PRL promotor contains
two regions of homology, with a consensus sequence found in the promoters of
other TGF beta-inhibited genes. These findings are consistent with other studies 
that have demonstrated transcriptional repression by TGF beta. The potency and
specificity of the effects of TGF beta on PRL gene expression suggest that it may
be a physiological regulator of lactotroph function.

PMID: 1779973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Biol Chem. 1991 Sep 25;266(27):18127-34.

Transcriptional induction of the human prolactin gene by cAMP requires two
cis-acting elements and at least the pituitary-specific factor Pit-1.

Peers B(1), Monget P, Nalda MA, Voz ML, Berwaer M, Belayew A, Martial JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorie de Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique, Université de
Liège, Sart-Tilman, Belgium.

To identify the cis-acting elements responsible for cAMP stimulation of human
prolactin (hPRL) promoter activity, pituitary GC cells were transfected with
5'-deleted hPRL promoters fused to the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter
gene. The proximal regulatory region (coordinates -250 to -42) was sufficient to 
confer strong cAMP stimulation (+/- 25 fold). Further 5' and 3' deletions
performed within this proximal region demonstrated that two types of cis-acting
elements are involved in the cAMP regulation: (i) the binding sites of the
pituitary-specific factor Pit-1, and (ii) the sequence between coordinates -115
and -85 (named fragment A), which contains a TGACG motif. We show by gel-shift
and Southwestern experiments that fragment A binds Pit-1 monomer and also a
ubiquitous factor that is neither cAMP-responsive element-binding protein nor
activator protein-1. Strong cAMP induction was observed when fragment A was
juxtaposed to a Pit-1 binding site. That Pit-1 plays an important role was
supported further by the finding that the hPRL proximal region conferred cAMP
regulation when linked to the herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase promoter only
in pituitary GC cells and not in other heterologous cells, which do not express
Pit-1. Furthermore, we observed that concatenated Pit-1 binding sites were able
to confer cAMP responsiveness to the thymidine kinase promoter in GC cells.

PMID: 1655738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Genes Dev. 1991 Aug;5(8):1490-503.

The pituitary-specific regulatory gene GHF1 contains a minimal cell type-specific
promoter centered around its TATA box.

McCormick A(1), Brady H, Fukushima J, Karin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology M-036, University of California, San Diego, School 
of Medicine, La Jolla 92093.

GHF-1 is a pituitary-specific transcription factor responsible for activation of 
the growth hormone (GH) gene. The GHF1 gene is expressed exclusively in cells of 
the somatotrophic lineage, and its transcription is extinguished in somatic cell 
hybrids. The minimal sequences required for differential transcription of GHF1 in
GH-expressing and -nonexpressing cell lines and somatic cell hybrids were
localized to a 15-bp region surrounding and including its TATA box. This 15-bp
fragment acts as a cell type-specific promoter element and is recognized by a
transcription factor present in GH-expressing cell lines. Hence, in addition to
enhancers and upstream promoter elements, the TATA element (TATA box plus
surrounding sequences) can be, in certain cases, an important determinant of
cell-type-specific transcription.

PMID: 1869051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Biol Chem. 1991 Jul 15;266(20):12832-5.

Alternative translation initiation site usage results in two structurally
distinct forms of Pit-1.

Voss JW(1), Yao TP, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0648.

Pit-1 is a pituitary-specific transcription factor that plays a critical role in 
the normal development of the anterior pituitary gland. Previous analyses have
shown that this protein exists in the rat pituitary gland and in rat
pituitary-derived cell lines as two forms of relative molecular mass 33 and 31
kDa. This aspect of Pit-1 expression has been conserved throughout the evolution 
from rodents to humans. Here, we determine the origin of these structurally
distinct forms of Pit-1 protein and find that these arise as a consequence of the
alternative usage of translation initiation sites present in Pit-1 mRNA.

PMID: 2071572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1991 Jun 14;177(2):790-6.

A Pit-1 binding site 3' to the transcription start site inhibits transcription
elongation in vitro.

Smith KP(1), Sharp ZD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health
Science Center, San Antonio 78284-7762.

The transcription factor Pit-1 can autoregulate its own expression by interacting
with binding sites associated with the Pit-1 gene. One of these binding sites is 
located within the transcribed region of the gene and appears to be responsible
for negatively regulating Pit-1 transcription. Using unique constructions in an
in vitro transcription system, we show here that binding of Pit-1 to its
recognition element can impede the progress of transcription elongation through
the occupied site. We propose that this is a viable mechanism for Pit-1
autoregulation.

PMID: 2049101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Biol Chem. 1991 May 25;266(15):9805-13.

Sp1 and thyroid hormone receptor differentially activate expression of human
growth hormone and chorionic somatomammotropin genes.

Tansey WP(1), Catanzaro DF.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia.

Activation of hGH-1 expression is mediated by the pituitary-specific
transcription factor GHF-I/Pit-I which binds the 5'-flanking DNA at two sites: I 
(-96/-70) and II (-134/-106). Although the factor(s) which direct the
placental-specific expression of hCS-1 are not known, hCS-1 sequences are
transcriptionally active in pituitary cells. In the present study we examined the
effects of sequence differences between hGH-1 and hCS-1 5'-flanking DNAs in
determining their basal and thyroid hormone-regulated promoter activities. We
showed that Sp1 is a major determinant of both hGH-1 and hCS-1 promoter
activities and that in hGH-1, binding and activation by Sp1 are modulated by
interference from GHF-I/Pit-1 binding at the adjacent site II sequence. A single 
base which differed in site II of hCS-1 greatly reduced GHF-1/Pit-1 binding and
thus facilitated binding and activation by Sp1. Further differences in promoter
activity of hGH-1 and hCS-1 sequences were accounted for by a thyroid
hormone-responsive element between -62/-48 in the hCS-1 gene. However, induction 
by T3 was independent of either Sp1 or GH-1/Pit-1 binding in the site II region. 
These data demonstrate that a small number of base changes between hGH and hCS
promoter sequences subserve a number of mechanisms which may differentially
modulate the expression of hGH and hCS genes.

PMID: 2033067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Apr 15;88(8):3130-4.

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone regulation of human TSHB expression: role of a
pituitary-specific transcription factor (Pit-1/GHF-1) and potential interaction
with a thyroid hormone-inhibitory element.

Steinfelder HJ(1), Hauser P, Nakayama Y, Radovick S, McClaskey JH, Taylor T,
Weintraub BD, Wondisford FE.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular and Nutritional Endocrinology Branch, National Institutes 
of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Regulation of human thyrotropin beta subunit gene (TSHB) expression by
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) was examined in a clonal rat pituitary-cell
line (GH3). Transient expression studies were done with various 5'-flanking DNA
sequences of TSHB coupled to reporter gene chloramphenicol acetyltransferase.
Deletion analysis defined two discrete regions (-128 to -92 base pairs and -28 to
+8 base pairs) that each mediated an approximately 2-fold TRH induction. The
upstream site contains a DNA sequence with close homology to the DNA-binding site
for a pituitary-specific transcriptional factor Pit-1/GHF-1. DNase I footprinting
analysis of mouse thyrotropic tumor extract as well as DNA-transfection studies
using an expression vector containing an N-terminal deletion of Pit-1/GHF-1 cDNA 
suggest that Pit-1/GHF-1 or a closely related protein in the thyrotroph mediates 
TRH responsiveness of this gene. In addition, the downstream site overlaps with
the recently characterized thyroid hormone-inhibitory element of TSHB. In fact,
deletion of DNA sequences important in thyroid hormone-receptor binding
(c-erbAB/c-ERBA2) from +3 to +8 base pairs, significantly reduced (30%) TRH
responsiveness. The location of a TRH-stimulatory element near a thyroid
hormone-inhibitory element may allow for fine control of TSHB expression in vivo.

PMCID: PMC51399
PMID: 1901656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Endocrinol. 1991 Apr;5(4):535-41.

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone action on the prolactin promoter is mediated by the
POU protein pit-1.

Yan GZ(1), Pan WT, Bancroft C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, City 
University of New York, New York 10029.

TRH is known to regulate transcription of the PRL gene in pituitary cells, but
little is known about the mechanism involved. We have characterized TRH response 
elements (TRHREs) in the promoter region of the rat PRL gene and the
gene-proximal protein that transmits the TRH signal to these elements. Exposure
of GH3 rat pituitary cells to TRH yielded a large specific stimulation of
transient expression of a PRL-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (PRL-CAT)
construct containing the PRL promoter region [(-204)PRL-CAT]. Analysis of 5'
deletions of this construct implied that regions -174/-113 and -75/+38 each
contain a TRHRE. GH3 cell nuclear extracts are known to footprint four sites,
termed, respectively, 1P-4P, on the PRL promoter region. The TRHRE between
positions -75/+38 was identified as element 1P, residing at -63/-39, since two
copies of a 1P oligodeoxynucleotide transferred a TRH response to either
(-39)PRL-CAT or mouse metallothionein-CAT construct (-39)mMT-CAT. Similarly, the 
more proximal TRHRE may be element 3P, residing at -167/-144, since two copies of
this element also transferred a TRH response to (-39)PRL-CAT. Binding of pit-1 to
site 1P is known to be capable of activating pituitary cell-specific PRL gene
expression. To investigate whether pit-1 can also transduce a TRH signal to this 
site, oligodeoxynucleotides were prepared corresponding to mutations in either or
both of two consensus sequences in site 1P.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1922085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Bull Mem Acad R Med Belg. 1991;146(11-12):415-20.

[Control of growth hormone synthesis, paradigm of tissue specificity and of
hormonal gene expression regulation].

[Article in French]

Rousseau G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unité hormones et métabolisme, Université catholique de Louvain-en-Woluwe.

The study of the transcriptional control of the growth hormone gene illustrates
the complementary role of three types of regulatory proteins. These proteins bind
to the gene upstream of the transcription initiation site to stimulate or inhibit
transcription. A first type of proteins includes ubiquitous factors. A second
type includes receptors for hormones that act in the nucleus. A third type is
represented by the pituitary factor Pit-1, the prototype of a novel class of
proteins that are also involved in controlling embryonic development and cell
proliferation. Indeed, Pit-1 determines not only the tissue specificity of
expression of the growth hormone gene, but also its control by somatocrinin, as
well as the ontogeny of the anterior pituitary and the maintenance of the
differentiated phenotype.

PMID: 1688134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nihon Naibunpi Gakkai Zasshi. 1990 Dec 20;66(12):1205-20.

Cell type specific expression of the growth hormone gene and its control by
GHF-1.

Karin M(1), Theill L, Castrillo JL, McCormick A, Brady H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla 92093.

PMID: 2292312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Endocrinol. 1990 Dec;4(12):1964-71.

Both Pit-1 and the estrogen receptor are required for estrogen responsiveness of 
the rat prolactin gene.

Day RN(1), Koike S, Sakai M, Muramatsu M, Maurer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242.

To examine the functional relationship between distinct cis-active elements
within the distal enhancer region of the rat PRL gene, we have used deletional
and mutational analysis of that region in transient transfection studies in GH3
pituitary tumor cells. Results from these studies demonstrate that the region of 
the PRL distal enhancer containing the Pit-1-binding sites is critical not only
for enhancer activity and the response to cAMP, but also for the response to
estradiol. An interaction of the estrogen receptor with factors conferring basal 
enhancer activity is suggested by studies with a mutant distal enhancer region in
which the PRL estrogen response element was converted to a palindromic estrogen
response element. To directly examine potential interactions, cotransfection
studies using PRL distal enhancer reporter gene constructs and expression vectors
for Pit-1 and rat estrogen receptor were performed in two heterologous cell
lines. The activity of the reporter gene under the control of the PRL distal
enhancer linked to either the thymidine kinase promoter or the PRL proximal
promoter was not significantly altered by cotransfection with the Pit-1
expression vector in COS-1 or RAT-1 cells. Coexpression of these reporter
constructs and an expression vector for estrogen receptor resulted in only a
slight response to estradiol. However, when both Pit-1 and estrogen receptor were
cotransfected with the distal enhancer reporter gene, a marked induction was
observed in response to estradiol, and this activity was dependent upon the
concentration of the Pit-1 expression vector.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2082192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Biol Chem. 1990 Oct 5;265(28):17180-8.

A novel transglutaminase-mediated post-translational modification of
phospholipase A2 dramatically increases its catalytic activity.

Cordella-Miele E(1), Miele L, Mukherjee AB.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Developmental Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Transglutaminases (TG), which include coagulation Factor XIIIa, are
calcium-dependent ubiquitous enzymes. TGs catalyze the formation of an isopeptide
bond by cross-linking a specific glutamine and a lysine residue between two
proteins or within the same protein molecule. Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) is a key
enzyme in the regulation of prostaglandin and leukotriene biosynthetic pathways, 
which catalyzes the release of free fatty acids from the sn-2 position of
membrane glycerophospholipids. This enzyme has been suggested to be
pathophysiologically related to the initiation and propagation of several
inflammatory diseases including juvenile rheumatoid and rheumatoid arthritis.
Here, we describe a novel TG-catalyzed post-translational modification of PLA2
which dramatically increases the activity of this enzyme. This increase was
dependent upon the time of preincubation, the concentration of TG and the
presence of Ca2+. Size exclusion chromatography of TG-treated PLA2 yielded two
peaks of PLA2 activity, with apparent molecular masses of 26 and 13 kDa,
respectively. The 26-kDa species, a putative PLA2 dimer, contained
epsilon-(gamma-glutamyl)-lysine isopeptide in about 1:1 molar ratio to PLA2,
suggesting an intramolecular rather than intermolecular cross-linking. This
hypothesis was confirmed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis of the 26- and 13-kDa species under denaturing conditions. The
specific activity of the dimeric peak was 10-fold higher with respect to that of 
the monomeric enzyme. These data suggest that TG-catalyzed covalent cross-linking
of PLA2 is intramolecular and that this may promote a noncovalent dimerization
and subsequent activation of this enzyme via a conformational change. To our
knowledge, this is the first demonstration that TG-mediated post-translational
modification of an enzyme (e.g. PLA2) causes a striking increase in the catalytic
activity of the enzyme.

PMID: 1976627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Endocrinol. 1990 Oct;4(10):1564-71.

Clustered point mutation analysis of the rat prolactin promoter.

Iverson RA(1), Day KH, d'Emden M, Day RN, Maurer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242.

To identify DNA regions important for basal and hormone-stimulated transcription 
of the rat PRL gene, a series of clustered point mutations were prepared within
the immediate 5' flanking region. DNA fragments representing the wild-type and 19
different linker-scanner mutations of the PRL gene were each linked to a
luciferase marker gene, and the DNA constructs were transferred into GH3
pituitary tumor cells by electroporation. Luciferase activity was determined 24 h
after transfection in extracts from control cells or cells treated with 0.5 mM
chlorophenylthio-cAMP, 100 nM TRH, or 100 nM phorbol myristate acetate. The
individual clustered point mutations covered a region from just up-stream of the 
TATA box (position -30) to a position 193 basepairs up-stream from the start of
transcription. Five regions in which mutations produced substantial decreases in 
both basal and cAMP-, TRH-, or phorbol ester-stimulated expression of the marker 
gene were detected. Three of these regions (positions -41 to -58, -113 to -124,
and -149 to -156) correspond to previously identified binding sites for the
pituitary-specific, homeobox protein, Pit-1/GHF-1. The fourth and fifth regions
do not correspond to Pit-1/GHF-1-binding sites and presumably represent sites for
an unidentified factor. Within these regions, sequences with some similarity to a
consensus cAMP response element and an AP-2-binding site have been detected.
These data confirm the importance of Pit-1/GHF-1 as a key factor in PRL gene
transcription. In addition, the results suggest that additional transcription
factors are probably required for efficient expression of the PRL gene.(ABSTRACT 
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2178221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Sep 11;18(17):5235-43.

Somatotroph- and lactotroph-specific interactions with the homeobox protein
binding sites in the rat growth hormone gene promoter.

Schaufele F(1), West BL, Reudelhuber T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco 94143.

Nuclear extracts prepared from growth hormone-secreting (GC) and
prolactin-secreting (235-1) rat anterior pituitary cell lines were compared for
their ability to bind to the DNA sequences conferring tissue-specificity to the
expression of the rat growth hormone (rGH) gene promoter. Cell-specific
differences in the interaction of Pit-1, a tissue-specific member of the
POU-domain transcription factor family, with the pGHF1 binding site were detected
by methylation interference experiments; otherwise the Pit-1 proteins present in 
GC cell and 235-1 cell extracts were similar. Two other protein/DNA complexes,
GHF5 and GHF7, were detected by gel mobility shift assays and the binding of both
complexes to the rGH promoter depended upon DNA sequences contained within the
two binding sites for Pit-1. In contrast to Pit-1 which can bind to either of the
two sites independently, a single Pit-1 binding site was insufficient for GHF5
and GHF7 binding; i.e. both Pit-1 binding sites within the rGH promoter were
required. Whereas GHF5 was present in nuclear extracts of GC cells and a variety 
of cells not producing growth hormone, GHF7 binding activity was detected only in
the GC cell line (and not in the 235-1 cell line). GHF7 binding activity was
therefore more closely correlated with growth hormone gene transcription than was
Pit-1. rGH promoters containing mutations which inhibited GHF5, GHF7 and Pit-1
binding were expressed less efficiently than the wild type promoter after
transfection into GC cells. One promoter mutation to which the GHF7 complex but
not the Pit-1 factor can bind was also transcription deficient demonstrating that
Pit-1 binding, independent of GHF7 binding, was nevertheless important to the
expression of the rat growth hormone promoter.

PMCID: PMC332147
PMID: 1976240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Nature. 1990 Aug 9;346(6284):583-6.

Autoregulation of pit-1 gene expression mediated by two cis-active promoter
elements.

Chen RP(1), Ingraham HA, Treacy MN, Albert VR, Wilson L, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine, La Jolla, California 92093.

The pit-1 gene is a member of a large family of genes that encode proteins which 
are involved in development and which contain a highly homologous region,
referred to as the POU domain. Pit-1, a pituitary-specific transcription factor, 
can activate the transcription of the growth hormone and prolactin promoters. It 
is expressed in mature thyrotroph, somatotroph and lactotroph cell types of the
anterior pituitary which arise sequentially during development; somatotrophs and 
lactotrophs, which secrete growth hormone and prolactin, respectively, are the
last to arise. Intriguingly, during ontogeny, pit-1 transcripts are observed in
the rat neural tube and neural plate (embryonic day 10-11) and disappear
thereafter (day 13), only to reappear exclusively in the anterior lobe of the
pituitary gland (day 15) just before activation of prolactin and growth hormone. 
This biphasic pattern suggests a complex mechanism of initial activation of pit-1
gene expression. Transcription and transfection analyses in vitro using wild-type
and mutated promoters indicate that Pit-1 can positively autoregulate the
expression of the pit-1 promoter as a consequence of binding to two Pit-1-binding
elements. Mutation of the 5' Pit-1-binding site abolished positive
autoregulation, whereas mutation of the element located immediately 3' of the cap
site markedly increased expression of the pit-1 promoter. These data are
consistent with a positive, attenuated autoregulatory loop that seems to function
in maintaining pit-1 gene expression.

PMID: 2142999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Genes Dev. 1990 May;4(5):695-711.

Pituitary cell phenotypes involve cell-specific Pit-1 mRNA translation and
synergistic interactions with other classes of transcription factors.

Simmons DM(1), Voss JW, Ingraham HA, Holloway JM, Broide RS, Rosenfeld MG,
Swanson LW.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, School of Medicine, La Jolla 92093-0613.

Development of the anterior pituitary gland involves proliferation and
differentiation of ectodermal cells in Rathke's pouch to generate five distinct
cell types that are defined by the trophic hormones they produce. A detailed
ontogenetic analysis of specific gene expression has revealed novel aspects of
organogenesis in this model system. The expression of transcripts encoding the
alpha-subunit common to three pituitary glycoprotein hormones in the single layer
of somatic ectoderm on embryonic day 11 established that primordial pituitary
cell commitment occurs prior to formation of a definitive Rathke's pouch.
Activation of Pit-1 gene expression occurs as an organ-specific event, with Pit-1
transcripts initially detected in anterior pituitary cells on embryonic day 15.
Levels of Pit-1 protein closely parallel those of Pit-1 transcripts without a
significant lag. Unexpectedly, Pit-1 transcripts remain highly expressed in all
five cell types of the mature pituitary gland, but the Pit-1 protein is detected 
in only three cell types--lactotrophs, somatotrophs, and thyrotrophs and not in
gonadotrophs or corticotrophs. The presence of Pit-1 protein in thyrotrophs
suggests that combinatorial actions of specific activating and restricting
factors act to confine prolactin and growth hormone gene expression to
lactotrophs and somatotrophs, respectively. A linkage between the initial
appearance of Pit-1 protein and the surprising coactivation of prolactin and
growth hormone gene expression is consistent with the model that Pit-1 is
responsible for the initial transcriptional activation of both genes. The
estrogen receptor, which has been reported to be activated in a stereotypic
fashion subsequent to the appearance of Pit-1, appears to be capable, in part, of
mediating the progressive increase in prolactin gene expression characteristic of
the mature lactotroph phenotype. This is a consequence of synergistic
transcriptional effects with Pit-1, on the basis of binding of the estrogen
receptor to a response element in the prolactin gene distal enhancer. These data 
imply that both transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of Pit-1 gene
expression and combinatorial actions with other classes of transcription factors 
activated in distinct temporal patterns, are required for the mature
physiological patterns of gene expression that define distinct cell types within 
the anterior pituitary gland.

PMID: 2379827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Recent Prog Horm Res. 1990;46:43-57; discussion 57-8.

Tissue-specific expression of the growth hormone gene and its control by growth
hormone factor-1.

Karin M(1), Theill L, Castrillo JL, McCormick A, Brady H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California-San
Diego, La Jolla 92093.

PMID: 2281188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nature. 1989 Dec 21-28;342(6252):945-8.

Dissection of functional domains of the pituitary-specific transcription factor
GHF-1.

Theill LE(1), Castrillo JL, Wu D, Karin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla 92093.

The specific expression of growth hormone (GH) in the somatotrophic cells of the 
anterior pituitary is largely attributable to a short promoter in the 5' flanking
region of the GH gene. This promoter contains two binding sites for the
transcription factor GHF-1, the expression of which is also specific to cells of 
the somatotrophic lineage and correlates with activation of the GH gene in the
developing mouse pituitary. Various studies indicate that GHF-1 is the main
determinant of cell type-specific expression of the GH gene. GHF-1 is a member of
the POU-domain class of proteins that each contain two highly conserved sequence 
motifs, the homoeodomain and the POU-specific domain. Here we report that the
GHF-1 homoeodomain is sufficient for sequence-specific DNA binding, although its 
activity is stimulated by the POU-specific domain, which does not interact
directly with the DNA. Transcriptional activation is mediated by a separate
domain rich in hydroxylated amino-acid residues. Similar sequences are present in
other cell type-specific transcription factors.

PMID: 2574416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


