
1. Dev Dyn. 2016 Mar 25. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24407. [Epub ahead of print]

Inhibiting Smad2/3 signaling in pluripotent mouse embryonic stem cells enhances
endoderm formation by increasing transcriptional priming of lineage-specifying
target genes.

Dahle Ø(1), Kuehn MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Basic Research Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Frederick, Maryland.

BACKGROUND: Pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESCs) offer great potential for
regenerative medicine. However, efficient in vitro generation of specific desired
cell types is still a challenge. We previously established that Smad2/3
signaling, essential for endoderm formation, regulates target gene expression by 
counteracting epigenetic repression mediated by Polycomb Repressive Complex 2
(PRC2). Although this mechanism has been demonstrated during differentiation and 
reprogramming, little is known of its role in pluripotent cells.
RESULTS: Chromatin immunoprecipitation-deep sequencing of undifferentiated mouse 
ESCs inhibited for Smad2/3 signaling identified Prdm14, important for protecting 
pluripotency, as a target gene. Although Prdm14 accumulates the normally
repressive PRC2 deposited histone modification H3K27me3 under these conditions,
surprisingly expression increases. Analysis indicates that increased H3K27me3
leads to increased binding of PRC2 accessory component Jarid2 and recruitment of 
RNA polymerase II. Similar increases were found at the Nodal endoderm target gene
Eomesodermin, but it remained unexpressed in pluripotent cells as normal. Upon
differentiation, however, Eomesodermin expression was significantly higher than
in cells that had not been inhibited for signaling prior to differentiation. In
addition, endoderm formation was markedly increased.
CONCLUSIONS: Blocking Smad2/3 signaling in pluripotent stem cells results in
epigenetic changes that enhance the capacity for endoderm differentiation. This
article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 27012147  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2016;117:471-96. doi: 10.1016/bs.ctdb.2015.11.007. Epub 2016
Feb 18.

Developmental Competence for Primordial Germ Cell Fate.

Günesdogan U(1), Surani MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom; Department of Physiology, Development and
Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Electronic
address: u.gunesdogan@gurdon.cam.ac.uk. (2)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK
Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom; Department 
of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom. Electronic address: a.surani@gurdon.cam.ac.uk.

During mammalian embryonic development, the trophectoderm and primitive endoderm 
give rise to extraembryonic tissues, while the epiblast differentiates into all
somatic lineages and the germline. Remarkably, only a few classes of signaling
pathways induce the differentiation of these progenitor cells into diverse
lineages. Accordingly, the functional outcome of a particular signal depends on
the developmental competence of the target cells. Thus, developmental competence 
can be defined as the ability of a cell to integrate intrinsic and extrinsic cues
to execute a specific developmental program toward a specific cell fate.
Downstream of signaling, there is the combinatorial activity of transcription
factors and their cofactors, which is modulated by the chromatin state of the
target cells. Here, we discuss the concept of developmental competence, and the
factors that regulate this state with reference to the specification of mammalian
primordial germ cells.

© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26969996  [PubMed - in process]


3. Epigenetics. 2016 Mar 1:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Quantitative genome-wide methylation analysis of high-grade non-muscle invasive
bladder cancer.

Kitchen MO(1,)(2), Bryan RT(3), Emes RD(4), Glossop JR(1), Luscombe C(2), Cheng
K(3), Zeegers MP(3,)(5,)(6,)(7), James ND(8), Devall AJ(3), Mein CA(9),
Gommersall L(2), Fryer AA(1), Farrell WE(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Institute for Science and Technology in Medicine, Keele University , UK.
(2)b Urology Department , University Hospitals of North Midlands NHS Trust , UK. 
(3)c Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham , UK.
(4)d Advanced Data Analysis Centre, University of Nottingham , UK. (5)e
Department of Complex Genetics , Maastricht University Medical Centre , The
Netherlands. (6)f NUTRIM School of Nutrition and Translational Research in
Metabolism, Maastricht University Medical Centre , The Netherlands. (7)g CAPHRI
School for Public Health and Primary Care, Maastricht University Medical Centre ,
The Netherlands. (8)h Cancer Research Unit, University of Warwick , UK. (9)i The 
Genome Centre, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry , London ,
UK.

High-grade non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (HG-NMIBC) is a clinically
unpredictable disease with greater risks of recurrence and progression relative
to their low-intermediate-grade counterparts. The molecular events, including
those affecting the epigenome, that characterize this disease entity in the
context of tumor development, recurrence, and progression, are incompletely
understood. We therefore interrogated genome-wide DNA methylation using
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip arrays in 21 primary HG-NMIBC tumors relative to
normal bladder controls. Using strict inclusion-exclusion criteria we identified 
1,057 hypermethylated CpGs within gene promoter-associated CpG islands,
representing 256 genes. We validated the array data by bisulphite pyrosequencing 
and examined 25 array-identified candidate genes in an independent cohort of 30
HG-NMIBC and 18 low-intermediate-grade NMIBC. These analyses revealed
significantly higher methylation frequencies in high-grade tumors relative to
low-intermediate-grade tumors for the ATP5G2, IRX1 and VAX2 genes (P<0.05), and
similarly significant increases in mean levels of methylation in high-grade
tumors for the ATP5G2, VAX2, INSRR, PRDM14, VSX1, TFAP2b, PRRX1, and HIST1H4F
genes (P<0.05). Although inappropriate promoter methylation was not invariantly
associated with reduced transcript expression, a significant association was
apparent for the ARHGEF4, PON3, STAT5a, and VAX2 gene transcripts (P<0.05).
Herein, we present the first genome-wide DNA methylation analysis in a unique
HG-NMIBC cohort, showing extensive and discrete methylation changes relative to
normal bladder and low-intermediate-grade tumors. The genes we identified hold
significant potential as targets for novel therapeutic intervention either alone,
or in combination, with more conventional therapeutic options in the treatment of
this clinically unpredictable disease.

PMID: 26929985  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2016 Feb 20;19(2):93-7. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2016.02.06.

[Research Progress of PR Domain Zinc Finger Protein 14].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Han Y(1), Lin Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, School of Medicine, Shanghai 200080, China.

PR domain zinc finger protein 14 (PRDM14) is an important member of the PRDM
family, PRDM14 plays a key role in the maintenance of cell integrity and
differentiation, growth and apoptosis of the cell. It also plays an critical role
in the formation of primordial germ cells, the maintenance of the totipotency of 
stem cells and the formation of tissues and organs. PRDM14 bears a single PR
domain and six tandemly repeated zinc <U+FB01>ngers, which is involved in the process of
the deacetylation and methylation of the histone, and is involved in the
formation of tumor trough the change level of methylation in the promoter region.
The abnormal methylation of PRDM14 can change the chromatin structure, DNA
conformation and the interaction mode of DNA and protein, it can suppress
transcription and expression of the gene, which caused the occurrence,
development and metastasis of tumor. The research progress of PRDM14 is reviewed 
based on the relevant literatures published in China and abroad.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 26903163  [PubMed - in process]


5. Nature. 2016 Jan 21;529(7586):403-7. doi: 10.1038/nature16480. Epub 2016 Jan 11.

NANOG alone induces germ cells in primed epiblast in vitro by activation of
enhancers.

Murakami K(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5), Günesdogan U(1,)(2,)(3), Zylicz JJ(1,)(2,)(3),
Tang WW(1,)(2,)(3), Sengupta R(1,)(2,)(3), Kobayashi T(1,)(2,)(3), Kim
S(1,)(2,)(3), Butler R(1), Dietmann S(3), Surani MA(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge,
Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK. (2)Department of Physiology,
Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge 
CB2 3DY, UK. (3)Wellcome Trust Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute,
University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK. (4)Laboratory 
for Pluripotent Cell Studies, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN, 2-2-3
Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan. (5)Laboratory for
Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Advanced Life Science, Hokkaido
University, Kita21 Nishi11, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 001-0021, Japan.

Nanog, a core pluripotency factor in the inner cell mass of blastocysts, is also 
expressed in unipotent primordial germ cells (PGCs) in mice, where its precise
role is yet unclear. We investigated this in an in vitro model, in which naive
pluripotent embryonic stem (ES) cells cultured in basic fibroblast growth factor 
(bFGF) and activin A develop as epiblast-like cells (EpiLCs) and gain competence 
for a PGC-like fate. Consequently, bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4), or
ectopic expression of key germline transcription factors Prdm1, Prdm14 and
Tfap2c, directly induce PGC-like cells (PGCLCs) in EpiLCs, but not in ES cells.
Here we report an unexpected discovery that Nanog alone can induce PGCLCs in
EpiLCs, independently of BMP4. We propose that after the dissolution of the naive
ES-cell pluripotency network during establishment of EpiLCs, the epigenome is
reset for cell fate determination. Indeed, we found genome-wide changes in
NANOG-binding patterns between ES cells and EpiLCs, indicating epigenetic
resetting of regulatory elements. Accordingly, we show that NANOG can bind and
activate enhancers of Prdm1 and Prdm14 in EpiLCs in vitro; BLIMP1 (encoded by
Prdm1) then directly induces Tfap2c. Furthermore, while SOX2 and NANOG promote
the pluripotent state in ES cells, they show contrasting roles in EpiLCs, as Sox2
specifically represses PGCLC induction by Nanog. This study demonstrates a
broadly applicable mechanistic principle for how cells acquire competence for
cell fate determination, resulting in the context-dependent roles of key
transcription factors during development.

PMCID: PMC4724940 [Available on 2016-07-21]
PMID: 26751055  [PubMed - in process]


6. Stem Cells. 2016 Feb;34(2):322-33. doi: 10.1002/stem.2243. Epub 2015 Nov 26.

Combined Overexpression of JARID2, PRDM14, ESRRB, and SALL4A Dramatically
Improves Efficiency and Kinetics of Reprogramming to Induced Pluripotent Stem
Cells.

Iseki H(1,)(2), Nakachi Y(1,)(3), Hishida T(4,)(2), Yamashita-Sugahara Y(1),
Hirasaki M(4), Ueda A(4), Tanimoto Y(5), Iijima S(5), Sugiyama F(5), Yagami K(5),
Takahashi S(2,)(5), Okuda A(4,)(2), Okazaki Y(1,)(3,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Functional Genomics and Systems Medicine, Saitama Medical
University, Saitama, Japan. (2)CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), 
Saitama, Japan. (3)Division of Translational Research, Saitama Medical
University, Saitama, Japan. (4)Division of Developmental Biology, Research Center
for Genomic Medicine, Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan. (5)Laboratory
Animal Resource Center, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Identification of a gene set capable of driving rapid and proper reprogramming to
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) is an important issue. Here we show that
the efficiency and kinetics of iPSC reprogramming are dramatically improved by
the combined expression of Jarid2 and genes encoding its associated proteins. We 
demonstrate that forced expression of JARID2 promotes iPSC reprogramming by
suppressing the expression of Arf, a known reprogramming barrier, and that the
N-terminal half of JARID2 is sufficient for such promotion. Moreover, JARID2
accelerated silencing of the retroviral Klf4 transgene and demethylation of the
Nanog promoter, underpinning the potentiating activity of JARID2 in iPSC
reprogramming. We further show that JARID2 physically interacts with ESRRB,
SALL4A, and PRDM14, and that these JARID2-associated proteins synergistically and
robustly facilitate iPSC reprogramming in a JARID2-dependent manner. Our findings
provide an insight into the important roles of JARID2 during reprogramming and
suggest that the JARID2-associated protein network contributes to overcoming
reprogramming barriers. Stem Cells 2016;34:322-333.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26523946  [PubMed - in process]


7. Elife. 2015 Nov 2;4. pii: e10150. doi: 10.7554/eLife.10150.

ETO family protein Mtgr1 mediates Prdm14 functions in stem cell maintenance and
primordial germ cell formation.

Nady N(1), Gupta A(2), Ma Z(1), Swigut T(1), Koide A(2), Koide S(2), Wysocka
J(1,)(3,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, United States. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, United States. (3)National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, , United States. (4)Department of Developmental
Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, United States.
(5)Institute of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, United States.

Prdm14 is a sequence-specific transcriptional regulator of embryonic stem cell
(ESC) pluripotency and primordial germ cell (PGC) formation. It exerts its
function, at least in part, through repressing genes associated with epigenetic
modification and cell differentiation. Here, we show that this repressive
function is mediated through an ETO-family co-repressor Mtgr1, which tightly
binds to the pre-SET/SET domains of Prdm14 and co-occupies its genomic targets in
mouse ESCs. We generated two monobodies, synthetic binding proteins, targeting
the Prdm14 SET domain and demonstrate their utility, respectively, in
facilitating crystallization and structure determination of the Prdm14-Mtgr1
complex, or as genetically encoded inhibitor of the Prdm14-Mtgr1 interaction.
Structure-guided point mutants and the monobody abrogated the Prdm14-Mtgr1
association and disrupted Prdm14's function in mESC gene expression and PGC
formation in vitro. Altogether, our work uncovers the molecular mechanism
underlying Prdm14-mediated repression and provides renewable reagents for
studying and controlling Prdm14 functions.

PMCID: PMC4749557
PMID: 26523391  [PubMed - in process]


8. Oncogene. 2015 Oct 26. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.405. [Epub ahead of print]

Sleeping Beauty transposon screen identifies signaling modules that cooperate
with STAT5 activation to induce B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Heltemes-Harris LM(1,)(2,)(3), Larson JD(3,)(4), Starr TK(3,)(4,)(5,)(6), Hubbard
GK(1,)(2,)(3), Sarver AL(3), Largaespada DA(3,)(6,)(7), Farrar MA(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA. (3)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA. (4)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. (5)Department of Obstetrics,
Gynecology and Women's Health, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(6)Center for Genome Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. 
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) activation occurs
frequently in human progenitor B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL). To
identify gene alterations that cooperate with STAT5 activation to initiate
leukemia, we crossed mice expressing a constitutively active form of STAT5
(Stat5b-CA) with mice in which a mutagenic Sleeping Beauty transposon (T2/Onc)
was mobilized only in B cells. Stat5b-CA mice typically do not develop B-ALL (<2%
penetrance); in contrast, 89% of Stat5b-CA mice in which the T2/Onc transposon
had been mobilized died of B-ALL by 3 months of age. High-throughput sequencing
approaches were used to identify genes frequently targeted by the T2/Onc
transposon; these included Sos1 (74%), Kdm2a (35%), Jak1 (26%), Bmi1 (19%),
Prdm14 or Ncoa2 (13%), Cdkn2a (10%), Ikzf1 (8%), Caap1 (6%) and Klf3 (6%).
Collectively, these mutations target three major cellular processes: (i) the
Janus kinase/STAT5 pathway (ii) progenitor B-cell differentiation and (iii) the
CDKN2A tumor-suppressor pathway. Transposon insertions typically resulted in
altered expression of these genes, as well as downstream pathways including
STAT5, extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk) and p38. Importantly,
expression of Sos1 and Kdm2a, and activation of p38, correlated with survival,
further underscoring the role these genes and associated pathways have in
B-ALL.Oncogene advance online publication, 26 October 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.405.

PMID: 26500062  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Sci Rep. 2015 Sep 25;5:14347. doi: 10.1038/srep14347.

Dynamic expression of chromatin modifiers during developmental transitions in
mouse preimplantation embryos.

Nestorov P(1,)(2), Hotz HR(1), Liu Z(1), Peters AH(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, 4058 Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Faculty of Sciences, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland.

During mouse preimplantation development, major changes in cell fate are
accompanied by extensive alterations of gene expression programs. Embryos first
transition from a maternal to zygotic program and subsequently specify the
pluripotent and the trophectodermal cell lineages. These processes are regulated 
by key transcription factors, likely in cooperation with chromatin modifiers that
control histone and DNA methylation. To characterize the spatiotemporal
expression of chromatin modifiers in relation to developmental transitions, we
performed gene expression profiling of 156 genes in individual oocytes and single
blastomeres of developing mouse embryos until the blastocyst stage. More than
half of the chromatin modifiers displayed either maternal or zygotic expression. 
We also detected lineage-specific expression of several modifiers, including
Ezh1, Prdm14, Scmh1 and Tet1 underscoring possible roles in cell fate decisions. 
Members of the SET-domain containing SMYD family showed differential gene
expression during preimplantation development. We further observed co-expression 
of genes with opposing biochemical activities, such as histone methyltransferases
and demethylases, suggesting the existence of a dynamic chromatin steady-state
during preimplantation development.

PMCID: PMC4585904
PMID: 26403153  [PubMed - in process]


10. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Oct 9;466(1):138-45. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.08.122. Epub 2015 Aug 29.

PRDM14 maintains pluripotency of embryonic stem cells through TET-mediated active
DNA demethylation.

Okashita N(1), Sakashita N(2), Ito K(2), Mitsuya A(2), Suwa Y(2), Seki Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, School of Science and Technology, Kwansei
Gakuin University, 2-1 Gakuen, Sanda, Hyogo 669-1337, Japan; Research Center for 
Environmental Bioscience, Kwansei Gakuin University, 2-1 Gakuen, Sanda, Hyogo
669-1337, Japan. (2)Department of Biomedical Science, School of Science and
Technology, Kwansei Gakuin University, 2-1 Gakuen, Sanda, Hyogo 669-1337, Japan. 
(3)Department of Biomedical Science, School of Science and Technology, Kwansei
Gakuin University, 2-1 Gakuen, Sanda, Hyogo 669-1337, Japan; Research Center for 
Environmental Bioscience, Kwansei Gakuin University, 2-1 Gakuen, Sanda, Hyogo
669-1337, Japan. Electronic address: yseki@kwansei.ac.jp.

Pluripotency and self-renewal of mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) depend on a
network of transcription factors maintained by exogenous leukaemia inhibitory
factor (LIF). PR-domain containing transcriptional regulator 14 (PRDM14), is
essential for maintenance of ESC self-renewal when the cells are cultured in
serum plus LIF, but not in 2i medium plus LIF. Here, we show that pluripotency of
ESCs is maintained by enforced expression of PRDM14 at a high level, as observed 
in ESCs in 2i plus LIF and developing primordial germ cells in the absence of
LIF. Constitutive expression of PRDM14 represses de novo DNA methylation in
pluripotency-associated genes, resulting in the maintenance of gene expression
after withdrawal of LIF, while also repressing the upregulation of
differentiation markers. Further, knockdown of Tet1/Tet2 and administration of
base excision repair (BER) pathway inhibitors impairs the PRDM14-induced
resistance of ESCs to differentiation. We conclude that, in the absence of LIF,
PRDM14 governs the retention of pluripotency-associated genes through the
regulation of TET functions in the BER-mediated active demethylation pathway,
while acting to exert TET-independent transcriptional repressive activity of
several differentiation markers.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26325469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2015 Dec;41(6):1545-56. doi: 10.1007/s10695-015-0106-1.
Epub 2015 Aug 7.

Spermatogonial stem cells specific marker identification in channel catfish,
Ictalurus punctatus and blue catfish, I. furcatus.

Shang M(1,)(2), Su B(3,)(4), Lipke EA(5), Perera DA(3,)(6), Li C(3,)(7), Qin
Z(3), Li Y(3), Dunn DA(5,)(8), Cek S(3,)(9), Peatman E(3), Dunham RA(10).

Author information: 
(1)School of Fisheries, Aquaculture, and Aquatic Sciences, Auburn University,
Auburn, AL, 36849, USA. mzs0040@tigermail.auburn.edu. (2)Key Laboratory of
Freshwater Aquatic Biotechnology and Genetic Breeding, Heilongjiang Fisheries
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Ministry of Agriculture,
Harbin, 150070, China. mzs0040@tigermail.auburn.edu. (3)School of Fisheries,
Aquaculture, and Aquatic Sciences, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA.
(4)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Aquatic Biotechnology and Genetic Breeding,
Heilongjiang Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences,
Ministry of Agriculture, Harbin, 150070, China. (5)Department of Chemical
Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA. (6)Gus R. Douglass
Land-Grant Institute, West Virginia State University, Institute, WV, 25112, USA. 
(7)Marine Science and Engineering College, Qingdao Agricultural University,
Qingdao, 266109, China. (8)Department of Biological Sciences, State University of
New York at Oswego, Oswego, NY, 13126-3599, USA. (9)Faculty of Marine Science and
Technology, Mustafa Kemal University, 31200, Iskenderun, Hatay, Turkey.
(10)School of Fisheries, Aquaculture, and Aquatic Sciences, Auburn University,
Auburn, AL, 36849, USA. dunhara@auburn.edu.

Testicular germ cells of channel catfish, Ictalurus punctatus, and blue catfish, 
I. furcatus were separated into four layers with Percoll density gradient
centrifugation, containing different cell types (40% in the first layer were
spermatogonial stem cells, SSCs). Expression of seventeen genes was analyzed for 
cells from different layers by real-time quantitative PCR. Pfkfb4, Urod, Plzf,
Integrin6, IntegrinV, Thy1 and Cdh1 genes showed the same expression change
pattern in both channel and blue catfish as these genes were down-regulated in
the spermatocytes and even more so in spermatids. Plzf and Integrin6 had
especially high expression in SSCs and can be used as SSCs specific markers. Sox2
gene was up-regulated in spermatocytes and even more highly up-regulated in
spermatids, which indicated it could be a spermatid marker. In contrast to
channel catfish, Id4, Smad5 and Prdm14 gene expressions were strongly
down-regulated in spermatocyte cells, but up-regulated in spermatid cells in blue
catfish. Smad5 gene was down-regulated in spermatocytes, but up-regulated in both
spermatogonia and spermatids, allowing identification as a marker for
spermatocytes in blue catfish. Oct4, Id4, Gfra2, Pum2 and Prdm14 genes showed
different expression patterns in the testicular germ cells of channel and blue
catfish. This may be a partial explanation to the differing responses of channel 
catfish and blue catfish to induced spawning technologies. The SSCs specific
markers can be used for further SSCs labeling, which can increase the SSCs
sorting efficiency and be applied in various studies involving SSCs and other
germ cells.

PMID: 26251285  [PubMed - in process]


12. J Chin Med Assoc. 2015 Aug;78(8):438-45. doi: 10.1016/j.jcma.2015.05.002. Epub
2015 Jun 13.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition-related factors in solid tumor and
hematological malignancy.

Chou YS(1), Yang MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University School of
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of
Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Division of
Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Lo-Hsu Foundation, Lotung Poh-Ai
Hospital, Luodong, Yilan, Taiwan, ROC. (2)Institute of Clinical Medicine,
National Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Division
of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Taipei Veterans General
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. Electronic address: mhyang2@vghtpe.gov.tw.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process plays pivotal roles in
regulatory mechanisms of embryogenesis and wound healing physiologically, and
organ fibrosis, cancer progression, and metastasis pathologically. EMT is
classified as primary, secondary, and tertiary during embryonic development. EMT 
contributes to repair of tissue injury and fibrogenesis by re-epithelialization
and regeneration of fibroblasts, respectively. The hallmarks of EMT include loss 
of contact inhibition, remodeling of extracellular matrix, and reorganization of 
cytoskeleton, along with expression of mesenchymal markers and reduction of
epithelial markers. Cancer cells acquire stemness, migration and invasive
capability, evade apoptosis, and initiate metastasis to distant organs. Several
EMT regulators including Snail, Zeb1, Zeb2, and Twist in solid tumor and Sox4,
distal-less homeobox gene 4 (DLX4), Prdm14, Bmi1, and the forkhead box family in 
hematological malignancy are reviewed with regard to their signaling pathways,
regulatory mechanisms, and clinical interactions.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Taiwan.

PMID: 26078096  [PubMed - in process]


13. PLoS One. 2015 May 20;10(5):e0125626. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125626.
eCollection 2015.

Histone demethylation maintains Prdm14 and Tsix expression and represses xIst in 
embryonic stem cells.

Kamikawa YF(1), Donohoe ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Burke Medical Research Institute, White Plains, New York, United States of
America; Department of Neuroscience Brain Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell 
Medical College, New York, New York, United States of America; Department of Cell
& Development, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, United States
of America.

Epigenetic reprogramming is exemplified by the remarkable changes observed in
cellular differentiation and X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) in mammalian female 
cells. Histone 3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) is a modification that
suppresses gene expression in multiple contexts including embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) and decorates the entire inactive X-chromosome. The conversion of female
somatic cells to induced pluripotency is accompanied by X-chromosome reactivation
(XCR) and H3K27me3 erasure. Here, we show that the H3K27-specific demethylase Utx
regulates the expression of the master regulators for XCI and XCR: Prdm14, Tsix, 
and Xist. Female ESC transcriptome analysis using a small molecule inhibitor for 
H3K27 demethylases, GSK-J4, identifies novel targets of H3K27 demethylation.
Consistent with a recent report that GSK-J4 can inhibit other histone
demethylase, we found that elevated H3K4me3 levels are associated with increased 
gene expression including Xist. Our data suggest multiple regulatory mechanisms
for XCI via histone demethylation.

PMCID: PMC4439117
PMID: 25993097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(10):1596-610. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1026485.

Destabilization of pluripotency in the absence of Mad2l2.

Pirouz M(1), Rahjouei A, Shamsi F, Eckermann KN, Salinas-Riester G, Pommerenke C,
Kessel M.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Molecular Cell Biology ; Max Planck Institute for Biophysical 
Chemistry ; Goettingen ; Germany.

The induction and maintenance of pluripotency requires the expression of several 
core factors at appropriate levels (Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, Prdm14). A subset of these 
proteins (Oct4, Sox2, Prdm14) also plays crucial roles for the establishment of
primordial germ cells (PGCs). Here we demonstrate that the Mad2l2 (MAD2B, Rev7)
gene product is not only required by PGCs, but also by pluripotent embryonic stem
cells (ESCs), depending on the growth conditions. Mad2l2(-/-) ESCs were unstable 
in LIF/serum medium, and differentiated into primitive endoderm. However, they
could be stably propagated using small molecule inhibitors of MAPK signaling.
Several components of the MAPK cascade were up- or downregulated even in
undifferentiated Mad2l2(-/-) ESCs. Global levels of repressive histone H3
variants were increased in mutant ESCs, and the epigenetic signatures on
pluripotency-, primitive endoderm-, and MAPK-related loci differed. Thus, H3K9me2
repressed the Nanog promoter, while the promoter of Gata4 lost H3K27me3 and
became de-repressed in LIF/serum condition. Promoters associated with genes
involved in MAPK signaling also showed misregulation of these histone marks. Such
epigenetic modifications could be indirect consequences of mutating Mad2l2.
However, our previous observations suggested the histone methyltransferases as
direct (G9a) or indirect (Ezh2) targets of Mad2l2. In effect, the intricate
balance necessary for pluripotency becomes perturbed in the absence of Mad2l2.

PMCID: PMC4614513 [Available on 2016-04-30]
PMID: 25928475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Apr 23;16(5):9097-118. doi: 10.3390/ijms16059097.

Identification and Characterization of a PRDM14 Homolog in Japanese Flounder
(Paralichthys olivaceus).

Fan L(1), Jiang J(2), Gao J(3), Song H(4), Liu J(5), Yang L(6), Li Z(7), Chen
Y(8), Zhang Q(9), Wang X(10).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding (Ocean University of China),
Ministry of Education, Qingdao 266003, China. fanlin_lynne@sina.cn. (2)Key
Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding (Ocean University of China), Ministry 
of Education, Qingdao 266003, China. j15964239284@163.com. (3)Key Laboratory of
Marine Genetics and Breeding (Ocean University of China), Ministry of Education, 
Qingdao 266003, China. gjn.1127@163.com. (4)Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and
Breeding (Ocean University of China), Ministry of Education, Qingdao 266003,
China. song.huayu@163.com. (5)Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding
(Ocean University of China), Ministry of Education, Qingdao 266003, China.
ljkmn911@outlook.com. (6)Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding (Ocean
University of China), Ministry of Education, Qingdao 266003, China.
yanglikun0320@126.com. (7)Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding (Ocean
University of China), Ministry of Education, Qingdao 266003, China.
xiumei0210@163.com. (8)Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding (Ocean
University of China), Ministry of Education, Qingdao 266003, China.
gtpeng@163.com. (9)Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding (Ocean
University of China), Ministry of Education, Qingdao 266003, China.
qzhang@ouc.edu.cn. (10)Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding (Ocean
University of China), Ministry of Education, Qingdao 266003, China.
wangxubo@ouc.edu.cn.

PRDM14 is a PR (PRDI-BF1-RIZ1 homologous) domain protein with six zinc fingers
and essential roles in genome-wide epigenetic reprogramming. This protein is
required for the establishment of germ cells and the maintenance of the embryonic
stem cell ground state. In this study, we cloned the full-length cDNA and genomic
DNA of the Paralichthys olivaceus prdm14 (Po-prdm14) gene and isolated the 5'
regulatory region of Po-prdm14 by whole-genome sequencing. Peptide sequence
alignment, gene structure analysis, and phylogenetic analysis revealed that
Po-PRDM14 was homologous to mammalian PRDM14. Results of real-time quantitative
polymerase chain reaction amplification (RT-qPCR) and in situ hybridization (ISH)
in embryos demonstrated that Po-prdm14 was highly expressed between the morula
and late gastrula stages, with its expression peaking in the early gastrula
stage. Relatively low expression of Po-prdm14 was observed in the other
developmental stages. ISH of gonadal tissues revealed that the transcripts were
located in the nucleus of the oocytes in the ovaries but only in the
spermatogonia and not the spermatocytes in the testes. We also presume that the
Po-prdm14 transcription factor binding sites and their conserved binding region
among vertebrates. The combined results suggest that Po-PRDM14 has a conserved
function in teleosts and mammals.

PMCID: PMC4463580
PMID: 25915026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Int J Mol Med. 2015 May;35(5):1219-29. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2132. Epub 2015 Mar
11.

Stem cells derived from human first-trimester umbilical cord have the potential
to differentiate into oocyte-like cells in vitro.

Hu X(1), Lu H(1), Cao S(1), Deng YL(1), Li QJ(1), Wan Q(1), Yie SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, The Second Medical College/Teaching
Hospital, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, Sichuan
610041, P.R. China.

Compared to stem cells derived from human term umbilical cord, stem cells derived
from human first-trimester umbilical cord (hFTUC) exhibit a significantly greater
proliferative potential, and more efficiency in terms of their in vitro
differentiation. In the present study, we investigated whether hFTUC-derived stem
cells are able to differentiate into germ cells. The hFTUC-derived stem cells
were first isolated, expanded and then cultured in differentiation medium
containing human follicular fluid, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)/luteinizing
hormone (LH) and estradiol for 24 days. During the period of induction, a
subpopulation of the cultured cells appeared that had a morphological resemblance
to primordial germ cells (PGCs) and cumulus-oocyte complex (COC)-like cells, and 
oocyte-like cells (OLCs). The PGC-like cells expressed specific markers
indicative of germ cell formation such as octamer-binding transcription factor 4 
(OCT4), stage-specific embryonic antigen 1 (SSEA1), B lymphocyte-induced
maturation protein-1 (Blimp1), PR domain containing 14 (Prdm14), transcription
factor AP-2 gamma (Tfap2C), VASA, STELLA, deleted in azoospermia-like (DAZL) and 
interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3). The OLCs, which contained a 
single germinal vesicle, expressed oocyte-specific markers, such as synaptonemal 
complex protein 3 (SCP3), growth/differentiation factor-9 (GDF9), GDF9B and zona 
pellucida (ZP)1, ZP2 and ZP3. The COC-like cells secreted estradiol, vascular
endothelial growth factor and leukemia inhibitory factor. Thus, our findings
suggest that hFTUC-derived stem cells have an intrinsic ability to differentiate 
into OLCs, which may provide an in vitro model for the identification of factors 
involved in germ cell formation and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4380121
PMID: 25760093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. EMBO J. 2015 Apr 15;34(8):1009-24. doi: 10.15252/embj.201488049. Epub 2015 Mar 6.

Human primordial germ cell commitment in vitro associates with a unique PRDM14
expression profile.

Sugawa F(1), Araúzo-Bravo MJ(2), Yoon J(1), Kim KP(1), Aramaki S(1), Wu G(1),
Stehling M(1), Psathaki OE(1), Hübner K(1), Schöler HR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany. (2)Department of Cell and Developmental 
Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany Group
of Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Biodonostia Health Research
Institute, San Sebastián, Spain IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science,
Bilbao, Spain. (3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany Medical Faculty, University
of Münster, Münster, Germany office@mpi-muenster.mpg.de.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2015 Apr 15;34(8):975-7.

Primordial germ cells (PGCs) develop only into sperm and oocytes in vivo. The
molecular mechanisms underlying human PGC specification are poorly understood due
to inaccessibility of cell materials and lack of in vitro models for tracking the
earliest stages of germ cell development. Here, we describe a defined and
stepwise differentiation system for inducing pre-migratory PGC-like cells
(PGCLCs) from human pluripotent stem cells (PSCs). In response to cytokines, PSCs
differentiate first into a heterogeneous mesoderm-like cell population and then
into PGCLCs, which exhibit minimal PRDM14 expression. PGC specification in humans
is similar to the murine process, with the sequential activation of mesodermal
and PGC genes, and the suppression of neural induction and of de novo DNA
methylation, suggesting that human PGC formation is induced via epigenesis, the
process of germ cell specification via inductive signals from surrounding somatic
cells. This study demonstrates that PGC commitment in humans shares key features 
with that of the mouse, but also highlights key differences, including
transcriptional regulation during the early stage of human PGC development (3-6
weeks). A more comprehensive understanding of human germ cell development may
lead to methodology for successfully generating PSC-derived gametes for
reproductive medicine.

© 2015 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4406649
PMID: 25750208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Br J Cancer. 2015 Mar 17;112(6):1105-13. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.636.

DNA hypermethylation analysis in sputum for the diagnosis of lung cancer:
training validation set approach.

Hubers AJ(1), Heideman DA(1), Burgers SA(2), Herder GJ(3), Sterk PJ(4), Rhodius
RJ(4), Smit HJ(5), Krouwels F(6), Welling A(7), Witte BI(8), Duin S(1), Koning
R(1), Comans EF(9), Steenbergen RD(1), Postmus PE(10), Meijer GA(1), Snijders
PJ(1), Smit EF(10), Thunnissen E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, De Boelelaan 1117,
Amsterdam 1081 HV, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Thoracic Oncology,
NKI-Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Department of
Pulmonary Diseases, Sint Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (5)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Sint Lucas Andreas Hospital,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (6)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Spaarne
Hospital, Hoofddorp, The Netherlands. (7)Department of Pulmonary Diseases,
Medisch Centrum Alkmaar, Alkmaar, The Netherlands. (8)Department of Epidemiology 
and Biostatistics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Nuclear Medicine, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (10)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, VU University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer has the highest mortality of all cancers. The aim of this
study was to examine DNA hypermethylation in sputum and validate its diagnostic
accuracy for lung cancer.
METHODS: DNA hypermethylation of RASSF1A, APC, cytoglobin, 3OST2, PRDM14, FAM19A4
and PHACTR3 was analysed in sputum samples from symptomatic lung cancer patients 
and controls (learning set: 73 cases, 86 controls; validation set: 159 cases, 154
controls) by quantitative methylation-specific PCR. Three statistical models were
used: (i) cutoff based on Youden's J index, (ii) cutoff based on fixed
specificity per marker of 96% and (iii) risk classification of post-test
probabilities.
RESULTS: In the learning set, approach (i) showed that RASSF1A was best able to
distinguish cases from controls (sensitivity 42.5%, specificity 96.5%). RASSF1A, 
3OST2 and PRDM14 combined demonstrated a sensitivity of 82.2% with a specificity 
of 66.3%. Approach (ii) yielded a combination rule of RASSF1A, 3OST2 and PHACTR3 
(sensitivity 67.1%, specificity 89.5%). The risk model (approach iii) distributed
the cases over all risk categories. All methods displayed similar and consistent 
results in the validation set.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings underscore the impact of DNA methylation markers in
symptomatic lung cancer diagnosis. RASSF1A is validated as diagnostic marker in
lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC4366885
PMID: 25719833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Cancer. 2015 Jan 20;6(3):270-5. doi: 10.7150/jca.10638. eCollection 2015.

Amplification of chromosome 8 genes in lung cancer.

Baykara O(1), Bakir B(1), Buyru N(1), Kaynak K(2), Dalay N(3).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Medical Biology, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Istanbul
University, Turkey. (2)2. Department of Chest Surgery, Cerrahpasa Medical
Faculty, Istanbul University, Turkey. (3)3. Department of Basic Oncology, I.U.
Oncology Institute, Istanbul University, Turkey.

Chromosomal alterations are frequent events in lung carcinogenesis and usually
display regions of focal amplification containing several overexpressed
oncogenes. Although gains and losses of chromosomal loci have been reported copy 
number changes of the individual genes have not been analyzed in lung cancer. In 
this study 22 genes were analyzed by MLPA in tumors and matched normal tissue
samples from 82 patients with non-small cell lung cancer. Gene amplifications
were observed in 84% of the samples. Chromosome 8 was found to harbor the most
frequent copy number alterations. The most frequently amplified genes were
ZNF703, PRDM14 and MYC on chromosome 8 and the BIRC5 gene on chromosome 17. The
frequency of deletions were much lower and the most frequently deleted gene was
ADAM9. Amplification of the ZNF703, PRDM14 and MYC genes were highly correlated
suggesting that the genes displaying high copy number changes on chromosome 8
collaborate during lung carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4317763
PMID: 25663945  [PubMed]


20. Chin Med J (Engl). 2015 Feb 5;128(3):373-7. doi: 10.4103/0366-6999.150109.

PRDM14 promotes the migration of human non-small cell lung cancer through
extracellular matrix degradation in vitro.

Bi HX, Shi HB, Zhang T(1), Cui G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Program in Molecular and Translational Medicine,
School of Medicine, Huzhou University, Huzhou, Zhejiang 313000, China.

BACKGROUND: As a novel molecular markerof non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
PRDI-BF1 and RIZ homology domain containing protein 14 (PRDM14) is over-expressed
in NSCLC tumor tissues. Extracellular matrix degradation mediated by the balance 
between matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinases (TIMPs) is one of the most important mechanism in lung cancer 
metastasis. This study aimed to determine if PRDM14 promoted the migration of
NSCLC cells through extracellular matrix degradation mediated by change of
MMP/TIMP expression.
METHODS: The expression of PRDM14 was down-regulated in human cell line A 549
after transfection with lentiviral vector-mediated short-hairpin ribonucleic
acids (shRNAs) which targeted the PRDM14 promoter. Cellular migration of
shRNA-infected cells was detected by a scratch wound healing assay and transwell 
cell migration assay. Expression levels of MMP1, MMP2, TIMP1, and TIMP2 were
measured by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Migration of PRDM14-shRNA-infected cells was significantly inhibited
relative to control cells as measured by the scratch wound healing (P < 0.05) and
transwell cell migration assays (P < 0.01). The expression of MMP1 in A549 cells 
infected by PRDM14-shRNA was down-regulated significantly (P < 0.01), whereas the
expression of TIMP1 and TIMP2 was up-regulated significantly (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: PRDM14 accelerates A549 cells migration in vitro through
extracellular matrix degradation. PRDM14 is considered as a potential therapeutic
target in metastatic NSCLC.

PMID: 25635434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Epigenetics. 2015;10(1):73-81. doi: 10.4161/15592294.2014.990787. Epub 2015 Jan
23.

Longitudinal assessment of DNA methylation changes during HPVE6E7-induced
immortalization of primary keratinocytes.

Schütze DM(1), Kooter JM, Wilting SM, Meijer CJ, Quint W, Snijders PJ,
Steenbergen RD.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pathology; Unit of Molecular Pathology ; VU University Medical
Center ; Amsterdam , The Netherlands.

High-risk human papillomavirus (hrHPV)-induced immortalization and malignant
transformation are accompanied by DNA methylation of host genes. To determine
when methylation is established during cell immortalization and whether it is
hrHPV-type dependent, DNA methylation was studied in a large panel of
HPVE6E7-immortalized keratinocyte cell lines. These cell lines displayed
different growth behaviors, i.e., continuous growth versus crisis period prior to
immortalization, reflecting differential immortalization capacities of the 7
HPV-types (16/18/31/33/45/66/70) studied. In this study, cells were monitored for
hypermethylation of 14 host genes (APC, CADM1, CYGB, FAM19A4, hTERT, mir124-1,
mir124-2, mir124-3, MAL, PHACTR3, PRDM14, RASSF1A, ROBO3, and SFRP2) at 4
different stages during immortalization. A significant increase in overall
methylation levels was seen with progression through each stage of
immortalization. At stage 1 (pre-immortalization), a significant increase in
methylation of hTERT, mir124-2, and PRDM14 was already apparent, which continued 
over time. Methylation of ROBO3 was significantly increased at stage 2 (early
immortal), followed by CYGB (stage 3) and FAM19A4, MAL, PHACTR3, and SFRP2 (stage
4). Methylation patterns were mostly growth behavior independent. Yet, hTERT
methylation levels were significantly increased in cells that just escaped from
crisis. Bisulfite sequencing of hTERT confirmed increased methylation in immortal
cells compared to controls, with the transcription core and known repressor sites
remaining largely unmethylated. In conclusion, HPV-induced immortalization is
associated with a sequential and progressive increase in promoter methylation of 
a subset of genes, which is mostly independent of the viral immortalization
capacity.

PMCID: PMC4622457
PMID: 25580631  [PubMed - in process]


22. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2014 Dec 5;369(1657). pii: 20130543. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2013.0543.

Primordial germ cell specification: a context-dependent cellular differentiation 
event [corrected].

Günesdogan U(1), Magnúsdóttir E(2), Surani MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge,
Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK Department of Physiology, Development
and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Downing St., Cambridge CB2 3DY, UK
Wellcome Trust Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute, University of
Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK. (2)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, BioMedical Center, University of Iceland, 101
Reykjavík, Iceland. (3)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute,
University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK Department of
Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Downing St.,
Cambridge CB2 3DY, UK Wellcome Trust Medical Research Council Stem Cell
Institute, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK
a.surani@gurdon.cam.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2014 Dec 19;369(1658):20140314.

During embryonic development, the foundation of the germline is laid by the
specification of primordial germ cells (PGCs) from the postimplantation epiblast 
via bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and WNT signalling. While the majority of
epiblast cells undergo differentiation towards somatic cell lineages, PGCs
initiate a unique cellular programme driven by the cooperation of the
transcription factors BLIMP1, PRDM14 and AP2<U+03B3>. These factors synergistically
suppress the ongoing somatic differentiation and drive the re-expression of
pluripotency and germ cell-specific genes accompanied by global epigenetic
changes. However, an unresolved question is how postimplantation epiblast cells
acquire the developmental competence for the PGC fate downstream of BMP/WNT
signalling. One emerging concept is that transcriptional enhancers might play a
central role in the establishment of developmental competence and the execution
of cell fate determination. Here, we discuss recent advances on the specification
and reprogramming of PGCs thereby highlighting the concept of enhancer function.

PMCID: PMC4216466
PMID: 25349452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Arkh Patol. 2014 Jul-Aug;76(4):15-7.

[Numerical impairments in genes in breast cancer: a multiplex ligation-dependent 
probe amplification study].

[Article in Russian]

Matsionis AE, Petrov AV, Gorelik MZ, Zavalishina LE.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze breast cancer samples using the new technique multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) assay. MATERIAL AND METHODS;
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded breast carcinoma samples from 65 patients were
examined. After manual microdissection, DNA was isolated using a commercial kit
("QIAGEN") and analyzed with SALSA MLPA KIT P078-B1 Breast Tumour
("MRC-Holland"). Capillary electrophoresis provided results.
RESULTS: MLPA assay was successful in all examined samples. The amplification and
deletion frequencies of the analyzed genes were in line with the literature data.
The technique requires conventional work-related skills in a molecular genetic
laboratory and, as a whole, presents no problems with its usage. The
interpretation of results is devoid of subjective meaning due to exclusively
their mathematical analysis. MLPA assay provides an insight into numerical
impairments in the following genes: ERBB2, MYC, TRAF4, C11orf30 (EMSY), ADAM9,
IKBKB, CCNE1, TOP2A, CDH1, CDC6, ESR1, CPD, EGFR, MTDH, CCND1, BIRC5, MED1,
FGFR1, MAPT, PRDM14, and AURKA.
CONCLUSION: MLPA is an easy-to-use and promising method for multiplex genetic
analysis of tumor cells in breast cancer.

PMID: 25306619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cell Rep. 2014 Oct 9;9(1):234-47. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.08.055. Epub 2014
Sep 26.

Control of embryonic stem cell identity by BRD4-dependent transcriptional
elongation of super-enhancer-associated pluripotency genes.

Di Micco R(1), Fontanals-Cirera B(2), Low V(2), Ntziachristos P(3), Yuen SK(2),
Lovell CD(2), Dolgalev I(4), Yonekubo Y(2), Zhang G(5), Rusinova E(5),
Gerona-Navarro G(5), Cañamero M(6), Ohlmeyer M(5), Aifantis I(3), Zhou MM(5),
Tsirigos A(7), Hernando E(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, and
Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York, NY 10016, USA; Helen L. and Martin S. Kimmel 
Center for Stem Cell Biology, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016,
USA. Electronic address: raffaella.dimicco@nyumc.org. (2)Department of Pathology,
New York University School of Medicine, and Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York,
NY 10016, USA; Helen L. and Martin S. Kimmel Center for Stem Cell Biology, NYU
Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, New 
York University School of Medicine, and Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York, NY
10016, USA; Helen L. and Martin S. Kimmel Center for Stem Cell Biology, NYU
Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute 
and NYU Cancer Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY
10016, USA. (4)Genome Technology Center, Office for Collaborative Science, NYU
Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA. (5)Department of Structural and Chemical
Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(6)Histopathology Core Unit, Biotechnology Program, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Oncológicas (CNIO), 28029 Madrid, Spain. (7)Department of
Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, and Perlmutter Cancer Center, 
New York, NY 10016, USA; Center for Health Informatics and Bioinformatics, NYU
School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. Electronic address:
aristotelis.tsirigos@nyumc.org. (8)Department of Pathology, New York University
School of Medicine, and Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York, NY 10016, USA; Helen 
L. and Martin S. Kimmel Center for Stem Cell Biology, NYU Langone Medical Center,
New York, NY 10016, USA. Electronic address: eva.hernando-monge@nyumc.org.

Transcription factors and chromatin-remodeling complexes are key determinants of 
embryonic stem cell (ESC) identity. Here, we demonstrate that BRD4, a member of
the bromodomain and extraterminal domain (BET) family of epigenetic readers,
regulates the self-renewal ability and pluripotency of ESCs. BRD4 inhibition
resulted in induction of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers and
commitment to the neuroectodermal lineage while reducing the ESC
multidifferentiation capacity in teratoma assays. BRD4 maintains transcription of
core stem cell genes such as OCT4 and PRDM14 by occupying their super-enhancers
(SEs), large clusters of regulatory elements, and recruiting to them Mediator and
CDK9, the catalytic subunit of the positive transcription elongation factor b
(P-TEFb), to allow Pol-II-dependent productive elongation. Our study describes a 
mechanism of regulation of ESC identity that could be applied to improve the
efficiency of ESC differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4317728
PMID: 25263550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Nov;35(11):2611-8. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgu197. Epub 2014 Sep
18.

Methylation-mediated repression of PRDM14 contributes to apoptosis evasion in
HPV-positive cancers.

Snellenberg S(1), Cillessen SA(1), Van Criekinge W(2), Bosch L(1), Meijer CJ(1), 
Snijders PJ(1), Steenbergen RD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Unit of Molecular Pathology, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands and. (2)Department of Pathology, Unit of
Molecular Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands and
BioBix, Department of Mathematical Modelling, Statistics and Bioinformatics,
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. (3)Department of Pathology, Unit of Molecular
Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands and
r.steenbergen@vumc.nl.

Promoter methylation of the transcription factor PRDM14 (PRDI-BF1 and RIZ domain 
containing 14) represents a highly frequent event in human papillomavirus
(HPV)-induced cervical cancers and cancer precursor lesions. Here, we aimed to
assess the functional consequences of PRDM14 promoter methylation in HPV-induced 
carcinogenesis. PRDM14 promoter methylation, expression and consequences of
ectopic PRDM14 expression were studied in HPV16-positive cervical and oral cancer
cell lines (SiHa, CaSki and 93VU147T), human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293T) cells
and primary human foreskin keratinocytes (HFK). PRDM14 mRNA expression was
restricted to HEK293T and HFK cells, and could be upregulated in SiHa cells upon 
DNA methylation inhibition. Ectopic expression of PRDM14 in SiHa, CaSki and
93VU147T cells resulted in significantly more apoptotic cells, as measured by
annexin V labelling, compared to HEK293T and HFK cells. MRNA profiling of 41
apoptosis regulators identified NOXA and PUMA as candidate target genes involved 
in PRDM14-mediated apoptosis induction. Full-length PRDM14 transactivated both
NOXA and PUMA promoters. Transactivation was abolished upon deletion of the
PRDM14 DNA binding domain. This suggests that NOXA and PUMA expression is
directly regulated by PRDM14, which in case of NOXA was linked to a consensus
PRDM14 binding motif in the promoter region. Taken together, these results
suggest that PRDM14 acts as a regulator of NOXA and PUMA-mediated apoptosis
induction, thereby providing evidence for a tumour suppressive role in
HPV-induced carcinogenesis. The contribution of methylation-mediated gene
silencing of PRDM14 to apoptosis evasion in HPV-positive cancer cells offers
novel therapeutic options for HPV-induced cancers.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25233927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. RNA Biol. 2014;11(7):798-807. doi: 10.4161/rna.29779. Epub 2014 Aug 19.

Coupling of X-chromosome reactivation with the pluripotent stem cell state.

Payer B(1), Lee JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute; Department of Molecular Biology;
Massachusetts General Hospital; Department of Genetics; Harvard Medical School;
Boston, MA USA.

X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) in female mammals is a dramatic example of
epigenetic gene regulation, which entails the silencing of an entire chromosome
through a wide range of mechanisms involving noncoding RNAs,
chromatin-modifications, and DNA-methylation. While XCI is associated with the
differentiated cell state, it is reversed by X-chromosome reactivation (XCR) ex
vivo in pluripotent stem cells and in vivo in the early mouse embryo and the
germline. Critical in the regulation of XCI vs. XCR is the X-inactivation center,
a multigene locus on the X-chromosome harboring several long noncoding RNA genes 
including, most prominently, Xist and Tsix. These genes, which sit at the top of 
the XCI hierarchy, are by themselves controlled by pluripotency factors, coupling
XCR with the naïve pluripotent stem cell state. In this point-of-view article we 
review the latest findings regarding this intricate relationship between cell
differentiation state and epigenetic control of the X-chromosome. In particular, 
we discuss the emerging picture of complex multifactorial regulatory mechanisms, 
ensuring both a fine-tuned and robust X-reactivation process.

PMCID: PMC4179954
PMID: 25137047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Clin Pathol. 2014 Aug;67(8):707-11. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2014-202414. Epub
2014 Jun 10.

Combined sputum hypermethylation and eNose analysis for lung cancer diagnosis.

Hubers AJ(1), Brinkman P(2), Boksem RJ(2), Rhodius RJ(2), Witte BI(3), Zwinderman
AH(4), Heideman DA(1), Duin S(1), Koning R(1), Steenbergen RD(1), Snijders PJ(1),
Smit EF(5), Sterk PJ(2), Thunnissen E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Academic Medical Centre,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (4)Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Academic
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, 
VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

AIMS: The aim of this study is to explore DNA hypermethylation analysis in sputum
and exhaled breath analysis for their complementary, non-invasive diagnostic
capacity in lung cancer.
METHODS: Sputum samples and exhaled breath were prospectively collected from 20
lung cancer patients and 31 COPD controls (Set 1). An additional 18 lung cancer
patients and 8 controls only collected exhaled breath as validation set (Set 2). 
DNA hypermethylation of biomarkers RASSF1A, cytoglobin, APC, FAM19A4, PHACTR3,
3OST2 and PRDM14 was considered, and breathprints from exhaled breath samples
were created using an electronic nose (eNose).
RESULTS: Both DNA hypermethylation markers in sputum and eNose were independently
able to distinguish lung cancer patients from controls. The combination of
RASSF1A and 3OST2 hypermethylation had a sensitivity of 85% with a specificity of
74%. eNose had a sensitivity of 80% with a specificity of 48%. Sensitivity for
lung cancer diagnosis increased to 100%, when RASSF1A hypermethylation was
combined with eNose, with specificity of 42%. Both methods showed to be
complementary to each other (p=0.011). eNose results were reproducible in Set 2.
CONCLUSIONS: When used in concert, RASSF1A hypermethylation in sputum and exhaled
breath analysis are complementary for lung cancer diagnosis, with 100%
sensitivity in this series. This finding should be further validated.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 24915850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Trends Biochem Sci. 2014 Jun;39(6):289-98. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2014.04.003. Epub 
2014 May 5.

PRDM14: a unique regulator for pluripotency and epigenetic reprogramming.

Nakaki F(1), Saitou M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan; JST, ERATO,
Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. (2)Department of Anatomy and 
Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Yoshida-Konoe-cho,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan; Center for iPS Cell Research and Application,
Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin Yoshida, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507,
Japan; JST, ERATO, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan; Institute 
for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences, Kyoto University, Yoshida-Ushinomiya-cho, 
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. Electronic address:
saitou@anat2.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

PRDM14 belongs to the PR domain-containing (PRDM) transcriptional regulators.
Among the PRDM family members, PRDM14 shows specific expression in
preimplantation embryos, primordial germ cells (PGCs), and embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) in vitro, and accordingly plays a key role in the regulation of their
pluripotency and epigenetic reprogramming, most notably, genome-wide DNA
demethylation. The function of PRDM14 appears to be conserved between mice and
humans, but it shows several characteristic differences between the two species. 
A precise understanding of the function of PRDM14 in mice and humans would shed
new light on the regulation of pluripotency and the epigenome in these two
species, providing a foundation for better control of stem cell fates in a
broader context.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24811060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cells. 2014 Jan;37(1):31-5. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2014.2212. Epub 2014 Jan
27.

Ground-state conditions promote robust Prdm14 reactivation and maintain an active
Dlk1-Dio3 region during reprogramming.

Habib O(1), Habib G, Moon SH, Hong KS, Do JT, Choi Y, Chang SW, Chung HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Konkuk University, Seoul 
143-701, Korea ; Stem Cell Research Laboratory, CHA Stem Cell Institute, CHA
University, Seoul 135-907, Korea.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are capable of unlimited self-renewal and 
can give rise to all three germ layers, thereby providing a new platform with
which to study mammalian development and epigenetic reprogramming. However, iPSC 
generation may result in subtle epigenetic variations, such as the aberrant
methylation of the Dlk1-Dio3 locus, among the clones, and this heterogeneity
constitutes a major drawback to harnessing the full potential of iPSCs. Vitamin C
has recently emerged as a safeguard to ensure the normal imprinting of the
Dlk1-Dio3 locus during reprogramming. Here, we show that vitamin C exerts its
effect in a manner that is independent of the reprogramming kinetics. Moreover,
we demonstrate that reprogramming cells under 2i conditions leads to the early
upregulation of Prdm14, which in turn results in a highly homogeneous population 
of authentic pluripotent colonies and prevents the abnormal silencing of the
Dlk1-Dio3 locus.

PMCID: PMC3907008
PMID: 24552707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Dec 17;1(6):518-31. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.11.010.
eCollection 2013.

Synergistic mechanisms of DNA demethylation during transition to ground-state
pluripotency.

Hackett JA(1), Dietmann S(2), Murakami K(1), Down TA(3), Leitch HG(4), Surani
MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK ; Wellcome Trust/MRC Stem Cell Institute, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK ; Department of Physiology, Development and
Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK. (2)Wellcome
Trust/MRC Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK.
(3)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK. (4)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK ; Wellcome Trust/MRC Stem Cell
Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK.

Pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) occupy a spectrum of reversible molecular states
ranging from a naive ground-state in 2i, to metastable embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) in serum, to lineage-primed epiblast stem cells (EpiSCs). To investigate
the role of DNA methylation (5mC) across distinct pluripotent states, we mapped
genome-wide 5mC and 5-hydroxymethycytosine (5hmC) in multiple PSCs. Ground-state 
ESCs exhibit an altered distribution of 5mC and 5hmC at regulatory elements and
dramatically lower absolute levels relative to ESCs in serum. By contrast, EpiSCs
exhibit increased promoter 5mC coupled with reduced 5hmC, which contributes to
their developmental restriction. Switch to 2i triggers rapid onset of both the
ground-state gene expression program and global DNA demethylation.
Mechanistically, repression of de novo methylases by PRDM14 drives DNA
demethylation at slow kinetics, whereas TET1/TET2-mediated 5hmC conversion
enhances both the rate and extent of hypomethylation. These processes thus act
synergistically during transition to ground-state pluripotency to promote a
robust hypomethylated state.

PMCID: PMC3871394
PMID: 24371807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Development. 2014 Jan;141(2):269-80. doi: 10.1242/dev.099622. Epub 2013 Dec 11.

PRDM14 promotes active DNA demethylation through the ten-eleven translocation
(TET)-mediated base excision repair pathway in embryonic stem cells.

Okashita N(1), Kumaki Y, Ebi K, Nishi M, Okamoto Y, Nakayama M, Hashimoto S,
Nakamura T, Sugasawa K, Kojima N, Takada T, Okano M, Seki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, School of Science and Technology, Kwansei Gakuin
University, 2-1 Gakuen, Sanda, Hyogo 669-1337, Japan.

Ten-eleven translocation (TET) proteins oxidize 5-methylcytosine (5mC) to
5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), 5-formylcytosine (5fC) and 5-carboxylcytosine
(5caC). 5fC and 5caC can be excised and repaired by the base excision repair
(BER) pathway, implicating 5mC oxidation in active DNA demethylation. Genome-wide
DNA methylation is erased in the transition from metastable states to the ground 
state of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and in migrating primordial germ cells
(PGCs), although some resistant regions become demethylated only in gonadal PGCs.
Understanding the mechanisms underlying global hypomethylation in naive ESCs and 
developing PGCs will be useful for realizing cellular pluripotency and
totipotency. In this study, we found that PRDM14, the PR domain-containing
transcriptional regulator, accelerates the TET-BER cycle, resulting in the
promotion of active DNA demethylation in ESCs. Induction of Prdm14 expression
transiently elevated 5hmC, followed by the reduction of 5mC at
pluripotency-associated genes, germline-specific genes and imprinted loci, but
not across the entire genome, which resembles the second wave of DNA
demethylation observed in gonadal PGCs. PRDM14 physically interacts with TET1 and
TET2 and enhances the recruitment of TET1 and TET2 at target loci. Knockdown of
TET1 and TET2 impaired transcriptional regulation and DNA demethylation by
PRDM14. The repression of the BER pathway by administration of pharmacological
inhibitors of APE1 and PARP1 and the knockdown of thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG)
also impaired DNA demethylation by PRDM14. Furthermore, DNA demethylation induced
by PRDM14 takes place normally in the presence of aphidicolin, which is an
inhibitor of G1/S progression. Together, our analysis provides mechanistic
insight into DNA demethylation in naive pluripotent stem cells and developing
PGCs.

PMID: 24335252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Dev Cell. 2013 Dec 9;27(5):516-29. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.11.001.

A mesodermal factor, T, specifies mouse germ cell fate by directly activating
germline determinants.

Aramaki S(1), Hayashi K(2), Kurimoto K(1), Ohta H(1), Yabuta Y(1), Iwanari H(3), 
Mochizuki Y(3), Hamakubo T(3), Kato Y(4), Shirahige K(4), Saitou M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan; Exploratory
Research for Advanced Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency,
Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. (2)Department of Anatomy and 
Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Yoshida-Konoe-cho,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan; Precursory Research for Embryonic Science and
Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8501, Japan; Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto
University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin Yoshida, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
(3)Department of Quantitative Biology and Medicine, Research Center for Advanced 
Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Komaba 4-6-1, Meguro-ku, Tokyo
153-8904, Japan. (4)Laboratory of Genome Structure and Function, Center for
Epigenetic Disease, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences,
The University of Tokyo, Yayoi 1-1-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan; Exploratory
Research for Advanced Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency,
Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan; Center for iPS Cell Research 
and Application, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin Yoshida, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences, Kyoto
University, Yoshida-Ushinomiya-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. Electronic
address: saitou@anat2.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2013 Dec 9;27(5):485-7.

Germ cells ensure reproduction and heredity. In mice, primordial germ cells
(PGCs), the precursors for spermatozoa and oocytes, are induced in pluripotent
epiblast by BMP4 and WNT3, yet the underlying mechanism remains unclear. Here,
using an in vitro PGC specification system, we show that WNT3 induces many
transcription factors associated with mesoderm in epiblast-like cells through
ß-CATENIN. Among these, T (BRACHYURY), a classical and conserved mesodermal
factor, was essential for robust activation of Blimp1 and Prdm14, two of the
germline determinants. T, but not SMAD1 or TCF1, binds distinct regulatory
elements of both Blimp1 and Prdm14 and directly upregulates these genes,
delineating the downstream PGC program. Without BMP4, a program induced by WNT3
prevents T from activating Blimp1 and Prdm14, demonstrating a permissive role of 
BMP4 in PGC specification. These findings establish the key signaling mechanism
for, and a fundamental role of a mesodermal factor in, mammalian PGC
specification.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24331926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Mol Cell. 2013 Dec 26;52(6):805-18. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.10.023. Epub 2013 
Nov 21.

Tsix RNA and the germline factor, PRDM14, link X reactivation and stem cell
reprogramming.

Payer B(1), Rosenberg M(1), Yamaji M(2), Yabuta Y(2), Koyanagi-Aoi M(3), Hayashi 
K(4), Yamanaka S(5), Saitou M(6), Lee JT(7).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Department of Molecular 
Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (2)Department of 
Anatomy and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan; JST, ERATO,
Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. (3)Center for iPS Cell
Research and Application, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin Yoshida,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8501, Japan; Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto
University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin Yoshida, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan;
JST, PRESTO, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. (5)Center for
iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin
Yoshida, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular
Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (6)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8501, Japan; JST, ERATO, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501,
Japan; Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto University, 53
Kawahara-cho, Shogoin Yoshida, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; Institute for
Integrated Cell-Material Sciences, Kyoto University, Yoshida-Ushinomiya-cho,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. (7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA
02114, USA; Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114,
USA; Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA. Electronic address: lee@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu.

Transitions between pluripotent and differentiated states are marked by dramatic 
epigenetic changes. Cellular differentiation is tightly linked to X chromosome
inactivation (XCI), whereas reprogramming to induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs) is associated with X chromosome reactivation (XCR). XCR reverses the
silent state of the inactive X, occurring in mouse blastocysts and germ cells. In
spite of its importance, little is known about underlying mechanisms. Here, we
examine the role of the long noncoding Tsix RNA and the germline factor, PRDM14. 
In blastocysts, XCR is perturbed by mutation of either Tsix or Prdm14. In iPSCs, 
XCR is disrupted only by PRDM14 deficiency, which also affects iPSC derivation
and maintenance. We show that Tsix and PRDM14 directly link XCR to pluripotency: 
first, PRDM14 represses Rnf12 by recruiting polycomb repressive complex 2;
second, Tsix enables PRDM14 to bind Xist. Thus, our study provides functional and
mechanistic links between cellular and X chromosome reprogramming.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3950835
PMID: 24268575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2014 Apr;61(4):593-600. doi: 10.1002/pbc.24833. Epub 2013
Nov 19.

Genome-wide analysis of DNA copy number alterations and loss of heterozygosity in
intracranial germ cell tumors.

Terashima K(1), Yu A, Chow WY, Hsu WC, Chen P, Wong S, Hung YS, Suzuki T,
Nishikawa R, Matsutani M, Nakamura H, Ng HK, Allen JC, Aldape KD, Su JM, Adesina 
AM, Leung HC, Man TK, Lau CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Cancer and Hematology Centers,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.

BACKGROUNDS: Intracranial germ cell tumors (GCTs) are rare and heterogeneous with
very little is known about their pathogenesis and underlying genetic
abnormalities.
PROCEDURES: In order to identify candidate genes and pathways which are involved 
in the pathogenesis of these tumors, we have profiled 62 intracranial GCTs for
DNA copy number alterations (CNAs) and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) by using
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array and quantitative real time PCR (qPCR).
RESULTS: Initially 27 cases of tumor tissues with matched blood samples were
fully analyzed by SNP microarray and qPCR. Statistical analysis using the genomic
identification of significant targets in cancer (GISTIC) tool identified 10
regions of significant copy number gain and 11 regions of significant copy number
loss. While overall pattern of genomic aberration was similar between germinoma
and nongerminomatous germ cell tumors (NGGCTs), a few subtype-specific peak
regions were identified. Analysis by SNP array and qPCR was replicated using an
independent cohort of 35 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Frequent aberrations of CCND2 (12p13) and RB1 (13q14) suggest that
Cyclin/CDK-RB-E2F pathway might play a critical role in the pathogenesis of
intracranial GCTs. Frequent gain of PRDM14 (8q13) implies that transcriptional
regulation of primordial germ cell specification might be an important factor in 
the development of this tumor.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24249158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Cancer Lett. 2014 Mar 1;344(1):138-46. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.10.025. Epub
2013 Oct 30.

Genomic evolution from primary breast carcinoma to distant metastasis: Few copy
number changes of breast cancer related genes.

Moelans CB(1), van der Groep P(2), Hoefnagel LD(3), van de Vijver MJ(4),
Wesseling P(5), Wesseling J(6), van der Wall E(7), van Diest PJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: cmoelans@umcutrecht.nl. (2)Department of
Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Division 
of Internal Medicine and Dermatology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. (3)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Pathology, Radboud University
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Department of Pathology, VU University
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Pathology, Canisius
Wilhelmina Hospital, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (6)Department of Pathology, The
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (7)Division of Internal
Medicine and Dermatology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Cancer initiation and progression is characterized by (epi)genetic aberrations.
However, little is known about the changes that occur during breast cancer
metastasis. In the present study, multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification was used to compare copy numbers of 21 established oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes between 55 primary breast cancer samples and corresponding
distant metastases. Distant breast cancer metastases generally showed similar
gene copy number aberrations compared to their corresponding primary tumors. The 
few genes that showed differences between primary tumor and metastasis (PRDM14,
MED1, CCNE1, TRAF4, MTDH, CDH1) have been implicated in the development of
therapy resistance.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24184827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cell Rep. 2013 Nov 14;5(3):687-701. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.09.044. Epub 2013 
Oct 31.

Single-cell profiling of epigenetic modifiers identifies PRDM14 as an inducer of 
cell fate in the mammalian embryo.

Burton A(1), Muller J, Tu S, Padilla-Longoria P, Guccione E, Torres-Padilla ME.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS/INSERM
U964, Université de Strasbourg, F-67404 Illkirch, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Cell plasticity or potency is necessary for the formation of multiple cell types.
The mechanisms underlying this plasticity are largely unknown. Preimplantation
mouse embryos undergo drastic changes in cellular potency, starting with the
totipotent zygote through to the formation of the pluripotent inner cell mass
(ICM) and differentiated trophectoderm in the blastocyst. Here, we set out to
identify and functionally characterize chromatin modifiers that define the
transitions of potency and cell fate in the mouse embryo. Using a quantitative
microfluidics approach in single cells, we show that developmental transitions
are marked by distinctive combinatorial profiles of epigenetic modifiers.
Pluripotent cells of the ICM are distinct from their differentiated trophectoderm
counterparts. We show that PRDM14 is heterogeneously expressed in 4-cell-stage
embryos. Forced expression of PRDM14 at the 2-cell stage leads to increased
H3R26me2 and can induce a pluripotent ICM fate. Our results shed light on the
epigenetic networks that govern cellular potency and identity in vivo.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24183668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Dis Model Mech. 2013 Nov;6(6):1494-506. doi: 10.1242/dmm.012575. Epub 2013 Sep 5.

A mouse model for inducible overexpression of Prdm14 results in rapid-onset and
highly penetrant T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL).

Carofino BL(1), Ayanga B, Justice MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine,
Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

PRDM14 functions in embryonic stem cell (ESC) maintenance to promote the
expression of pluripotency-associated genes while suppressing differentiation
genes. Expression of PRDM14 is tightly regulated and typically limited to ESCs
and primordial germ cells; however, aberrant expression is associated with tumor 
initiation in a wide variety of human cancers, including breast cancer and
leukemia. Here, we describe the generation of a Cre-recombinase-inducible mouse
model for the spatial and temporal control of Prdm14 misexpression [ROSA26
floxed-stop Prdm14 (R26PR)]. When R26PR is mated to either of two Cre lines,
Mx1-cre or MMTV-cre, mice develop early-onset T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL) with median overall survival of 41 and 64 days for R26PR;Mx1-cre and
R26PR;MMTV-cre, respectively. T-ALL is characterized by the accumulation of
immature single-positive CD8 cells and their widespread infiltration. Leukemia is
preceded by a dramatic expansion of cells resembling hematopoietic stem cells and
lymphoid-committed progenitors prior to disease onset, accompanied by a blockage 
in B-cell differentiation at the early pro-B stage. Rapid-onset PRDM14-induced
T-ALL requires factors that are present in stem and progenitor cells:
R26PR;dLck-cre animals, which express Prdm14 starting at the double-positive
stage of thymocyte development, do not develop disease. PRDM14-induced leukemic
cells contain high levels of activated NOTCH1 and downstream NOTCH1 targets,
including MYC and HES1, and are sensitive to pharmacological inhibition of NOTCH1
with the <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor DAPT. Greater than 50% of human T-ALLs harbor
activating mutations in NOTCH1; thus, our model carries clinically relevant
molecular aberrations. The penetrance, short latency and involvement of the
NOTCH1 pathway will make this hematopoietic R26PR mouse model ideal for future
studies on disease initiation, relapse and novel therapeutic drug combinations.
Furthermore, breeding R26PR to additional Cre lines will allow for the continued 
development of novel cancer models.

PMCID: PMC3820272
PMID: 24046360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Oct;15(10):1141-52. doi: 10.1038/ncb2839. Epub 2013 Sep 8.

SON connects the splicing-regulatory network with pluripotency in human embryonic
stem cells.

Lu X(1), Göke J, Sachs F, Jacques PÉ, Liang H, Feng B, Bourque G, Bubulya PA, Ng 
HH.

Author information: 
(1)1] Gene Regulation Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, 138672,
Singapore [2] Department of Biological Sciences, National University of
Singapore, 117543, Singapore [3].

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2013 Nov 13;32(22):2903-4.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) harbour the ability to undergo
lineage-specific differentiation into clinically relevant cell types.
Transcription factors and epigenetic modifiers are known to play important roles 
in the maintenance of pluripotency of hESCs. However, little is known about
regulation of pluripotency through splicing. In this study, we identify the
spliceosome-associated factor SON as a factor essential for the maintenance of
hESCs. Depletion of SON in hESCs results in the loss of pluripotency and cell
death. Using genome-wide RNA profiling, we identified transcripts that are
regulated by SON. Importantly, we confirmed that SON regulates the proper
splicing of transcripts encoding for pluripotency regulators such as OCT4,
PRDM14, E4F1 and MED24. Furthermore, we show that SON is bound to these
transcripts in vivo. In summary, we connect a splicing-regulatory network for
accurate transcript production to the maintenance of pluripotency and
self-renewal of hESCs.

PMCID: PMC4097007
PMID: 24013217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Nature. 2013 Sep 12;501(7466):222-6. doi: 10.1038/nature12417. Epub 2013 Aug 4.

Induction of mouse germ-cell fate by transcription factors in vitro.

Nakaki F(1), Hayashi K, Ohta H, Kurimoto K, Yabuta Y, Saitou M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

The germ-cell lineage ensures the continuity of life through the generation of
male and female gametes, which unite to form a totipotent zygote. We have
previously demonstrated that, by using cytokines, embryonic stem cells and
induced pluripotent stem cells can be induced into epiblast-like cells (EpiLCs)
and then into primordial germ cell (PGC)-like cells with the capacity for both
spermatogenesis and oogenesis, creating an opportunity for understanding and
regulating mammalian germ-cell development in both sexes in vitro. Here we show
that, without cytokines, simultaneous overexpression of three transcription
factors, Blimp1 (also known as Prdm1), Prdm14 and Tfap2c (also known as AP2<U+03B3>),
directs EpiLCs, but not embryonic stem cells, swiftly and efficiently into a PGC 
state. Notably, Prdm14 alone, but not Blimp1 or Tfap2c, suffices for the
induction of the PGC state in EpiLCs. The transcription-factor-induced PGC state,
irrespective of the transcription factors used, reconstitutes key transcriptome
and epigenetic reprogramming in PGCs, but bypasses a mesodermal program that
accompanies PGC or PGC-like-cell specification by cytokines including bone
morphogenetic protein 4. Notably, the transcription-factor-induced PGC-like cells
contribute to spermatogenesis and fertile offspring. Our findings provide a new
insight into the transcriptional logic for PGC specification, and create a
foundation for the transcription-factor-based reconstitution and regulation of
mammalian gametogenesis.

PMID: 23913270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;15(8):905-15. doi: 10.1038/ncb2798. Epub 2013 Jul 14.

A tripartite transcription factor network regulates primordial germ cell
specification in mice.

Magnúsdóttir E(1), Dietmann S, Murakami K, Günesdogan U, Tang F, Bao S, Diamanti 
E, Lao K, Gottgens B, Azim Surani M.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge,
Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK.

Transitions in cell states are controlled by combinatorial actions of
transcription factors. BLIMP1, the key regulator of primordial germ cell (PGC)
specification, apparently acts together with PRDM14 and AP2<U+03B3>. To investigate
their individual and combinatorial functions, we first sought an in vitro system 
for transcriptional readouts and chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing
analysis. We then integrated this data with information from single-cell
transcriptome analysis of normal and mutant PGCs. Here we show that BLIMP1 binds 
directly to repress somatic and cell proliferation genes. It also directly
induces AP2<U+03B3>, which together with PRDM14 initiates the PGC-specific fate. We
determined the occupancy of critical genes by AP2<U+03B3>-which, when computed
altogether with those of BLIMP1 and PRDM14 (both individually and cooperatively),
reveals a tripartite mutually interdependent transcriptional network for PGCs. We
also demonstrate that, in principle, BLIMP1, AP2<U+03B3> and PRDM14 are sufficient for
PGC specification, and the unprecedented resetting of the epigenome towards a
basal state.

PMCID: PMC3796875
PMID: 23851488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Sep 5;13(3):351-9. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.06.004. Epub
2013 Jul 11.

FGF signaling inhibition in ESCs drives rapid genome-wide demethylation to the
epigenetic ground state of pluripotency.

Ficz G(1), Hore TA, Santos F, Lee HJ, Dean W, Arand J, Krueger F, Oxley D, Paul
YL, Walter J, Cook SJ, Andrews S, Branco MR, Reik W.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge, CB22 3AT, UK.
gabriella.ficz@babraham.ac.uk

Genome-wide erasure of DNA methylation takes place in primordial germ cells
(PGCs) and early embryos and is linked with pluripotency. Inhibition of Erk1/2
and Gsk3ß signaling in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) by small-molecule
inhibitors (called 2i) has recently been shown to induce hypomethylation. We show
by whole-genome bisulphite sequencing that 2i induces rapid and genome-wide
demethylation on a scale and pattern similar to that in migratory PGCs and early 
embryos. Major satellites, intracisternal A particles (IAPs), and imprinted genes
remain relatively resistant to erasure. Demethylation involves oxidation of
5-methylcytosine (5mC) to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), impaired maintenance of
5mC and 5hmC, and repression of the de novo methyltransferases (Dnmt3a and
Dnmt3b) and Dnmt3L. We identify a Prdm14- and Nanog-binding cis-acting regulatory
region in Dnmt3b that is highly responsive to signaling. These insights provide a
framework for understanding how signaling pathways regulate reprogramming to an
epigenetic ground state of pluripotency.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3765959
PMID: 23850245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. EMBO Rep. 2013 Jul;14(7):583-4. doi: 10.1038/embor.2013.81. Epub 2013 Jun 14.

Rejuvenating tithonus.

Loh KM(1), Lim B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California, USA.

PMCID: PMC3701247
PMID: 23764924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. BMC Med. 2013 Jun 11;11:146. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-11-146.

Phenotype, donor age and gender affect function of human bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stromal cells.

Siegel G(1), Kluba T, Hermanutz-Klein U, Bieback K, Northoff H, Schäfer R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical and Experimental Transfusion Medicine (IKET), University
Hospital Tübingen, Otfried-Müller-Strasse 4/1, Tübingen, D-72076, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) are attractive for cell-based
therapies ranging from regenerative medicine and tissue engineering to
immunomodulation. However, clinical efficacy is variable and it is unclear how
the phenotypes defining bone marrow (BM)-derived MSCs as well as donor
characteristics affect their functional properties.
METHODS: BM-MSCs were isolated from 53 (25 female, 28 male; age: 13 to 80 years) 
donors and analyzed by: (1) phenotype using flow cytometry and cell size
measurement; (2) in vitro growth kinetics using population doubling time; (3)
colony formation capacity and telomerase activity; and (4) function by in vitro
differentiation capacity, suppression of T cell proliferation, cytokines and
trophic factors secretion, and hormone and growth factor receptor expression.
Additionally, expression of Oct4, Nanog, Prdm14 and SOX2 mRNA was compared to
pluripotent stem cells.
RESULTS: BM-MSCs from younger donors showed increased expression of MCAM, VCAM-1,
ALCAM, PDGFRß, PDL-1, Thy1 and CD71, and led to lower IL-6 production when
co-cultured with activated T cells. Female BM-MSCs showed increased expression of
IFN-<U+03B3>R1 and IL-6ß, and were more potent in T cell proliferation suppression.
High-clonogenic BM-MSCs were smaller, divided more rapidly and were more frequent
in BM-MSC preparations from younger female donors. CD10, ß1integrin, HCAM, CD71, 
VCAM-1, IFN-<U+03B3>R1, MCAM, ALCAM, LNGFR and HLA ABC were correlated to BM-MSC
preparations with high clonogenic potential and expression of IFN-<U+03B3>R1, MCAM and
HLA ABC was associated with rapid growth of BM-MSCs. The mesodermal
differentiation capacity of BM-MSCs was unaffected by donor age or gender but was
affected by phenotype (CD10, IFN-<U+03B3>R1, GD2). BM-MSCs from female and male donors
expressed androgen receptor and FGFR3, and secreted VEGF-A, HGF, LIF,
Angiopoietin-1, basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and NGFB. HGF secretion
correlated negatively to the expression of CD71, CD140b and Galectin 1. The
expression of Oct4, Nanog and Prdm14 mRNA in BM-MSCs was much lower compared to
pluripotent stem cells and was not related to donor age or gender. Prdm14 mRNA
expression correlated positively to the clonogenic potential of BM-MSCs.
CONCLUSIONS: By identifying donor-related effects and assigning phenotypes of
BM-MSC preparations to functional properties, we provide useful tools for assay
development and production for clinical applications of BM-MSC preparations.

PMCID: PMC3694028
PMID: 23758701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Med Oncol. 2013;30(3):605. doi: 10.1007/s12032-013-0605-9. Epub 2013 May 21.

High expression of PRDM14 correlates with cell differentiation and is a novel
prognostic marker in resected non-small cell lung cancer.

Zhang T(1), Meng L, Dong W, Shen H, Zhang S, Liu Q, Du J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oncology, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, 
Shandong University, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, People's Republic of China.

PR (PRDI-BF1 and RIZ) domain containing proteins (PRDM) have been indicated to
play important roles in several human cancers. The objectives of this study were 
to determine the frequency and prognostic significance of PRDM1 and PRDM14
expression in a cohort of surgically resected non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
patients. Immunohistochemistry and Western blotting was used to detect the
expression status of PRDM1 in primary tumors and PRDM14 for both primary lung
cancers and matched lymph node metastases. Univariate and multivariate analysis
were performed to determine the association between PRDM expression and
prognosis. PRDM1 expression was observed in all NSCLC patients' tumor samples.
PRDM14 was found to be increased expression in 35.65 % cases (46/129) for primary
tumors and 39.68 % cases (25/63) for paired metastatic lymph nodes. Increased
expression of PRDM14 correlated with differentiation of tumor cells significantly
(P = 0.008). Western blotting analysis verified that PRDM14 associated with cell 
differentiation in NSCLC. The overall survival rates of patients with high PRDM14
expression and low PRDM14 expression were 41.30 and 65.06 %, respectively (hazard
ratio: 3.051, 95 % CI: 1.752, 5.312, P < 0.0001). The progression-free survival
rates were 34.78 % for patients in the high expression group and 59.03 % for
patients in the low OLC1 expression group (hazard ratio: 2.775, 95 % CI: 1.648,
4.675, P < 0.0001). Thus, our study showed that increased expression of PRDM14
correlated with cell differentiation of NSCLC cells. PRDM14 was a potential
biomarker for predicting unfavorable prognosis in NSCLC.

PMID: 23690269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Pathol. 2013 Sep;231(1):53-62. doi: 10.1002/path.4210. Epub 2013 Jul 8.

Methylation-specific digital karyotyping of HPV16E6E7-expressing human
keratinocytes identifies novel methylation events in cervical carcinogenesis.

Steenbergen RD(1), Ongenaert M, Snellenberg S, Trooskens G, van der Meide WF,
Pandey D, Bloushtain-Qimron N, Polyak K, Meijer CJ, Snijders PJ, Van Criekinge W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. r.steenbergen@vumc.nl

Transformation of epithelial cells by high-risk human papillomavirus (hrHPV)
types can lead to anogenital carcinomas, particularly cervical cancer, and
oropharyngeal cancers. This process is associated with DNA methylation
alterations, often affecting tumour suppressor gene expression. This study aimed 
to comprehensively unravel genome-wide DNA methylation events linked to a
transforming hrHPV-infection, which is driven by deregulated expression of the
viral oncogenes E6 and E7 in dividing cells. Primary human keratinocytes
transduced with HPV16E6E7 and their untransduced counterparts were subjected to
methylation-specific digital karyotyping (MSDK) to screen for genome-wide
DNA-methylation changes at different stages of HPV-induced transformation.
Integration of the obtained methylation profiles with genome-wide gene expression
patterns of cervical carcinomas identified 34 genes with increased methylation in
HPV-transformed cells and reduced expression in cervical carcinomas. For 12 genes
(CLIC3, CREB3L1, FAM19A4, LFNG, LHX1, MRC2, NKX2-8, NPTX-1, PHACTR3, PRDM14, SOST
and TNFSF13) specific methylation in HPV-containing cell lines was confirmed by
semi-quantitative methylation-specific PCR. Subsequent analysis of FAM19A4, LHX1,
NKX2-8, NPTX-1, PHACTR3 and PRDM14 in cervical tissue specimens showed increasing
methylation levels for all genes with disease progression. All six genes were
frequently methylated in cervical carcinomas, with highest frequencies (up to
100%) seen for FAM19A4, PHACTR3 and PRDM14. Analysis of hrHPV-positive cervical
scrapes revealed significantly increased methylation levels of the latter three
genes in women with high-grade cervical disease compared to controls. In
conclusion, MSDK analysis of HPV16-transduced keratinocytes at different stages
of HPV-induced transformation resulted in the identification of novel DNA
methylation events, involving FAM19A4, LHX1, NKX2-8, PHACTR3 and PRDM14 genes in 
cervical carcinogenesis. These genes may provide promising triage markers to
assess the presence of (pre)cancerous cervical lesions in hrHPV-positive women.

Copyright © 2013 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 23674368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. EMBO Rep. 2013 Jul;14(7):629-37. doi: 10.1038/embor.2013.67. Epub 2013 May 14.

Prdm14 promotes germline fate and naive pluripotency by repressing FGF signalling
and DNA methylation.

Grabole N(1), Tischler J, Hackett JA, Kim S, Tang F, Leitch HG, Magnúsdóttir E,
Surani MA.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, Department of Physiology, 
Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK.

Primordial germ cells (PGCs) and somatic cells originate from postimplantation
epiblast cells in mice. As pluripotency is lost upon differentiation of somatic
lineages, a naive epigenome and the pluripotency network are re-established
during PGC development. Here we demonstrate that Prdm14 contributes not only to
PGC specification, but also to naive pluripotency in embryonic stem (ES) cells by
repressing the DNA methylation machinery and fibroblast growth factor (FGF)
signalling. This indicates a critical role for Prdm14 in programming PGCs and
promoting pluripotency in ES cells.

PMCID: PMC3701237
PMID: 23670199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Nat Genet. 2013 Jun;45(6):686-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.2635. Epub 2013 May 12.

Identification of nine new susceptibility loci for testicular cancer, including
variants near DAZL and PRDM14.

Ruark E(1), Seal S, McDonald H, Zhang F, Elliot A, Lau K, Perdeaux E, Rapley E,
Eeles R, Peto J, Kote-Jarai Z, Muir K, Nsengimana J, Shipley J; UK Testicular
Cancer Collaboration (UKTCC), Bishop DT, Stratton MR, Easton DF, Huddart RA,
Rahman N, Turnbull C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics and Epidemiology, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton,
UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2013 Jul;10(7):370.

Testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT) is the most common cancer in young men and is
notable for its high familial risks. So far, six loci associated with TGCT have
been reported. From genome-wide association study (GWAS) analysis of 307,291 SNPs
in 986 TGCT cases and 4,946 controls, we selected for follow-up 694 SNPs, which
we genotyped in a further 1,064 TGCT cases and 10,082 controls from the UK. We
identified SNPs at nine new loci (1q22, 1q24.1, 3p24.3, 4q24, 5q31.1, 8q13.3,
16q12.1, 17q22 and 21q22.3) showing association with TGCT (P < 5 × 10(-8)), which
together account for an additional 4-6% of the familial risk of TGCT. The loci
include genes plausibly related to TGCT development. PRDM14, at 8q13.3, is
essential for early germ cell specification, and DAZL, at 3p24.3, is required for
the regulation of germ cell development. Furthermore, PITX1, at 5q31.1, regulates
TERT expression and is the third TGCT-associated locus implicated in telomerase
regulation.

PMCID: PMC3680037
PMID: 23666240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Ovarian Res. 2013 Apr 9;6:24. doi: 10.1186/1757-2215-6-24. eCollection 2013.

Small SSEA-4-positive cells from human ovarian cell cultures: related to
embryonic stem cells and germinal lineage?

Virant-Klun I(1), Stimpfel M(1), Cvjeticanin B(1), Vrtacnik-Bokal E(1), Skutella 
T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, 
Slajmerjeva 3, Ljubljana, 1000, Republic of Slovenia. (2)Institute for Anatomy
and Cell Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 
307, Heidelberg, 69120, Germany.

BACKGROUND: It has already been found that very small embyronic-like stem cells
(VSELs) are present in adult human tissues and organs. The aim of this study was 
to find if there exists any similar population of cells in cell cultures of
reproductive tissues and embryonic stem cells, and if these cells have any
relation to pluripotency and germinal lineage.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here we report that a population of small SSEA-4-positive
cells with diameters of up to 4 µm was isolated by fluorescence-activated cell
sorting (FACS) from the human ovarian cell cultures after enzymatic degradation
of adult cortex tissues. These small cells - putative ovarian stem cells - were
also observed during cell culturing of up to 6 months and more. In general, small
putative ovarian stem cells, isolated by FACS, showed a relatively low gene
expression profile when compared to human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and human 
adult fibroblasts; this may reflect the quiescent state of these cells. In spite 
of that, small putative ovarian stem cells expressed several genes related to
primordial germ cells (PGCs), pluripotency and germinal lineage, including VASA. 
The PGC-related gene PRDM1 was strongly expressed in small putative ovarian stem 
cells; in both hESCs and fibroblasts it was significantly down-regulated. In
addition, putative ovarian stem cells expressed other PGC-related genes, such as 
PRDM14 and DPPA3. Most of the pluripotency and germinal lineage-related genes
were up-regulated in hESCs (except VASA). When compared to fibroblasts, there
were several pluripotency-related genes, which were up-regulated in small
putative ovarian stem cells. Similar populations of small cells were also
isolated by FACS from human testicular and hESC cultures.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirm the potential embryonic-like character of small 
putative stem cells isolated from human adult ovaries and their possible relation
to germinal lineage.

PMCID: PMC3660272
PMID: 23570331  [PubMed]


49. Cancers (Basel). 2012 Dec 1;4(4):1050-1066. Epub 2012 Oct 18.

Mouse Lymphoblastic Leukemias Induced by Aberrant Prdm14 Expression Demonstrate
Widespread Copy Number Alterations Also Found in Human ALL.

Simko SJ(1), Voicu H, Carofino BL, Justice MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Cancer 
and Hematology Centers, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Aberrant expression and activation of oncogenes in somatic cells has been
associated with cancer initiation. Required for reacquisition of pluripotency in 
the developing germ cell, PRDM14 initiates lymphoblastic leukemia when
misexpressed in murine bone marrow. Activation of pluripotency in somatic cells
can lead to aneuploidy and copy number alterations during iPS cell generation,
and we hypothesized that PRDM14-induced lymphoblastic leukemias would demonstrate
significant chromosomal damage. High-resolution oligo array comparative genomic
hybridization demonstrated infrequent aneuploidy but frequent amplification and
deletion, with amplifications occurring in a 5:1 ratio with deletions. Many
deletions (i.e., Cdkn2a, Ebf1, Pax5, Ikzf1) involved B-cell development genes and
tumor suppressor genes, recapitulating deletions occurring in human leukemia.
Pathways opposing senescence were frequently deactivated via Cdkn2a deletion or
Tbx2 amplification, with corollary gene expression. Additionally, gene expression
studies of abnormal pre-leukemic B-precursors showed downregulation of genes
involved in chromosomal stability (i.e., Xrcc6) and failure to upregulate DNA
repair pathways. We propose a model of leukemogenesis, triggered by pluripotency 
genes like Prdm14, which involves ongoing DNA damage and failure to activate
non-homologous end-joining secondary to aberrant gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3593237
PMID: 23487523  [PubMed]


50. Mol Reprod Dev. 2013 Aug;80(8):590-609. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22151. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

Lessons for inductive germline determination.

Seervai RN(1), Wessel GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island, 02192, USA.

Formation of the germline in an embryo marks a fresh round of reproductive
potential, yet the developmental stage and location within the embryo where the
primordial germ cells (PGCs) form differs wildly among species. In most animals, 
the germline is formed either by an inherited mechanism, in which maternal
provisions within the oocyte drive localized germ-cell fate once acquired in the 
embryo, or an inductive mechanism that involves signaling between cells that
directs germ-cell fate. The inherited mechanism has been widely studied in model 
organisms such as Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, Xenopus
laevis, and Danio rerio. Given the rapid generation time and the effective
adaptation for laboratory research of these organisms, it is not coincidental
that research on these organisms has led the field in elucidating mechanisms for 
germline specification. The inductive mechanism, however, is less well understood
and is studied primarily in the mouse (Mus musculus). In this review, we compare 
and contrast these two fundamental mechanisms for germline determination,
beginning with the key molecular determinants that play a role in the formation
of germ cells across all animal taxa. We next explore the current understanding
of the inductive mechanism of germ-cell determination in mice, and evaluate the
hypotheses for selective pressures on these contrasting mechanisms. We then
discuss the hypothesis that the transition between these determination
mechanisms, which has happened many times in phylogeny, is more of a continuum
than a binary change. Finally, we propose an analogy between germline
determination and sex determination in vertebrates-two of the milestones of
reproduction and development-in which animals use contrasting strategies to
activate similar pathways.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4366005
PMID: 23450642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2013 Mar;20(3):311-6. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2510. Epub 2013 Feb 
17.

Naive pluripotency is associated with global DNA hypomethylation.

Leitch HG(1), McEwen KR, Turp A, Encheva V, Carroll T, Grabole N, Mansfield W,
Nashun B, Knezovich JG, Smith A, Surani MA, Hajkova P.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2013 Mar;20(3):249-51.

Naive pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and embryonic germ cells (EGCs) are
derived from the preimplantation epiblast and primordial germ cells (PGCs),
respectively. We investigated whether differences exist between ESCs and EGCs, in
view of their distinct developmental origins. PGCs are programmed to undergo
global DNA demethylation; however, we find that EGCs and ESCs exhibit equivalent 
global DNA methylation levels. Inhibition of MEK and Gsk3b by 2i conditions leads
to pronounced reduction in DNA methylation in both cell types. This is driven by 
Prdm14 and is associated with downregulation of Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b. However,
genomic imprints are maintained in 2i, and we report derivation of EGCs with
intact genomic imprints. Collectively, our findings establish that culture in 2i 
instills a naive pluripotent state with a distinctive epigenetic configuration
that parallels molecular features observed in both the preimplantation epiblast
and nascent PGCs.

PMCID: PMC3591483
PMID: 23416945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Mar 7;12(3):368-82. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.12.012. Epub
2013 Jan 17.

PRDM14 ensures naive pluripotency through dual regulation of signaling and
epigenetic pathways in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Yamaji M(1), Ueda J, Hayashi K, Ohta H, Yabuta Y, Kurimoto K, Nakato R, Yamada Y,
Shirahige K, Saitou M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

In serum, mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) fluctuate between a naive inner cell
mass (ICM)-like state and a primed epiblast-like state, but when cultured with
inhibitors of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and glycogen synthase
kinase 3 pathways (2i), they are harnessed exclusively in a distinct naive
pluropotent state, the ground state, that more faithfully recapitulates the ICM. 
Understanding the mechanism underlying this naive pluripotent state will be
critical for realizing the full potential of ESCs. We show here that PRDM14, a
PR-domain-containing transcriptional regulator, ensures naive pluripotency
through a dual mechanism: antagonizing activation of the fibroblast growth factor
receptor (FGFR) signaling by the core pluripotency transcriptional circuitry, and
repressing expression of de novo DNA methyltransferases that modify the epigenome
to a primed epiblast-like state. PRDM14 exerts these effects by recruiting
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) specifically to key targets and repressing
their expression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23333148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Stem Cells. 2013 Apr;31(4):682-92. doi: 10.1002/stem.1307.

A PRC2-dependent repressive role of PRDM14 in human embryonic stem cells and
induced pluripotent stem cell reprogramming.

Chan YS(1), Göke J, Lu X, Venkatesan N, Feng B, Su IH, Ng HH.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore.

PRDM14 is an important determinant of the human embryonic stem cell (ESC)
identity and works in concert with the core ESC regulators to activate
pluripotency-associated genes. PRDM14 has been previously reported to exhibit
repressive activity in mouse ESCs and primordial germ cells; and while PRDM14 has
been implicated to suppress differentiation genes in human ESCs, the exact
mechanism of this repressive activity remains unknown. In this study, we provide 
evidence that PRDM14 is a direct repressor of developmental genes in human ESCs. 
PRDM14 binds to silenced genes in human ESCs and its global binding profile is
enriched for the repressive trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3)
modification. Further investigation reveals that PRDM14 interacts directly with
the chromatin regulator polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and PRC2 binding is 
detected at PRDM14-bound loci in human ESCs. Depletion of PRDM14 reduces PRC2
binding at these loci and the concomitant reduction of H3K27me3 modification.
Using reporter assays, we demonstrate that gene loci bound by PRDM14 exhibit
repressive activity that is dependent on both PRDM14 and PRC2. In reprogramming
human fibroblasts into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), ectopically
expressed PRDM14 can repress these developmental genes in fibroblasts. In
addition, we show that PRDM14 recruits PRC2 to repress a key mesenchymal gene
ZEB1, which enhances mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition in the initiation event
of iPSC reprogramming. In summary, our study reveals a repressive role of PRDM14 
in the maintenance and induction of pluripotency and identifies PRDM14 as a new
regulator of PRC2.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23280602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Development. 2012 Dec;139(24):4591-600. doi: 10.1242/dev.083055. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Prdm14 acts upstream of islet2 transcription to regulate axon growth of primary
motoneurons in zebrafish.

Liu C(1), Ma W, Su W, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics
and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

The precise formation of three-dimensional motor circuits is essential for
movement control. Within these circuits, motoneurons (MNs) are specified from
spinal progenitors by dorsoventral signals and distinct transcriptional programs.
Different MN subpopulations have stereotypic cell body positions and show
specific spatial axon trajectories. Our knowledge of MN axon outgrowth remains
incomplete. Here, we report a zebrafish gene-trap mutant, short lightning (slg), 
in which prdm14 expression is disrupted. slg mutant embryos show shortened axons 
in caudal primary (CaP) MNs resulting in defective embryonic movement. Both the
CaP neuronal defects and behavior abnormality of the mutants can be phenocopied
by injection of a prdm14 morpholino into wild-type embryos. By removing a copy of
the inserted transposon from homozygous mutants, prdm14 expression and normal
embryonic movement were restored, confirming that loss of prdm14 expression
accounts for the observed defects. Mechanistically, Prdm14 protein binds to the
promoter region of islet2, a known transcription factor required for CaP
development. Notably, disruption of islet2 function caused similar CaP axon
outgrowth defects as observed in slg mutant embryos. Furthermore, overexpression 
of islet2 in slg mutant embryos rescued the shortened CaP axon phenotypes.
Together, these data reveal that prdm14 regulates CaP axon outgrowth through
activation of islet2 expression.

PMID: 23136389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Jul 6;11(1):110-7. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.02.023.

The germ cell determinant Blimp1 is not required for derivation of pluripotent
stem cells.

Bao S(1), Leitch HG, Gillich A, Nichols J, Tang F, Kim S, Lee C, Zwaka T, Li X,
Surani MA.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute of Cancer and Developmental
Biology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, CB2 1QN, UK.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Jul 6;11(1):1-2.

Blimp1 (Prdm1), the key determinant of primordial germ cells (PGCs), plays a
combinatorial role with Prdm14 during PGC specification from postimplantation
epiblast cells. They together initiate epigenetic reprogramming in early germ
cells toward an underlying pluripotent state, which is equivalent to embryonic
stem cells (ESCs). Whereas Prdm14 alone can promote reprogramming and is
important for the propagation of the pluripotent state, it is not known whether
Blimp1 is similarly involved. By using a genetic approach, we demonstrate that
Blimp1 is dispensable for the derivation and maintenance of ESCs and
postimplantation epiblast stem cells (epiSCs). Notably, Blimp1 is also
dispensable for reprogramming epiSCs to ESCs. Thus, although Blimp1 is obligatory
for PGC specification, it is not required for the reversion of epiSCs to ESCs and
for their maintenance thereafter. This study suggests that reprogramming,
including that of somatic cells to ESCs, may not entail an obligatory route
through a Blimp1-positive PGC-like state.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3391686
PMID: 22770244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. EMBO J. 2012 May 16;31(10):2247-8. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.117. Epub 2012 Apr 20.

Epigenetic reprogramming: Prdm14 hits the accelerator.

Geijsen N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute KNAW, School of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. n.geijsen@hubrecht.eu

Comment on
    Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Apr 6;10(4):425-39.

PMCID: PMC3364742
PMID: 22522701  [PubMed]


57. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Apr 6;10(4):425-39. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.01.020.

Epiblast stem cell-based system reveals reprogramming synergy of germline
factors.

Gillich A(1), Bao S, Grabole N, Hayashi K, Trotter MW, Pasque V, Magnúsdóttir E, 
Surani MA.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge,
UK.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2012 May 16;31(10):2247-8.

Epigenetic reprogramming in early germ cells is critical toward the establishment
of totipotency, but investigations of the germline events are intractable. An
objective cell culture-based system could provide mechanistic insight on how the 
key determinants of primordial germ cells (PGCs), including Prdm14, induce
reprogramming in germ cells to an epigenetic ground state. Here we show a
Prdm14-Klf2 synergistic effect that can accelerate and enhance reversion of mouse
epiblast stem cells (epiSCs) to a naive pluripotent state, including X
reactivation and DNA demethylation. Notably, Prdm14 alone has little effect on
epiSC reversion, but it enhances the competence for reprogramming and potentially
PGC specification. Reprogramming of epiSCs by the combinatorial effect of
Prdm14-Klf2 involves key epigenetic changes, which might have an analogous role
in PGCs. Our study provides a paradigm toward a systematic analysis of how other 
key genes contribute to complex and dynamic events of reprogramming in the
germline.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3343665
PMID: 22482507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28960. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028960. Epub 2011 Dec 15.

Single cell analysis facilitates staging of Blimp1-dependent primordial germ
cells derived from mouse embryonic stem cells.

Vincent JJ(1), Li Z, Lee SA, Liu X, Etter MO, Diaz-Perez SV, Taylor SK, Gkountela
S, Lindgren AG, Clark AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

The cell intrinsic programming that regulates mammalian primordial germ cell
(PGC) development in the pre-gonadal stage is challenging to investigate. To
overcome this we created a transgene-free method for generating PGCs in vitro
(iPGCs) from mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Using labeling for SSEA1 and
cKit, two cell surface molecules used previously to isolate presumptive iPGCs, we
show that not all SSEA1+/cKit+ double positive cells exhibit a PGC identity.
Instead, we determined that selecting for cKit(bright) cells within the SSEA1+
fraction significantly enriches for the putative iPGC population. Single cell
analysis comparing SSEA1+/cKit(bright) iPGCs to ESCs and embryonic PGCs
demonstrates that 97% of single iPGCs co-express PGC signature genes Blimp1,
Stella, Dnd1, Prdm14 and Dazl at similar levels to e9.5-10.5 PGCs, whereas 90% of
single mouse ESC do not co-express PGC signature genes. For the 10% of ESCs that 
co-express PGC signature genes, the levels are significantly lower than iPGCs.
Microarray analysis shows that iPGCs are transcriptionally distinct from ESCs and
repress gene ontology groups associated with mesoderm and heart development. At
the level of chromatin, iPGCs contain 5-methyl cytosine bases in their DNA at
imprinted and non-imprinted loci, and are enriched in histone H3 lysine 27
trimethylation, yet do not have detectable levels of Mvh protein, consistent with
a Blimp1-positive pre-gonadal PGC identity. In order to determine whether iPGC
formation is dependent upon Blimp1, we generated Blimp1 null ESCs and found that 
loss of Blimp1 significantly depletes SSEA1/cKit(bright) iPGCs. Taken together,
the generation of Blimp1-positive iPGCs from ESCs constitutes a robust model for 
examining cell-intrinsic regulation of PGCs during the Blimp1-positive stage of
development.

PMCID: PMC3240638
PMID: 22194959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2011 Oct;34(5):475-82. doi: 10.1007/s13402-011-0043-7. Epub
2011 May 6.

Molecular differences between ductal carcinoma in situ and adjacent invasive
breast carcinoma: a multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification study.

Moelans CB(1), de Wegers RA, Monsuurs HN, Maess AH, van Diest PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan
100, PO Box 85500, 3508 GA, Utrecht, The Netherlands. cmoelans@umcutrecht.nl

Erratum in
    Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2011 Oct;34(5):509-10.

Republished from
    Anal Cell Pathol (Amst). 2010;33(3):165-73.

BACKGROUND: Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) accounts for approximately 20% of
mammographically detected breast cancers. Although DCIS is generally highly
curable, some women with DCIS will develop life-threatening invasive breast
cancer, but the determinants of progression to infiltrating ductal cancer (IDC)
are largely unknown.
METHODS: In the current study, we used multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA), a multiplex PCR-based test, to compare copy numbers of 21
breast cancer related genes between laser-microdissected DCIS and adjacent IDC
lesions in 39 patients. Genes included in this study were ESR1, EGFR, FGFR1,
ADAM9, IKBKB, PRDM14, MTDH, MYC, CCND1, EMSY, CDH1, TRAF4, CPD, MED1, HER2, CDC6,
TOP2A, MAPT, BIRC5, CCNE1 and AURKA.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in copy number for the 21 genes
between DCIS and adjacent IDC. Low/intermediate-grade DCIS showed on average 6
gains/amplifications versus 8 in high-grade DCIS (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.158). Furthermore,
alterations of AURKA and CCNE1 were exclusively found in high-grade DCIS, and
HER2, PRDM14 and EMSY amplification was more frequent in high-grade DCIS than in 
low/intermediate-grade DCIS. In contrast, the average number of alterations in
low/intermediate and high grade IDC was similar, and although EGFR alterations
were exclusively found in high grade IDC compared to low/intermediate-grade IDC, 
there were generally fewer differences between low/intermediate-grade and
high-grade IDC than between low/intermediate-grade and high-grade DCIS.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, there were no significant differences in copy number
for 21 breast cancer related genes between DCIS and adjacent IDC, indicating that
DCIS is genetically as advanced as its invasive counterpart. However, high grade 
DCIS showed more copy number changes than low/intermediate grade DCIS with
specifically involved genes, supporting a model in which different histological
grades of DCIS are associated with distinct genomic changes that progress to IDC 
in different routes. These high grade DCIS specific genes may be potential
targets for treatment and/or predict progression.

PMCID: PMC3219861
PMID: 21547576  [PubMed]


60. Nature. 2011 May 19;473(7347):398-402. doi: 10.1038/nature10008. Epub 2011 Apr 3.

Dynamic regulation of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in mouse ES cells and during
differentiation.

Ficz G(1), Branco MR, Seisenberger S, Santos F, Krueger F, Hore TA, Marques CJ,
Andrews S, Reik W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics and Imprinting, The Babraham Institute,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 2011 May 19;473(7347):293-4.

Methylation at the 5' position of cytosine in DNA has important roles in genome
function and is dynamically reprogrammed during early embryonic and germ cell
development. The mammalian genome also contains 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC),
which seems to be generated by oxidation of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) by the TET
family of enzymes that are highly expressed in embryonic stem (ES) cells. Here we
use antibodies against 5hmC and 5mC together with high throughput sequencing to
determine genome-wide patterns of methylation and hydroxymethylation in mouse
wild-type and mutant ES cells and differentiating embryoid bodies. We find that
5hmC is mostly associated with euchromatin and that whereas 5mC is
under-represented at gene promoters and CpG islands, 5hmC is enriched and is
associated with increased transcriptional levels. Most, if not all, 5hmC in the
genome depends on pre-existing 5mC and the balance between these two
modifications is different between genomic regions. Knockdown of Tet1 and Tet2
causes downregulation of a group of genes that includes pluripotency-related
genes (including Esrrb, Prdm14, Dppa3, Klf2, Tcl1 and Zfp42) and a concomitant
increase in methylation of their promoters, together with an increased propensity
of ES cells for extraembryonic lineage differentiation. Declining levels of TETs 
during differentiation are associated with decreased hydroxymethylation levels at
the promoters of ES cell-specific genes together with increased methylation and
gene silencing. We propose that the balance between hydroxymethylation and
methylation in the genome is inextricably linked with the balance between
pluripotency and lineage commitment.

PMID: 21460836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Oncogene. 2011 Jun 23;30(25):2859-73. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.12. Epub 2011 Feb 21.

Prdm14 initiates lymphoblastic leukemia after expanding a population of cells
resembling common lymphoid progenitors.

Dettman EJ(1), Simko SJ, Ayanga B, Carofino BL, Margolin JF, Morse HC 3rd,
Justice MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.

Understanding the heterogeneous genetic mechanisms of tumor initiation in
lymphoid leukemias (LL) will lead to improvements in prognostic classification
and treatment regimens. In previous studies of mouse leukemias, we showed that
retroviral insertion at the ecotropic viral insertion site 32 locus leads to
increased expression of Prdm14, a pluripotency gene implicated in the
self-renewal capacity of embryonic stem cells and the early stages of breast
cancer. Here, we show that PRDM14 is also overexpressed in ~25% of human lymphoid
neoplasms, with increased frequencies in T-cell acute LL and hyperdiploid
precursor B-cell acute LL. To test if Prdm14 overexpression could initiate
leukemia, mice were transduced with bone marrow cells transfected with a Prdm14
expression vector. LLs developed in 96% of female mice and 42% of male mice.
Before the onset of leukemia, differentiation of transduced cells was biased up
to 1000-fold toward cells with features of common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs),
and lymphoid differentiation showed a relative block at the pro-B stage.
Microarray gene expression analysis of expanded CLP-like cells before the onset
of leukemia demonstrated upregulation of genes involved in pluripotency, tumor
initiation, early B-lineage commitment, Wnt/Ras signaling and the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Among the dysregulated genes were imprinted
genes and non-coding RNAs including Dlk1 and Meg3, which are also key
pluripotency mediators. Heightened expression of the estrogen-dependent oncogene,
Myb, in tumors suggests a basis for the increased frequency of cancer in female
mice. These data provide the first direct evidence for the association of Prdm14 
with cancer initiation in an in vivo mouse model and in human lymphoid
malignancies, while suggesting mechanisms for Prdm14's mode of action.

PMCID: PMC3121925
PMID: 21339739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 25;286(12):10641-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.216390. Epub 2011
Jan 26.

A germ cell-specific gene, Prmt5, works in somatic cell reprogramming.

Nagamatsu G(1), Kosaka T, Kawasumi M, Kinoshita T, Takubo K, Akiyama H, Sudo T,
Kobayashi T, Oya M, Suda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Differentiation, The Sakaguchi Laboratory, School of
Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. gonag@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp

Germ cells possess the unique ability to acquire totipotency during development
in vivo as well as give rise to pluripotent stem cells under the appropriate
conditions in vitro. Recent studies in which somatic cells were experimentally
converted into pluripotent stem cells revealed that genes expressed in primordial
germ cells (PGCs), such as Oct3/4, Sox2, and Lin28, are involved in this
reprogramming. These findings suggest that PGCs may be useful for identifying
factors that successfully and efficiently reprogram somatic cells into toti-
and/or pluripotent stem cells. Here, we show that Blimp-1, Prdm14, and Prmt5,
each of which is crucial for PGC development, have the potential to reprogram
somatic cells into pluripotent stem cells. Among them, Prmt5 exhibited remarkable
reprogramming of mouse embryonic fibroblasts into which Prmt5, Klf4, and Oct3/4
were introduced. The resulting cells exhibited pluripotent gene expression,
teratoma formation, and germline transmission in chimeric mice, all of which were
indistinguishable from those induced with embryonic stem cells. These data
indicate that some of the factors that play essential roles in germ cell
development are also active in somatic cell reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC3060515
PMID: 21270127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Feb;18(2):120-7. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2000. Epub 2010 Dec 
23.

Sequence-specific regulator Prdm14 safeguards mouse ESCs from entering
extraembryonic endoderm fates.

Ma Z(1), Swigut T, Valouev A, Rada-Iglesias A, Wysocka J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.

Prdm14 is a PR-domain and zinc-finger protein whose expression is restricted to
the pluripotent cells of the early embryo, embryonic stem cells (ESCs), and germ 
cells. Here, we show that Prdm14 safeguards mouse ESC (mESC) maintenance by
preventing induction of extraembryonic endoderm (ExEn) fates. Conversely, Prdm14 
overexpression impairs ExEn differentiation during embryoid body formation.
Prdm14 occupies and represses genomic loci encoding ExEn differentiation factors,
while also binding to and promoting expression of genes associated with mESC
self-renewal. Prdm14-associated genomic regions substantially overlap those
occupied by Nanog and Oct4, are enriched in a chromatin signature associated with
distal regulatory elements and contain a unique DNA-sequence motif recognized by 
Prdm14 in vitro. Our work identifies a new member of the mESC transcriptional
network, Prdm14, which plays a dual role as a context-dependent transcriptional
repressor or activator.

PMID: 21183938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 29;5(10):e13703. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013703.

The LARGE principle of cellular reprogramming: lost, acquired and retained gene
expression in foreskin and amniotic fluid-derived human iPS cells.

Wolfrum K(1), Wang Y, Prigione A, Sperling K, Lehrach H, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Aging Group, Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

Human amniotic fluid cells (AFCs) are routinely obtained for prenatal diagnostics
procedures. Recently, it has been illustrated that these cells may also serve as 
a valuable model system to study developmental processes and for application in
regenerative therapies. Cellular reprogramming is a means of assigning greater
value to primary AFCs by inducing self-renewal and pluripotency and, thus,
bypassing senescence. Here, we report the generation and characterization of
human amniotic fluid-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (AFiPSCs) and
demonstrate their ability to differentiate into the trophoblast lineage after
stimulation with BMP2/BMP4. We further carried out comparative transcriptome
analyses of primary human AFCs, AFiPSCs, fibroblast-derived iPSCs (FiPSCs) and
embryonic stem cells (ESCs). This revealed that the expression of key
senescence-associated genes are down-regulated upon the induction of pluripotency
in primary AFCs (AFiPSCs). By defining distinct and overlapping gene expression
patterns and deriving the LARGE (Lost, Acquired and Retained Gene Expression)
Principle of Cellular Reprogramming, we could further highlight that AFiPSCs,
FiPSCs and ESCs share a core self-renewal gene regulatory network driven by OCT4,
SOX2 and NANOG. Nevertheless, these cell types are marked by distinct gene
expression signatures. For example, expression of the transcription factors,
SIX6, EGR2, PKNOX2, HOXD4, HOXD10, DLX5 and RAXL1, known to regulate
developmental processes, are retained in AFiPSCs and FiPSCs. Surprisingly,
expression of the self-renewal-associated gene PRDM14 or the developmental
processes-regulating genes WNT3A and GSC are restricted to ESCs. Implications of 
this, with respect to the stability of the undifferentiated state and long-term
differentiation potential of iPSCs, warrant further studies.

PMCID: PMC2966395
PMID: 21060825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Nanomedicine. 2011 Jun;7(3):315-23. doi: 10.1016/j.nano.2010.10.004. Epub 2010
Nov 2.

Delivery of siRNA into breast cancer cells via phage fusion protein-targeted
liposomes.

Bedi D(1), Musacchio T, Fagbohun OA, Gillespie JW, Deinnocentes P, Bird RC,
Bookbinder L, Torchilin VP, Petrenko VA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University,
Auburn, Alabama, USA.

Efficacy of siRNAs as potential anticancer therapeutics can be increased by their
targeted delivery into cancer cells via tumor-specific ligands. Phage display
offers a unique approach to identify highly specific and selective ligands that
can deliver nanocarriers to the site of disease. In this study, we proved a novel
approach for intracellular delivery of siRNAs into breast cancer cells through
their encapsulation into liposomes targeted to the tumor cells with preselected
intact phage proteins. The targeted siRNA liposomes were obtained by a fusion of 
two parental liposomes containing spontaneously inserted siRNA and fusion phage
proteins. The presence of pVIII coat protein fused to a MCF-7 cell-targeting
peptide DMPGTVLP in the liposomes was confirmed by Western blotting. The novel
phage-targeted siRNA-nanopharmaceuticals demonstrate significant down-regulation 
of PRDM14 gene expression and PRDM14 protein synthesis in the target MCF-7 cells.
This approach offers the potential for development of new anticancer siRNA-based 
targeted nanomedicines.FROM THE CLINICAL EDITOR: In this study, the authors
report a novel approach for targeted intracellular delivery of siRNAs into breast
cancer cells through encapsulation into liposomes targeted to the tumor cells
with preselected intact phage proteins.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3108001
PMID: 21050894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Anal Cell Pathol (Amst). 2010;33(3):165-73. doi: 10.3233/ACP-CLO-2010-0546.

Molecular differences between ductal carcinoma in situ and adjacent invasive
breast carcinoma: a multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification study.

Moelans CB(1), de Weger RA, Monsuur HN, Maes AH, van Diest PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. cmoelans@umcutrecht.nl

Republished in
    Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2011 Oct;34(5):475-82.

Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) accounts for approximately 20% of
mammographically detected breast cancers. Although DCIS is generally highly
curable, some women with DCIS will develop life-threatening invasive breast
cancer, but the determinants of progression to infiltrating ductal cancer (IDC)
are largely unknown. In the current study, we used multiplex ligation-dependent
probe amplification (MLPA), a multiplex PCR-based test, to compare copy numbers
of 21 breast cancer related genes between laser-microdissected DCIS and adjacent 
IDC lesions in 39 patients. Genes included in this study were ESR1, EGFR, FGFR1, 
ADAM9, IKBKB, PRDM14, MTDH, MYC, CCND1, EMSY, CDH1, TRAF4, CPD, MED1, HER2, CDC6,
TOP2A, MAPT, BIRC5, CCNE1 and AURKA.There were no significant differences in copy
number for the 21 genes between DCIS and adjacent IDC. Low/intermediate-grade
DCIS showed on average 6 gains/amplifications versus 8 in high-grade DCIS
(p=0.158). Furthermore, alterations of AURKA and CCNE1 were exclusively found in 
high-grade DCIS, and HER2, PRDM14 and EMSY amplification was more frequent in
high-grade DCIS than in low/intermediate-grade DCIS. In contrast, the average
number of alterations in low/intermediate and high-grade IDC was similar, and
although EGFR alterations were exclusively found in high-grade IDC compared to
low/intermediate-grade IDC, there were generally fewer differences between
low/intermediate-grade and high-grade IDC than between low/intermediate-grade and
high-grade DCIS.In conclusion, there were no significant differences in copy
number for 21 breast cancer related genes between DCIS and adjacent IDC,
indicating that DCIS is genetically as advanced as its invasive counterpart.
However, high-grade DCIS showed more copy number changes than
low/intermediate-grade DCIS with specifically involved genes, supporting a model 
in which different histological grades of DCIS are associated with distinct
genomic changes that progress to IDC in different routes. These high-grade DCIS
specific genes may be potential targets for treatment and/or predict progression.

PMCID: PMC4605452
PMID: 20978320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Nature. 2010 Nov 11;468(7321):316-20. doi: 10.1038/nature09531. Epub 2010 Oct 17.

A genome-wide RNAi screen reveals determinants of human embryonic stem cell
identity.

Chia NY(1), Chan YS, Feng B, Lu X, Orlov YL, Moreau D, Kumar P, Yang L, Jiang J, 
Lau MS, Huss M, Soh BS, Kraus P, Li P, Lufkin T, Lim B, Clarke ND, Bard F, Ng HH.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, 60 Biopolis Street,
Singapore 138672.

The derivation of human ES cells (hESCs) from human blastocysts represents one of
the milestones in stem cell biology. The full potential of hESCs in research and 
clinical applications requires a detailed understanding of the genetic network
that governs the unique properties of hESCs. Here, we report a genome-wide RNA
interference screen to identify genes which regulate self-renewal and
pluripotency properties in hESCs. Interestingly, functionally distinct complexes 
involved in transcriptional regulation and chromatin remodelling are among the
factors identified in the screen. To understand the roles of these potential
regulators of hESCs, we studied transcription factor PRDM14 to gain new insights 
into its functional roles in the regulation of pluripotency. We showed that
PRDM14 regulates directly the expression of key pluripotency gene POU5F1 through 
its proximal enhancer. Genome-wide location profiling experiments revealed that
PRDM14 colocalized extensively with other key transcription factors such as OCT4,
NANOG and SOX2, indicating that PRDM14 is integrated into the core
transcriptional regulatory network. More importantly, in a gain-of-function
assay, we showed that PRDM14 is able to enhance the efficiency of reprogramming
of human fibroblasts in conjunction with OCT4, SOX2 and KLF4. Altogether, our
study uncovers a wealth of novel hESC regulators wherein PRDM14 exemplifies a key
transcription factor required for the maintenance of hESC identity and the
reacquisition of pluripotency in human somatic cells.

PMID: 20953172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2010 Sep;13(9):867-72. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2010.09.06.

[Relationship between the expression of PRDM14 in non-small cell lung cancer and 
the clinicopathologic characteristics].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu B(1), Zhang S, Hui L, Qiu X, Cui Z.

Author information: 
(1)The Center of Laboratory Technology and Experimental Medicine, Shenyang
110001, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The positive regulatory domain proteins (PRDM) are
family of transcriptional regulation related to the formation of human tumor
factor and play key roles in the cell differentiation and malignant
transformation. PRDM14 is a member of the PRDM family. The aim of this study is
to detect the expression of PRDM14 in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tissues,
and analyze its relationship with clinicopathologic characteristics of NSCLC.
METHODS: PRDM14 expression was detected in 70 NSCLC specimens and 7 paracancerous
tissues using the immunohistochemistry (SP method). The PRDM14 protein expression
was determined in 42 NSCLC specimens and 42 paracancerous tissues by Western
blot.
RESULTS: Among 70 NSCLC specimens, 8 specimens showed weak expression of PRDM14
(11.43%, 8/70), 62 specimens showed moderate to strong staining of PRDM14
(88.57%, 62/70), whereas 7 paracancerous specimens showed weak staining extent.
PRDM14 expression level was positively correlated with differentiation (P=0.046) 
and histological type (P=0.047). The positive cytoplasmic expression of PRDM14 in
highly differentiated NSCLC, the low expression of PRDM14 in poorly
differentiated NSCLC. The results of Western blot showed that there were
significant difference between the two groups (P<0.001); expression of PRDM14 was
conspicuous in NSCLC specimens but low in paracancerous tissues. PRDM14
expression level was positively correlated with differentiation (P=0.017). The
positive cytoplasmic expression of PRDM14 in highly differentiated NSCLC, the low
expression of PRDM14 in poorly differentiated NSCLC.
CONCLUSIONS: The high expression of PRDM14 in NSCLC is associated with
differentiation and histological type. The PRDM14 may play an important role in
the development of NSCLC.

PMID: 20840815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mod Pathol. 2010 Jul;23(7):1029-39. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.84. Epub 2010 May
14.

Molecular profiling of invasive breast cancer by multiplex ligation-dependent
probe amplification-based copy number analysis of tumor suppressor and oncogenes.

Moelans CB(1), de Weger RA, Monsuur HN, Vijzelaar R, van Diest PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. cmoelans@umcutrecht.nl

Several oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes have been shown to be implicated in 
the development, progression and response to therapy of invasive breast cancer.
The phenotypic uniqueness (and thus the heterogeneity of clinical behavior) among
patients' tumors may be traceable to the underlying variation in gene copy number
of these genes. To obtain a more complete view of gene copy number changes and
their relation to phenotype, we analyzed 20 breast cancer-related genes in 104
invasive breast cancers with the use of multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA). We identified MYC gene amplification in 48% of patients,
PRDM14 in 34%, topoisomerase IIalpha (TOP2A) in 32%, ADAM9 in 32%, HER2 in 28%,
cyclin D1 (CCND1) in 26%, EMSY in 25%, IKBKB in 21%, AURKA in 17%, FGFR1 in 17%, 
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) in 16%, CCNE1 in 12% and EGFR in 9% of patients.
There was a significant correlation between the number of amplified genes and the
histological grade and mitotic index of the tumor. Gene amplifications of EGFR,
CCNE1 and HER2 were negatively associated with estrogen receptor status whereas
FGFR1, ADAM9, IKBKB and TOP2A revealed a positive association. Amplifications of 
ESR1, PRDM14, MYC and HER2 were associated with a high mitotic index, and PRDM14 
and HER2 amplifications with high histological grade. MYC amplification was
detected more frequently in ductal tumors and high-level MYC amplifications were 
significantly associated with large tumor size. HER2/MYC, HER2/CCNE1 and EGFR/MYC
co-amplified tumors were significantly larger than tumors with either of these
amplifications. Gene loss occurred most frequently in E-cadherin (CDH1) (20%) and
FGFR1 (10%). In conclusion, MLPA analysis with this 'breast cancer kit' allowed
to simultaneously assess copy numbers of 20 important breast cancer genes,
providing an overview of the most frequent (co)amplifications as well as
interesting phenotypic correlations, and thereby data on the potential importance
of these genes in breast cancer.

PMID: 20473280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Reproduction. 2010 Feb;139(2):381-93. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0373. Epub 2009 Oct 27.

Functional reconstruction of NANOS3 expression in the germ cell lineage by a
novel transgenic reporter reveals distinct subcellular localizations of NANOS3.

Yamaji M(1), Tanaka T, Shigeta M, Chuma S, Saga Y, Saitou M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Mammalian Germ Cell Biology, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, 2-2-3 Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.

Mutations of RNA-binding proteins such as NANOS3, TIAL1, and DND1 in mice have
been known to result in the failure of survival and/or proliferation of
primordial germ cells (PGCs) soon after their fate is specified (around embryonic
day (E) 8.0), leading to the infertility of these animals. However, the
mechanisms of actions of these RNA-binding proteins remain largely unresolved. As
a foundation to explore the role of these RNA-binding proteins in germ cells, we 
established a novel transgenic reporter strain that expresses NANOS3 fused with
EGFP under the control of Nanos3 regulatory elements. NANOS3-EGFP exhibited
exclusive expression in PGCs as early as E7.25, and continued to be expressed in 
female germ cells until around E14.5 and in male germ cells throughout the fetal 
period with declining expression levels after E16.5. NANOS3-EGFP resumed strong
expression in postnatal spermatogonia and continued to be expressed in
undifferentiated spermatogonial cells in adults. Importantly, the Nanos3-EGFP
transgene rescued the sterile phenotype of Nanos3 homozygous mutants,
demonstrating the functional equivalency of NANOS3-EGFP with endogenous NANOS3.
We found that throughout germ cell development, a predominant amount of
NANOS3-EGFP co-localized with TIAL1 (also known as TIAR) and phosphorylated
eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha, markers for the stress granules, whereas a
fraction of it showed co-localization with DCP1A, a marker for the processing
bodies. On the other hand, NANOS3-EGFP did not co-localize with Tudor
domain-containing protein 1, a marker for the intermitochondrial cements, in
spermatogenic cells. These findings unveil the presence of distinct
posttranscriptional regulations in PGCs soon after their specification, for which
RNA-binding proteins such as NANOS3 and TIAL1 would play critical functions.

PMID: 19861488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2009 Aug;19(4):386-95. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2009.06.003. Epub 
2009 Jul 16.

Germ cell specification in mice.

Saitou M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.
saitou@anat2.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Specification of germ cell fate is vital to development and heredity. In mice,
germ cell fate is induced in a subset of pluripotent epiblast cells during early 
gastrulation. Reflecting the function of the germ line as the transducer of
genetic information, germ cell specification integrates at least three key
events: repression of the somatic program, re-acquisition of potential
pluripotency, and ensuing genome-wide epigenetic reprogramming. Blimp1 and Prdm14
are the two critical transcriptional regulators that orchestrate these events.
The recent clarification of the mechanism by which signaling activities confer
the germ cell fate to the epiblast cells underscores the feasibility of
generating the mammalian germ cell lineage in vitro.

PMID: 19616424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cell. 2009 May 1;137(3):571-84. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.03.014.

A signaling principle for the specification of the germ cell lineage in mice.

Ohinata Y(1), Ohta H, Shigeta M, Yamanaka K, Wakayama T, Saitou M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN Kobe Institute,
Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Japan.

Comment in
    Cell. 2009 May 1;137(3):398-400.

Specification of the germ cell lineage is vital to development and heredity. In
mice, the germ cell fate is induced in pluripotent epiblast cells by signaling
molecules, yet the underlying mechanism remains unknown. Here we demonstrate that
germ cell fate in the epiblast is a direct consequence of Bmp4 signaling from the
extraembryonic ectoderm (ExE), which is antagonized by the anterior visceral
endoderm (AVE). Strikingly, Bmp8b from the ExE restricts AVE development, thereby
contributing to Bmp4 signaling. Furthermore, Wnt3 in the epiblast ensures its
responsiveness to Bmp4. Serum-free, defined cultures revealed that, in response
to Bmp4, competent epiblast cells uniformly expressed key transcriptional
regulators Blimp1 and Prdm14 and acquired germ-cell properties, including
genome-wide epigenetic reprogramming, in an orderly fashion. Notably, the induced
cells contributed to both spermatogenesis and fertility of offspring. By
identifying a signaling principle in germ cell specification, our study
establishes a robust strategy for reconstituting the mammalian germ cell lineage 
in vitro.

PMID: 19410550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Feb;10(2):91-103. doi: 10.1038/nrm2618. Epub 2009 Jan
8.

Making a commitment: cell lineage allocation and axis patterning in the early
mouse embryo.

Arnold SJ(1), Robertson EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, 
Oxford, OX1 3RE, UK.

Genetic studies have identified the key signalling pathways and developmentally
regulated transcription factors that govern cell lineage allocation and axis
patterning in the early mammalian embryo. Recent advances have uncovered details 
of the molecular circuits that tightly control cell growth and differentiation in
the mammalian embryo from the blastocyst stage, through the establishment of
initial anterior-posterior polarity, to gastrulation, when the germ cells are set
aside and the three primary germ layers are specified. Relevant studies in lower 
vertebrates indicate the conservation and divergence of regulatory mechanisms for
cell lineage allocation and axis patterning.

PMID: 19129791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. PLoS One. 2008;3(11):e3823. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003823. Epub 2008 Nov 27.

The zinc finger SET domain gene Prdm14 is overexpressed in lymphoblastic
lymphomas with retroviral insertions at Evi32.

Dettman EJ(1), Justice MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: AKXD recombinant inbred strains of mice have proven to be very useful
in the identification of potential oncogenes and tumor suppressors involved in
the development of lymphoid and myeloid malignancies. In these tumors, the
hematopoietic insertion of an active AKV murine leukemia virus (MuLV) is
associated with the onset of disease. Common sites of retroviral insertion (CIS) 
identify genes causally associated with the development or initiation of
lymphoma.
METHODOLOGY: In the present study, we analyzed a previously uncharacterized CIS, 
Ecotropic Viral Integration Site 32 (Evi32), which is located on mouse chromosome
1. We analyzed candidate genes in the region to identify those involved in Evi32 
mediated oncogenesis.
RESULTS: Here we show that proviral insertion at Evi32 correlates with
significant overexpression of a putative transcription factor, PR-domain
containing 14 (Prdm14). Tumors with insertions at Evi32 are consistently lymphoid
in nature. Prdm14 is normally expressed early in embryonic development with the
highest expression in undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells. This study
implicates Prdm14 as a proto-oncogene involved in lymphoblastic lymphoma
formation.

PMCID: PMC2584371
PMID: 19043588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cell Cycle. 2008 Nov 15;7(22):3514-8. Epub 2008 Nov 12.

Specification of the germ cell lineage in mice: a process orchestrated by the
PR-domain proteins, Blimp1 and Prdm14.

Kurimoto K(1), Yamaji M, Seki Y, Saitou M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Mammalian Germ Cell Biology, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan.

Germ cell specification in mice, which generates primordial germ cells (PGCs),
the common source of the oocytes and spermatozoa, from the epiblast, integrates
three key events: repression of the somatic program, re-acquisition of potential 
pluripotency, and genome-wide epigenetic reprogramming. A PR-domain containing
protein, Blimp1 (also known as Prdm1), has been identified as a critical factor
for PGC specification. Using a highly representative single-cell microarray
technology, we identified a complex but highly ordered genome-wide transcription 
dynamics associated with PGC specification. This analysis not only demonstrated a
dominant role of Blimp1 for the repression of the genes normally downregulated in
PGCs relative to their somatic neighbors, but also revealed the presence of gene 
expression programs initiating independently from Blimp1. Among such programs, we
identified Prdm14, another PR-domain containing protein, as a key regulator for
the re-acquisition of potential pluripotency and genome-wide epigenetic
reprogramming. The launch of the germ cell lineage in mice, therefore, is
orchestrated by two independently acquired, PR domain-containing transcriptional 
regulators, Blimp1 and Prdm14.

PMID: 19001867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Nat Genet. 2008 Aug;40(8):1016-22. doi: 10.1038/ng.186. Epub 2008 Jul 11.

Critical function of Prdm14 for the establishment of the germ cell lineage in
mice.

Yamaji M(1), Seki Y, Kurimoto K, Yabuta Y, Yuasa M, Shigeta M, Yamanaka K,
Ohinata Y, Saitou M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Mammalian Germ Cell Biology, Center for Developmental Biology, 
RIKEN Kobe Institute, 2-2-3 Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047,
Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2008 Aug;40(8):934-5.

Specification of germ cell fate is fundamental in development and heredity.
Recent evidence indicates that in mice, specification of primordial germ cells
(PGCs), the common source of both oocytes and spermatozoa, occurs through the
integration of three key events: repression of the somatic program, reacquisition
of potential pluripotency and ensuing genome-wide epigenetic reprogramming. Here 
we provide genetic evidence that Prdm14, a PR domain-containing transcriptional
regulator with exclusive expression in the germ cell lineage and pluripotent cell
lines, is critical in two of these events, the reacquisition of potential
pluripotency and successful epigenetic reprogramming. In Prdm14 mutants, the
failure of these two events manifests even in the presence of Prdm1 (also known
as Blimp1), a key transcriptional regulator for PGC specification. Our combined
evidence demonstrates that Prdm14 defines a previously unknown genetic pathway,
initiating independently from Prdm1, for ensuring the launching of the mammalian 
germ cell lineage.

PMID: 18622394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Mar 21;367(4):899-905. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.12.189. Epub 2008 Jan 14.

PRDM14 suppresses expression of differentiation marker genes in human embryonic
stem cells.

Tsuneyoshi N(1), Sumi T, Onda H, Nojima H, Nakatsuji N, Suemori H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Embryonic Stem Cell Research, Stem Cell Research Center,
Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho,
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

PRDM14 was identified by microarray analysis and was expressed in specifically
undifferentiated human ES cells. PRDM14 protein is thought to regulate gene
transcription in human ES cells, as it contains a PR domain, a subtype of the SET
domain which catalyzes histone methylation. To analyze the function of PRDM14, we
performed knock-down and forced expression of PRDM14 in human ES cells.
Knock-down of PRDM14 by siRNA induced expression of early differentiation marker 
genes. Forced expression of PRDM14 suppressed expression of differentiation
marker genes in the embryoid body. These results suggest that PRDM14 is involved 
in the maintenance of the self-renewal of human ES cells by suppression of gene
expression.

PMID: 18194669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Cancer Res. 2007 Oct 15;67(20):9649-57.

Gene amplification and overexpression of PRDM14 in breast cancers.

Nishikawa N(1), Toyota M, Suzuki H, Honma T, Fujikane T, Ohmura T, Nishidate T,
Ohe-Toyota M, Maruyama R, Sonoda T, Sasaki Y, Urano T, Imai K, Hirata K, Tokino
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Several genes that encode PR (PRDI-BF1 and RIZ) domain proteins (PRDM) have been 
linked to human cancers. To explore the role of the PR domain family genes in
breast carcinogenesis, we examined the expression profiles of 16 members of the
PRDM gene family in a panel of breast cancer cell lines and primary breast cancer
specimens using semiquantitative real-time PCR. We found that PRDM14 mRNA is
overexpressed in about two thirds of breast cancers; moreover,
immunohistochemical analysis showed that expression of PRDM14 protein is also
up-regulated. Analysis of the gene copy number revealed that PRDM14 is a target
of gene amplification on chromosome 8q13, which is a region where gene
amplification has frequently been detected in various human tumors. Introduction 
of PRDM14 into cancer cells enhanced cell growth and reduced their sensitivity to
chemotherapeutic drugs. Conversely, knockdown of PRDM14 by siRNA induced
apoptosis in breast cancer cells and increased their sensitivity to
chemotherapeutic drugs, suggesting that up-regulated expression of PRDM14 may
play an important role in the proliferation of breast cancer cells. That little
or no expression of PRDM14 is seen in noncancerous tissues suggests that PRDM14
could be an ideal therapeutic target for the treatment of breast cancer.

PMID: 17942894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


