
1. J Med Genet. 2016 Mar 14. pii: jmedgenet-2015-103646. doi:
10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103646. [Epub ahead of print]

Clinical features for diagnosis and management of patients with PRDM12 congenital
insensitivity to pain.

Zhang S(1), Malik Sharif S(2), Chen YC(3), Valente EM(4), Ahmed M(2), Sheridan
E(2), Bennett C(2), Woods G(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge School of Clinical
Medicine, Cambridge, UK. (2)The Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service, Chapel
Allerton Hospital, Leeds, UK. (3)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Wellcome Trust, Cambridge, 
UK. (4)Section of Neurosciences, Department of Medicine and Surgery, University
of Salerno, Italy. (5)School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge School
of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge, UK Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Wellcome Trust, Cambridge, 
UK.

BACKGROUND: Congenital insensitivity to pain (CIP) is a rare extreme phenotype
characterised by an inability to perceive pain present from birth due to lack of,
or malfunction of, nociceptors. PRDM12 has recently been identified as a new gene
that can cause CIP. The full phenotype and natural history have not yet been
reported.
METHODS: We have ascertained five adult patients and report their clinical
features.
RESULTS: Based on our findings, and those of previous patients, we describe the
natural history of the PRDM12-CIP disorder, and derive diagnostic and management 
features to guide the clinical management of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: PRDM12-CIP is a distinct and diagnosable disorder, and requires
specific clinical management to minimise predictable complications.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26975306  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Neuropharmacology. 2016 Apr;103:183-94. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.12.011.
Epub 2015 Dec 17.

Regulation of nucleus accumbens transcript levels in mice by early-life social
stress and cocaine.

Lo Iacono L(1), Valzania A(1), Visco-Comandini F(2), Viscomi MT(1), Felsani A(3),
Puglisi-Allegra S(4), Carola V(5).

Author information: 
(1)IRCSS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy. (2)Sobell Department of Motor
Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, University College of London, Great Britain,
UK. (3)Institute of Cellular Biology and Neurobiology, CNR, Rome, Italy. (4)IRCSS
Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy; Department of Psychology and "Daniel Bovet" 
Center, University of Rome "La Sapienza", Italy. (5)IRCSS Fondazione Santa Lucia,
Rome, Italy. Electronic address: valeria.carola@uniroma1.it.

Much interest has been piqued regarding the quality of one's environment at early
ages in modulating the susceptibility to drug addiction in adulthood. However,
the molecular mechanisms that are engaged during early trauma and mediate the
risk for drug addiction are poorly understood. In rodents, exposure to early-life
stress alters the rewarding effects of cocaine, amphetamine, and morphine in
adulthood. Recently, we demonstrated that the exposure of juvenile mice to social
threat (Social Stress, S-S) promoted cocaine-seeking behavior and relapse of
cocaine-seeking after periods of withdrawal, compared with unhandled controls
(UN) and with juvenile mice that experienced only daily isolation in a novel
environment (no social stress, NS-S). Interestingly, while the exposure to NS-S
slightly increased cocaine-seeking behavior compared with UN, the same was not
sufficient to promote cocaine reinstatement. In this study, we examined the
long-term transcriptional changes that are induced by S-S compared to NS-S and
linked the increased susceptibility of S-S mice to cocaine reinstatement. To this
end, we performed genome-wide RNA sequencing analysis in the nucleus accumbens
(NAC), which revealed that 89 transcripts were differentially expressed between
S-S and NS-S mice. By Gene Ontology classification, these hits were enriched in
genes that mediate cell proliferation, neuronal differentiation, and
neuron/forebrain development. Eleven of these genes have been reported to be
involved in substance use disorders, and the remaining genes are novel candidates
in this area. We characterized 4 candidates with regard to their significant
neurobiological relevance (ZIC1, ZIC2, FABP7, and PRDM12) and measured their
expression in the NAC by immunohistochemistry. These findings provide insights
into novel molecular mechanisms in NAC that might be associated with the risk of 
relapse in cocaine-dependent individuals.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26706499  [PubMed - in process]


3. Trends Neurosci. 2015 Nov;38(11):712-24. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2015.08.010.

New Mendelian Disorders of Painlessness.

Nahorski MS(1), Chen YC(2), Woods CG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
CB2 0XY, UK. Electronic address: msn27@cam.ac.uk. (2)Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK. Electronic
address: ycc33@cam.ac.uk. (3)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University
of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK. Electronic address: cw347@cam.ac.uk.

Erroneous activation of the pain-sensing system, as in chronic or neuropathic
pain, represents a major health burden with insufficient treatment options.
However, the study of genetic disorders rendering individuals completely unable
to feel pain offers hope. All causes of congenital painlessness affect
nociceptors, evolutionarily conserved specialist neurons able to sense all type
of tissue damage. The discovery of new genes essential for sensing pain (SCN11A, 
PRDM12, and CLTCL1) has provided unexpected insights into the biological
mechanisms that drive distinct stages of nociception. Drugs targeting two
previously discovered painlessness genes, NGF and SCN9A, are currently in
late-stage clinical trials; thus, characterization of these new painlessness
genes has significant potential for the generation of new classes of analgesics.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26549885  [PubMed - in process]


4. Development. 2015 Oct 1;142(19):3416-28. doi: 10.1242/dev.121871.

Prdm12 specifies V1 interneurons through cross-repressive interactions with Dbx1 
and Nkx6 genes in Xenopus.

Thélie A(1), Desiderio S(1), Hanotel J(1), Quigley I(2), Van Driessche B(3),
Rodari A(3), Borromeo MD(4), Kricha S(1), Lahaye F(5), Croce J(5), Cerda-Moya
G(6), Ordoño Fernandez J(1), Bolle B(1), Lewis KE(7), Sander M(8), Pierani A(9), 
Schubert M(5), Johnson JE(4), Kintner CR(2), Pieler T(10), Van Lint C(3),
Henningfeld KA(10), Bellefroid EJ(11), Van Campenhout C(11).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB),
Institute of Molecular Biology and Medecine (IBMM) and ULB Neuroscience
Institute, Gosselies B-6041, Belgium. (2)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The
Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (3)Laboratory of 
Molecular Virology, ULB, IBMM, Gosselies B-6041, Belgium. (4)Department of
Neuroscience, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (5)Sorbonne 
Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, CNRS UMR 7009, Laboratoire de Biologie du 
Développement de Villefranche-sur-Mer (UMR 7009), Observatoire Océanologique de
Villefranche-sur-Mer, Villefranche-sur-Mer 06230, France. (6)Department of
Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 
3EG, UK. (7)Department of Biology, Syracuse University, 107 College Place,
Syracuse, NY 13244, USA. (8)Departments of Pediatrics and Cellular and Molecular 
Medicine, Pediatric Diabetes Research Center, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0695, USA. (9)Génétique et développement du cortex
cerebral, Institut Jacques Monod, CNRS UMR 7592, Université Paris Diderot,
Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris Cedex 13 75205, France. (10)Department of
Developmental Biochemistry, Center for Nanoscale Microscopy and Molecular
Physiology of the Brain (CNMPB), University of Göttingen, 37077 Göttingen,
Germany. (11)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics, Université Libre de Bruxelles 
(ULB), Institute of Molecular Biology and Medecine (IBMM) and ULB Neuroscience
Institute, Gosselies B-6041, Belgium ebellefr@ulb.ac.be cvcampen@ulb.ac.be.

V1 interneurons are inhibitory neurons that play an essential role in vertebrate 
locomotion. The molecular mechanisms underlying their genesis remain, however,
largely undefined. Here, we show that the transcription factor Prdm12 is
selectively expressed in p1 progenitors of the hindbrain and spinal cord in the
frog embryo, and that a similar restricted expression profile is observed in the 
nerve cord of other vertebrates as well as of the cephalochordate amphioxus.
Using frog, chick and mice, we analyzed the regulation of Prdm12 and found that
its expression in the caudal neural tube is dependent on retinoic acid and Pax6, 
and that it is restricted to p1 progenitors, due to the repressive action of Dbx1
and Nkx6-1/2 expressed in the adjacent p0 and p2 domains. Functional studies in
the frog, including genome-wide identification of its targets by RNA-seq and
ChIP-Seq, reveal that vertebrate Prdm12 proteins act as a general determinant of 
V1 cell fate, at least in part, by directly repressing Dbx1 and Nkx6 genes. This 
probably occurs by recruiting the methyltransferase G9a, an activity that is not 
displayed by the amphioxus Prdm12 protein. Together, these findings indicate that
Prdm12 promotes V1 interneurons through cross-repressive interactions with Dbx1
and Nkx6 genes, and suggest that this function might have only been acquired
after the split of the vertebrate and cephalochordate lineages.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4631751
PMID: 26443638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2015 Oct;54(10):595-605. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22263. Epub
2015 Aug 7.

Molecular characterization and follow-up of five CML patients with new BCR-ABL1
fusion transcripts.

Huet S(1), Dulucq S(2), Chauveau A(3), Ménard A(4), Chomel JC(5), Maisonneuve
H(6), Legros L(7), Perrin MC(8), Ferrant E(9), Moreilhon C(10), Couturier MA(11),
Sujobert P(1), Magaud JP(1), Ugo V(3), Chabane K(1), Raynaud S(10), Hayette S(1);
GBMHM (Groupe des Biologistes Moléculaires des Hémopathies Malignes, French
Molecular Biology Group in Hematology).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire D'hématologie, Centre De Biologie Sud, Hospices Civils De Lyon,
Pierre-Bénite, France. (2)Laboratoire D'hématologie, Centre
Hospitalo-Universitaire De Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. (3)Laboratoire
D'hématologie, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Régional De Brest, Brest, France.
(4)Laboratoire D'hématologie, Institut De Biologie, Centre
Hospitalo-Universitaire De Nantes, Nantes, France. (5)Service De Cancérologie
Biologique, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire De Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
(6)Service Clinique d'onco-Hématologie, Centre Hospitalier Départemental Vendée, 
La-Roche-sur-Yon, France. (7)Service D'hématologie Clinique, Groupe Hospitalier
L'archet, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire De Nice, Nice, France. (8)Service
D'hématologie Clinique, Hôpital Fleyriat, Bourg-en-Bresse, France. (9)Service
D'hématologie Clinique, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire De Dijon, Dijon, France.
(10)Laboratoire D'hématologie, Hôpital Pasteur, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire De
Nice, Nice, France. (11)Service D'hématologie Stérile, Institut
Cancérologie-Hématologie, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Régional De Brest,
Brest, France.

We report five chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) patients in whom we identified and
characterized undescribed BCR-ABL1 fusion transcripts. We investigated the
precise features of the molecular rearrangements and the minimal residual disease
follow-up for these five patients. Three resulted from new rearrangements between
the BCR and ABL1 sequences (the breakpoints being located within BCR exon 13 in
two cases and within BCR exon 18 in one case). The other two cases revealed a
complex e8-[ins]-a2 fusion transcript involving a third partner gene, PRDM12 and 
SPECC1L, respectively. Moreover, single nucleotide polymorphism-array analysis
performed in the latter two cases showed copy number alterations shared by the
two patients, thus identifying genes that were deleted during rearrangement and
suggesting their potential role in CML pathogenesis. Interestingly, we highlight 
that the prognosis of alterations, such as the presence of an e8a2 transcript or 
the deletion of various genes, which have been controversial, may be definitively
erased by the introduction of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26252834  [PubMed - in process]


6. Nat Genet. 2015 Aug;47(8):962. doi: 10.1038/ng0815-962b.

Corrigendum: Transcriptional regulator PRDM12 is essential for human pain
perception.

Chen YC, Auer-Grumbach M, Matsukawa S, Zitzelsberger M, Themistocleous AC, Strom 
TM, Samara C, Moore AW, Cho LT, Young GT, Weiss C, Schabhüttl M, Stucka R, Schmid
AB, Parman Y, Graul-Neumann L, Heinritz W, Passarge E, Watson RM, Hertz JM, Moog 
U, Baumgartner M, Valente EM, Pereira D, Restrepo CM, Katona I, Dusl M, Stendel
C, Wieland T, Stafford F, Reimann F, von Au K, Finke C, Willems PJ, Nahorski MS, 
Shaikh SS, Carvalho OP, Nicholas AK, Karbani G, McAleer MA, Cilio MR, McHugh JC, 
Murphy SM, Irvine AD, Jensen UB, Windhager R, Weis J, Bergmann C, Rautenstrauss
B, Baets J, De Jonghe P, Reilly MM, Kropatsch R, Kurth I, Chrast R, Michiue T,
Bennett DL, Woods CG, Senderek J.

Erratum for
    Nat Genet. 2015 Jul;47(7):803-8.

PMID: 26220135  [PubMed]


7. Nat Genet. 2015 Jul;47(7):803-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.3308. Epub 2015 May 25.

Transcriptional regulator PRDM12 is essential for human pain perception.

Chen YC(1), Auer-Grumbach M(2), Matsukawa S(3), Zitzelsberger M(4),
Themistocleous AC(5), Strom TM(6), Samara C(7), Moore AW(8), Cho LT(9), Young
GT(9), Weiss C(4), Schabhüttl M(2), Stucka R(4), Schmid AB(10), Parman Y(11),
Graul-Neumann L(12), Heinritz W(13), Passarge E(14), Watson RM(15), Hertz JM(16),
Moog U(17), Baumgartner M(18), Valente EM(19), Pereira D(20), Restrepo CM(21),
Katona I(22), Dusl M(4), Stendel C(23), Wieland T(24), Stafford F(1), Reimann
F(25), von Au K(26), Finke C(27), Willems PJ(28), Nahorski MS(1), Shaikh SS(1),
Carvalho OP(1), Nicholas AK(29), Karbani G(30), McAleer MA(15), Cilio MR(31),
McHugh JC(32), Murphy SM(33), Irvine AD(34), Jensen UB(35), Windhager R(2), Weis 
J(22), Bergmann C(36), Rautenstrauss B(37), Baets J(38), De Jonghe P(38), Reilly 
MM(39), Kropatsch R(40), Kurth I(41), Chrast R(42), Michiue T(3), Bennett DL(43),
Woods CG(1), Senderek J(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. [2]
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Ludwig Maximilians
University Munich, Munich, Germany. (5)1] Nuffield Department of Clinical
Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. [2] Brain Function Research
Group, School of Physiology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa. (6)1] Institute of Human Genetics,
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany. [2] Institute of Human Genetics, 
Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany. (7)Department of Medical
Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (8)Disease Mechanism
Research Core, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama, Japan. (9)Neusentis
Research Unit, Pfizer, Cambridge, UK. (10)1] Nuffield Department of Clinical
Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. [2] School of Health and
Rehabilitation Sciences, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Australia.
(11)Department of Neurology, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(12)Ambulantes Gesundheitszentrum der Charité Campus Virchow (Humangenetik),
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (13)1] Praxis für Humangenetik
Cottbus, Cottbus, Germany. [2] Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (14)1] Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. [2] Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum
Essen, Essen, Germany. (15)Department of Dermatology, Our Lady's Children's
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. (16)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University
Hospital, Odense, Denmark. (17)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg
University, Heidelberg, Germany. (18)Neuropädiatrische Ambulanz, Krankenhaus der 
Barmherzigen Schwestern Linz, Linz, Austria. (19)Neurogenetics Unit, Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. (20)Departamento de
Cirugía Plástica, Hospital Infantil Universitario de San José, Bogotá, Colombia. 
(21)Unidad de Genética, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá, Colombia. (22)Institut
für Neuropathologie, Uniklinik RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany. (23)1]
Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Ludwig Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany. 
[2] German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Munich, Germany.
(24)Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany. 
(25)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 
(26)SPZ Neuropädiatrie Charité, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(27)CharitéCentrum für Zahn-, Mund- und Kieferheilkunde, Arbeitsbereich
Kinderzahnmedizin, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (28)GENDIA
(GENetic DIAgnostic Network), Antwerp, Belgium. (29)Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. (30)Yorkshire Regional 
Genetics Service, Chapel Allerton Hospital, Leeds, UK. (31)1] Department of
Neurology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California,
USA. [2] Department of Neuroscience, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital and
Research Institute, Rome, Italy. (32)Department of Neurology and Neurophysiology,
Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. (33)1] Department of Neurology, 
Adelaide &Meath Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. [2] Academic Unit of Neurology,
Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland. (34)1] Department of Dermatology, Our Lady's
Children's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. [2] Clinical Medicine, Trinity College,
Dublin, Ireland. (35)Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus, Denmark. (36)1] Center for Human Genetics, Bioscientia, Ingelheim,
Germany. [2] Department of Medicine, Renal Division, Freiburg University Medical 
Center, Freiburg, Germany. [3] Center for Clinical Research, Freiburg University 
Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany. (37)1] Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Ludwig
Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany. [2] Medizinisch Genetisches
Zentrum, Munich, Germany. (38)1] Neurogenetics Group, VIB Department of Molecular
Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. [2] Laboratory of
Neurogenetics, Institute Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. [3]
Department of Neurology, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium. (39)MRC
Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Institute of Neurology, National Hospital 
for Neurology, London, UK. (40)Department of Human Genetics, Ruhr-University
Bochum, Bochum, Germany. (41)Institute of Human Genetics, Jena University
Hospital, Jena, Germany. (42)1] Institute of Human Genetics, Technische
Universität München, Munich, Germany. [2] Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. [3] Department of Clinical Neuroscience,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (43)Nuffield Department of Clinical
Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2015 Aug;47(8):962.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2015 Oct;88(4):342-3.

Pain perception has evolved as a warning mechanism to alert organisms to tissue
damage and dangerous environments. In humans, however, undesirable, excessive or 
chronic pain is a common and major societal burden for which available medical
treatments are currently suboptimal. New therapeutic options have recently been
derived from studies of individuals with congenital insensitivity to pain (CIP). 
Here we identified 10 different homozygous mutations in PRDM12 (encoding PRDI-BF1
and RIZ homology domain-containing protein 12) in subjects with CIP from 11
families. Prdm proteins are a family of epigenetic regulators that control neural
specification and neurogenesis. We determined that Prdm12 is expressed in
nociceptors and their progenitors and participates in the development of sensory 
neurons in Xenopus embryos. Moreover, CIP-associated mutants abrogate the
histone-modifying potential associated with wild-type Prdm12. Prdm12 emerges as a
key factor in the orchestration of sensory neurogenesis and may hold promise as a
target for new pain therapeutics.

PMID: 26005867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(12):1799-808. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1036209.

The evolutionarily conserved transcription factor PRDM12 controls sensory neuron 
development and pain perception.

Nagy V(1), Cole T, Van Campenhout C, Khoung TM, Leung C, Vermeiren S, Novatchkova
M, Wenzel D, Cikes D, Polyansky AA, Kozieradzki I, Meixner A, Bellefroid EJ,
Neely GG, Penninger JM.

Author information: 
(1)IMBA-Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences,
Vienna, Austria; UNSW Medicine, Sydney, Australia.

Erratum in
    Cell Cycle. 2015;14(19):3203.

PR homology domain-containing member 12 (PRDM12) belongs to a family of conserved
transcription factors implicated in cell fate decisions. Here we show that PRDM12
is a key regulator of sensory neuronal specification in Xenopus. Modeling of
human PRDM12 mutations that cause hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy
(HSAN) revealed remarkable conservation of the mutated residues in evolution.
Expression of wild-type human PRDM12 in Xenopus induced the expression of sensory
neuronal markers, which was reduced using various human PRDM12 mutants. In
Drosophila, we identified Hamlet as the functional PRDM12 homolog that controls
nociceptive behavior in sensory neurons. Furthermore, expression analysis of
human patient fibroblasts with PRDM12 mutations uncovered possible downstream
target genes. Knockdown of several of these target genes including
thyrotropin-releasing hormone degrading enzyme (TRHDE) in Drosophila sensory
neurons resulted in altered cellular morphology and impaired nociception. These
data show that PRDM12 and its functional fly homolog Hamlet are evolutionary
conserved master regulators of sensory neuronal specification and play a critical
role in pain perception. Our data also uncover novel pathways in multiple species
that regulate evolutionary conserved nociception.

PMCID: PMC4613559 [Available on 2016-04-18]
PMID: 25891934  [PubMed - in process]


9. Dev Biol. 2015 Mar 1;399(1):164-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.12.028. Epub 2015
Jan 6.

The requirement of histone modification by PRDM12 and Kdm4a for the development
of pre-placodal ectoderm and neural crest in Xenopus.

Matsukawa S(1), Miwata K(2), Asashima M(2), Michiue T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sciences (Biology), Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan. (2)Research 
Center for Stem Cell Engineering National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba City, Ibaraki, Japan. (3)Department of
Sciences (Biology), Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, University of Tokyo,
3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan. Electronic address:
tmichiue@bio.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

In vertebrates, pre-placodal ectoderm and neural crest development requires
morphogen gradients and several transcriptional factors, while the involvement of
histone modification remains unclear. Here, we report that histone-modifying
factors play crucial roles in the development of pre-placodal ectoderm and neural
crest in Xenopus. During the early neurula stage, PRDM12 was expressed in the
lateral pre-placodal ectoderm and repressed the expression of neural crest
specifier genes via methylation of histone H3K9. ChIP-qPCR analyses indicated
that PRDM12 promoted the occupancy of the trimethylated histone H3K9 (H3K9me3) on
the Foxd3, Slug, and Sox8 promoters. Injection of the PRDM12 MO inhibited the
expression of presumptive trigeminal placode markers and decreased the occupancy 
of H3K9me3 on the Foxd3 promoter. Histone demethylase Kdm4a also inhibited the
expression of presumptive trigeminal placode markers in a similar manner to
PRDM12 MO and could compensate for the effects of PRDM12. ChIP-qPCR analyses
revealed that promotion of the occupancy of H3K9me3 on the Foxd3, Slug, and Sox8 
promoters was inhibited by Kdm4a overexpression. Taken together, these data
indicate that histone modification was essential for pre-placodal ectoderm and
neural crest development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25576027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cell Struct Funct. 2013;38(2):197-206. Epub 2013 Jul 12.

Prdm12 is induced by retinoic acid and exhibits anti-proliferative properties
through the cell cycle modulation of P19 embryonic carcinoma cells.

Yang CM(1), Shinkai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University.

The Prdm (PRDI-BF1-RIZ1 homologous) family is involved in cell differentiation,
and several Prdms have been reported to methylate histone H3 by intrinsic or
extrinsic pathways. Here, we report that Prdm12 recruits G9a to methylate histone
H3 on lysine 9 through its zinc finger domains. Because of the expression of
Prdm12 in the developmental nervous system, we investigated the role of Prdm12 on
P19 embryonic carcinoma cells as a model system for neurogenesis. In P19 cells,
Prdm12 is induced by Retinoic acid (RA). Overproduction of Prdm12 in P19 cells
impairs cell proliferation and increases the G1 population accompanied by the
upregulation of p27. In contrast, the knockdown of Prdm12 increases the number of
cells in a suspension culture of RA-induced neural differentiation. Both the PR
domain and zinc finger domains are required for the anti-proliferative activity
of Prdm12. While the data in this study is based on in vitro models, the results 
suggest that Prdm12 is induced by the RA signaling in vivo, and may regulate
neural differentiation during animal development.

PMID: 23856557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. PLoS One. 2008;3(12):e3859. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003859. Epub 2008 Dec 3.

Prdm proto-oncogene transcription factor family expression and interaction with
the Notch-Hes pathway in mouse neurogenesis.

Kinameri E(1), Inoue T, Aruga J, Imayoshi I, Kageyama R, Shimogori T, Moore AW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropathology Group, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako, Saitama, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Establishment and maintenance of a functional central nervous system 
(CNS) requires a highly orchestrated process of neural progenitor cell
proliferation, cell cycle exit, and differentiation. An evolutionary conserved
program consisting of Notch signalling mediated by basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) 
transcription factor activity is necessary for both the maintenance of neural
progenitor cell character and the progression of neurogenesis; however,
additional players in mammalian CNS neural specification remain largely unknown. 
In Drosophila we recently characterized Hamlet, a transcription factor that
mediates Notch signalling and neural cell fate.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Hamlet is a member of the Prdm (PRDI-BF1 and RIZ 
homology domain containing) proto-oncogene transcription factor family, and in
this study we report that multiple genes in the Prdm family (Prdm6, 8, 12, 13 and
16) are expressed in the developing mouse CNS in a spatially and temporally
restricted manner. In developing spinal cord Prdm8, 12 and 13 are expressed in
precise neuronal progenitor zones suggesting that they may specify discrete
neuronal subtypes. In developing telencephalon Prdm12 and 16 are expressed in the
ventricular zone in a lateral to medial graded manner, and Prdm8 is expressed in 
a complementary domain in postmitotic neurons. In postnatal brain Prdm8
additionally shows restricted expression in cortical layers 2/3 and 4, the
hippocampus, and the amygdala. To further elucidate roles of Prdm8 and 16 in the 
developing telencephalon we analyzed the relationship between these factors and
the bHLH Hes (Hairy and enhancer of split homolog) effectors of Notch signalling.
In Hes null telencephalon neural differentiation is enhanced, Prdm8 expression is
upregulated, and Prdm16 expression is downregulated; conversely in utero
electroporation of Hes1 into the developing telencephalon upregulates Prdm16
expression.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data demonstrate that Prdm genes are regulated by
the Notch-Hes pathway and represent strong candidates to control neural class
specification and the sequential progression of mammalian CNS neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2585159
PMID: 19050759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Leukemia. 2004 Jan;18(1):178-80.

A potential role for PRDM12 in the pathogenesis of chronic myeloid leukaemia with
derivative chromosome 9 deletion.

Reid AG, Nacheva EP.

PMID: 14523459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Leukemia. 2003 Jul;17(7):1313-23.

Quantitative PCR identifies a minimal deleted region of 120 kb extending from the
Philadelphia chromosome ABL translocation breakpoint in chronic myeloid leukemia 
with poor outcome.

Kolomietz E(1), Marrano P, Yee K, Thai B, Braude I, Kolomietz A, Chun K, Minkin
S, Kamel-Reid S, Minden M, Squire JA.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis has shown previously that
10-15% of chronic myeloid leukemias (CML) have hemizygous deletions of variable
sizes affecting regions that flank the ABL and BCR translocation breakpoints on
the derivative chromosome 9, and these patients have a poor outcome. FISH studies
using large commercial genomic probes have previously suggested that
haploinsufficiency of sequences flanking either ABL or BCR modify the disease
process of CML and lead to an unfavorable prognosis. In this present study,
real-time quantitative PCR (Q-PCR) analysis was used to identify and map much
smaller hemizygous microdeletions in a subset of CML patients that were not
deleted using large genomic FISH probes. Microdeletions were identified by Q-PCR 
in 25 of 71 patients selected based on less favorable outcome (chronic phase
duration of less than 96 months and a survival time of less than 84 months). In
contrast, no microdeletion was detected in any of 18 CML samples selected from a 
group with a more favorable outcome. Detailed mapping of the 25 Q-PCR
microdeletions showed that the minimal deleted region extended approximately 120 
kb from the 5' end of the ABL gene in the centromeric direction on the derivative
chromosome 9, and the region 3' to BCR on chromosome 22 was excluded. Of the four
ESTs and/or genes that map to the 120 kb region, the putative tumor suppressor
PRDM12 is the strongest candidate gene. The potential role for each sequence in
modifying the clinical behavior of CML is presented.

PMID: 12835719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


