
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Mar 23. pii: S0167-4889(16)30072-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2016.03.019. [Epub ahead of print]

PCGF2 negatively regulates arsenic trioxide-induced PML-RARA protein degradation 
via UBE2I inhibition in NB4 cells.

Jo S(1), Young LL(1), Kim S(2), Lee H(3), Chung H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hanyang Biomedical Research Institute, Hanyang University, 222 Wangsimni-ro,
Seongdong-gu, Seoul 04763, Republic of Korea; Department of Biomedical Science,
Graduate School of Biomedical Science and Bioengineering, 222 Wangsimni-ro,
Seongdong-gu, Seoul 04763, Republic of Korea. (2)Hanyang Biomedical Research
Institute, Hanyang University, 222 Wangsimni-ro, Seongdong-gu, Seoul 04763,
Republic of Korea; Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, College of Health
Science, Yonsei University, 1 Yongseidae-gil, Wonju, Gangwon-do 26493, Republic
of Korea. (3)Hanyang Biomedical Research Institute, Hanyang University, 222
Wangsimni-ro, Seongdong-gu, Seoul 04763, Republic of Korea; Department of
Biomedical Science, Graduate School, Hanyang University, 222 Wangsimni-ro,
Seongdong-gu, Seoul 04763, Republic of Korea. (4)Hanyang Biomedical Research
Institute, Hanyang University, 222 Wangsimni-ro, Seongdong-gu, Seoul 04763,
Republic of Korea; Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Hanyang
University, 222 Wangsimni-ro, Seongdong-gu, Seoul 04763, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: hc2n@hanyang.ac.kr.

Arsenic trioxide (ATO) is a therapeutic agent for acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL) which induces PML-RARA protein degradation via enhanced UBE2I-mediated
sumoylation. PCGF2, a Polycomb group protein, has been suggested as an anti-SUMO 
E3 protein by inhibiting the sumoylation of UBE2I substrates, HSF2 and RANGAP1,
via direct interaction. Thus, we hypothesized that PCGF2 might play a role in
ATO-induced PML-RARA degradation by interacting with UBE2I. PCGF2 protein was
down-regulated upon ATO treatment in human APL cell line, NB4. Knockdown of PCGF2
in NB4 cells, in the absence of ATO treatment, was sufficient to induce
sumoylation-, ubiquitylation- and PML nuclear body-mediated degradation of
PML-RARA protein. Moreover, overexpression of PCGF2 protected ATO-mediated
degradation of ectopic and endogenous PML-RARA in 293T and NB4 cells,
respectively. In 293T cells, UBE2I-mediated PML-RARA degradation was reduced upon
PCGF2 co-expression. In addition, UBE2I-mediated sumoylation of PML-RARA was
reduced upon PCGF2 co-expression and PCGF2-UBE2I interaction was confirmed by
co-immunoprecipitation. Likewise, endogenous PCGF2-UBE2I interaction was detected
by co-immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence assays in NB4 cells.
Intriguingly, upon ATO-treatment, such interaction was disrupted and UBE2I was
co-immunoprecipitated or co-localized with its SUMO substrate, PML-RARA. Taken
together, our results suggested a novel role of PCGF2 in ATO-mediated degradation
of PML-RARA that PCGF2 might act as a negative regulator of UBE2I via direct
interaction.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 27030546  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2016 Mar 29. pii: dkw088. [Epub ahead of print]

Comparative effects of overproducing the AraC-type transcriptional regulators
MarA, SoxS, RarA and RamA on antimicrobial drug susceptibility in Klebsiella
pneumoniae.

Jiménez-Castellanos JC(1), Wan Ahmad Kamil WN(2), Cheung CH(1), Tobin MS(1),
Brown J(1), Isaac SG(1), Heesom KJ(3), Schneiders T(4), Avison MB(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(2)School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK 
Faculty of Biotechnology & Biomolecular Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia,
Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia. (3)Bristol University Proteomics Facility,
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. (4)Division of Infection and Pathway
Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. (5)School of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
matthewb.avison@bristol.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVES: In Klebsiella pneumoniae, overproduction of RamA and RarA leads to
increased MICs of various antibiotics; MarA and SoxS are predicted to perform a
similar function. We have compared the relative effects of overproducing these
four AraC-type regulators on envelope permeability (a combination of outer
membrane permeability and efflux), efflux pump and porin production, and
antibiotic susceptibility in K. pneumoniae.
METHODS: Regulators were overproduced using a pBAD expression vector. Antibiotic 
susceptibility was measured using disc testing. Envelope permeability was
estimated using a fluorescent dye accumulation assay. Porin and efflux pump
production was quantified using proteomics and validated using real-time
quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Envelope permeability and antibiotic disc inhibition zone diameters both
reduced during overproduction of RamA and to a lesser extent RarA or SoxS, but
did not change following overproduction of MarA. These effects were associated
with overproduction of the efflux pumps AcrAB (for RamA and SoxS) and OqxAB (for 
RamA and RarA) and the outer membrane protein TolC (for all regulators). Effects 
on porin production were strain specific.
CONCLUSIONS: RamA is the most potent regulator of antibiotic permeability in K.
pneumoniae, followed by RarA then SoxS, with MarA having very little effect. This
observed relative potency correlates well with the frequency at which these
regulators are reportedly overproduced in clinical isolates.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 27029850  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Br J Haematol. 2016 Mar 28. doi: 10.1111/bjh.14056. [Epub ahead of print]

The genetic landscape of paediatric de novo acute myeloid leukaemia as defined by
single nucleotide polymorphism array and exon sequencing of 100 candidate genes.

Olsson L(1,)(2), Zettermark S(1), Biloglav A(1), Castor A(3), Behrendtz M(4),
Forestier E(5), Paulsson K(1), Johansson B(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. (2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Office for Medical 
Services, Division of Laboratory Medicine, Lund, Sweden. (3)Department of
Paediatrics, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. (4)Department of
Paediatrics, Linköping University Hospital, Linköping, Sweden. (5)Department of
Medical Bioscience, University of Umeå, Umeå, Sweden.

Cytogenetic analyses of a consecutive series of 67 paediatric (median age
8 years; range 0-17) de novo acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) patients revealed
aberrations in 55 (82%) cases. The most common subgroups were KMT2A rearrangement
(29%), normal karyotype (15%), RUNX1-RUNX1T1 (10%), deletions of 5q, 7q and/or
17p (9%), myeloid leukaemia associated with Down syndrome (7%), PML-RARA (7%) and
CBFB-MYH11 (5%). Single nucleotide polymorphism array (SNP-A) analysis and exon
sequencing of 100 genes, performed in 52 and 40 cases, respectively (39
overlapping), revealed =1 aberration in 89%; when adding cytogenetic data, this
frequency increased to 98%. Uniparental isodisomies (UPIDs) were detected in 13% 
and copy number aberrations (CNAs) in 63% (median 2/case); three UPIDs and 22
CNAs were recurrent. Twenty-two genes were targeted by focal CNAs, including
AEBP2 and PHF6 deletions and genes involved in AML-associated gene fusions. Deep 
sequencing identified mutations in 65% of cases (median 1/case). In total, 60
mutations were found in 30 genes, primarily those encoding signalling proteins
(47%), transcription factors (25%), or epigenetic modifiers (13%). Twelve genes
(BCOR, CEBPA, FLT3, GATA1, KIT, KRAS, NOTCH1, NPM1, NRAS, PTPN11, SMC3 and TP53) 
were recurrently mutated. We conclude that SNP-A and deep sequencing analyses
complement the cytogenetic diagnosis of paediatric AML.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 27022003  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Cell Rep. 2016 Mar 29;14(12):2938-49. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.02.074. Epub
2016 Mar 17.

NPM and BRG1 Mediate Transcriptional Resistance to Retinoic Acid in Acute
Promyelocytic Leukemia.

Nichol JN(1), Galbraith MD(2), Kleinman CL(3), Espinosa JM(4), Miller WH Jr(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Oncology, Segal Cancer Centre
and Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montréal,
QC H3T 1E2, Canada. (2)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University
of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA; Department of
Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309, USA. (3)Department 
of Human Genetics, Segal Cancer Centre and Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General
Hospital, McGill University, Montréal, QC H3T 1E2, Canada. (4)Department of
Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA; Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental
Biology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Colorado Boulder,
Boulder, CO 80309, USA; Linda Crnic Institute for Down Syndrome, School of
Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. 
(5)Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Oncology, Segal Cancer Centre
and Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montréal,
QC H3T 1E2, Canada. Electronic address: wmiller@ldi.jgh.mcgill.ca.

Perturbation in the transcriptional control of genes driving differentiation is
an established paradigm whereby oncogenic fusion proteins promote leukemia. From 
a retinoic acid (RA)-sensitive acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cell line, we
derived an RA-resistant clone characterized by a block in transcription
initiation, despite maintaining wild-type PML/RARA expression. We uncovered an
aberrant interaction among PML/RARA, nucleophosmin (NPM), and topoisomerase II
beta (TOP2B). Surprisingly, RA stimulation in these cells results in enhanced
chromatin association of the nucleosome remodeler BRG1. Inhibition of NPM or
TOP2B abrogated BRG1 recruitment. Furthermore, NPM inhibition and targeting BRG1 
restored differentiation when combined with RA. Here, we demonstrate a role for
NPM and BRG1 in obstructing RA differentiation and implicate chromatin remodeling
in mediating therapeutic resistance in malignancies. NPM mutations are the most
common genetic change in patients with acute leukemia (AML); therefore, our model
may be applicable to other more common leukemias driven by NPM.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4814328 [Available on 2017-03-29]
PMID: 26997274  [PubMed - in process]


5. Genome Biol Evol. 2016 Mar 2;8(3):540-55. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evw017.

Evolution of Chromosomal Clostridium botulinum Type E Neurotoxin Gene Clusters:
Evidence Provided by Their Rare Plasmid-Borne Counterparts.

Carter AT(1), Austin JW(2), Weedmark KA(3), Peck MW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Gut Health and Food Safety, Institute of Food Research, Norwich Research Park,
Norwich, United Kingdom andrew.carter@ifr.ac.uk. (2)Bureau of Microbial Hazards, 
Health Products and Food Branch, Health Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada. (3)National
Microbiology Laboratory, Public Health Agency of Canada, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(4)Gut Health and Food Safety, Institute of Food Research, Norwich Research Park,
Norwich, United Kingdom.

Analysis of more than 150 Clostridium botulinum Group II type E genomes
identified a small fraction (6%) where neurotoxin-encoding genes were located on 
plasmids. Seven closely related (134-144 kb) neurotoxigenic plasmids of subtypes 
E1, E3, and E10 were characterized; all carried genes associated with plasmid
mobility via conjugation. Each plasmid contained the same 24-kb neurotoxin
cluster cassette (six neurotoxin cluster and six flanking genes) that had split a
helicase gene, rather than the more common chromosomal rarA. The neurotoxin
cluster cassettes had evolved as separate genetic units which had either exited
their chromosomal rarA locus in a series of parallel events, inserting into the
plasmid-borne helicase gene, or vice versa. A single intact version of the
helicase gene was discovered on a nonneurotoxigenic form of this plasmid. The
observed low frequency for the plasmid location may reflect one or more of the
following: 1) Less efficient recombination mechanism for the helicase gene
target, 2) lack of suitable target plasmids, and 3) loss of neurotoxigenic
plasmids. Type E1 and E10 plasmids possessed a Clustered Regularly Interspaced
Short Palindromic Repeats locus with spacers that recognized C. botulinum Group
II plasmids, but not C. botulinum Group I plasmids, demonstrating their long-term
separation. Clostridium botulinum Group II type E strains also carry
nonneurotoxigenic plasmids closely related to C. botulinum Group II types B and F
plasmids. Here, the absence of neurotoxin cassettes may be because recombination 
requires both a specific mechanism and specific target sequence, which are rarely
found together.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

PMID: 26936890  [PubMed - in process]


6. Ann Hematol. 2016 Apr;95(5):673-80. doi: 10.1007/s00277-016-2622-1. Epub 2016 Feb
26.

Prognostic factors in acute promyelocytic leukemia: strategies to define
high-risk patients.

Testa U(1), Lo-Coco F(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanità, Rome, Italy. ugo.testa@iss.it. (2)Department of Biomedicine and
Prevention, University Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. (3)Laboratory of
Neuro-Oncohematology, Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy.

All trans retinoic acid (ATRA) has revolutionized the therapy of acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Treatment of this leukemia with ATRA in combination
with chemotherapy has resulted in complete remission rates >90 % and long-term
remission rates above 80 %. Furthermore, the combination of ATRA and arsenic
trioxide (ATO) was shown to be safe and effective in frontline treatment and, for
patients with low and intermediate risk disease, possibly superior to the
standard ATRA and anthracycline-based regimen. However, in spite of this
tremendous progress, APL still remains associated with a high incidence of early 
death due to the frequent occurrence of an abrupt bleeding diathesis. This
hemorrhagic syndrome more frequently develops in high-risk APL patients,
currently defined as those exhibiting >10<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(9)/L WBC at presentation. In
addition to high WBC count, other molecular and immunophenotypic features have
been associated with high-risk APL. Among them, the expression in APL blasts of
the stem/progenitor cell antigen CD34, the neural adhesion molecule (CD56), and
the T cell antigen CD2 help to identify a subset of patients at higher risk of
relapse and often the expression of these markers is associated with high WBC
count. At the molecular level, the short PML/RARA isoform and FLT3-internal
tandem duplication (ITD) mutations have been associated with increased relapse
risk. These observations indicate that extended immunophenotypic and molecular
characterization of APL at diagnosis including evaluation of CD2, CD56, and CD34 
antigens and of FLT3 mutations may help to better design risk-adapted treatment
in this disease.

PMID: 26920716  [PubMed - in process]


7. Food Chem. 2016 Jul 1;202:404-8. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2016.02.004. Epub 2016
Feb 2.

Influence of heat treatment on the structure and core IgE-binding epitopes of
rAra h 2.02.

Cai Q(1), Zhang WJ(2), Zhu QQ(2), Chen Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Bio-Energy Crops, School of Life Sciences, Shanghai
University, Shanghai, PR China; Shanghai Genechem Co., Ltd., Shanghai, PR China. 
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Bio-Energy Crops, School of Life Sciences, Shanghai
University, Shanghai, PR China. (3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Bio-Energy Crops,
School of Life Sciences, Shanghai University, Shanghai, PR China. Electronic
address: chenqincc@staff.shu.edu.cn.

The rAra h 2.02 was studied to determine the influence of heat treatment on its
structure and core IgE-binding epitopes. The results of SDS-PAGE, Western
blotting, MALDI-TOF-MS, and atomic force microscopy showed that the structure of 
rAra h 2.02 was altered after boiling (100°C) or autoclaving (121°C) for 20min.
Furthermore, some of the protein may be aggregated. Results of circular dichroism
spectroscopy showed that the a-helices content was reduced, while ß-turns and
random coils were increased by 81% and 27%, respectively, after autoclaving.
Antibodies of three core IgE-binding epitopes were used to determine the binding 
capacity of rAra h 2.02 after thermal processing by indirect ELISA. The results
showed that the binding capacities of the three core IgE-binding epitopes were
changed after different heat treatments.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26920311  [PubMed - in process]


8. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 17;11(2):e0148346. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148346.
eCollection 2016.

The Mutational Landscape of Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia Reveals an Interacting
Network of Co-Occurrences and Recurrent Mutations.

Ibáñez M(1), Carbonell-Caballero J(2), García-Alonso L(2), Such E(1),
Jiménez-Almazán J(2), Vidal E(2), Barragán E(3), López-Pavía M(1), LLop M(3),
Martín I(1), Gómez-Seguí I(1), Montesinos P(1), Sanz MA(1), Dopazo J(2,)(4,)(5), 
Cervera J(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Service, Hospital Universitario y Politécnico La Fe, Valencia,
Spain. (2)Computational Genomics Department, Centro de Investigación Príncipe
Felipe, Valencia, Spain. (3)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Department of
Clinical Chemistry, Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain. (4)Functional 
Genomics Node, Spanish National Institute of Bioinformatics at CIPF, 46012,
Valencia, Spain. (5)Bioinformatics of Rare Diseases (BIER), CIBER de Enfermedades
Raras (CIBERER), Valencia, Spain. (6)Genetics Unit, Hospital Universitario y
Politécnico La Fe, Valencia, Spain.

Preliminary Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia (APL) whole exome sequencing (WES)
studies have identified a huge number of somatic mutations affecting more than a 
hundred different genes mainly in a non-recurrent manner, suggesting that APL is 
a heterogeneous disease with secondary relevant changes not yet defined. To
extend our knowledge of subtle genetic alterations involved in APL that might
cooperate with PML/RARA in the leukemogenic process, we performed a comprehensive
analysis of somatic mutations in APL combining WES with sequencing of a custom
panel of targeted genes by next-generation sequencing. To select a reduced subset
of high confidence candidate driver genes, further in silico analysis were
carried out. After prioritization and network analysis we found recurrent
deleterious mutations in 8 individual genes (STAG2, U2AF1, SMC1A, USP9X, IKZF1,
LYN, MYCBP2 and PTPN11) with a strong potential of being involved in APL
pathogenesis. Our network analysis of multiple mutations provides a reliable
approach to prioritize genes for additional analysis, improving our knowledge of 
the leukemogenesis interactome. Additionally, we have defined a functional module
in the interactome of APL. The hypothesis is that the number, or the specific
combinations, of mutations harbored in each patient might not be as important as 
the disturbance caused in biological key functions, triggered by several not
necessarily recurrent mutations.

PMCID: PMC4757557
PMID: 26886259  [PubMed - in process]


9. Planta. 2016 Feb 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Characterization of wheat-Secale africanum chromosome 5R(a) derivatives carrying 
Secale specific genes for grain hardness.

Li G(1), Gao D(1), La S(1), Wang H(1), Li J(1), He W(1), Yang E(2), Yang Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China, Chengdu, 610054, China. (2)Crop Research Institute, Sichuan 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Chengdu, 610066, Sichuan, China. (3)School of
Life Science and Technology, University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China, Chengdu, 610054, China. yangzujun@uestc.edu.cn.

MAIN CONCLUSION: New wheat- Secale africanum chromosome 5R (a) substitution and
translocation lines were developed and identified by fluorescence in situ
hybridization and molecular markers, and chromosome 5R (a) specific genes
responsible for grain hardness were isolated. The wild species, Secale africanum 
Stapf. (genome R(a)R(a)), serves as a valuable germplasm resource for increasing 
the diversity of cultivated rye (S. cereale L., genome RR) and providing novel
genes for wheat improvement. In the current study, fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) and molecular markers were applied to characterize new
wheat-S. africanum chromosome 5R(a) derivatives. Labeled rye genomic DNA (GISH)
and the Oligo-probes pSc119.2 and pTa535 (FISH) were used to study a wheat-S.
africanum amphiploid and a disomic 5R(a) (5D) substitution, and to identify a
T5DL.5R(a)S translocation line and 5R(a)S and 5R(a)L isotelosome lines.
Twenty-one molecular markers were mapped to chromosome 5R(a) arms which will
facilitate future rapid identification of 5R(a) introgressions in wheat
backgrounds. Comparative analysis of the molecular markers mapped on 5R(a) with
homoeologous regions in wheat confirmed a deletion on the chromosome T5DL.5R(a)S,
which suggests that the wheat-S. africanum Robertsonian translocation involving
homologous group 5 may not be fully compensating. Complete coding sequences at
the paralogous puroindoline-a (Pina) and grain softness protein gene (Gsp-1) loci
from S. africanum were cloned and localized onto the short arm of chromosome
5R(a). The S. africanum chromosome 5R(a) substitution and translocation lines
showed a reduction in the hardness index, which may be associated with the S.
africanum- specific Pina and Gsp-1 gene sequences. The present study reports the 
production of novel wheat-S. africanum chromosome 5R(a) stripe rust resistant
derivatives and new rye-specific molecular markers, which may find application in
future use of wild Secale genome resources for grain quality studies and disease 
resistance breeding.

PMID: 26883668  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Hematology. 2016 Feb 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Fusion genes in malignant neoplastic disorders of haematopoietic system.

Saleem M, Yusoff NM.

Objectives The new World Health Organization's (WHO) classification of
haematopoietic and lymphoid tissue neoplasms incorporating the recurrent fusion
genes as the defining criteria for different haematopoietic malignant phenotypes 
is reviewed. The recurrent fusion genes incorporated in the new WHO's
classification and other chromosomal rearrangements of haematopoietic and
lymphoid tissue neoplasms are reviewed. Methodology Cytokines and transcription
factors in haematopoiesis and leukaemic mechanisms are described. Genetic
features and clinical implications due to the encoded chimeric neoproteins
causing malignant haematopoietic disorders are reviewed. Results and discussion
Multiple translocation partner genes are well known for leukaemia such as MYC,
MLL, RARA, ALK, and RUNX1. With the advent of more sophisticated diagnostic tools
and bioinformatics algorithms, an exponential growth in fusion genes discoveries 
is likely to increase. Conclusion Demonstration of fusion genes and their
specific translocation breakpoints in malignant haematological disorders are
crucial for understanding the molecular pathogenesis and clinical phenotype of
cancer, determining prognostic indexes and therapeutic responses, and monitoring 
residual disease and relapse status.

PMID: 26871368  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Int J Hematol Oncol Stem Cell Res. 2015 Oct 1;9(4):215-7.

Treatment related acute promyelocytic leukemia (t-APML) in breast cancer survivor
treated with anthracycline based chemotherapy: rare case report.

Madabhavi I(1), Modi G(1), Panchal H(1), Patel A(1), Anand A(1), Parikh S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Pediatric Oncology, GCRI, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India.

Treatment related acute myeloid leukemia (t-AML) is well documented phenomenon
after chemotherapy. In this subgroup of patients acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APML) due to delayed complication of using anthracycline is very rare
occurrence. Very few cases are reported in world literature. We are reporting a
rare case of occurrence of t-APML in cured breast cancer patient treated with
doxorubicin. 43 year old female presented with triple negative early breast
cancer treated initially with Right modified radical mastectomy. Pathological
staging was pT2N0M0. She was treated with 6 cycle of adjuvant AC (Doxorubicin,
Cyclophosphamide). After latent period of 23 months she developed symptoms of
fever, weakness and generalized body ache. On further investigation she was found
to have acute promyelocytic leukemia (APML). We had successfully treated t-APML
with conventional 7+3 induction and subsequent consolidation with ATRA (All Trans
Retinoic Acid) and arsenic trioxide. Patient was given maintenance treatment for 
18 months after confirming negative PML RARA by RT PCR and declared cured.
Patient is under regular surveillance in our centre.

PMCID: PMC4748692
PMID: 26865933  [PubMed]


12. Zh Evol Biokhim Fiziol. 2015 Sep-Oct;51(5):377-82.

[REACTION OF STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS OF HEMATOENCEPHALIC BARRIER IN NEWBORN RATS TO
NORMOBARIC HYPOXIA].

[Article in Russian]

Otellin VA, Khozhai LI, Shishko TT.

For the last time a particular interest of investigators has been attracted to
the period of early newborn state when active process of adaptation of the
organism to new life conditions occur defining its increased sensitivity to the
effect of unfavorable environmental factors. An important place among these
processes belongs to formation of homeostasis mechanisms and, primarily, the
barrier mechanisms. The purpose of the present study was to investigate reactions
of the hematoencephalic barrier (HEB) to action of perinatal normobaric hypoxia
(a model of incomplete human pregnancy). Using light and electron microscopy, our
investigation showed that after action of hypoxia all wall elements of neocortex 
capillaries revealed structural alterations which may cause impairment of
microcirculation and increased permeability of HEB. It is established that
differentiation of the basal membrane of a capillary wall takes place during the 
early perinatal period and the indicator of its differentiation is the formation 
of its plates - laminae rara et densa. After action of hypoxia, besides a delay
of formation of the basal membrane, a vesicular type of its degeneration occurs. 
Key words: perinatal hypoxia, hematoencephalic barrier, capillary, endothelial
cells, basal membrane.

PMID: 26856078  [PubMed - in process]


13. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Nov 1;8(11):15294-300. eCollection 2015.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia with cryptic t(15;17) on isochromosome 17: a case
report and review of literature.

Tang Y(1), Wang Y(1), Hu L(2), Meng F(1), Xu D(1), Wan K(1), Huang L(1), Li C(1),
Zhou J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology 1095 Jie-Fang Avenue, Wuhan 430030, Hubei,
P. R. China. (2)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology 1095 Jie-Fang Avenue,
Wuhan 430030, Hubei, P. R. China.

Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia (APL) is one of the most curable leukemia which
shows great sensitivity to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) although a small number
of the patients present poor prognosis and short survival. Isochromosome 17 in
APL which usually bears an additional copy of RARA/PML fusion gene is considered 
to be a negative factor on its prognosis. Cryptic t(15;17) on i(17q) leads to an 
extra copy of PML/RARA rather than RARA/PML which may confer a worse prognosis.
We describe here a rare APL case with complex chromosomal abnormality including
isochromosome 17 bearing cryptic t(15;17) showing poor outcome. The patient lacks
a classic t(15;17) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) presents 2
PML/RARA fusion signals on both long arms of the isochromosome. The patient also 
acquired a secondary mutation at relapse when the initial karyotype was already a
complex karyotype involving chromosome 13, 17 and 22 at the same time. The poor
response of this patient to traditional chemotherapy like ATRA and novel therapy 
like arsenic trioxide (ATO) suggests that early auto-hematological stem cell
transplantation may be the choice of APL with isochromosome 17 especially with
cryptic t(15;17) on i(17q). We are the first to show a clear history and evidence
of FISH of these kind of cases. A small summary of cases with cryptic t(15;17) on
isochromosome 17 is also made.

PMCID: PMC4713669
PMID: 26823883  [PubMed - in process]


14. Leuk Lymphoma. 2016 Jan 12:1-5. [Epub ahead of print]

The leukemic oncoprotein NPM1-RARA inhibits TP53 activity.

Swaney EM(1), Chattopadhyay A(1), Abecassis I(1), Rush EA(1), Redner RL(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medicine , University of Pittsburgh, and University of
Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh , PA , USA.

The variant acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) translocation t(5;17)(q35;q21)
fuses the N-terminus of nucleophosmin (NPM1) to the retinoic acid receptor alpha 
(RARA). We found that ectopic NPM1-RARA expression decreased TP53 protein levels 
in target cells. NPM1-RARA impaired TP53-dependent transcription. Cells
expressing NPM1-RARA were more resistant to apoptotic stimuli. This work
identifies the TP53 tumor suppressor as a novel target through which NPM1-RARA
impacts leukemogenesis, and confirms the importance of impairment of TP53 in
establishment of the APL phenotype.

PMID: 26754533  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. IMA Fungus. 2015 Dec;6(2):483-91. doi: 10.5598/imafungus.2015.06.02.12. Epub 2015
Nov 25.

Baobabopsis, a new genus of graminicolous downy mildews from tropical Australia, 
with an updated key to the genera of downy mildews.

Thines M(1), Telle S(2), Choi YJ(3), Tan YP(4), Shivas RG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Fungal Research (IPF), Georg-Voigt-Str. 14-16, D-60325 Frankfurt
am Main, Germany;; Biodiversity and Climate Research Centre (BiK-F),
Georg-Voigt-Str. 14-16, D-60325 Frankfurt am Main, Germany; Senckenberg
Gesellschaft für Naturkunde, Senckenberganlage 25, D-60325 Frankfurt am Main,
Germany; Goethe University, Faculty of Biosciences, Institute of Ecology,
Evolution and Diversity, May-von-Laue-Str. 9, D-60483 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Integrative Fungal Research (IPF), Georg-Voigt-Str. 14-16, D-60325 Frankfurt
am Main, Germany;; Biodiversity and Climate Research Centre (BiK-F),
Georg-Voigt-Str. 14-16, D-60325 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (3)Integrative Fungal
Research (IPF), Georg-Voigt-Str. 14-16, D-60325 Frankfurt am Main, Germany;;
Biodiversity and Climate Research Centre (BiK-F), Georg-Voigt-Str. 14-16, D-60325
Frankfurt am Main, Germany; Senckenberg Gesellschaft für Naturkunde,
Senckenberganlage 25, D-60325 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (4)Plant Pathology
Herbarium, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Ecosciences Precinct, GPO Box
267, Brisbane, Qld 4001, Australia.

So far 19 genera of downy mildews have been described, of which seven are
parasitic to grasses. Here, we introduce a new genus, Baobabopsis, to accommodate
two distinctive downy mildews, B. donbarrettii sp. nov., collected on Perotis
rara in northern Australia, and B. enneapogonis sp. nov., collected on Enneapogon
spp. in western and central Australia. Baobabopsis donbarrettii produced both
oospores and sporangiospores that are morphologically distinct from other downy
mildews on grasses. Molecular phylogenetic analyses showed that the two species
of Baobabopsis occupied an isolated position among the known genera of
graminicolous downy mildews. The importance of the Poaceae for the evolution of
downy mildews is highlighted by the observation that more than a third of the
known genera of downy mildews occur on grasses, while more than 90 % of the known
species of downy mildews infect eudicots.

PMCID: PMC4681264
PMID: 26734551  [PubMed]


16. Br J Haematol. 2016 Mar;172(6):909-13. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13910. Epub 2016 Jan 5.

Mutations affecting both the rearranged and the unrearranged PML alleles in
refractory acute promyelocytic leukaemia.

Iaccarino L(1,)(2), Ottone T(1,)(2), Divona M(1), Cicconi L(1), Cairoli R(3),
Voso MT(1), Lo-Coco F(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Università di Roma "Tor Vergata",
Rome, Italy. (2)Laboratory of Neuro-Oncohematology, Fondazione Santa Lucia
I.R.C.C.S, Rome, Italy. (3)Division of Haematology, Niguarda Hospital, Milan,
Italy.

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) is characterized by the PML/RARA fusion
transcript. PML and RARA mutations have been shown to directly respond to arsenic
trioxide (ATO) and all-trans retinoic (ATRA). We analysed the prevalence of PML
mutations in 32 patients with de novo or therapy-related APL (t-APL; n = 5),
treated with ATO. We identified one ATO-resistant t-APL patient, who presented a 
PML A216T mutation in both the rearranged and unrearranged PML alleles, and two
mutations in the rearranged RARA gene. In this patient, subclones with different 
PML and RARA mutations acquired clonal dominance during the disease course,
probably leading to treatment resistance.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26728337  [PubMed - in process]


17. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015 Dec 21;10(1):161. doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0353-3.

Rare diseases and orphan drugs: 500 years ago.

Dooms MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universitaire Ziekenhuizen Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. dooms@evonet.be.

In 1581 Rembert Dodoens wrote "Medicinalium observationum exempla rara, recognita
et aucta" a Latin book about the diagnosis and treatment of disorders with a low 
prevalence.

PMCID: PMC4687102
PMID: 26691530  [PubMed - in process]


18. Br J Haematol. 2016 Mar;172(6):841-54. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13890. Epub 2015 Dec 21.

Current standard treatment of adult acute promyelocytic leukaemia.

Lo-Coco F(1,)(2), Cicconi L(1,)(2), Breccia M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Neuro-Oncohaematology, Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Haematology, Sapienza University,
Rome, Italy.

The outcome of patients with acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) has dramatically
improved over the last two decades, due to the introduction of combined all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA) and chemotherapy regimens and, more recently, to the advent 
of arsenic trioxide (ATO). ATRA and anthracycline-based chemotherapy remains a
widely used strategy, providing cure rates above 80%, but it is associated with
risk of severe infections and occurrence of secondary leukaemias. ATO is the most
effective single agent in APL and, used alone or in combination with ATRA or ATRA
and reduced-intensity chemotherapy, results in greater efficacy with considerably
less haematological toxicity. The toxic profile of ATO includes frequent, but
manageable, QTc prolongation and increase of liver enzymes. Two large randomized 
studies have shown that ATRA + ATO is superior to ATRA + chemotherapy for newly
diagnosed low-risk APL resulting in 2-4 year event-free survival rates above 90% 
and very few relapses. According to real world data, the spectacular progress in 
APL outcomes reported in clinical trials has not been paralleled by a significant
improvement in early death rates, this remains the most challenging issue for the
final cure of the disease.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26687281  [PubMed - in process]


19. Lancet Haematol. 2015 Sep;2(9):e357-66. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(15)00115-5. Epub 
2015 Aug 20.

Use of arsenic trioxide in remission induction and consolidation therapy for
acute promyelocytic leukaemia in the Australasian Leukaemia and Lymphoma Group
(ALLG) APML4 study: a non-randomised phase 2 trial.

Iland HJ(1), Collins M(2), Bradstock K(3), Supple SG(4), Catalano A(4), Hertzberg
M(3), Browett P(5), Grigg A(6), Firkin F(7), Campbell LJ(8), Hugman A(4),
Reynolds J(2), Di Iulio J(2), Tiley C(9), Taylor K(10), Filshie R(7), Seldon
M(11), Taper J(12), Szer J(6), Moore J(13), Bashford J(14), Seymour JF(15);
Australasian Leukaemia and Lymphoma Group.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, NSW, Australia;
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. Electronic address:
harryiland@gmail.com. (2)Centre for Biostatistics and Clinical Trials, Peter
MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. (3)University
of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia; Haematology, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, NSW,
Australia. (4)Haematology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, NSW,
Australia. (5)University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. (6)Haematology,
Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, VIC, Australia; University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia. (7)University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia;
Haematology, St Vincent's Hospital, Fitzroy, VIC, Australia. (8)University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; Victorian Cancer Cytogenetics Service, St
Vincent's Hospital, Fitzroy, VIC, Australia. (9)Haematology, Gosford Hospital,
Gosford, NSW, Australia; University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia.
(10)Haematology, Mater Medical Centre, South Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(11)University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia; Haematology, Calvary
Mater Hospital, Newcastle, Australia. (12)Haematology, Nepean Hospital,
Kingswood, NSW, Australia. (13)Haematology, St Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst, 
NSW, Australia; University of New South Wales, Kensington, NSW, Australia.
(14)Haematology, Wesley Medical Centre, Auchenflower, QLD, Australia.
(15)Haematology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia; University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Initial treatment of acute promyelocytic leukaemia traditionally
involves tretinoin (all-trans retinoic acid) combined with anthracycline-based
risk-adapted chemotherapy, with arsenic trioxide being the treatment of choice at
relapse. To try to reduce the relapse rate, we combined arsenic trioxide with
tretinoin and idarubicin in induction therapy, and used arsenic trioxide with
tretinoin as consolidation therapy.
METHODS: Patients with previously untreated genetically confirmed acute
promyelocytic leukaemia were eligible for this study. Eligibilty also required
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status 0-3, age older than 1 year,
normal left ventricular ejection fraction, Q-Tc interval less than 500 ms,
absence of serious comorbidity, and written informed consent. Patients with
genetic variants of acute promyelocytic leukaemia (fusion of genes other than PML
with RARA) were ineligible. Induction comprised 45 mg/m(2) oral tretinoin in four
divided doses daily on days 1-36, 6-12 mg/m(2) intravenous idarubicin on days 2, 
4, 6, and 8, adjusted for age, and 0·15 mg/kg intravenous arsenic trioxide once
daily on days 9-36. Supportive therapy included blood products for
protocol-specified haemostatic targets, and 1 mg/kg prednisone daily as
prophylaxis against differentiation syndrome. Two consolidation cycles with
tretinoin and arsenic trioxide were followed by maintenance therapy with oral
tretinoin, 6-mercaptopurine, and methotrexate for 2 years. The primary endpoints 
of the study were freedom from relapse and early death (within 36 days of
treatment start) and we assessed improvement compared with the 2 year interim
results. To assess durability of remission we compared the primary endpoints and 
disease-free and overall survival at 5 years in APML4 with the 2 year interim
APML4 data and the APML3 treatment protocol that excluded arsenic trioxide. This 
study is registered with the Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry,
number ACTRN12605000070639.
FINDINGS: 124 patients were enrolled between Nov 10, 2004, and Sept 23, 2009,
with data cutoff of March 15, 2012. Four (3%) patients died early. After a median
follow-up of 4·2 years (IQR, 3·2-5·2), the 5 year freedom from relapse was 95%
(95% CI 89-98), disease-free survival was 95% (89-98), event-free survival was
90% (83-94), and overall survival was 94% (89-97). The comparison with APML3 data
showed that hazard ratios were 0·23 (95% CI 0·08-0·64, p=0·002) for freedom from 
relapse, 0·21 (0·07-0·59, p=0·001) for disease-free survival, 0·34 (0·16-0·69,
p=0·002) for event-free survival, and 0·35 (0·14-0·91, p=0·02) for overall
survival.
INTERPRETATION: Incorporation of arsenic trioxide in initial therapy induction
and consolidation for acute promyelocytic leukaemia reduced the risk of relapse
when compared with historical controls. This improvement, together with a
non-significant reduction in early deaths and absence of deaths in remission,
translated into better event-free and overall survival.
FUNDING: Phebra.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26685769  [PubMed - in process]


20. Clin Chim Acta. 2016 Jan 30;453:38-41. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2015.12.001. Epub 2015 
Dec 2.

Rapid diagnosis of acute promyelocytic leukemia with the PML-RARA fusion gene
using a combination of droplet-reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
and instant-quality fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Shigeto S(1), Matsuda K(2), Yamaguchi A(3), Sueki A(1), Uehara M(3), Sugano M(1),
Uehara T(1), Honda T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shinshu University Hospital, Matsumoto,
Japan. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shinshu University Hospital,
Matsumoto, Japan. Electronic address: kmatsuda@shinshu-u.ac.jp. (3)Core
Technology Development Center, Seiko Epson Corporation, Suwa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) with the PML-RARA fusion gene can 
be effectively cured using molecular-targeted therapies, which require both
detection and quantification of the PML-RARA fusion gene. Here, we developed a
rapid assay for identifying and measuring the PML-RARA fusion gene in patients
with APL using droplet-reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(droplet-RT-PCR) and instant quality-fluorescence in situ hybridization
(IQ-FISH).
METHODS: RNA for droplet-RT-PCR and fixed-cell suspensions for IQ-FISH were
prepared from five patients with APL and three controls. We evaluated the
amplification efficiency and reaction time with droplet-RT-PCR and signal clarity
and hybridization time with IQ-FISH.
RESULTS: The reaction using droplet-RT-PCR was completed in 26min. The PML-RARA
fusion gene was detected in all samples from the five patients. IQ-FISH yielded
clear signals after 1h of hybridization. There were no significant differences in
signal clarity or positive signal ratios between IQ-FISH and conventional FISH.
CONCLUSIONS: Simultaneous droplet-RT-PCR and IQ-FISH, in addition to
morphological examination of blood smears, can be used to diagnose patients as
having APL within 4h based on molecular/cytogenetic results. Rapid diagnosis can 
allow effective therapies to be started promptly.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26656442  [PubMed - in process]


21. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2015;2015:507-13. doi:
10.1182/asheducation-2015.1.507.

Acute myeloid leukemia in children and adolescents: identification of new
molecular targets brings promise of new therapies.

Kolb EA(1), Meshinchi S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nemours Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Nemours/A. I. duPont Hospital
for Children, Wilmington, DE; and. (2)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA.

Recent reports of recurrent mutations in childhood acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
have identified potential targets for new therapeutic strategies. Acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized commonly by a fusion between the
PML gene and the RARA gene, genes targetable by arsenic (ATO) and retinoic acid
(ATRA), respectively. A mutation in GATA1, common in AML of Down syndrome
(ML-DS), renders cells more susceptible to cytarabine and anthracyclines, thus
permitting targeted dose reductions to preserve high survival rates while
reducing toxicity. In all other patients, Ras pathway mutations, KMT2A and other 
methyltransferase mutations, FLT3 mutations, and KIT mutations are all relatively
common in childhood AML and all are potentially "druggable". The focus of this
review is on those therapies likely to be clinically available in the near
future. The preclinical and clinical data providing a rationale for testing in
children of specific agents in children is discussed. Whether the expression of a
potential target is sufficient to predict response to a targeted therapy is an
open question in childhood AML. Development of clinical trials to evaluate
targeted therapies in small molecularly defined subsets of AML will be the next
great challenge for all cooperative groups in North America and Europe.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26637766  [PubMed - in process]


22. Avicenna J Med. 2015 Oct-Dec;5(4):131-3. doi: 10.4103/2231-0770.165125.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia presenting as pulmonary thromboembolism: Not all
APLs bleed.

Vaid AK(1), Batra S(1), Karanth SS(1), Gupta S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Medanta, The Medicity, Gurgaon, Haryana,
India. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Max Superspeciality Hospital, Mohali,
Punjab, India.

We present a rare case of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) presenting as
pulmonary thromboembolism being misdiagnosed as community-acquired pneumonia.
Thrombotic phenomenon in APL are poorly understood and grossly underreported. In 
our case, following no response to standard antibiotic treatment, the patient was
further investigated and detected to have an acute pulmonary thromboembolism
following right lower limb deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Though, complete blood
picture revealed only mild hyperleukocytosis, bone marrow biopsy and aspiration
revealed 60% blasts and a positive t (15,17)(q22,12) and PML retinoic acid
receptor alpha (RARA) fusion protein on molecular cytogenetics. He was diagnosed 
as APL and received treatment with all-transretinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic
trioxide (ATO) and therapeutic anticoagulation.

PMCID: PMC4637951
PMID: 26629469  [PubMed]


23. Zootaxa. 2015 Sep 8;4013(2):280-6. doi: 10.11646/zootaxa.4013.2.8.

Contribution to the study of Chinese Tersilochinae (Hymenoptera: Ichneumonidae).

Khalaim AI(1), Sheng ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Zoological Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russia.
Facultad de Ingeniería y Ciencias, Universidad Autónoma de Tamaulipas, Cd.
Victoria, Mexico.; Email: ptera@mail.ru. (2)General Station of Forest Pest
Management, State Forestry Administration, Shenyang, P.R. China.; Email:
shengmaoling@163.com.

New data on Chinese Tersilochinae are provided: one species, Tersilochus scutatus
sp. n., is described from Liaoning province of China and the Russian Far East,
and two species, Barycnemis bellator (Müller) and Tersilochus curvator Horstmann,
are new records from China. Thus, this work raises the total number of known
Chinese species to 31. Two close species, Diaparsis pulchra Khalaim and D. rara
(Horstmann), are compared; specimens previously treated as  D. rara, var. from
the Russian Far East are found to belong to D. pulchra. Tersilochine faunas of
China, South Korea and Primorskiy region of Russia are discussed. The fauna of
Palaearctic China is still poorly known, being represented by an equal number of 
genera and somewhat fewer species than the fauna of South Korea, and it is half
the size of the fauna of Primorskiy Region of Russia; the Oriental fauna of
China, with only four described species, is virtually unknown.

PMID: 26623898  [PubMed - in process]


24. J Clin Invest. 2016 Jan;126(1):85-98. doi: 10.1172/JCI82897. Epub 2015 Nov 23.

PML-RARA requires DNA methyltransferase 3A to initiate acute promyelocytic
leukemia.

Cole CB, Verdoni AM, Ketkar S, Leight ER, Russler-Germain DA, Lamprecht TL,
Demeter RT, Magrini V, Ley TJ.

The DNA methyltransferases DNMT3A and DNMT3B are primarily responsible for de
novo methylation of specific cytosine residues in CpG dinucleotides during
mammalian development. While loss-of-function mutations in DNMT3A are highly
recurrent in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), DNMT3A mutations are almost never
found in AML patients with translocations that create oncogenic fusion genes such
as PML-RARA, RUNX1-RUNX1T1, and MLL-AF9. Here, we explored how DNMT3A is involved
in the function of these fusion genes. We used retroviral vectors to express
PML-RARA, RUNX1-RUNX1T1, or MLL-AF9 in bone marrow cells derived from WT or
DNMT3A-deficient mice. Additionally, we examined the phenotypes of hematopoietic 
cells from Ctsg-PML-RARA mice, which express PML-RARA in early hematopoietic
progenitors and myeloid precursors, with or without DNMT3A. We determined that
the methyltransferase activity of DNMT3A, but not DNMT3B, is required for
aberrant PML-RARA-driven self-renewal ex vivo and that DNMT3A is dispensable for 
RUNX1-RUNX1T1- and MLL-AF9-driven self-renewal. Furthermore, both the
PML-RARA-driven competitive transplantation advantage and development of acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) required DNMT3A. Together, these findings suggest
that PML-RARA requires DNMT3A to initiate APL in mice.

PMCID: PMC4701540 [Available on 2016-04-04]
PMID: 26595813  [PubMed - in process]


25. Nat Med. 2015 Dec;21(12):1481-90. doi: 10.1038/nm.3993. Epub 2015 Nov 23.

Synthetic lethal targeting of oncogenic transcription factors in acute leukemia
by PARP inhibitors.

Esposito MT(1), Zhao L(1), Fung TK(1), Rane JK(1), Wilson A(1), Martin N(2), Gil 
J(2), Leung AY(3), Ashworth A(4), So CW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia and Stem Cell Biology Group, Department of Haematological Medicine,
Division of Cancer Studies, King's College London, London, UK. (2)Cell
Proliferation Group, Medical Research Council Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial 
College London, London, UK. (3)Department of Medicine, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China. (4)University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) Helen
Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2015 Dec;21(12):1393-4.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is mostly driven by oncogenic transcription factors,
which have been classically viewed as intractable targets using small-molecule
inhibitor approaches. Here we demonstrate that AML driven by repressive
transcription factors, including AML1-ETO (encoded by the fusion oncogene
RUNX1-RUNX1T1) and PML-RARa fusion oncoproteins (encoded by PML-RARA) are
extremely sensitive to poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibition, in part
owing to their suppressed expression of key homologous recombination
(HR)-associated genes and their compromised DNA-damage response (DDR). In
contrast, leukemia driven by mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL, encoded by KMT2A)
fusions with dominant transactivation ability is proficient in DDR and
insensitive to PARP inhibition. Intriguingly, genetic or pharmacological
inhibition of an MLL downstream target, HOXA9, which activates expression of
various HR-associated genes, impairs DDR and sensitizes MLL leukemia to PARP
inhibitors (PARPis). Conversely, HOXA9 overexpression confers PARPi resistance to
AML1-ETO and PML-RARa transformed cells. Together, these studies describe a
potential utility of PARPi-induced synthetic lethality for leukemia treatment and
reveal a novel molecular mechanism governing PARPi sensitivity in AML.

PMID: 26594843  [PubMed - in process]


26. Blood. 2016 Jan 14;127(2):243-50. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-04-637678. Epub 2015
Nov 4.

Varying responses of PML-RARA with different genetic mutations to arsenic
trioxide.

Liu J(1), Zhu HH(1), Jiang H(1), Jiang Q(1), Huang XJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Peking University People's Hospital, Peking University Institute of
Hematology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation,
Beijing, China.

Resistance to arsenic and/or all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) is a challenging
problem in the clinical management of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL).
Acquired genetic mutations in the PML moiety of the PML-RARA fusion gene are
found in some patients with relapsed/refractory APL. Whether all of the
identified point mutations play a role and have a similar function in the
mechanisms of arsenic resistance remains unknown. Here we performed in vitro
functional analyses and a retrospective analysis of APL patients to investigate
the effect of PML-RARA mutations in mediating resistance to arsenic trioxide.
Among the 5-point mutations in the PML part of PML-RARA identified in patients
with relapsed APL, we found that A216V, S214L, and A216T mutations could
attenuate the negative regulation of arsenic on PML-RARA, resulting in the
retention of oncoproteins. In contrast, L217F and S220G mutations functioned
weakly in this context. Furthermore, we demonstrated that either increasing the
concentration of arsenic trioxide or combining it with ATRA could overcome the
mutation-triggered arsenic resistance in vitro. In addition to presenting more
evidence to reinforce the correlation of genetic mutations in PML-RARA with
arsenic efficacy, we provide novel insight into the functional difference of
acquired mutations of PML-RARA both in vitro and in the clinical setting. Our
findings may help predict the prognosis and select more effective strategies
during APL therapy.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26537301  [PubMed - in process]


27. Cancer Genet. 2015 Nov;208(11):575-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.08.001. Epub 
2015 Aug 20.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia with isochromosome 17q and cryptic PML-RARA
successfully treated with all-trans retinoic acid and arsenic trioxide.

Shepshelovich D(1), Oniashvili N(2), Parnes D(3), Klein A(4), Muchtar E(5),
Yeshaya J(2), Aviram A(3), Rabizadeh E(6), Raanani P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Medicine A, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, Petach Tikva, Israel;
Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Electronic
address: Shepshelovich@yahoo.com. (2)Cytogenetic Laboratory, Raphael Recanati
Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, Petach Tikva,
Israel. (3)Hematological Laboratories, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, 
Petach Tikva, Israel. (4)Medicine A, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital,
Petach Tikva, Israel. (5)Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel; Institute of Hematology, Davidoff Center, Rabin Medical Center,
Beilinson Hospital, Petach Tikva, Israel. (6)Hematological Laboratories, Rabin
Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, Petach Tikva, Israel; Hemato-Oncology
Laboratory, Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Petach Tikva, Israel.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a subtype of acute leukemia that is
characterized by typical morphology, bleeding events and distinct chromosomal
aberrations, usually the t(15;17)(q22;q21) translocation. Approximately 9% of APL
patients harbor other translocations involving chromosome 17, such as the
t(11;17)(q23;q21), t(5;17)(q35;q12-21), t(11;17)(q13;q21), and der(17). All-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic trioxide (ATO) have specific targeted activities
against the PML-RARA fusion protein. The combination of ATRA and ATO is
reportedly superior to chemotherapy and ATRA as induction therapy for APL. The
clinical significance of non-t(15:17) APL-related aberrations is controversial,
with conflicting reports regarding sensitivity to modern, targeted therapy.
Isochromosome 17q (iso(17q)) is rarely associated with APL and usually occurs
concurrently with the t(15:17) translocation. No published data is available
regarding the efficacy of ATO-based therapy for APL patients who harbor iso(17q).
We report on an APL patient with iso(17q) as the sole cytogenetic aberration and 
a cryptic PML-RARA transcript, who was treated with ATRA and ATO after failure of
chemotherapy and achieved complete remission. To our knowledge, this is the first
published report of APL associated with iso(17q) as the sole cytogenetic
aberration, which was successfully treated with an ATO containing regimen.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26471811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Oct;94(41):e1778. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001778.

A Pediatric Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia With a Rare Karyotype of
ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) and Favorable Outcome: A Case Report.

He Y(1), Wang P, Liang K, Chen X, Du W, Li J, Hu Y, Bai Y, Liu W, Li X, Jin R,
Zhang M, Zheng J.

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Stem Cell Research and Application, Institute of
Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology (YH, KL, XC, WD, JL, YH, WL, XL, JZ); Department of
Clinical Laboratory, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University 
of Science and Technology (PW); Department of Pediatric, Union Hospital, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (YB, RJ); and
Institute of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China (MZ).

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a specific malignant hematological disorder
with a diagnostic hallmark of chromosome translocation t(15;17)(q22;q21). As a
very rare secondary cytogenetic aberration in pediatric APL, ider(17q)
(q10)t(15;17) was suggested to be a poor prognostic factor based on previous case
reports.Here, we report a pediatric APL case with a rare karyotype of
ider(17)(q10)t(15;17). Bone marrow aspiration, immunophenotyping, molecular
biology, cytogenetic, and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analyses were
performed at initial diagnosis and during the treatment.A 6-year-old boy was
brought to our hospital with the chief complaint of bleeding gums twice and
intermittent fever for 3 days in January 2013. He was diagnosed as low-risk APL
according to the 2012 NCCN guideline on APL, with the expression of PML-RARA
(bcr3 subtype) and the karyotype of 46,XY,
der(15)t(15;17)(q22;q21),ider(17)(q10)t(15;17), which was further verified by
FISH. The patient was treated through combination all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) 
and arsenic with daunorubicin according to the 2012 NCCN guideline for APL.
Continuous hematological completed remission (HCR) and major molecular remission 
(MMR) were achieved with normal karyotype for >28 months after induction
chemotherapy.Different from previously reported cases, this pediatric APL patient
with ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) displays favorable clinical outcomes, which might be
related to the low-risk classification and arsenic treatment during the
treatment. It suggests that ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) may not be the sole determinant
for worse outcomes in pediatric APL and implies that more contributed factors
should be considered for pediatric APL prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4616798
PMID: 26469919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Nat Genet. 2015 Nov;47(11):1341-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.3409. Epub 2015 Oct 5.

Genomic landscapes of breast fibroepithelial tumors.

Tan J(1,)(2), Ong CK(1,)(2), Lim WK(1,)(2), Ng CC(1,)(2), Thike AA(3), Ng LM(4), 
Rajasegaran V(1,)(2), Myint SS(1,)(2), Nagarajan S(1,)(2), Thangaraju S(1,)(2),
Dey S(4), Nasir ND(3), Wijaya GC(1,)(2), Lim JQ(1,)(2), Huang D(1,)(2), Li
Z(1,)(2), Wong BH(1), Chan JY(5), McPherson JR(2), Cutcutache I(2), Poore G(6),
Tay ST(2), Tan WJ(3), Putti TC(7), Ahmad BS(8), Iau P(8), Chan CW(8), Tang AP(8),
Yong WS(9,)(10,)(11), Madhukumar P(9,)(10,)(11), Ho GH(9,)(10,)(11), Tan
VK(9,)(10,)(11), Wong CY(9,)(10,)(11), Hartman M(8,)(12,)(13), Ong
KW(9,)(10,)(11), Tan BK(9,)(10,)(11), Rozen SG(2), Tan P(2,)(4,)(14), Tan PH(3), 
Teh BT(1,)(2,)(4,)(15).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Epigenome, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Division of Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-National University of
Singapore Graduate Medical School, Singapore. (3)Department of Pathology,
Singapore General Hospital, Singapore. (4)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore. (5)Department of Medical Oncology,
National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore. (6)Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA. (7)Department of
Pathology, National University of Singapore Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
Singapore. (8)Department of Surgery, National University Hospital, Singapore.
(9)Department of Surgical Oncology, National Cancer Center Singapore, Singapore. 
(10)Department of General Surgery, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.
(11)SingHealth Duke-National University of Singapore Breast Centre, Singapore.
(12)Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of Singapore,
Singapore. (13)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (14)Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore.
(15)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Singapore.

Breast fibroepithelial tumors comprise a heterogeneous spectrum of pathological
entities, from benign fibroadenomas to malignant phyllodes tumors. Although MED12
mutations have been frequently found in fibroadenomas and phyllodes tumors, the
landscapes of genetic alterations across the fibroepithelial tumor spectrum
remain unclear. Here, by performing exome sequencing of 22 phyllodes tumors
followed by targeted sequencing of 100 breast fibroepithelial tumors, we observed
three distinct somatic mutation patterns. First, we frequently observed MED12 and
RARA mutations in both fibroadenomas and phyllodes tumors, emphasizing the
importance of these mutations in fibroepithelial tumorigenesis. Second, phyllodes
tumors exhibited mutations in FLNA, SETD2 and KMT2D, suggesting a role in driving
phyllodes tumor development. Third, borderline and malignant phyllodes tumors
harbored additional mutations in cancer-associated genes. RARA mutations
exhibited clustering in the portion of the gene encoding the ligand-binding
domain, functionally suppressed RARA-mediated transcriptional activation and
enhanced RARA interactions with transcriptional co-repressors. This study
provides insights into the molecular pathogenesis of breast fibroepithelial
tumors, with potential clinical implications.

PMID: 26437033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS Genet. 2015 Oct 1;11(10):e1005501. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005501.
eCollection 2015.

Retinoic Acid Receptors Control Spermatogonia Cell-Fate and Induce Expression of 
the SALL4A Transcription Factor.

Gely-Pernot A(1), Raverdeau M(1), Teletin M(2), Vernet N(1), Féret B(1),
Klopfenstein M(1), Dennefeld C(1), Davidson I(1), Benoit G(3), Mark M(2),
Ghyselinck NB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC),
Département de Génétique Fonctionnelle et Cancer, Illkirch, France; Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), UMR7104, Illkirch, France; Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U964, Illkirch,
France; Université de Strasbourg (UNISTRA), Illkirch Cedex, France. (2)Institut
de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), Département de
Génétique Fonctionnelle et Cancer, Illkirch, France; Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), UMR7104, Illkirch, France; Institut National de la
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U964, Illkirch, France; Université de
Strasbourg (UNISTRA), Illkirch Cedex, France; Hôpitaux Universitaires de
Strasbourg (HUS), Strasbourg, France. (3)Centre de Génétique et de Physiologie
Moléculaire et Cellulaire (GCPhiMC), UMR5534 CNRS, Université de Lyon 1,
Villeurbanne, France.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) is instrumental to male germ cell differentiation,
but its mechanism of action remains elusive. To address this question, we have
analyzed the phenotypes of mice lacking, in spermatogonia, all rexinoid receptors
(RXRA, RXRB and RXRG) or all ATRA receptors (RARA, RARB and RARG). We demonstrate
that the combined ablation of RXRA and RXRB in spermatogonia recapitulates the
set of defects observed both upon ablation of RAR in spermatogonia. We also show 
that ATRA activates RAR and RXR bound to a conserved regulatory region to
increase expression of the SALL4A transcription factor in spermatogonia. Our
results reveal that this major pluripotency gene is a target of ATRA signaling
and that RAR/RXR heterodimers are the functional units driving its expression in 
spermatogonia. They add to the mechanisms through which ATRA promote expression
of the KIT tyrosine kinase receptor to trigger a critical step in spermatogonia
differentiation. Importantly, they indicate also that meiosis eventually occurs
in the absence of a RAR/RXR pathway within germ cells and suggest that
instructing this process is either ATRA-independent or requires an ATRA signal
originating from Sertoli cells.

PMCID: PMC4591280
PMID: 26427057  [PubMed - in process]


31. Int J Hematol. 2015 Nov;102(5):643. doi: 10.1007/s12185-015-1868-z.

Erratum to: A new transcriptional variant and small azurophilic granules in an
acute promyelocytic leukemia case with NPM1/RARA fusion gene.

Kikuma T(1), Nakamachi Y(2), Noguchi Y(1), Okazaki Y(1), Shimomura D(3),
Yakushijin K(4), Yamamoto K(4), Matsuoka H(4), Minami H(4), Itoh T(5), Kawano
S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Kobe University Hospital, 7-5-2
Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0017, Japan. (2)Department of Clinical
Laboratory, Kobe University Hospital, 7-5-2 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo,
650-0017, Japan. nakamati@med.kobe-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Clinical Pathology, 
Tenri Hospital, Tenri, Nara, Japan. (4)Division of Medical Oncology/Hematology,
Department of Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Hyogo,
Japan. (5)Division of Diagnostic Pathology, Department of Pathology, Kobe
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan. (6)Division of
Laboratory Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Hyogo,
Japan.

Erratum for
    Int J Hematol. 2015 Dec;102(6):713-8.

PMID: 26420438  [PubMed]


32. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2015 Oct;139(10):1308-13. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2013-0345-RS.

Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia: A Review and Discussion of Variant Translocations.

Adams J(1), Nassiri M.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis.

The majority of patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) manifest the
t(15;17)(q24.1;q21.2) translocation; however, a minor but significant proportion 
of patients with APL harbor complex, cryptic, or variant translocations, which
typically involve RARA. With the exception of ZBTB16/RARA, these variants have
similar morphologic and immunophenotypic features as classic APL. Study of the
variant forms of APL not only gives insight into the pathogenesis of APL but also
allows us to understand the mechanism of retinoid therapy. It is important to
identify these cryptic and variant translocations because certain variants,
including ZBTB16/RARA and STAT5B/RARA, are resistant to treatment with all-trans 
retinoic acid, arsenic trioxide, and anthracyclines.

PMID: 26414475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016 Jan;100(2):661-71. doi:
10.1007/s00253-015-6953-y. Epub 2015 Sep 28.

Expression of a codon-optimised recombinant Ara h 2.02 peanut allergen in
Escherichia coli.

Lew MH(1), Lim RL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Applied Sciences, UCSI University, No. 1, Jalan Menara Gading, UCSI
Heights, Cheras, Kuala Lumpur, 56000, Malaysia. kelvinlew86213@yahoo.com.
(2)Faculty of Applied Sciences, UCSI University, No. 1, Jalan Menara Gading, UCSI
Heights, Cheras, Kuala Lumpur, 56000, Malaysia. reneelim@ucsiuniversity.edu.my.

Current diagnostic tools for peanut allergy using crude peanut extract showed low
predictive value and reduced specificity for detection of peanut
allergen-specific immunoglobulin E (IgE). The Ara h 2.02, an isoform of the major
peanut allergen Ara h 2, contains three IgE epitope recognition sequence of
'DPYSPS' and may be a better reagent for component resolve diagnosis. This
research aimed to generate a codon-optimised Ara h 2.02 gene for heterologous
expression in Escherichia coli and allergenicity study of this recombinant
protein. The codon-optimised gene was generated by PCR using overlapping primers 
and cloned into the pET-28a (+) expression vector. Moderate expression of a
22.5 kDa 6xhistidine-tagged recombinant Ara h 2.02 protein (6xHis-rAra h 2.02) in
BL21 (DE3) host cells was observed upon induction with 1 mM isopropyl
ß-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG). The insoluble recombinant protein was
purified under denaturing condition using nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni-NTA)
affinity chromatography and refolded by dialysis in decreasing urea
concentration, amounting to a yield of 74 mg/l of expression culture.
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) and
immunoblot analysis confirmed the production of the recombinant 6xHis-rAra h
2.02. The refolded recombinant 6xHis-rAra h 2.02, with or without adjuvant, was
able to elicit comparable level of allergen-specific IgE and IgG1 in sensitised
Balb/c mice. In addition, the specific IgE antibodies raised against the
recombinant protein were able to recognise the native Ara h 2 protein,
demonstrating its allergenicity and potential as a reagent for diagnosis and
therapeutic study.

PMID: 26411458  [PubMed - in process]


34. Lancet Oncol. 2015 Oct;16(13):1295-305. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00193-X. Epub 
2015 Sep 14.

Arsenic trioxide and all-trans retinoic acid treatment for acute promyelocytic
leukaemia in all risk groups (AML17): results of a randomised, controlled, phase 
3 trial.

Burnett AK(1), Russell NH(2), Hills RK(3), Bowen D(4), Kell J(5), Knapper S(3),
Morgan YG(6), Lok J(6), Grech A(3), Jones G(7), Khwaja A(8), Friis L(9), McMullin
MF(10), Hunter A(11), Clark RE(12), Grimwade D(6); UK National Cancer Research
Institute Acute Myeloid Leukaemia Working Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology Cardiff University School of Medicine, Cardiff, UK. 
Electronic address: akburnett719@gmail.com. (2)Department of Haematology,
Nottingham University Hospital NHS Trust, Nottingham, UK. (3)Department of
Haematology Cardiff University School of Medicine, Cardiff, UK. (4)Department of 
Haematology, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, UK. (5)Department of
Haematology, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, UK. (6)Department of Medical 
and Molecular Genetics, King's College London, Faculty of Life Sciences and
Medicine, London, UK. (7)Department of Haematology, Newcastle Teaching Hospitals 
NHS Trust, Newcastle, UK. (8)Department of Haematology, University College
Hospitals, London, UK. (9)Department of Haematology, Rigshospitalet, National
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. (10)Department of Haematology, Belfast 
City Hospital, Belfast, UK. (11)Department of Haematology, Leicester Royal
Infirmary, Leicester, UK. (12)Department of Haematology, Royal Liverpool
University Hospital, Liverpool, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2015 Oct;16(13):1274-5.

BACKGROUND: Acute promyelocytic leukaemia is a chemotherapy-sensitive subgroup of
acute myeloid leukaemia characterised by the presence of the PML-RARA fusion
transcript. The present standard of care, chemotherapy and all-trans retinoic
acid (ATRA), results in a high proportion of patients being cured. In this study,
we compare a chemotherapy-free ATRA and arsenic trioxide treatment regimen with
the standard chemotherapy-based regimen (ATRA and idarubicin) in both high-risk
and low-risk patients with acute promyelocytic leukaemia.
METHODS: In the randomised, controlled, multicentre, AML17 trial, eligible
patients (aged =16 years) with acute promyelocytic leukaemia, confirmed by the
presence of the PML-RARA transcript and without significant cardiac or pulmonary 
comorbidities or active malignancy, and who were not pregnant or breastfeeding,
were enrolled from 81 UK hospitals and randomised 1:1 to receive treatment with
ATRA and arsenic trioxide or ATRA and idarubicin. ATRA was given to participants 
in both groups in a daily divided oral dose of 45 mg/m(2) until remission, or
until day 60, and then in a 2 weeks on-2 weeks off schedule. In the ATRA and
idarubicin group, idarubicin was given intravenously at 12 mg/m(2) on days 2, 4, 
6, and 8 of course 1, and then at 5 mg/m(2) on days 1-4 of course 2; mitoxantrone
at 10 mg/m(2) on days 1-4 of course 3, and idarubicin at 12 mg/m(2) on day 1 of
the final (fourth) course. In the ATRA and arsenic trioxide group, arsenic
trioxide was given intravenously at 0·3 mg/kg on days 1-5 of each course, and at 
0·25 mg/kg twice weekly in weeks 2-8 of course 1 and weeks 2-4 of courses 2-5.
High-risk patients (those presenting with a white blood cell count >10<U+2008>×<U+2008>10(9)
cells per L) could receive an initial dose of the immunoconjugate gemtuzumab
ozogamicin (6 mg/m(2) intravenously). Neither maintenance treatment nor CNS
prophylaxis was given to patients in either group. All patients were monitored by
real-time quantitative PCR. Allocation was by central computer minimisation,
stratified by age, performance status, and de-novo versus secondary disease. The 
primary endpoint was quality of life on the European Organisation for Research
and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) QLQ-C30 global health status. All analyses are by
intention to treat. This trial is registered with the ISRCTN registry, number
ISRCTN55675535.
FINDINGS: Between May 8, 2009, and Oct 3, 2013, 235 patients were enrolled and
randomly assigned to ATRA and idarubicin (n=119) or ATRA and arsenic trioxide
(n=116). Participants had a median age of 47 years (range 16-77; IQR 33-58) and
included 57 high-risk patients. Quality of life did not differ significantly
between the treatment groups (EORTC QLQ-C30 global functioning effect size 2·17
[95% CI -2·79 to 7·12; p=0·39]). Overall, 57 patients in the ATRA and idarubicin 
group and 40 patients in the ATRA and arsenic trioxide group reported grade 3-4
toxicities. After course 1 of treatment, grade 3-4 alopecia was reported in 23
(23%) of 98 patients in the ATRA and idarubicin group versus 5 (5%) of 95 in the 
ATRA and arsenic trioxide group, raised liver alanine transaminase in 11 (10%) of
108 versus 27 (25%) of 109, oral toxicity in 22 (19%) of 115 versus one (1%) of
109. After course 2 of treatment, grade 3-4 alopecia was reported in 25 (28%) of 
89 patients in the ATRA and idarubicin group versus 2 (3%) of 77 in the ATRA and 
arsenic trioxide group; no other toxicities reached the 10% level. Patients in
the ATRA and arsenic trioxide group had significantly less requirement for most
aspects of supportive care than did those in the ATRA and idarubicin group.
INTERPRETATION: ATRA and arsenic trioxide is a feasible treatment in low-risk and
high-risk patients with acute promyelocytic leukaemia, with a high cure rate and 
less relapse than, and survival not different to, ATRA and idarubicin, with a low
incidence of liver toxicity. However, no improvement in quality of life was seen.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26384238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):32494-508. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5572.

DNA-mediated adjuvant immunotherapy extends survival in two different mouse
models of myeloid malignancies.

Le Pogam C(1,)(2), Patel S(1,)(2), Gorombei P(1,)(2), Guerenne L(1,)(2), Krief
P(1,)(2), Omidvar N(3), Tekin N(4), Bernasconi E(1,)(2), Sicre F(1,)(2,)(5),
Schlageter MH(1,)(2,)(5), Chopin M(6), Noguera ME(5), West R(7), Abu A(8),
Mathews V(8), Pla M(1,)(2), Fenaux P(1,)(2,)(5), Chomienne C(1,)(2,)(5), Padua
RA(1,)(2,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Unité Mixte de la Recherche de Santé (UMR-S), Institut Universitaire
d'Hématologie, Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France. (2)Institut National de
la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) Unité (U), Paris, France.
(3)Haemotology Department, Cardiff University School of Medicine, Cardiff, UK.
(4)Biotechnology Institute, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey. (5)Hôpital Saint
Louis, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France.
(6)Département d'Expérimentation Animale, Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie,
University Paris Diderot, Paris, France. (7)Welsh Heart Research Institute,
Cardiff University School of Medicine, Cardiff, UK. (8)Department of Hematology, 
Christian Medical College and Hospital, Vellore, India.

We have previously shown that a specific promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid
receptor alpha (PML-RARA) DNA vaccine combined with all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA) increases the number of long term survivors with enhanced immune responses
in a mouse model of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). This study reports the
efficacy of a non-specific DNA vaccine, pVAX14Flipper (pVAX14), in both APL and
high risk myelodysplastic syndrome (HR-MDS) models. PVAX14 is comprised of novel 
immunogenic DNA sequences inserted into the pVAX1 therapeutic plasmid. APL mice
treated with pVAX14 combined with ATRA had increased survival comparable to that 
obtained with a specific PML-RARA vaccine. Moreover, the survival advantage
correlated with decreased PML-RARA transcript levels and increase in anti-RARA
antibody production. In HR-MDS mice, pVAX14 significantly improved survival and
reduced biomarkers of leukemic transformation such as phosphorylated
mitogen-activated protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinase (MEK) 1.
In both preclinical models, pVAX14 vaccine significantly increased interferon
gamma (IFN<U+03B3>) production, memory T-cells (memT), reduced the number of colony
forming units (CFU) and increased expression of the adapter molecule signalling
to NF-<U+03BA>B, MyD88. These results demonstrate the adjuvant properties of pVAX14
providing thus new approaches to improve clinical outcome in two different models
of myeloid malignancies, which may have potential for a broader applicability in 
other cancers.

PMCID: PMC4741708
PMID: 26378812  [PubMed - in process]


36. An Bras Dermatol. 2015 Jul-Aug;90(4):602. doi: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20153433e.

Correction: Nevus sebáceo cerebriforme: uma rara apresentação.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    An Bras Dermatol. 2015 May-Jun;90(3 Suppl 1):160-1.

[This corrects the article DOI: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20153433.].

PMCID: PMC4560559
PMID: 26375239  [PubMed]


37. Angiogenesis. 2016 Jan;19(1):25-38. doi: 10.1007/s10456-015-9486-1. Epub 2015 Sep
15.

PML-RARa modulates the vascular signature of extracellular vesicles released by
acute promyelocytic leukemia cells.

Fang Y(1,)(2), Garnier D(1), Lee TH(1), D'Asti E(1), Montermini L(1), Meehan
B(1), Rak J(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal
Children's Hospital, McGill University, 1001 Decarie Blvd, Montreal, QC, H4A 3J1,
Canada. (2)Department of Hematology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200127, China. (3)The Research Institute
of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill
University, 1001 Decarie Blvd, Montreal, QC, H4A 3J1, Canada.
janusz.rak@mcgill.ca.

Oncogenic transformation is believed to impact the vascular phenotype and
microenvironment in cancer, at least in part, through mechanisms involving
extracellular vesicles (EVs). We explored these questions in the context of acute
promyelocytic leukemia cells (NB4) expressing oncogenic fusion protein, PML-RARa 
and exquisitely sensitive to its clinically used antagonist, the all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA). We report that NB4 cells produce considerable numbers of
EVs, which are readily taken up by cultured endothelial cells triggering their
increased survival. NB4 EVs contain PML-RARa transcript, but no detectable
protein, which is also absent in endothelial cells upon the vesicle uptake,
thereby precluding an active intercellular trafficking of this oncogene in this
setting. ATRA treatment changes the emission profile of NB4-related EVs resulting
in preponderance of smaller vesicles, an effect that occurs in parallel with the 
onset of cellular differentiation. ATRA also increases IL-8 mRNA and protein
content in NB4 cells and their EVs, while decreasing the levels of VEGF and
tissue factor (TF). Endothelial cell uptake of NB4-derived EVs renders these
cells more TF-positive and procoagulant, and this effect is diminished by
pre-treatment of EV donor cells with ATRA. Profiling angiogenesis-related
transcripts in intact and ATRA-treated APL cells and their EVs reveals multiple
differences attributable to cellular responses and EV molecular packaging. These 
observations point to the potential significance of changes in the angiogenic
signature and activity associated with EVs released from tumor cells subjected to
targeted therapy.

PMID: 26374632  [PubMed - in process]


38. Case Rep Hematol. 2015;2015:412016. doi: 10.1155/2015/412016. Epub 2015 Aug 17.

Promyelocytic Leukemia with No Retinoic Acid Receptor Alpha Abnormality but with 
RUNX1T1 Insertion to Chromosome 7q: A Classification and Management Dilemma.

Overholt K(1), Guinipero TL(1), Heerema NA(2), Loken MR(3), Kahwash SB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology and Blood and Marrow Transplant, Nationwide Children's
Hospital, Columbus, OH 43205, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (3)Hematologics, Inc., Seattle, WA 98121,
USA. (4)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA ; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Nationwide Children's
Hospital, Columbus, OH 43205, USA.

A case of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) with RUNX1T1 insertion to 7q is
described and compared to reported cases of APL with negative retinoic acid
receptor alpha (RARA) abnormality. In this report, we describe the case of a
2-year-old boy who presented with bone pain and was found to have pancytopenia.
Bone marrow examination showed morphologic and immunophenotypic findings typical 
of APL, but conventional cytogenetics, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH),
and real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) showed no evidence of RARA
rearrangements. The only cytogenetic abnormality found was a small insertion in
7q, and three copies of RUNX1T1. Gene sequencing results became available after
initiating therapy but were not informative. We describe the rarity of such cases
and discuss how the typical morphologic and immunophenotypic findings of APL,
coupled with the definite absence of RARA rearrangement (by FISH and RT-PCR),
present a diagnostic and classification dilemma, raising the possibility of an
unknown alternative mechanism for the leukemogenesis and maturation arrest seen
in other APL variants. The diagnostic challenges and urgent management issues
this unusual case raises may justify including it, along with similar cases, in a
separate subtype of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in future classifications.

PMCID: PMC4553303
PMID: 26351594  [PubMed]


39. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Aug 26;8:2271-7. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S85753. eCollection
2015.

Expression profiles of pivotal microRNAs and targets in thyroid papillary
carcinoma: an analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas.

Cong D(1), He M(2), Chen S(2), Liu X(1), Liu X(2), Sun H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Surgical Translational Medicine, Department
of Thyroid and Parathyroid Surgery, People's Republic of China-Japan Union
Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, People's Republic of China. (2)Key 
Laboratory of Radiobiology (Ministry of Health), School of Public Health, Jilin
University, Changchun, Jilin, People's Republic of China.

In the present study, we analyzed microRNA (miRNA) and gene expression profiles
using 499 papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) samples and 58 normal thyroid tissues
obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas database. A pivotal regulatory network of
18 miRNA and 16 targets was identified. Upregulated miRNAs (miR-222, miR-221,
miR-146b, miR-181a/b/d, miR-34a, and miR-424) and downregulated miRNAs (miR-9-1, 
miR-138, miR-363, miR-20b, miR-195, and miR-152) were identified. Among them, the
upregulation of miR-424 and downregulation of miR-363, miR-195, and miR-152 were 
not previously identified. The genes CCNE2 (also known as cyclin E2), E2F1, RARA,
CCND1 (cyclin D1), RUNX1, ITGA2, MET, CDKN1A (p21), and COL4A1 were
overexpressed, and AXIN2, TRAF6, BCL2, RARB, HSP90B1, FGF7, and PDGFRA were
downregulated. Among them, CCNE2, COL4A1, TRAF6, and HSP90B1 were newly
identified. Based on receiver operating characteristic curves, several miRNAs
(miR-222, miR-221, and miR-34a) and genes (CCND1 and MET) were ideal diagnostic
indicators, with sensitivities and specificities greater than 90%. The
combination of inversely expressed miRNAs and targets improved diagnostic
accuracy. In a clinical feature analysis, several miRNAs (miR-34a, miR-424,
miR-20b, and miR-152) and genes (CCNE2, COL4A1, TRAF6, and HSP90B1) were
associated with aggressive clinical features, which have not previously been
reported. Our study not only identified a pivotal miRNA regulatory network
associated with PTC but also provided evidence that miRNAs and target genes can
be used as biomarkers in PTC diagnosis and clinical risk evaluation.

PMCID: PMC4556042
PMID: 26345235  [PubMed]


40. Int J Hematol. 2015 Dec;102(6):713-8. doi: 10.1007/s12185-015-1857-2. Epub 2015
Sep 5.

A new transcriptional variant and small azurophilic granules in an acute
promyelocytic leukemia case with NPM1/RARA fusion gene.

Kikuma T(1), Nakamachi Y(2), Noguchi Y(1), Okazaki Y(1), Shimomura D(3),
Yakushijin K(4), Yamamoto K(4), Matsuoka H(4), Minami H(4), Itoh T(5), Kawano
S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Kobe University Hospital, 7-5-2
Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0017, Japan. (2)Department of Clinical
Laboratory, Kobe University Hospital, 7-5-2 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo,
650-0017, Japan. nakamati@med.kobe-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Clinical Pathology, 
Tenri Hospital, Tenri, Nara, Japan. (4)Division of Medical Oncology/Hematology,
Department of Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Hyogo,
Japan. (5)Division of Diagnostic Pathology, Department of Pathology, Kobe
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan. (6)Division of
Laboratory Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Hyogo,
Japan.

Erratum in
    Int J Hematol. 2015 Nov;102(5):643.

We report here the first case of NPM1/RARA-positive acute promyelocytic leukemia 
(APL) preceded by myeloid sarcoma (MS) in the vertebra. A 52-year-old man was
diagnosed with MS, as the tumor cells were positive for myeloperoxidase and CD68 
but negative for CD163. After treatment with steroids and radiation, the size of 
the tumor was markedly reduced and peripheral blood count was normal. Bone marrow
examination showed 89.2% consisted of unclassified promyelocytes characterized by
round nuclei and abundant small azurophilic granules but no Auer rods. The
results of chromosome analysis showed 46,XY,t(5;17)(q35;q12).
Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction amplified the NPM1/RARA fusion
transcripts derived from a combination of NPM1 exon 4 and RARA exon 5, or of NPM1
exon 1 and RARA exon 5; the latter of these has not been reported previously.
Electron microscopic examination of the promyelocyte nuclei showed they were oval
with mild nuclear chromatin condensation and small- to medium-sized nucleoli.
Hematological and molecular complete remission was attained after induction
therapy including all-trans retinoic acid. As MS was also diagnosed in two of the
seven other reported cases of APL with NPM1/RARA, MS may occur more frequently in
APL with NPM1/RARA than APL with PML/RARA.

PMID: 26342691  [PubMed - in process]


41. Ann Hematol. 2015 Nov;94(11):1829-37. doi: 10.1007/s00277-015-2477-x. Epub 2015
Aug 22.

Evaluating frequency of PML-RARA mutations and conferring resistance to arsenic
trioxide-based therapy in relapsed acute promyelocytic leukemia patients.

Lou Y(1), Ma Y(1), Sun J(1), Ye X(1), Pan H(1), Wang Y(1), Qian W(1), Meng H(1), 
Mai W(1), He J(1), Tong H(1), Jin J(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Institute of Hematology, the First Affiliated
Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, 79# Qingchun Road, Hangzhou, 
China, 310003. (2)Department of Hematology, Institute of Hematology, the First
Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, 79# Qingchun Road,
Hangzhou, China, 310003. zjuhematology@163.com. (3)Key Laboratory of
Hematopoietic Malignancies, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
zjuhematology@163.com.

The aim of the study is to better understand the mechanism of relapse and
acquired clinical resistance to arsenic trioxide (ATO) and/or all-trans retinoic 
acid (ATRA). Thirty relapsed acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patients were
followed. Fifteen patients experienced two or more relapses; nine patients had
clinical resistance to ATO-based therapy. The frequency and clinical significance
of promyelocytic leukemia (PML)-retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) mutational
status using Sanger sequencing were evaluated. Overall, eight different types of 
mutations in the RARA region (V218D, R272Q, T278A, T291I, N299D, R294W, A300G,
and L220_F228delinsP) were identified in 11 patients. Eight missense mutations
(L211P, C213R, S214L, A216V, L217F, D219H, S221G, and D241G) were found in the
PML portion of PML-RARA in 14 patients, with A216V as the predominant mutation.
Eight patients were found to harbor both PML and RARA mutations over the course
of the disease. The PML-region mutations were associated with response to
ATO-based therapy (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001), number of relapses (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001), and early relapse
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.013). Notably, one case sampled at nine different time points showed
alternating clonal dominance over the course of treatment. This study
demonstrated frequent mutations of PML-RARA and supported a clonal selection
model in relation to APL relapse and ATO resistance.

PMID: 26294332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Forensic Sci Int Genet. 2015 Sep;18:160-70. doi: 10.1016/j.fsigen.2015.07.010.
Epub 2015 Jul 23.

Massive parallel sequencing applied to the molecular autopsy in sudden cardiac
death in the young.

Brion M(1), Sobrino B(2), Martinez M(3), Blanco-Verea A(3), Carracedo A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Xenética de Enfermidades Cardiovasculares, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria de Santiago, Red de Investigación Cardiovascular (RIC), Santiago De
Compostela, Spain; Grupo de Medicina Xenómica, University of Santiago de
Compostela. Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, SERGAS, Santiago de
Compostela, Spain. Electronic address: maria.brion@usc.es. (2)Grupo de Medicina
Xenómica, University of Santiago de Compostela. Fundación Pública Galega de
Medicina Xenómica, SERGAS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. (3)Xenética de
Enfermidades Cardiovasculares, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago, 
Red de Investigación Cardiovascular (RIC), Santiago De Compostela, Spain; Grupo
de Medicina Xenómica, University of Santiago de Compostela. Fundación Pública
Galega de Medicina Xenómica, SERGAS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. (4)Grupo de
Medicina Xenómica, University of Santiago de Compostela. Fundación Pública Galega
de Medicina Xenómica, SERGAS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain; Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Rara (CIBERER), Spain; Center of
Excellence in Genomic Medicine, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, KSA, Saudi
Arabia.

Sudden cardiac death in the young is a very traumatic event that occurs often in 
apparently healthy individuals without an explainable cause of death after a
comprehensive medico-legal investigation. Knowledge about the pathologies with a 
risk of sudden death is increasingly showing a greater underlying genetic
heterogeneity, which provides one of the main handicaps for molecular autopsy. On
the other hand the enormous technological advances in sequencing technologies,
allow us to analyse as many genes as we want at a cost increasingly reduced. The 
sum of these two factors (increased knowledge of genetics and available
technologies) allow us to make an individualized study of the causes of sudden
cardiac death in young adults, through massive sequencing of all potential genes 
involved in the process. We define this approach as massive genomic autopsy, and 
with this review we will try to explain the possible scenarios and methods
available for its implementation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26243589  [PubMed - in process]


43. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Aug;153(1):67-77. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3522-0.
Epub 2015 Jul 30.

Assessment of HER2 status in invasive breast cancers with increased centromere 17
copy number.

Jang MH(1), Kim EJ, Kim HJ, Chung YR, Park SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 300
Gumi-dong, Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi, 463-707, Korea.

This study was designed to evaluate usefulness of additional fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) using other reference genes on chromosome 17 for assessment 
of HER2 status in invasive breast cancers with increased centromere 17 copy
number, and to compare this approach with conventional methods based on the 2007 
and 2013 ASCO/CAP guidelines. We performed FISH with probes for SMS, RARA, and
TP53 on 253 breast cancers with centromeric probe CEP17 copy number = 2.6 using
tissue microarrays. If one or more gene had a mean copy number <2.6, the largest 
number for that gene(s) was chosen as an alternative to CEP17 copy number. Of the
243 cases in which re-grading was possible, only 2 had copy numbers = 2.6 for
RARA, SMS, and TP53. Of the 151 breast cancers which were considered HER2
non-amplified by the 2007 ASCO/CAP guidelines using the HER2:CEP17 ratio, 42
(27.8%) were re-graded as amplified and 33 (21.8%) as equivocal after FISH using 
additional reference genes. Of the 101 HER2-non-amplified cases by the 2013
ASCO/CAP guidelines, 2 (2.0%) were reclassified as amplified and 24 (23.8%) as
equivocal. Of 46 equivocal cases, 35 (76.1%) were re-graded as amplified. After
re-grading, HER2-amplified cases were significantly increased, and the
concordance between HER2 FISH and HER2 immunohistochemistry decreased. And some
pathologic features of the cases which were designated to have HER2 amplification
after additional FISH were not compatible with those of HER2-amplified breast
cancers. The use of additional reference genes has been suggested as an option
for accurate assessment of HER2 status in breast cancers with increased CEP17
copy number. However, this has limitations in that it can cause over-grading of
HER2 status in tumors that lose the new reference genes. Thus, at present, it
seems that additional FISH using other reference gene such as SMS, RARA, and TP53
for the cases with increased CEP17 copy number is not suitable for daily
practice.

PMID: 26223814  [PubMed - in process]


44. Zhong Yao Cai. 2015 Jan;38(1):127-31.

[Extracts from Testudinis Carapacis et Plastri Regulates Expression of ID1 in
Mscs].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang HL, Chen JF, Ye MS, Huang JZ, Chen DF.

OBJECTIVE: To explore BMP4 affecting the Extracts from Testudinis Carapacis et
Plastri (PTE) stimulating proliferation of MSCs and the mechanism.
METHODS: Cotransfected PGL3-IDI and pEGFP-BMP4 of 0, 0. 1,0. 3, 0. 5 and 1 µg/mL 
respectively using the calcium phosphate co-precipitation method in rat MSCs. One
of transfected cells were divided into control group and PTE group. PTE group was
stimulated by PTE of 30 µ/L for 36 h, while control group was not. Collected
cells using lucifease activity measurement to detect the activity of ID. Then 0. 
3 µg/mL pEGFP-BMP4 was chose to cotransfect. MSCs was divided into control group,
PTE group, BMP4 group, BMP4 + PTE group. BMP4 and BMP4 + PTE group were
cotransfected with PGL3-ID1 and pEGFP-BMP4 but control or PTE groups were not.
PTE and BMP4 + PTE groups were stimulated by PTE of 30 µg/mL for 36 h but the
either two groups were not. The activities of ID1, BMP4 and RARa were detected
using RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The expressions of ID1, BMP4 and RARa rose in PTE group. The expression 
of BMP4 and RARa rose while IDI decreased in BMP4 groups. BMP4, ID1 and RARa
decreased remarkable in BMP4 + PTE group comparing with BMP4 group.
CONCLUSION: PTE promotes the proliferation of MSCs, it also regulates the
expression of BMP4 to prevent excessive proliferation of MSCs.

PMID: 26214882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Leuk Res. 2015 Sep;39(9):938-44. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2015.05.016. Epub 2015
Jul 2.

Prognostic factors of patients with newly diagnosed acute promyelocytic leukemia 
treated with arsenic trioxide-based frontline therapy.

Lou Y(1), Ma Y(1), Suo S(1), Ni W(1), Wang Y(1), Pan H(1), Tong H(1), Qian W(1), 
Meng H(1), Mai W(1), Huang J(1), Yu W(1), Wei J(1), Mao L(1), Jin J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Institute of Hematology, The First Affiliated
Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, China. (2)Department of
Hematology, Institute of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, China. Electronic address: zjuhematology@163.com.

Prognostic factors for patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) treated
in the context of arsenic trioxide (ATO)-based frontline regimes have not been
established clearly. We retrospectively analyzed the clinical features,
immunophenotypes, Fms-like tyrosine kinase-3 internal tandem duplication
(FLT3-ITD), and outcomes of 184 consecutive newly diagnosed APL patients treated 
by intravenous ATO-based therapy. The median age was 40 years (14-77 years). The 
early death rate was 4.9% (9/184 patients). With a median follow-up time of 36
months (9-74 months), the 3-year relapse-free survival (RFS) and overall survival
(OS) were 93.3% and 92.2%, respectively. Interestingly, there was no meaningful
association between 3-year RFS and initial white blood cell count, FLT3-ITD
status, or type of PML-RARA isoforms. In multivariable analysis, the CD56
expression was the only independent risk factor in terms of RFS (hazard ratio,
4.70; P=0.005). These results suggested that ATO-based therapy may ameliorate the
unfavorable influence of previously known high-risk features; moreover, CD56
expression remains to be a potentially unfavorable prognostic factor in APL
patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26183877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 16;5:11999. doi: 10.1038/srep11999.

Promoter-level expression clustering identifies time development of
transcriptional regulatory cascades initiated by ErbB receptors in breast cancer 
cells.

Mina M(1), Magi S(2), Jurman G(1), Itoh M(3), Kawaji H(3), Lassmann T(4), Arner
E(5), Forrest AR(6), Carninci P(6), Hayashizaki Y(7), Daub CO(8); FANTOM
Consortium, Okada-Hatakeyama M(2), Furlanello C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Via Sommarive 18, I-38123 Povo, Trento, Italy.
(2)Laboratory for Integrated Cellular Systems, RIKEN Center for Integrative
Medical Sciences (IMS), Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. (3)1]
RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies (Division of Genomic Technologies)
(CLST (DGT)), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan 
[2] RIKEN Omics Science Center (OSC), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama
230-0045, Japan [3] RIKEN Preventive Medicine and Diagnosis Innovation Program
(PMI), 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (4)1] RIKEN Center for
Life Science Technologies (Division of Genomic Technologies) (CLST (DGT)), 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan [2] RIKEN Omics
Science Center (OSC), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan
[3] Telethon Kids Institute, The University of Western Australia, 100 Roberts
Road, Subiaco, WA 6008, Australia. (5)1] RIKEN Center for Life Science
Technologies (Division of Genomic Technologies) (CLST (DGT)), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan [2] RIKEN Omics Science Center
(OSC), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan [3] Department of
Medicine at Karolinska Institutet and Center for Metabolism and Endocrinology at 
Karolinska University Hospital, 141 86, Stockholm, Sweden. (6)1] RIKEN Center for
Life Science Technologies (Division of Genomic Technologies) (CLST (DGT)), 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan [2] RIKEN Omics
Science Center (OSC), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.
(7)1] RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies (Division of Genomic
Technologies) (CLST (DGT)), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa
230-0045, Japan [2] RIKEN Preventive Medicine and Diagnosis Innovation Program
(PMI), 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (8)1] RIKEN Center for
Life Science Technologies (Division of Genomic Technologies) (CLST (DGT)), 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan [2] RIKEN Omics
Science Center (OSC), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan
[3] Department of Biosciences and Nutrition and Science for Life Laboratory,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, SE-141 86, Sweden.

The analysis of CAGE (Cap Analysis of Gene Expression) time-course has been
proposed by the FANTOM5 Consortium to extend the understanding of the sequence of
events facilitating cell state transition at the level of promoter regulation. To
identify the most prominent transcriptional regulations induced by growth factors
in human breast cancer, we apply here the Complexity Invariant Dynamic Time
Warping motif EnRichment (CIDER) analysis approach to the CAGE time-course
datasets of MCF-7 cells stimulated by epidermal growth factor (EGF) or heregulin 
(HRG). We identify a multi-level cascade of regulations rooted by the Serum
Response Factor (SRF) transcription factor, connecting the MAPK-mediated
transduction of the HRG stimulus to the negative regulation of the MAPK pathway
by the members of the DUSP family phosphatases. The finding confirms the known
primary role of FOS and FOSL1, members of AP-1 family, in shaping gene expression
in response to HRG induction. Moreover, we identify a new potential regulation of
DUSP5 and RARA (known to antagonize the transcriptional regulation induced by the
estrogen receptors) by the activity of the AP-1 complex, specific to HRG
response. The results indicate that a divergence in AP-1 regulation determines
cellular changes of breast cancer cells stimulated by ErbB receptors.

PMCID: PMC4503981
PMID: 26179713  [PubMed - in process]


47. Zookeys. 2015 Jun 8;(507):1-24. doi: 10.3897/zookeys.507.9973. eCollection 2015.

Further studies on water mites from Korea, with description of two new species
(Acari, Hydrachnidia).

Peic V(1), Semenchenko KA(2), Lee W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Montenegro, Cetinjski put b.b., 81000
Podgorica, Montenegro. (2)Institute of Biology and Soil Science, Far Eastern
Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, Vladivostok, 690022 Russia. (3)Hanyang
University, Department of Life Sciences, Seoul 133-791, Korea.

New records of water mites (Acari: Hydrachnidia) from streams in South Korea are 
presented. Two species are described as new to science: Torrenticolaneodentifera 
sp. n. (Torrenticolidae) and Atractidesermilovi sp. n. (Hygrobatidae). Five
species are reported as first records for Korea: Wandesia (Wandesia) reducta
Tuzovskij, 1987, Wandesia (Wandesia) cf.rara Tuzovskij, 1990, Sperchon (Sperchon)
orientalis Tuzovskij, 1990, Feltria (Feltria) kuluensis Tuzovskij, 1988 and
Atractides (Atractides) constrictus (Sokolow, 1934). The latter species is
redescribed and elevated to species rank based on new material from the Russian
Far East.

PMCID: PMC4490216
PMID: 26155068  [PubMed]


48. Oncogene. 2015 Jul 6. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.261. [Epub ahead of print]

The oncofusion protein FUS-ERG targets key hematopoietic regulators and modulates
the all-trans retinoic acid signaling pathway in t(16;21) acute myeloid leukemia.

Sotoca AM(1), Prange KH(1), Reijnders B(1), Mandoli A(1), Nguyen LN(1),
Stunnenberg HG(1), Martens JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Nijmegen Centre for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The ETS transcription factor ERG has been implicated as a major regulator of both
normal and aberrant hematopoiesis. In acute myeloid leukemias harboring t(16;21),
ERG function is deregulated due to a fusion with FUS/TLS resulting in the
expression of a FUS-ERG oncofusion protein. How this oncofusion protein
deregulates the normal ERG transcription program is unclear. Here, we show that
FUS-ERG acts in the context of a heptad of proteins (ERG, FLI1, GATA2, LYL1,
LMO2, RUNX1 and TAL1) central to proper expression of genes involved in
maintaining a stem cell hematopoietic phenotype. Moreover, in t(16;21) FUS-ERG
co-occupies genomic regions bound by the nuclear receptor heterodimer RXR:RARA
inhibiting target gene expression and interfering with hematopoietic
differentiation. All-trans retinoic acid treatment of t(16;21) cells as well as
FUS-ERG knockdown alleviate the myeloid-differentiation block. Together, the
results suggest that FUS-ERG acts as a transcriptional repressor of the retinoic 
acid signaling pathway.Oncogene advance online publication, 6 July 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.261.

PMID: 26148230  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


49. Leukemia. 2016 Jan;30(1):14-23. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.172. Epub 2015 Jul 1.

Genome-scale definition of the transcriptional programme associated with
compromised PU.1 activity in acute myeloid leukaemia.

Sive JI(1), Basilico S(1), Hannah R(1), Kinston SJ(1), Calero-Nieto FJ(1),
Göttgens B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research and
Wellcome Trust and MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.

Transcriptional dysregulation is associated with haematological malignancy.
Although mutations of the key haematopoietic transcription factor PU.1 are rare
in human acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), they are common in murine models of
radiation-induced AML, and PU.1 downregulation and/or dysfunction has been
described in human AML patients carrying the fusion oncogenes RUNX1-ETO and
PML-RARA. To study the transcriptional programmes associated with compromised
PU.1 activity, we adapted a Pu.1-mutated murine AML cell line with an inducible
wild-type PU.1. PU.1 induction caused transition from leukaemia phenotype to
monocytic differentiation. Global binding maps for PU.1, CEBPA and the histone
mark H3K27Ac with and without PU.1 induction showed that mutant PU.1 retains
DNA-binding ability, but the induction of wild-type protein dramatically
increases both the number and the height of PU.1-binding peaks. Correlating
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) Seq with gene expression data, we found that
PU.1 recruitment coupled with increased histone acetylation induces gene
expression and activates a monocyte/macrophage transcriptional programme. PU.1
induction also caused the reorganisation of a subgroup of CEBPA binding peaks.
Finally, we show that the PU.1 target gene set defined in our model allows the
stratification of primary human AML samples, shedding light on both known and
novel AML subtypes that may be driven by PU.1 dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC4705427
PMID: 26126967  [PubMed - in process]


50. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 23;34:65. doi: 10.1186/s13046-015-0181-2.

Halofuginone inhibits phosphorylation of SMAD-2 reducing angiogenesis and
leukemia burden in an acute promyelocytic leukemia mouse model.

Assis PA(1), De Figueiredo-Pontes LL(2), Lima AS(3), Leão V(4), Cândido LA(5),
Pintão CT(6), Garcia AB(7), Saggioro FP(8), Panepucci RA(9), Chahud F(8), Nagler 
A(10), Falcão RP(11), Rego EM(12).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of the Department of Internal Medicine,
Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP,
14049900, Brazil. patricia_aas@yahoo.com.br. (2)Hematology and Oncology Divisions
of the Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School of Ribeirão Preto,
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, 14049900, Brazil.
lorenafigdo@yahoo.com.br. (3)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of the Department 
of Internal Medicine, Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, 
Ribeirão Preto, SP, 14049900, Brazil. asglima@hotmail.com. (4)Hematology and
Oncology Divisions of the Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School of
Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, 14049900, Brazil.
vitor.leao.vleao@gmail.com. (5)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of the
Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of 
São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, 14049900, Brazil. larissa_candidoa@usp.br.
(6)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of the Department of Internal Medicine,
Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP,
14049900, Brazil. cpintao@hotmail.com. (7)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of
the Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University
of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, 14049900, Brazil. aglairbg@hotmail.com.
(8)Pathology Department, Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São
Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, 14049900, Brazil. fchahud@fmrp.usp.br. (9)Hematology
and Oncology Divisions of the Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School of 
Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, 14049900, Brazil.
panepucci@hemocentro.fmrp.usp.br. (10)Hematology Division and Cord Blood Bank,
Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel Aviv University, Tel Hashomer, 6997801, Israel.
arnon.nagler@sheba.health.gov.il. (11)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of the
Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of 
São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, 14049900, Brazil. rpfalcao@fmrp.usp.br.
(12)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of the Department of Internal Medicine,
Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP,
14049900, Brazil. emrego@hcrp.fmrp.usp.br.

BACKGROUND: Halofuginone (HF) is a low-molecular-weight alkaloid that has been
demonstrated to interfere with Metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and Tumor Growth
Factor-ß (TGF-ß) function and, to present antiangiogenic, antiproliferative and
proapoptotic properties in several solid tumor models. Based on the fact that
high levels of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) and increased
angiogenesis have been described in acute myeloid leukemia and associated with
disease progression, we studied the in vivo effects of HF using an Acute
Promyelocytic Leukemia (APL) mouse model.
METHODS: NOD/SCID mice were transplanted with leukemic cells from hCG-PML/RARA
transgenic mice (TM) and treated with HF 150 µg/kg/day for 21 days. The leukemic 
infiltration and the percentage of VEGF+ cells were evaluated by morphology and
flow cytometry. The effect of HF on the gene expression of several pro- and
antiangiogenic factors, phosphorylation of SMAD2 and VEGF secretion was assessed 
in vitro using NB4 and HUVEC cells.
RESULTS: HF treatment resulted in hematological remission with decreased
accumulation of immature cell and lower amounts of VEGF in BM of leukemic mice.
In vitro, HF modulated gene expression of several pro- and antiangiogenic
factors, reduced VEGF secretion and phosphorylation of SMAD2, blocking
TGF-ß-signaling.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, our results demonstrate that HF inhibits SMAD2
signaling and reduces leukemia growth and angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4486128
PMID: 26099922  [PubMed - in process]


51. Haematologica. 2015 Aug;100(8):1064-75. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.123018. Epub
2015 Jun 18.

Transcription and methylation analyses of preleukemic promyelocytes indicate a
dual role for PML/RARA in leukemia initiation.

Gaillard C(1), Tokuyasu TA(2), Rosen G(3), Sotzen J(4), Vitaliano-Prunier A(5),
Roy R(2), Passegué E(6), de Thé H(5), Figueroa ME(4), Kogan SC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco,
CA, USA Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Université Paris-Diderot UMR
944/7212, France. (2)Computational Biology Core, Helen Diller Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Phoenix Children's Hospital, AZ, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(5)Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Université Paris-Diderot UMR 944/7212,
France. (6)Department of Medicine, Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San Francisco, CA,
USA. (7)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, CA, USA scott.Kogan@ucsf.edu.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia is an aggressive malignancy characterized by the
accumulation of promyelocytes in the bone marrow. PML/RARA is the primary
abnormality implicated in this pathology, but the mechanisms by which this
chimeric fusion protein initiates disease are incompletely understood.
Identifying PML/RARA targets in vivo is critical for comprehending the road to
pathogenesis. Utilizing a novel sorting strategy, we isolated highly purified
promyelocyte populations from normal and young preleukemic animals, carried out
microarray and methylation profiling analyses, and compared the results from the 
two groups of animals. Surprisingly, in the absence of secondary lesions,
PML/RARA had an overall limited impact on both the transcriptome and methylome.
Of interest, we did identify down-regulation of secondary and tertiary granule
genes as the first step engaging the myeloid maturation block. Although initially
not sufficient to arrest terminal granulopoiesis in vivo, such alterations set
the stage for the later, complete differentiation block seen in leukemia.
Further, gene set enrichment analysis revealed that PML/RARA promyelocytes
exhibit a subtle increase in expression of cell cycle genes, and we show that
this leads to both increased proliferation of these cells and expansion of the
promyelocyte compartment. Importantly, this proliferation signature was absent
from the poorly leukemogenic p50/RARA fusion model, implying a critical role for 
PML in the altered cell-cycle kinetics and ability to initiate leukemia. Thus,
our findings challenge the predominant model in the field and we propose that
PML/RARA initiates leukemia by subtly shifting cell fate decisions within the
promyelocyte compartment.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMID: 26088929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Craniofac Surg. 2015 Jul;26(5):1600-5. doi: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000001526.

Irf6-Related Gene Regulatory Network Involved in Palate and Lip Development.

Dai J(1), Yu H, Si J, Fang B, Shen SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Craniomaxillofacial Science, Shanghai Ninth People's
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Stomatology, Shanghai, China.

Numerous genes including Irf6 have been revealed to contribute to cleft lip with 
or without cleft palate (CL/P). In this study, we performed a systematic
bioinformatics analysis of Irf6-related gene regulatory network involved in
palate and lip development by using GeneDecks, DAVID, STRING, and GeneMANIA
database. Our results showed that many CL/P candidate genes have relation with
Irf6, and 9 of these genes, including Msx1, Pvrl1, Pax9, Jag2, Irf6, Tgfb3, Rara,
Gli2, and Tgfb2, were enriched into the CL/P gene group. Some of these 9 genes
also were commonly involved in different signaling pathways and different
biological processes, and they also have protein-protein interactions with Irf6. 
These findings make us analyze the intricate function of Irf6 in a CL/P gene
regulatory network, followed by guiding us to perform further functional studies 
on these genes in the future. This method also offers us a simple, cheap, but
useful method to analyze the relationship with a gene regulatory network of a
certain disease such as CL/P.

PMID: 26086926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Exp Mol Pathol. 2015 Aug;99(1):104-8. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.06.006. Epub 2015
Jun 14.

A novel approach to quantitating leukemia fusion transcripts by qRT-PCR without
the need for standard curves.

Schumacher JA(1), Scott Reading N(1), Szankasi P(1), Matynia AP(2), Kelley TW(3).

Author information: 
(1)ARUP Laboratories, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (2)Department of Pathology,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (3)Department of Pathology,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. Electronic address:
todd.kelley@path.utah.edu.

Acute myeloid leukemia patients with recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities
including inv(16);CBFB-MYH11 and t(15;17);PML-RARA may be assessed by monitoring 
the levels of the corresponding abnormal fusion transcripts by quantitative
reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR). Such testing is important for evaluating the
response to therapy and for the detection of early relapse. Existing qRT-PCR
methods are well established and in widespread use in clinical laboratories but
they are laborious and require the generation of standard curves. Here, we
describe a new method to quantitate fusion transcripts in acute myeloid leukemia 
by qRT-PCR without the need for standard curves. Our approach uses a plasmid
calibrator containing both a fusion transcript sequence and a reference gene
sequence, representing a perfect normalized copy number (fusion transcript copy
number/reference gene transcript copy number; NCN) of 1.0. The NCN of patient
specimens can be calculated relative to that of the single plasmid calibrator
using experimentally derived PCR efficiency values. We compared the data obtained
using the plasmid calibrator method to commercially available assays using
standard curves and found that the results obtained by both methods are
comparable over a broad range of values with similar sensitivities. Our method
has the advantage of simplicity and is therefore lower in cost and may be less
subject to errors that may be introduced during the generation of standard
curves.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26079545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Clin Transl Allergy. 2015 Jun 11;5:22. doi: 10.1186/s13601-015-0064-9.
eCollection 2015.

Use of a basophil activation test as a complementary diagnostic tool in the
diagnosis of severe peanut allergy in adults.

Rentzos G(1), Lundberg V(2), Lundqvist C(2), Rodrigues R(3), van Odijk J(4),
Lundell AC(2), Pullerits T(4), Telemo E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Section of Allergology, Gothenburg, Sweden ; 
Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Section of Allergology,
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden. (2)Department of
Rheumatology and Inflammation Research, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. (3)Department of Clinical Immunology and
Transfusion Medicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Section of Allergology, Gothenburg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Diagnosis of severe peanut allergy is difficult and delays in making 
an accurate diagnosis may place the patient at risk. Adults with a history of
anaphylaxis must strictly avoid any contact with peanuts or products that may
contain traces of peanuts. For these persons, conventional evaluations with skin 
prick testing (SPT) and IgE tests may not be sufficient to assess the risk of
anaphylaxis. Therefore, we investigated whether the basophil activation test
(BAT) could be used for the diagnosis of severe peanut allergy in adults. We
compared the non-invasive BAT with conventional laboratory diagnostic tests,
including SPT and specific IgE to allergen extracts and components, for the
diagnosis of severe peanut allergy.
METHODS: Forty-seven persons with severe allergy to peanuts and a clinical
diagnosis of anaphylaxis (PA-group), 22 subjects with peanut sensitization
(PS-group) and 22 control (C-group) subjects, all in the age range of 18-60
years, were recruited retrospectively and prospectively into the study.
Thirty-four patients with peanut allergy and 11 peanut-sensitized patients were
sensitized to soy, while 36 patients in the PA-group and 20 patients in the
PS-group were sensitized to birch pollen. All the patients and control subjects
were investigated with BAT and SPT for responses to peanut, soy and birch
extracts and their serum samples were assayed for the presence of specific IgE to
peanut, soy and birch extracts, as well as IgE to allergen components (ISAC).
RESULTS: In a multivariate factor analysis, severe peanut allergy (PA) was
positively associated with SPT to peanut, IgE to peanut, BAT to peanut and IgE to
rAra h 1, 2, 3 and 6 peanut components, as well as to soy components (nGly m 5
and nGly m 6). In contrast, peanut sensitization was positively associated with
increased levels of IgE to rAra h 8, birch and birch-related components.
BAT-detected reactivity to peanut was significantly higher in patients who had a 
history of severe allergy to peanuts, as compared with patients who were
sensitized to peanuts (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), and the receiver operating curve (ROC)
analysis showed that BAT had high sensitivity and specificity for predicting
severe peanut allergy, with a ROC area under the curve of 0.862. However, in the 
PA-group, the BAT results for peanut correlated only weakly with the levels of
IgE to rAra h 1, 2 and 3 and nAra h 6.
STUDY LIMITATIONS: oral provocation in the patients with a history of severe
peanut allergy could not be performed to compare clinical reactivity with the BAT
result due to ethical constraints. Neither was it possible to perform BAT with
peanut recombinant allergens which were not available at the time the study
commenced.
CONCLUSIONS: BAT is useful in determining the severity of peanut allergy and may 
be used as a complementary diagnostic tool to ensure accurate diagnosis of severe
peanut allergy in adults. Thus, it may reduce the need to subject these patients 
to further tests, including an open challenge with peanuts.

PMCID: PMC4464723
PMID: 26075055  [PubMed]


55. Am J Clin Pathol. 2015 Jul;144(1):6-18. doi: 10.1309/AJCPI9C8UILYQTNS.

Acute Myeloid Leukemia With Recurrent Cytogenetic Abnormalities.

Foucar K(1), Anastasi J(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM and 
kfoucar@salud.unm.edu. (2)University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL.

OBJECTIVES: Session 1 of the 2013 Society for Hematopathology/European
Association for Hematopathology Workshop was devoted to the cases of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) with recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities.
METHODS: Based on World Health Organization 2008 criteria, seven specific
translocations are defined as "recurrent" in AML. Of these seven, three are
considered to be AML defining regardless of blast percentage. Workshop cases
provided the opportunity to consider potential new AML-defining cytogenetic
mutations, as well as other unique aspects of AML with cytogenetic abnormalities.
RESULTS: Most of the 38 cases submitted were acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
with t(15;17)(q24.1;q21.1) and so-called variants (12 cases), AML with
t(8;21)(q22;q22) (seven cases), AML with inv(3)(q11q26.2) (six cases), and AML
with 11q23 translocations (five cases).
CONCLUSIONS: This review focuses on providing updated recommendations for the
rapid diagnosis of APL, discussing the types and significance of variant RARA
mutations in APL-like leukemias, and refining low-blast-count (oligoblastic) AML.
In addition, the significance of unique morphologic, immunophenotypic, and
genetic variations in AML defined by a recurrent cytogenetic abnormality is
included.

Copyright© by the American Society for Clinical Pathology.

PMID: 26071458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 8;10(6):e0129222. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129222.
eCollection 2015.

Yeast Assay Highlights the Intrinsic Genomic Instability of Human PML Intron 6
over Intron 3 and the Role of Replication Fork Proteins.

Chanet R(1), Kienda G(1), Heneman-Masurel A(1), Vernis L(1), Cassinat B(2),
Guardiola P(3), Fenaux P(2), Chomienne C(2), Huang ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)UMR3348 "Genotoxic Stress and Cancer", Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Orsay, France; Institut Curie, Centre de Recherche, Orsay, France. 
(2)AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France; Inserm UMRS-1131, Hôpital
Saint-Louis, Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France. (3)Plateforme SNP,
Transcriptome & Epigénomique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Angers, France.

Human acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by a specific balanced 
translocation t(15;17)(q22;q21) involving the PML and RARA genes. In both de novo
and therapy-related APL, the most frequent PML breakpoints are located within
intron 6, and less frequently in intron 3; the precise mechanisms by which these 
breakpoints arise and preferentially in PML intron 6 remain unsolved. To
investigate the intrinsic properties of the PML intron sequences in vivo, we
designed Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains containing human PML intron 6 or intron
3 sequences inserted in yeast chromosome V and measured gross chromosomal
rearrangements (GCR). This approach provided evidence that intron 6 had a
superior instability over intron 3 due to an intrinsic property of the sequence
and identified the 3' end of intron 6 as the most susceptible to break. Using
yeast strains invalidated for genes that control DNA replication, we show that
this differential instability depended at least upon Rrm3, a DNA helicase, and
Mrc1, the human claspin homolog. GCR induction by hydrogen peroxide, a general
genotoxic agent, was also dependent on genetic context. We conclude that: 1) this
yeast system provides an alternative approach to study in detail the properties
of human sequences in a genetically controlled situation and 2) the different
susceptibility to produce DNA breaks in intron 6 versus intron 3 of the human PML
gene is likely due to an intrinsic property of the sequence and is under
replication fork genetic control.

PMCID: PMC4460018
PMID: 26053431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Anticancer Res. 2015 Jun;35(6):3307-16.

Bortezomib Causes ER Stress-related Death of Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia Cells
Through Excessive Accumulation of PML-RARA.

Takenokuchi M(1), Miyamoto K(2), Saigo K(2), Taniguchi T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacological Sciences, Himeji Dokkyo University, Himeji, Hyogo, 
Japan tmariko@himeji-du.ac.jp. (2)Faculty of Pharmacological Sciences, Himeji
Dokkyo University, Himeji, Hyogo, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIM: The success of proteasome inhibitors in therapy of multiple
myeloma has led to their use for other malignancies. For the proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib, combination therapies with histone deacetylase inhibitors, which
up-regulate ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS)-related enzymes, produce a
beneficial effect. However, the mechanisms underlying the effect of bortezomib
are not completely understood. We hypothesized that bortezomib causes excessive
accumulation of aberrant proteins, which augments endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress, leading to death of malignant cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The NB4 cell line established from a patient with acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) expressing the promyelocytic leukemia/retinoic acid 
receptor alpha (PML-RARA) fusion protein was used to assess changes in cell
viability and apoptosis caused by bortezomib, as well as alterations in PML-RARA 
and UPS-related enzymes via western blotting and immunoprecipitation assays.
RESULTS: Bortezomib time- and dose-dependently reduced cell viability and induced
apoptosis. Bortezomib significantly increased the abundance of
ubiquitinated-PML-RARA (Ub-PML-RARA), ubiquitin-conjugating human enzyme 8
(UbcH8), and Ub-UbcH8, indicating that UbcH8 is the E2 ubiquitin-conjugating
enzyme for PML-RARA. Moreover, UbcH8 abundance was dose-dependently increased in 
the culture supernatant of bortezomib-treated cells.
CONCLUSION: UbcH8 may have a utility as a biomarker of treatment response to
bortezomib in patients with APL. Furthermore, bortezomib impairs the UPS that
controls normal protein homeostasis by causing excessive accumulation of PML-RARA
augmenting ER stress and leading to APL cell death. The study provides a
rationale for incorporating proteasome inhibitors in the treatment of diseases
expressing aberrant proteins. Furthermore, monitoring of UPS-related enzymes
might have use in predicting the treatment response to proteasome inhibitors and 
in assessing their therapeutic effects.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26026090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 17;290(29):17690-709. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.638510. Epub
2015 May 27.

All-trans-retinoic Acid Modulates the Plasticity and Inhibits the Motility of
Breast Cancer Cells: ROLE OF NOTCH1 AND TRANSFORMING GROWTH FACTOR (TGFß).

Zanetti A(1), Affatato R(1), Centritto F(1), Fratelli M(1), Kurosaki M(1),
Barzago MM(1), Bolis M(1), Terao M(1), Garattini E(1), Paroni G(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche 
Mario Negri, Via La Masa 19, 20156 Milano, Italy. (2)From the Laboratory of
Molecular Biology, Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Via La Masa
19, 20156 Milano, Italy gabriela.paroni@marionegri.it.

All-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) is a natural compound proposed for the
treatment/chemoprevention of breast cancer. Increasing evidence indicates that
aberrant regulation of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a
determinant of the cancer cell invasive and metastatic behavior. The effects of
ATRA on EMT are largely unknown. In HER2-positive SKBR3 and UACC812 cells,
showing co-amplification of the ERBB2 and RARA genes, ATRA activates a
RARa-dependent epithelial differentiation program. In SKBR3 cells, this causes
the formation/reorganization of adherens and tight junctions. Epithelial
differentiation and augmented cell-cell contacts underlie the anti-migratory
action exerted by the retinoid in cells exposed to the EMT-inducing factors EGF
and heregulin-ß1. Down-regulation of NOTCH1, an emerging EMT modulator, is
involved in the inhibition of motility by ATRA. Indeed, the retinoid blocks
NOTCH1 up-regulation by EGF and/or heregulin-ß1. Pharmacological inhibition of
<U+03B3>-secretase and NOTCH1 processing also abrogates SKBR3 cell migration.
Stimulation of TGFß contributes to the anti-migratory effect of ATRA. The
retinoid switches TGFß from an EMT-inducing and pro-migratory determinant to an
anti-migratory mediator. Inhibition of the NOTCH1 pathway not only plays a role
in the anti-migratory action of ATRA; it is relevant also for the
anti-proliferative activity of the retinoid in HCC1599 breast cancer cells, which
are addicted to NOTCH1 for growth/viability. This effect is enhanced by the
combination of ATRA and the <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor
N-(N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-l-alanyl)-S-phenylglycine t-butyl ester, supporting
the concept that the two compounds act at the transcriptional and
post-translational levels along the NOTCH1 pathway.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4505019 [Available on 2016-07-17]
PMID: 26018078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS One. 2015 May 21;10(5):e0125783. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125783.
eCollection 2015.

Identification of the Adapter Molecule MTSS1 as a Potential Oncogene-Specific
Tumor Suppressor in Acute Myeloid Leukemia.

Schemionek M(1), Kharabi Masouleh B(1), Klaile Y(2), Krug U(3), Hebestreit K(4), 
Schubert C(1), Dugas M(4), Büchner T(3), Wörmann B(5), Hiddemann W(6), Berdel
WE(3), Brümmendorf TH(1), Müller-Tidow C(3), Koschmieder S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, Hemostaseology, and Stem Cell
Transplantation, Faculty of Medicine, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Department of Urology, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany.
(3)Department of Medicine A, Hematology, Oncology, Pneumology, University of
Muenster, Muenster, Germany. (4)Institute for Medical Informatics, University of 
Muenster, Muenster, Germany. (5)Membership of the German Society of Hematology
and Oncology (DGHO), Berlin, Germany. (6)Department of Internal Medicine III,
University of Munich, Munich, Germany; Clinical Cooperation Group Acute Myeloid
Leukemia, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, German Research Center for Environmental
Health, Munich, Germany.

The adapter protein metastasis suppressor 1 (MTSS1) is implicated as a tumor
suppressor or tumor promoter, depending on the type of solid cancer. Here, we
identified Mtss1 expression to be increased in AML subsets with favorable
outcome, while suppressed in high risk AML patients. High expression of MTSS1
predicted better clinical outcome of patients with normal-karyotype AML.
Mechanistically, MTSS1 expression was negatively regulated by FLT3-ITD signaling 
but enhanced by the AML1-ETO fusion protein. DNMT3B, a negative regulator of
MTSS1, showed strong binding to the MTSS1 promoter in PML-RARA positive but not
AML1-ETO positive cells, suggesting that AML1-ETO leads to derepression of MTSS1.
Pharmacological treatment of AML cell lines carrying the FLT3-ITD mutation with
the specific FLT3 inhibitor PKC-412 caused upregulation of MTSS1. Moreover,
treatment of acute promyelocytic cells (APL) with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) 
increased MTSS1 mRNA levels. Taken together, our findings suggest that MTSS1
might have a context-dependent function and could act as a tumor suppressor,
which is pharmacologically targetable in AML patients.

PMCID: PMC4440712
PMID: 25996952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2015 May-Jun;36(3):185-91. doi: 10.2500/aap.2015.36.3840.

Effect of chemical modifications on allergenic potency of peanut proteins.

Bencharitiwong R(1), van der Kleij HP, Koppelman SJ, Nowak-Wegrzyn A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Allergy Asthma Proc. 2015 May-Jun;36(3):236.

BACKGROUND: Modification of native peanut extracts could reduce adverse effects
of peanut immunotherapy.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to compare native and chemically modified crude peanut
extract (CPE) and major peanut allergens Ara h 2 and Ara h 6 in a
mediator-release assay based on the rat basophilic leukemia (RBL) cell line
transfected with human Fce receptor.
METHODS: Native Ara h 2/6 was reduced and alkylated (RA), with or without
additional glutaraldehyde treatment (RAGA). CPE was reduced and alkylated. Sera
of subjects with peanut allergy (16 males; median age 7 years) were used for
overnight RBL-passive sensitization. Cells were stimulated with 0.1 pg/mL to 10
µg/mL of peanut. ß-N-acetylhexosaminidase release (NHR) was used as a marker of
RBL degranulation, expressed as a percentage of total degranulation caused by
Triton X.
RESULTS: Median peanut-specific immunoglobulin E was 233 kUA/L. Nineteen subjects
were responders, NHR = 10% in the mediator release assay. Responders had reduced 
NHR by RA and RAGA compared with the native Ara h 2/6. Modification resulted in a
later onset of activation by 10- to 100-fold in concentration and a lowering of
the maximum release. Modified RA-Ara h 2/6 and RAGA-Ara h 2/6 caused
significantly lower maximum mediator release than native Ara h 2/6, at protein
concentrations 0.1, 1, and 10 ng/mL (p < 0.001, < 0.001, and < 0.001,
respectively, for RA; and < 0.001, 0.026, and 0.041, respectively, for RAGA).
RA-CPE caused significantly lower maximum NHR than native CPE, at protein
concentration 1 ng/mL (p < 0.001) and 10 ng/mL (p < 0.002). Responders had high
rAra h 2 immunoglobulin E (mean, 61.1 kUA/L; p < 0.001) and higher NHR in
mediator release assay to native Ara h 2/6 than CPE, which indicates that Ara h
2/6 were the most relevant peanut allergens in these responders.
CONCLUSIONS: Chemical modification of purified native Ara h 2 and Ara h 6 reduced
mediator release in an in vitro assay ~100-fold, which indicates decreased
allergenicity for further development of the alternative candidate for safe
peanut immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4405596
PMID: 25976435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Oncotarget. 2015 May 30;6(15):13176-200.

MicroRNA networks regulated by all-trans retinoic acid and Lapatinib control the 
growth, survival and motility of breast cancer cells.

Fisher JN(1), Terao M(1), Fratelli M(1), Kurosaki M(1), Paroni G(1), Zanetti
A(1), Gianni M(1), Bolis M(1), Lupi M(2), Tsykin A(3), Goodall GJ(3), Garattini
E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche
"Mario Negri", Milano, Italy. (2)Department of Oncology, IRCCS-Istituto di
Ricerche Farmacologiche "Mario Negri", Milano, Italy. (3)Centre for Cancer
Biology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, Australia and Department of Medicine, University
of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.

SKBR3-cells, characterized by ERBB2/RARA co-amplification, represent a subgroup
of HER2+ breast-cancers sensitive to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and
Lapatinib. In this model, the two agents alone or in combination modulate the
expression of 174 microRNAs (miRs). These miRs and predicted target-transcripts
are organized in four interconnected modules (Module-1 to -4). Module-1 and
Module-3 consist of ATRA/Lapatinib up-regulated and potentially anti-oncogenic
miRs, while Module-2 contains ATRA/Lapatinib down-regulated and potentially
pro-oncogenic miRs. Consistent with this, the expression levels of Module-1/-3
and Module-2 miRs are higher and lower, respectively, in normal mammary tissues
relative to ductal-carcinoma-in-situ, invasive-ductal-carcinoma and metastases.
This indicates associations between tumor-progression and the expression profiles
of Module-1 to -3 miRs. Similar associations are observed with tumor
proliferation-scores, staging, size and overall-survival using TCGA (The Cancer
Genome Atlas) data. Forced expression of Module-1 miRs, (miR-29a-3p; miR-874-3p) 
inhibit SKBR3-cell growth and Module-3 miRs (miR-575; miR-1225-5p) reduce growth 
and motility. Module-2 miRs (miR-125a; miR-193; miR-210) increase SKBR3 cell
growth, survival and motility. Some of these effects are of general significance,
being replicated in other breast cancer cell lines representing the heterogeneity
of this disease. Finally, our study demonstrates that HIPK2-kinase and the
PLCXD1-phospholipase-C are novel targets of miR-193a-5p/miR-210-3p and
miR-575/miR-1225-5p, respectively.

PMCID: PMC4537007
PMID: 25961594  [PubMed - in process]


62. J Bone Miner Metab. 2016 Mar;34(2):161-70. doi: 10.1007/s00774-015-0666-2. Epub
2015 May 9.

Immediate effects of retinoic acid on gene expression in primary murine
osteoblasts.

Yorgan TA(1), Heckt T(1), Rendenbach C(1), Helmis C(1), Seitz S(1), Streichert
T(2), Amling M(1), Schinke T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Osteology and Biomechanics, University Medical Center Hamburg
Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (2)Department of Clinical Chemistry, University
Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (3)Department of Osteology
and Biomechanics, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. 
schinke@uke.de.

Consistent with clinical observations demonstrating that hypervitaminosis A is
associated with increased skeletal fracture risk, we have previously found that
dietary retinol deprivation partially corrects the bone mineralization defects in
a mouse model of X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets. That retinol-dependent
signaling pathways impact the skeleton is further supported by various findings
demonstrating a negative influence of retinoic acid (RA) on bone-forming
osteoblasts. We hypothesized that RA would directly regulate the expression of
specific target genes in osteoblasts, and we aimed to identify these by
genome-wide expression analyses. Here we show that high dietary retinol intake in
mice causes low bone mass associated with increased osteoclastogenesis and
decreased osteoblastogenesis, but intact bone matrix mineralization. We
additionally found that short-term treatment of primary osteoblasts with RA
causes a rapid induction of specific genes involved in either retinol-dependent
signaling (i.e. Rara, Crabp2) or skeletal remodeling (i.e. Twist2, Tnfsf11). In
contrast, neither expression of established osteoblast differentiation markers
nor the proliferation rate was immediately affected by RA administration.
Collectively, our data suggest that the negative effects of vitamin A on skeletal
integrity are explainable by an immediate influence of RA signaling on specific
genes in osteoblasts that in turn influence bone remodeling.

PMID: 25956707  [PubMed - in process]


63. Oncotarget. 2015 May 30;6(15):13269-77.

Absolute quantification of the pretreatment PML-RARA transcript defines the
relapse risk in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Albano F(1), Zagaria A(1), Anelli L(1), Coccaro N(1), Tota G(1), Brunetti C(1),
Minervini CF(1), Impera L(1), Minervini A(1), Cellamare A(1), Orsini P(1), Cumbo 
C(1), Casieri P(1), Specchia G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation (D.E.T.O.), Hematology
Section, University of Bari, 70124, Bari, Italy.

In this study we performed absolute quantification of the PML-RARA transcript by 
droplet digital polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR) in 76 newly diagnosed acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cases to verify the prognostic impact of the
PML-RARA initial molecular burden. ddPCR analysis revealed that the amount of
PML-RARA transcript at diagnosis in the group of patients who relapsed was higher
than in that with continuous complete remission (CCR) (272 vs 89.2 PML-RARA
copies/ng, p = 0.0004, respectively). Receiver operating characteristic analysis 
detected the optimal PML-RARA concentration threshold as 209.6 PML-RARA/ng (AUC
0.78; p < 0.0001) for discriminating between outcomes (CCR versus relapse). Among
the 67 APL cases who achieved complete remission after the induction treatment,
those with >209.6 PML-RARA/ng had a worse relapse-free survival (p = 0.0006). At 
5-year follow-up, patients with >209.6 PML-RARA/ng had a cumulative incidence of 
relapse of 50.3% whereas 7.5% of the patients with suffered a relapse (p <
0.0001). Multivariate analysis identified the amount of PML-RARA before induction
treatment as the sole independent prognostic factor for APL relapse.Our results
show that the pretreatment PML-RARA molecular burden could therefore be used to
improve risk stratification in order to develop more individualized treatment
regimens for high-risk APL cases.

PMCID: PMC4537013
PMID: 25944686  [PubMed - in process]


64. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 27;10(4):e0125171. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125171.
eCollection 2015.

MicroRNA-27a Contributes to Rhabdomyosarcoma Cell Proliferation by Suppressing
RARA and RXRA.

Tombolan L(1), Zampini M(1), Casara S(2), Boldrin E(1), Zin A(3), Bisogno G(4),
Rosolen A(4), De Pittà C(5), Lanfranchi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy;
C.R.I.B.I.-Biotechnology Centre, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(2)C.R.I.B.I.-Biotechnology Centre, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(3)Institute of Pediatric Research, IRP, Padova, Italy; Department of Women's and
Children's Health, Oncohematology Unit, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(4)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Oncohematology Unit, University
of Padova, Padova, Italy. (5)Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padova,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Rhabdomyosarcomas (RMS) are rare but very aggressive childhood tumors
that arise as a consequence of a regulatory disruption in the growth and
differentiation pathways of myogenic precursor cells. According to morphological 
criteria, there are two major RMS subtypes: embryonal RMS (ERMS) and alveolar RMS
(ARMS) with the latter showing greater aggressiveness and metastatic potential
with respect to the former. Efforts to unravel the complex molecular mechanisms
underlying RMS pathogenesis and progression have revealed that microRNAs (miRNAs)
play a key role in tumorigenesis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The expression profiles of 8 different RMS cell
lines were analyzed to investigate the involvement of miRNAs in RMS. The miRNA
population from each cell line was compared to a reference sample consisting of a
balanced pool of total RNA extracted from those 8 cell lines. Sixteen miRNAs
whose expression discriminates between translocation-positive ARMS and negative
RMS were identified. Attention was focused on the role of miR-27a that is
up-regulated in the more aggressive RMS cell lines (translocation-positive ARMS) 
in which it probably acts as an oncogene. MiR-27a overexpressing cells showed a
significant increase in their proliferation rate that was paralleled by a
decrease in the number of cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. It was
possible to demonstrate that miR-27a is implicated in cell cycle control by
targeting the retinoic acid alpha receptor (RARA) and retinoic X receptor alpha
(RXRA).
CONCLUSIONS: Study results have demonstrated that miRNA expression signature
profiling can be used to classify different RMS subtypes and suggest that miR-27a
may have a therapeutic potential in RMS by modulating the expression of retinoic 
acid receptors.

PMCID: PMC4410939
PMID: 25915942  [PubMed - in process]


65. Tumour Biol. 2015 Sep;36(10):7457-63. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3410-6. Epub 2015
Apr 24.

Bioinformatics analyses of significant prognostic risk markers for thyroid
papillary carcinoma.

Min XS(1), Huang P(2), Liu X(2), Dong C(2), Jiang XL(2), Yuan ZT(2), Mao LF(2),
Chang S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Xiangya Hospital of Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, 410008, Peoples Republic of China. (2)Department of General
Surgery, Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, #87 Xiangya Road,
Changsha, Hunan, 410008, Peoples Republic of China. (3)Department of General
Surgery, Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, #87 Xiangya Road,
Changsha, Hunan, 410008, Peoples Republic of China. shichchchhc@163.com.

This study was aimed to identify the prognostic risk markers for thyroid
papillary carcinoma (TPC) by bioinformatics. The clinical data of TPC and their
microRNAs (miRNAs) and genes expression profile data were downloaded from The
Cancer Genome Atlas. Elastic net-Cox's proportional regression hazards model
(EN-COX) was used to identify the prognostic associated factors. The receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve and Kaplan-Meier (KM) curve were used to
screen the significant prognostic risk miRNA and genes. Then, the target genes of
the obtained miRNAs were predicted followed by function prediction. Finally, the 
significant risk genes were performed literature mining and function analysis.
Total 1046 miRNAs and 20531 genes in 484 cases samples were identified after data
preprocessing. From the EN-COX model, 30 prognostic risk factors were obtained.
Based on the 30 risk factors, 3 miRNAs and 11 genes were identified from the ROC 
and KM curves. The target genes of miRNA-342 such as B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2 (BCL2)
were mainly enriched in the biological process related to cellular metabolic
process and Disease Ontology terms of lymphoma. The target genes of miRNA-93 were
mainly enriched in the pathway of G1 phase. Among the 11 prognostic risk genes,
v-maf avian musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homologue F (MAFF), SRY
(sex-determining region Y)-box 4 (SOX4), and retinoic acid receptor, alpha (RARA)
encoded transcription factors. Besides, RARA was enriched in four pathways. These
prognostic markers such as miRNA-93, miRNA-342, RARA, MAFF, SOX4, and BCL2 may be
used as targets for TPC chemoprevention.

PMID: 25908172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Clin Mol Allergy. 2015 Apr 15;13(1):5. doi: 10.1186/s12948-014-0007-3.
eCollection 2015.

Evaluation of basophil allergen threshold sensitivity (CD-sens) to peanut and Ara
h 8 in children IgE-sensitized to Ara h 8.

Glaumann S(1), Nilsson C(1), Johansson SG(2), Asarnoj A(3), Wickman M(4), Borres 
MP(5), Nopp A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Science and Education, Södersjukhuset, Centre for
Allergy Research, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden ; Sachs' Children and 
Youth Hospital, Södersjukhuset, 118 83 Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Department of
Medicine, Clinical Immunology and Allergy Unit, Karolinska Institutet and
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden ; Department of Women's and Children's Health,
Karolinska Institutet at Astrid Lindgren Children's Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. 
(4)Sachs' Children and Youth Hospital, Södersjukhuset, 118 83 Stockholm, Sweden ;
Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Thermo Fisher Scientific, Uppsala, Sweden ; Department of Women's and
Children's Health, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Diagnosing peanut allergy properly is important and can be achieved
by combining clinical history with various diagnostic methods such as
IgE-antibody (IgE-ab) measurements, skin-prick test, basophil allergen threshold 
sensitivity (CD-sens) and food challenge. We aimed to evaluate CD-sens to peanut,
Ara h 8 and Gly m 4 in relation to an oral peanut challenge in children
IgE-sensitized to birch, peanut and Ara h 8 avoiding peanuts.
METHODS: Twenty children IgE-sensitized to birch pollen and Ara h 8, but not to
Ara h 1, Ara h 2 or Ara h 3 were challenged orally with roasted peanuts. Blood
samples were drawn for IgE-ab and CD-sens analysis. To measure CD-sens, basophils
were stimulated in vitro with decreasing doses of allergens until threshold
sensitivity was reached.
RESULTS: All children passed challenge without objective symptoms, but mild oral 
allergy syndrome (OAS) symptoms were reported in 6/20 children. Nineteen of
twenty children were negative in CD-sens to peanut but 17/20 were positive to
rAra h 8. Eleven of twenty children were positive in CD-sens to rGly m 4.
CONCLUSION: Positive CD-sens to rAra h 8 show that the Ara h 8 IgE-ab sensitized 
basophils can be activated by a rAra h 8 allergen and initiate an allergic
inflammation despite a negative challenge. Hence, children sensitized to Ara h 8 
but not to peanut storage proteins may be at risk for systemic allergic reaction 
when eating larger amounts of peanuts but most likely don't have to fear smaller 
amounts.

PMCID: PMC4397898
PMID: 25878561  [PubMed]


67. Nat Med. 2015 May;21(5):457-66. doi: 10.1038/nm.3839. Epub 2015 Apr 13.

Active Pin1 is a key target of all-trans retinoic acid in acute promyelocytic
leukemia and breast cancer.

Wei S(1), Kozono S(1), Kats L(2), Nechama M(1), Li W(3), Guarnerio J(2), Luo
M(1), You MH(4), Yao Y(1), Kondo A(1), Hu H(5), Bozkurt G(6), Moerke NJ(7), Cao
S(6), Reschke M(2), Chen CH(1), Rego EM(8), Lo-Coco F(9), Cantley LC(10), Lee
TH(4), Wu H(6), Zhang Y(3), Pandolfi PP(2), Zhou XZ(1), Lu KP(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Translational Therapeutics, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center (BIDMC), Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA. [2] Department of Medicine, BIDMC, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.. [3] Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer 
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (2)1] Department of
Medicine, BIDMC, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.. [2] Cancer 
Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [3] Department of Pathology, BIDMC, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Biosciences,
University of Texas, Austin, Texas, USA. (4)Division of Gerontology, Department
of Medicine, BIDMC, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (5)1]
Department of Medicine, BIDMC, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.. [2] Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (6)Department of Biological Chemistry
and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(7)Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA. (8)Department of Internal Medicine, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto,
Brazil. (9)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor Vergata University and
Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy. (10)1] Department of Medicine, BIDMC,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.. [2] Cancer Research
Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. [3] Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

A common key regulator of oncogenic signaling pathways in multiple tumor types is
the unique isomerase Pin1. However, available Pin1 inhibitors lack the required
specificity and potency for inhibiting Pin1 function in vivo. By using
mechanism-based screening, here we find that all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA)--a
therapy for acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) that is considered the first
example of targeted therapy in cancer, but whose drug target remains
elusive--inhibits and degrades active Pin1 selectively in cancer cells by
directly binding to the substrate phosphate- and proline-binding pockets in the
Pin1 active site. ATRA-induced Pin1 ablation degrades the protein encoded by the 
fusion oncogene PML-RARA and treats APL in APL cell and animal models as well as 
in human patients. ATRA-induced Pin1 ablation also potently inhibits
triple-negative breast cancer cell growth in human cells and in animal models by 
acting on many Pin1 substrate oncogenes and tumor suppressors. Thus, ATRA
simultaneously blocks multiple Pin1-regulated cancer-driving pathways, an
attractive property for treating aggressive and drug-resistant tumors.

PMCID: PMC4425616
PMID: 25849135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 27;10(3):e0122530. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122530.
eCollection 2015.

Development and validation of a 3-Plex RT-qPCR assay for the simultaneous
detection and quantitation of the three PML-RARa fusion transcripts in acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Chen Z(1), Tong Y(1), Li Y(1), Gao Q(2), Wang Q(2), Fu C(1), Xia Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan,
Hubei, China. (2)Department of Hematology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University,
Wuhan, Hubei, China.

Rapid diagnosis of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) with promyelocytic
leukemia-retinoic acid receptor alpha (PML-RARa) contributes to a highly
effective therapy with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). Real-time quantitative
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) is a valuable tool to
diagnose APL with PML-RARa. However, a single RT-qPCR analysis, which is
laborious and costly, has to be performed in three reactions to determine whether
one of the three PML-RARa transcripts is present and to quantify the involved
transcript. This paper describes a novel TaqMan MGB probe-based 3-plex RT-qPCR
assay in a single reaction to detect simultaneously the three PML-RARa
transcripts. Specific primers and probe were designed, and the results were
further normalized to the Abelson gene. The detection results for the serially
diluted plasmid indicate that the analytical sensitivity was 10 copies per
reaction for PML-RARa bcr1, bcr2, and bcr3. A relatively high sensitivity of 10-4
was achieved with this assay when analyzing the bcr1 transcripts obtained from
the NB4 cell line. The reproducibility was satisfactory because the coefficients 
of variation of cycle threshold values were less than 3% for both inter- and
intra-assays. After testing 319 newly diagnosed patients with leukemia (including
61 APL cases), the results of the 3-plex RT-qPCR assay completely agreed with the
traditional methods used for the detection of PML-RARa. The quantitative results 
of the 3-plex RT-qPCR were highly correlated with the single RT-qPCR and showed
similar assay sensitivity for 60 PML-RARa positive APL samples at diagnosis and
199 samples from 57 patients during follow-up. Interestingly, one PML-RARa bcr2
case at diagnosis with breakpoint at 1579, which was not detected by the single
RT-q-PCR, was detected by the 3-plex RT-qPCR assay. The 3-plex RT-qPCR assay is a
specific, sensitive, stable, and cost-effective method that can be used for the
rapid diagnosis and treatment monitoring of APL with PML-RARa.

PMCID: PMC4376893
PMID: 25815789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Oncoscience. 2014 Dec 27;2(1):50-8. eCollection 2015.

Simple, rapid and accurate molecular diagnosis of acute promyelocytic leukemia by
loop mediated amplification technology.

Spinelli O(1), Rambaldi A(1), Rigo F(2), Zanghì P(1), D'Agostini E(2), Amicarelli
G(2), Colotta F(2), Divona M(3), Ciardi C(4), Coco FL(4), Minnucci G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplant Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera Papa Giovanni 
XXIII, Bergamo, Italy. (2)DiaSorin SpA, Gerenzano (VA), Italy. (3)Department of
Biomedicine and Prevention, University Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy. (4)Department of
Biomedicine and Prevention, University Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy ; Fondazione
Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy.

The diagnostic work-up of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) includes the
cytogenetic demonstration of the t(15;17) translocation and/or the PML-RARA
chimeric transcript by RQ-PCR or RT-PCR. This latter assays provide suitable
results in 3-6 hours. We describe here two new, rapid and specific assays that
detect PML-RARA transcripts, based on the RT-QLAMP (Reverse
Transcription-Quenching Loop-mediated Isothermal Amplification) technology in
which RNA retrotranscription and cDNA amplification are carried out in a single
tube with one enzyme at one temperature, in fluorescence and real time format. A 
single tube triplex assay detects bcr1 and bcr3 PML-RARA transcripts along with
GUS housekeeping gene. A single tube duplex assay detects bcr2 and GUSB. In 73
APL cases, these assays detected in 16 minutes bcr1, bcr2 and bcr3 transcripts.
All 81 non-APL samples were negative by RT-QLAMP for chimeric transcripts whereas
GUSB was detectable. In 11 APL patients in which RT-PCR yielded equivocal
breakpoint type results, RT-QLAMP assays unequivocally and accurately defined the
breakpoint type (as confirmed by sequencing). Furthermore, RT-QLAMP could amplify
two bcr2 transcripts with particularly extended PML exon 6 deletions not
amplified by RQ-PCR. RT-QLAMP reproducible sensitivity is 10(-3) for bcr1 and
bcr3 and 10(-)2 for bcr2 thus making this assay particularly attractive at
diagnosis and leaving RQ-PCR for the molecular monitoring of minimal residual
disease during the follow up. In conclusion, PML-RARA RT-QLAMP compared to RT-PCR
or RQ-PCR is a valid improvement to perform rapid, simple and accurate molecular 
diagnosis of APL.

PMCID: PMC4341464
PMID: 25815362  [PubMed]


70. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015;56(12):3401-6. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2015.1023799. Epub 2015 
Oct 5.

NPM-RAR binding to TRADD selectively inhibits caspase activation, while allowing 
activation of NF<U+03BA>B and JNK.

Chattopadhyay A(1), Abecassis I(1), Redner RL(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medicine and University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute ,
University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh , PA , USA.

The t(5;17) variant of acute promeylocytic leukemia (APL) expresses a fusion of
nucleophosmin (NPM) with the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA). We have
previously shown that NPM-RAR is a binding partner of the tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) receptor type-I-associated DEATH domain protein, TRADD. Binding of TNF to
its receptor, TNF-R, induces recruitment of TRADD, and subsequent recruitment of 
a cascade of proteins that ultimate activate caspase 3, nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF<U+03BA>B) 
and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). We have previously shown that NPM-RAR
interaction with TRADD blocks TNF activation of caspase 3, caspase 8,
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) cleavage and, ultimately, apoptosis. We now
report that NPM-RAR expression is permissive for TNF activation of NF<U+03BA>B and JNK. 
We propose that inhibition of TNF activation of apoptosis, while preserving TNF
activation of NF<U+03BA>B and JNK pathways that stimulate cell growth and survival,
represents a novel mechanism through which NPM-RAR contributes to development of 
the leukemic phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4743255 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 25791120  [PubMed - in process]


71. Cancer Genet. 2015 Apr;208(4):162-3. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.01.008. Epub
2015 Feb 2.

Successful treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia with a t(X;17)(p11.4;q21)
and BCOR-RARA fusion gene.

Ichikawa S(1), Ichikawa S(2), Ishikawa I(3), Takahashi T(4), Fujiwara T(5),
Harigae H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Osaki Citizen Hospital, Osaki, Japan; Department of 
Hematology and Rheumatology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan. Electronic address: riviere13104@gmail.com. (2)Department of
Hematology, Osaki Citizen Hospital, Osaki, Japan; Department of Medical Oncology,
Osaki Citizen Hospital, Osaki, Japan. (3)Department of Hematology, Osaki Citizen 
Hospital, Osaki, Japan; Department of Internal Medicine, JR Sendai Hospital,
Sendai, Japan. (4)Department of Hematology, Osaki Citizen Hospital, Osaki, Japan.
(5)Department of Hematology and Rheumatology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, Sendai, Japan; Department of Molecular Hematology/Oncology, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

PMID: 25790901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Apr;36(4):413-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv016. Epub 2015 Mar
6.

PU.1 downregulation in murine radiation-induced acute myeloid leukaemia (AML):
from molecular mechanism to human AML.

Verbiest T(1), Bouffler S(2), Nutt SL(3), Badie C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biological Effects Department, Centre for Radiation, Chemical and
Environmental Hazards, Public Health England, Didcot OX11 ORQ, UK, CRUK & MRC
Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK. (2)Biological Effects Department, Centre for
Radiation, Chemical and Environmental Hazards, Public Health England, Didcot OX11
ORQ, UK. (3)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade,
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia and Department of Medical Biology, University
of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia. (4)Biological Effects
Department, Centre for Radiation, Chemical and Environmental Hazards, Public
Health England, Didcot OX11 ORQ, UK, christophe.badie@phe.gov.uk.

The transcription factor PU.1, encoded by the murine Sfpi1 gene (SPI1 in humans),
is a member of the Ets transcription factor family and plays a vital role in
commitment and maturation of the myeloid and lymphoid lineages. Murine studies
directly link primary acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) and decreased PU.1 expression
in specifically modified strains. Similarly, a radiation-induced chromosome 2
deletion and subsequent Sfpi1 point mutation in the remaining allele lead to
murine radiation-induced AML. Consistent with murine data, heterozygous deletion 
of the SPI1 locus and mutation of the -14kb SPI1 upstream regulatory element were
described previously in human primary AML, although they are rare events. Other
mechanisms linked to PU.1 downregulation in human AML include TP53 deletion,
FLT3-ITD mutation and the recurrent AML1-ETO [t(8;21)] and PML-RARA [t(15;17)]
translocations. This review provides an up-to-date overview on our current
understanding of the involvement of PU.1 in the initiation and development of
radiation-induced AML, together with recommendations for future murine and human 
studies.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4392607
PMID: 25750172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Autophagy. 2015;11(3):460-71. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1009797.

Retinoic acid-induced IgG production in TLR-activated human primary B cells
involves ULK1-mediated autophagy.

Eriksen AB(1), Torgersen ML, Holm KL, Abrahamsen G, Spurkland A, Moskaug JØ,
Simonsen A, Blomhoff HK.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biochemistry ; Institute of Basic Medical Sciences; University
of Oslo ; Oslo , Norway.

In the present study we have established a vital role of autophagy in retinoic
acid (RA)-induced differentiation of toll-like receptor (TLR)-stimulated human B 
cells into Ig-secreting cells. Thus, RA enhanced autophagy in TLR9- and
CD180-stimulated peripheral blood B cells, as revealed by increased levels of the
autophagosomal marker LC3B-II, enhanced colocalization between LC3B and the
lysosomal marker Lyso-ID, by a larger percentage of cells with more than 5
characteristic LC3B puncta, and by the concomitant reduction in the level of
SQSTM1/p62. Furthermore, RA induced expression of the autophagy-inducing protein 
ULK1 at the transcriptional level, in a process that required the retinoic acid
receptor RAR. By inhibiting autophagy with specific inhibitors or by knocking
down ULK1 by siRNA, the RA-stimulated IgG production in TLR9- and CD180-mediated 
cells was markedly reduced. We propose that the identified prominent role of
autophagy in RA-mediated IgG-production in normal human B cells provides a novel 
mechanism whereby vitamin A exerts its important functions in the immune system.

PMCID: PMC4502696
PMID: 25749095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 3;10(3):e0119064. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119064.
eCollection 2015.

Tigecycline susceptibility and the role of efflux pumps in tigecycline resistance
in KPC-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae.

He F(1), Fu Y(1), Chen Q(1), Ruan Z(1), Hua X(1), Zhou H(2), Yu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310016, China. (2)Department
of Respiratory Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310003, China.

KPC-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates have emerged as important pathogens 
of nosocomial infections, and tigecycline is one of the antibiotics recommended
for severe infections caused by KPC-producing K. pneumoniae. To identify the
susceptibility profile of KPC-producing K. pneumoniae to tigecycline and
investigate the role of efflux pumps in tigecycline resistance, a total of 215
KPC-producing K. pneumoniae isolates were collected. The minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC) of tigecycline was determined by standard broth microdilution
tests. Isolates showing resistance to tigecycline underwent susceptibility test
with efflux pump inhibitors. Expression levels of efflux pump genes (acrB and
oqxB) and their regulators (ramA, marA, soxS and rarA) were examined by real-time
PCR, and the correlation between tigecycline MICs and gene expression levels were
analysed. Our results show that the tigecycline resistance rate in these isolates
was 11.2%. Exposure of the tigecycline-resistant isolates to the efflux pump
inhibitor NMP resulted in an obvious decrease in MICs and restored susceptibility
to tigecycline in 91.7% of the isolates. A statistically significant association 
between acrB expression and tigecycline MICs was observed, and overexpression of 
ramA was found in three tigecycline-resistant isolates, further analysis
confirmed ramR mutations existed in these isolates. Transformation of one mutant 
with wild-type ramR restored susceptibility to tigecycline and repressed
overexpression of ramA and acrB. These data indicate that efflux pump AcrAB,
which can be up-regulated by ramR mutations and subsequent ramA activation,
contributed to tigecycline resistance in K. pneumoniae clinical isolates.

PMCID: PMC4348519
PMID: 25734903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Am J Hematol. 2015 Jun;90(6):504-10. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23988. Epub 2015 Apr 2.

The clinical significance of negative flow cytometry immunophenotypic results in 
a morphologically scored positive bone marrow in patients following treatment for
acute myeloid leukemia.

Ouyang J(1,)(2), Goswami M(1), Tang G(1), Peng J(1,)(3), Ravandi F(1), Daver
N(1), Routbort M(1), Konoplev S(1), Lin P(1), Medeiros LJ(1), Jorgensen JL(1),
Wang SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of Hematology Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xiangya
Medical School Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China.

Comment in
    Am J Hematol. 2015 Nov;90(11):E213-5.

In a patient with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) following therapy, finding =5%
bone marrow (BM) blasts is highly concerning for residual/relapsed disease. Over 
an 18-month period, we performed multicolor flow cytometry immunophenotyping
(MFC) for AML minimal residual disease on >4,000 BM samples, and identified 41
patients who had =5% myeloblasts by morphology but negative by MFC. At the time
of a negative MFC study, an abnormal cytogenetic study converted to negative in
14 patients and remained positive at a low level (2.5-9.5%) by fluorescence in
situ hybridization in 3 (14%), of the latter, abnormalities subsequently
disappeared in the repeated BM in 2 patients. Positive pretreatment mutations,
including FLT3, NPM1, IDH1, CEBPA, became negative in all 10 patients tested. Of 
the seven patients with favorable cytogenetics, PML/RARA, CBFB-MYH11 or
RUNX1-RUNX1T1 fusion transcripts were detected at various levels in six patients 
but all patients remained in complete remission. With no additional chemotherapy 
given, 39 patients had BM repeated (median 2 weeks, range <1-21), and all cases
showed <5% BM blasts and a continuously negative MFC. In the end of follow-up
(median 10 months, range 1-22), 13 patients experienced relapse, 12/13 showing
clonal cytogenetic evolution/switch and 11 demonstrating major immunophenotypic
shifts. We conclude that MFC is useful in identifying a regenerating BM sample
with =5% BM blasts that would otherwise be scored as positive using standard
morphologic examination. We believe this conclusion is supported by the changes
in molecular cytogenetic status and the patient clinical follow-up data.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25732229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Int J Med Robot. 2015 Dec;11(4):413-7. doi: 10.1002/rcs.1641. Epub 2015 Mar 1.

Robot-assisted radical adrenalectomy with clamping of the vena cava for excision 
of a metastatic adrenal vein thrombus: a case report.

Ploumidis A(1), Spinoit AF(1,)(2), De Naeyer G(1), Ficarra V(1,)(3), Mottrie
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, OLV Vattikuti Robotic Surgery Institute, Aalst,
Belgium. (2)Department of Urology, Ghent University Hopsital, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medical Sciences, Urologic Clinic,
University of Padoua, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Renal or adrenal neoplastic vein thrombi are relative
contra-indications for laparoscopic treatment. To the best of our knowledge, we
present the first robot-assisted radical adrenalectomy (RARA) with the presence
of a thrombus in the adrenal vein.
METHODS: A 54 year-old male with a history of laparoscopic left radical
nephrectomy for clear cell carcinoma was referred to our department with a
diagnosed right adrenal tumour extending into the adrenal vein. A RARA was
planned through a trans-peritoneal approach, and an en bloc resection of the
adrenal and its vein with clamping of the vena cava was performed.
RESULTS: Console time was 94 min and the estimated blood loss was 44 ml. The
pathology report confirmed clear cell carcinoma with negative surgical margins.
Convalescence was uneventful.
CONCLUSION: RARA with thrombectomy and vascular reconstruction can be safe,
effective and feasible in experienced hands, using robotic bulldogs. Copyright © 
2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25727563  [PubMed - in process]


77. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 May 5;406:49-59. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.02.019. Epub
2015 Feb 25.

Retinoic acid potentiates inflammatory cytokines in human mast cells:
identification of mast cells as prominent constituents of the skin retinoid
network.

Babina M(1), Guhl S(2), Motakis E(3), Artuc M(2), Hazzan T(2), Worm M(2), Forrest
AR(3), Zuberbier T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: magda.babina@charite.de. (2)Department of
Dermatology and Allergy, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Division of Genomic Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, 
Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan; RIKEN Omics Science Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.

Retinoic acid (RA), the active vitamin-A-metabolite, has well-established
functions in skin homeostasis and in the immune system. Skin mast cells (MCs)
combine traits of both structures, being of hematopoietic origin, but functional 
in the skin environment. It remains largely unknown whether mature MCs are
targeted by the retinoid network. Here, we demonstrate that human skin MCs
display substantial susceptibility to RA by which they are instructed to increase
pro-inflammatory mediators (IL-1ß, IL-8, TNF-a) but not histamine release. The
effects are observed at physiological RA levels, in different microenvironments, 
and are largely donor-independent. RA susceptibility is owed to the cells'
abundant expression of RARA, the receptor mediating MC cytokine responses.
Unexpectedly, bioinformatics calculations on the FANTOM5 expression atlas
revealed general enrichment of retinoid network components in MCs against other
skin cells, and MCs rapidly upregulated RA responsive genes. In conclusion, MCs
are important yet hitherto overlooked retinoid targets in the skin.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25725371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Blood Cancer J. 2015 Feb 27;5:e284. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2015.2.

Absence of natural intracellular retinoids in mouse bone marrow cells and
implications for PML-RARA transformation.

Niu H(1), Chacko J(1), Hadwiger G(1), Welch JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St 
Louis, MO, USA.

PMCID: PMC4349261
PMID: 25723855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Case Rep Hematol. 2015;2015:343854. doi: 10.1155/2015/343854. Epub 2015 Jan 26.

High-Risk Microgranular Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia with a Five-Way Complex
Translocation Involving PML-RARA.

Powers B(1), Persons D(2), Rao D(2), Woodroof J(2), Lin TL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Kansas School of Medicine, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, KS 66210, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas School
of Medicine, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, KS 66210, USA.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is classically characterized by chromosomal
translocation (15;17), resulting in the PML-RARA fusion protein leading to
disease. Here, we present a case of a 50-year-old man who presented with signs
and symptoms of acute leukemia with concern for APL. Therapy was immediately
initiated with all-trans retinoic acid. The morphology of his leukemic blasts was
consistent with the hypogranular variant of APL. Subsequent FISH and cytogenetic 
analysis revealed a unique translocation involving five chromosomal regions:
9q34, 17q21, 15q24, 12q13, and 15q26.1. Molecular testing demonstrated PML/RARA
fusion transcripts. Treatment with conventional chemotherapy was added and he
went into a complete remission. Given his elevated white blood cell count at
presentation, intrathecal chemotherapy for central nervous system prophylaxis was
also given. The patient remains on maintenance therapy and remains in remission. 
This is the first such report of a 5-way chromosomal translocation leading to
APL. Similar to APL with chromosomal translocations other than classical t(15;17)
which result in the typical PML-RARA fusion, our patient responded promptly to an
ATRA-containing regimen and remains in complete remission.

PMCID: PMC4321077
PMID: 25692052  [PubMed]


80. FEBS Lett. 2015 Mar 12;589(6):726-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.02.001. Epub
2015 Feb 11.

MicroRNA-138 promotes tau phosphorylation by targeting retinoic acid receptor
alpha.

Wang X(1), Tan L(2), Lu Y(1), Peng J(1), Zhu Y(1), Zhang Y(3), Sun Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China. (2)Key
Laboratory for Molecular Diagnosis of Hubei Province, The Central Hospital of
Wuhan, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, Hubei 430014, China. (3)Key Laboratory for Molecular Diagnosis of Hubei
Province, The Central Hospital of Wuhan, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430014, China. Electronic
address: yadong-zhang@hotmail.com. (4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Tongji
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan 430030, China. Electronic address: tjszyong@163.com.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative dementia
characterized by Aß deposition and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) composed of
hyperphosphorylated tau. Emerging evidence shows that microRNAs (miRNAs)
contribute to the pathogenesis of AD. Herein, we investigated the role of
miR-138, a brain enriched miRNA, which is increased in AD patients. We found that
miR-138 is increased in AD models, including N2a/APP and HEK293/tau cell lines.
Overexpression of miR-138 activates glycogen synthase kinase-3ß (GSK-3ß), and
increases tau phosphorylation in HEK293/tau cells. Furthermore, we confirm that
retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) is a direct target of miR-138, and supplement
of RARA substantially suppresses GSK-3ß activity, and reduces tau phosphorylation
induced by miR-138. In conclusion, our data suggest that miR-138 promotes tau
phosphorylation by targeting the RARA/GSK-3ß pathway.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25680531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Am J Case Rep. 2015 Feb 10;16:73-6. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.892760.

Acute appendicitis secondary to acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Rodriguez EA(1), Lopez MA(1), Valluri K(1), Wang D(1), Fischer A(1), Perdomo
T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Miami Palm Beach Regional
Campus, Atlantis, FL, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, JFK Medical Center,
Atlantis, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: The gastrointestinal tract is a rare site for extramedullary
involvement in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL).
CASE REPORT: A 43-year-old female with no past medical history presented
complaining of mild abdominal pain, fever, and chills for the past day. On
examination, she was tachycardic and febrile, with mild tenderness of her right
lower quadrant and without signs of peritoneal irritation. Laboratory examination
revealed pancytopenia and DIC, with a fibrinogen level of 290 mg/dL. CT of the
abdomen showed a thickened and hyperemic appendix without perforation or abscess,
compatible with acute appendicitis. The patient was given IV broad-spectrum
antibiotics and was transfused with packed red blood cells and platelets. She
underwent uncomplicated laparoscopic appendectomy and bone marrow biopsy, which
revealed neoplastic cells of 90% of the total bone marrow cellularity. Flow
cytometry indicated presence of 92.4% of immature myeloid cells with t (15: 17)
and q (22: 12) mutations, and FISH analysis for PML-RARA demonstrated a long-form
fusion transcript, positive for APL. Appendix pathology described leukemic
infiltration with co-expression of myeloperoxidase and CD68, consistent with
myeloid sarcoma of the appendix. The patient completed a course of daunorubicin, 
cytarabine, and all trans-retinoic acid. Repeat bone marrow biopsy demonstrated
complete remission. She will follow up with her primary care physician and
hematologist/oncologist.
CONCLUSIONS: Myeloid sarcoma of the appendix in the setting of APL is very rare
and it might play a role in the development of acute appendicitis. Urgent
management, including bone marrow biopsy for definitive diagnosis and urgent
surgical intervention, dramatically improve prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4327184
PMID: 25666852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(4):510-5. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.988022.

ZRF1: a novel epigenetic regulator of stem cell identity and cancer.

Aloia L(1), Demajo S, Di Croce L.

Author information: 
(1)a Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG) ; Barcelona , Spain.

The Zuotin-related factor 1, ZRF1, has recently been identified as an epigenetic 
regulator of gene transcription in stem cells and cancer. During differentiation 
of human teratocarcinoma cells, ZRF1 promotes transcriptional induction of
developmental genes that are repressed by Polycomb complexes. Importantly, ZRF1
has recently been shown to be required for both neural differentiation of
embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and for maintenance of neural progenitor cell (NPC)
identity. Moreover, a dual role has now emerged for ZRF1 in cancer: on the one
hand, ZRF1 plays a crucial role in oncogene-induced senescence (OIS) by
activating the INK4/ARF locus, thus working as a tumor suppressor; on the other
hand, ZRF1 promotes leukemogenesis in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in a
Polycomb-independent fashion. Therefore, increasing evidence points to ZRF1 as a 
novel target for therapy of neurodegenerative diseases and cancer.

PMCID: PMC4615000
PMID: 25665097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Int J Lab Hematol. 2015 Aug;37(4):515-20. doi: 10.1111/ijlh.12326. Epub 2015 Jan 
14.

Utility and impact of early t(15;17) identification by Fluorescence In Situ
Hybridization (FISH) in clinical decision making for patients in Acute
Promyelocytic Leukemia (APL).

Kolhe R(1), Mangaonkar A(2), Mansour J(2), Clemmons A(3), Shaw J(1), Dupont B(1),
Walczak L(1), Mondal A(1), Rojiani A(1), Jillella A(4), Kota V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Georgia Regents University Cancer Center,
Augusta, GA, USA. (3)University of Georgia College of Pharmacy, Augusta, GA, USA.
(4)Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia (APL) is a curable malignancy with
studies showing above 90% survival. However, population-based studies looking at 
survival suggest that approximately 30% of patients with APL die during
induction. Early demonstration of t(15;17) will lead to accurate decision making 
regarding treatment. The aim of this project was to validate earlier time frames 
for the Abbott Molecular Vysis LSI promyelocytic leukemia (PML)/ retinoic acid
receptor alpha (RARA) fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) probe (ASR 6-16
h).
METHODS: Twenty patients (15 APL cases and five non-APL cases) were selected for 
validating various hybridization times for the FISH probe. Expected normal signal
pattern was two red and two green signals (2R2G), and the most common expected
abnormal signal pattern was two fusion (yellow) signals, one red and one green
(2F1R1G) and/or one fusion, one red and one green (1F1R1G).
RESULTS: The specificity of the probe ranged from 84% at 2 h, 86% at 4 h, 84% at 
6 h, and 87% for overnight hybridization. The sensitivity increased from 79% at 2
h, 80% at 4 h, 81% at 6 h to 87% for overnight hybridization.
CONCLUSION: Based on the validation studies, we recommend reading of FISH results
at the 4-h incubation mark for a preliminary diagnosis and confirmation with
overnight hybridization.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25639817  [PubMed - in process]


84. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015;56(9):2731-4. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2015.1007454. Epub 2015
Feb 11.

Novel STAT5B-RARA fusion transcript in acute promyelocytic leukemia:
identification and treatment response.

Wang YY(1), Hao J(1), Liu ZY(1), Weng XQ(2), Sheng Y(2), Jiang CL(2), Zhu YM(2), 
Chen B(2), Xiong SM(2), Li JM(2), Chen QS(2), Chen HY(3), Qiao C(4), Chen Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Hematology , Bei Zhan Hospital , Shanghai , China. (2)b State 
Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Rui Jin
Hospital Affiliated with Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine ,
Shanghai , China. (3)c Jingjiang People's Hospital, The Seventh Affiliated
Hospital of Yangzhou University , Jingjiang , Jiangsu Province , China. (4)d
Department of Hematology , The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Jiangsu Province Hospital , Nanjing , China.

PMID: 25629986  [PubMed - in process]


85. Allergy. 2015 Apr;70(4):391-407. doi: 10.1111/all.12574.

IgE recognition patterns in peanut allergy are age dependent: perspectives of the
EuroPrevall study.

Ballmer-Weber BK(1), Lidholm J, Fernández-Rivas M, Seneviratne S, Hanschmann KM, 
Vogel L, Bures P, Fritsche P, Summers C, Knulst AC, Le TM, Reig I, Papadopoulos
NG, Sinaniotis A, Belohlavkova S, Popov T, Kralimarkova T, de Blay F, Purohit A, 
Clausen M, Jedrzejczak-Czechowcz M, Kowalski ML, Asero R, Dubakiene R, Barreales 
L, Clare Mills EN, van Ree R, Vieths S.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy Unit, Department of Dermatology, University Hospital, Zürich,
Switzerland.

Erratum in
    Allergy. 2015 Jun;70(6):725.

BACKGROUND: We tested the hypothesis that specific molecular sensitization
patterns correlate with the clinical data/manifestation in a European
peanut-allergic population characterized under a common protocol.
METHODS: Sixty-eight peanut-allergic subjects and 82 tolerant controls from 11
European countries were included. Allergy to peanut and lowest symptom-eliciting 
dose was established by double-blind placebo-controlled food challenge in all but
anaphylactic subjects. Information of early or late (before or after 14 years of 
age) onset of peanut allergy was obtained from standardized questionnaires. IgE
to peanut allergens rAra h 1-3, 6, 8-9, profilin and CCD was determined using
ImmunoCAP.
RESULTS: Seventy-eight percent of peanut allergics were sensitized to peanut
extract and 90% to at least one peanut component. rAra h 2 was the sole major
allergen for the peanut-allergic population. Geographical differences were
observed for rAra h 8 and rAra h 9, which were major allergens for
central/western and southern Europeans, respectively. Sensitization to rAra h 1
and 2 was exclusively observed in early-onset peanut allergy. Peanut-tolerant
subjects were frequently sensitized to rAra h 8 or 9 but not to storage proteins.
Sensitization to Ara h 2 = 1.0 kUA /l conferred a 97% probability for a systemic 
reaction (P = 0.0002). Logistic regression revealed a significant influence of
peanut extract sensitization and region on the occurrence of systemic reactions
(P = 0.0185 and P = 0.0436, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Sensitization to Ara h 1, 2 and 3 is usually acquired in childhood.
IgE to Ara h 2 = 1.0 kUA /l is significantly associated with the development of
systemic reactions to peanut.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25620497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Mol Cytogenet. 2014 Dec 23;7(1):103. doi: 10.1186/s13039-014-0103-6. eCollection 
2014.

TRIP11-PDGFRB fusion in a patient with a therapy-related myeloid neoplasm with
t(5;14)(q33;q32) after treatment for acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Kim HG(1), Jang JH(2), Koh EH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine, Gyeongsang National University School of
Medicine, 79 Gangnam-ro, Jinju, Korea. (2)Green Cross Laboratories, Yongin,
Korea. (3)Departments of Laboratory Medicine, Gyeongsang National University
School of Medicine, 79 Gangnam-ro, 660-702 Jinju, Korea ; Institute of Heath
Sciences, Gyeongsang National University School of Medicine, Jinju, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Therapy-related myeloid neoplasm after treatment for acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a relatively infrequent but severe complication. 
Most therapy-related myeloid neoplasms after treatment for APL are classified as 
therapy-related myelodysplastic syndrome or therapy-related acute myeloid
leukemia. Translocation of 5q31-33, PDGFRB occur rarely in therapy-related
myeloid neoplasm and there has been two identified PDGFRB partner genes located
at 14q32, TRIP11 and KIAA1509.
RESULTS: The TRIP11-PDGFRB fusion was identified in a patient with
therapy-related myeloid neoplasm with t(5;14)(q33;q32) after treatment of APL
using conventional cytogenetics, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and
molecular methods. Cytogenetic analysis of the bone marrow aspirate revealed 46, 
XY, t(5;14)(q33;q32) in all 20 analyzed cells. No other cytogenetic abnormalities
were observed. Break-apart FISH analysis demonstrated that rearrangement of
PDGFRB at 5q33 was positive in 460 of 500 cells analyzed, while the PML-RARA
rearrangement remained undetectable by RT-PCR. Sequencing of RT-PCR products
revealed fusion between exon 16 of TRIP11 and exon 11 of PDGFRB. However, the
KIAA1509-PDGFRB fusion was not detected by RT-PCR.
CONCLUSION: We firstly demonstrated that therapy-related myeloid neoplasm with
TRIP11-PDGFRB fusion was identified after treatment of APL.

PMCID: PMC4299380
PMID: 25606057  [PubMed]


87. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2015 Jan;13(1):19-22.

Identification of a novel fusion gene, IRF2BP2-RARA, in acute promyelocytic
leukemia.

Yin CC(1), Jain N(1), Mehrotra M(1), Zhagn J(1), Protopopov A(1), Zuo Z(1),
Pemmaraju N(1), DiNardo C(1), Hirsch-Ginsberg C(1), Wang SA(1), Medeiros LJ(1),
Chin L(1), Patel KP(1), Ravandi F(1), Futreal A(1), Bueso-Ramos CE(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Hematopathology, Leukemia, Genomic Medicine, and
Laboratory Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 
Texas.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by the fusion of retinoic
acid receptor alpha (RARA) with promyelocytic leukemia (PML) or, rarely, other
gene partners. This report presents a patient with APL with a novel fusion
between RARA and the interferon regulatory factor 2 binding protein 2 (IRF2BP2)
genes. A bone marrow examination in a 19-year-old woman who presented with
ecchymoses and epistaxis showed morphologic and immunophenotypic features
consistent with APL. PML oncogenic domain antibody was positive. Results of
fluorescence in situ hybridization, conventional cytogenetics, reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and oligonucleotide microarray 
for PML-RARA and common APL variant translocations were negative. Next-generation
RNA-sequencing analysis followed by RT-PCR and direct sequencing revealed
distinct breakpoints within IRF2BP2 exon 2 and RARA intron 2. The patient
received all-trans retinoic acid, arsenic, and gemtuzumab ozogamicin, and
achieved complete remission. However, the disease relapsed 10 months later, 2
months after consolidation therapy. This is the first report showing involvement 
of IRF2BP2 in APL, and it expands the list of novel RARA partners identified in
APL.

Copyright © 2015 by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network.

PMID: 25583766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Indian Pediatr. 2014 Dec;51(12):1020-1.

Identification of PML/RARá fusion gene by RT-PCR acute promyelocytic leukaemia.

Purkait R(1), Dolai TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Medicine and *Haematology, NRS Medical College and
Hospital, Kolkata, WB, India. radheshyampurkait@gmail.com.

PMID: 25560168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Stem Cells. 2015 May;33(5):1390-404. doi: 10.1002/stem.1926.

Signalling Through Retinoic Acid Receptors is Required for Reprogramming of Both 
Mouse Embryonic Fibroblast Cells and Epiblast Stem Cells to Induced Pluripotent
Stem Cells.

Yang J(1), Wang W, Ooi J, Campos LS, Lu L, Liu P.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

We previously demonstrated that coexpressing retinoic acid (RA) receptor gamma
and liver receptor homolog-1 (LRH1 or NR5A2) with OCT4, MYC, KLF4, and SOX2 (4F) 
rapidly reprograms mouse embryonic fibroblast cells (MEFs) into induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Here, we further explore the role of RA in
reprogramming and report that the six factors (6F) efficiently and directly
reprogram MEFs into integration-free iPSCs in defined medium (N2B27) in the
absence of feeder cells. Through genetic and chemical approaches, we find that RA
signalling is essential, in a highly dose-sensitive manner, for MEF
reprogramming. The removal of exogenous RA from N2B27, the inhibition of
endogenous RA synthesis or the expression of a dominant-negative form of RARA
severely impedes reprogramming. By contrast, supplementing N2B27 with various
retinoids substantially boosts reprogramming. In addition, when coexpressed with 
LRH1, RA receptors (RARs) can promote reprogramming in the absence of both
exogenous and endogenously synthesized RA. Remarkably, the reprogramming of
epiblast stem cells into embryonic stem cell-like cells also requires low levels 
of RA, which can modulate Wnt signalling through physical interactions of RARs
with ß-catenin. These results highlight the important functions of RA signalling 
in reprogramming somatic cells and primed stem cells to naïve pluripotency. Stem 
Cells 2015;33:1390-1404.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25546009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Dec;22(6):1531-4. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2014.06.006.

[Expression characteristics of CD200 in acute myeloid leukemia and its clinical
significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang XL(1), Shen AL(2), Guo R(2), Wang Y(2), Qiu HR(2), Qiao C(2), Yang H(2),
Zhang JF(2), Li JY(2), Wu YJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Center, Yuhuamgding Hospital of Shandong Yantai, Yantai 264000,
Shangdong Province, China; Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University (Jiangsu Province People's Hospital),
Nanjing 210029, Jiansu Province, China. (2)Department of Hematology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University (Jiangsu Province People's
Hospital), Nanjing 210029, Jiansu Province, China. (3)Department of Hematology,
The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University (Jiangsu Province
People's Hospital), Nanjing 210029, Jiansu Province, China. E-mail:
wuyujie123456@163.com.

This study was aimed to investigate the relationship between expression of CD200 
antigen and clinical characteristics in AML patients and to analyse the value of 
CD200 in evaluation of AML prognosis. The CD200 and immunophenotypes were
detected by flow cytometry, the chromosome karyotypes were determined by R
banding, the FISH was used to measure the AML1/ETO, PML/RARa and inv(16), and PCR
technique was used to detect the fusion genes AML1/ETO and PML/RARa. The results 
showed that the positive rate of CD200 antigen expression in 54 patients was
57.4% (31/54), the CD200 antigen expression between sex and age of patients was
no significant different (P > 0.05). There was significant difference of CD200
expression between CD34 and CD117 (P < 0.05), but the difference of CD200
expression in chromosome karyotypes was no significant difference(P > 0.05).
Moreover, there was significant difference of CD200 expression in CD34 and CD117 
of CBF positive AML patients (P < 0.05). It is concluded that the CD200 antigen
expression in AML may associate with a poor prognosis of patients.

PMID: 25543469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Hematol Oncol. 2014 Dec 24;7:94. doi: 10.1186/s13045-014-0094-0.

Homeobox gene expression in acute myeloid leukemia is linked to typical
underlying molecular aberrations.

Skvarova Kramarzova K, Fiser K, Mejstrikova E, Rejlova K, Zaliova M, Fornerod M, 
Drabkin HA, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM, Stary J, Trka J, Starkova J.

BACKGROUND: Although distinct patterns of homeobox (HOX) gene expression have
been described in defined cytogenetic and molecular subsets of patients with
acute myeloid leukemia (AML), it is unknown whether these patterns are the direct
result of transcriptional alterations or rather represent the differentiation
stage of the leukemic cell.
METHOD: To address this question, we used qPCR to analyze mRNA expression of HOXA
and HOXB genes in bone marrow (BM) samples of 46 patients with AML and sorted
subpopulations of healthy BM cells. These various stages of myeloid
differentiation represent matched counterparts of morphological subgroups of AML.
To further study the transcriptional alterations of HOX genes in hematopoiesis,
we also analyzed gene expression of epigenetic modifiers in the subpopluations of
healthy BM and leukemic cells.
RESULTS: Unsupervised hierarchical clustering divided the AMLs into five clusters
characterized by the presence of prevalent molecular genetic aberrations.
Notably, the impact of genotype on HOX gene expression was significantly more
pronounced than that of the differentiation stage of the blasts. This driving
role of molecular aberrations was best exemplified by the repressive effect of
the PML-RARa fusion gene on HOX gene expression, regardless of the presence of
the FLT3/ITD mutation. Furthermore, HOX gene expression was positively correlated
with mRNA levels of histone demethylases (JMJD3 and UTX) and negatively
correlated with gene expression of DNA methyltranferases. No such relationships
were observed in subpopulations of healthy BM cells.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that specific molecular genetic aberrations, 
rather than differentiation per se, underlie the observed differences in HOX gene
expression in AML. Moreover, the observed correlations between epigenetic
modifiers and HOX expression that are specific to malignant hematopoiesis,
suggest their potential causal relationships.

PMCID: PMC4310032
PMID: 25539595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Leuk Res. 2015 Feb;39(2):131-7. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2014.11.010. Epub 2014 Nov
27.

Correlation between FLT3-ITD status and clinical, cellular and molecular profiles
in promyelocytic acute leukemias.

Souza Melo CP(1), Campos CB(2), Dutra ÁP(3), Neto JC(4), Fenelon AJ(5), Neto
AH(6), Carbone EK(7), Pianovski MA(8), Ferreira AC(9), Assumpcão JG(10).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório BIOCOD Biotecnologia Ltda., Av. das Nações 2448, Portaria A,
Vespasiano CEP 33200-000, MG, Brazil. Electronic address:
inacatrina@yahoo.com.br. (2)Laboratório BIOCOD Biotecnologia Ltda., Av. das
Nações 2448, Portaria A, Vespasiano CEP 33200-000, MG, Brazil. Electronic
address: catharina.campos@labhpardini.com.br. (3)Hospital Santa Casa de
Misericórdia de Belo Horizonte, Av. Francisco Sales 1111, Belo Horizonte CEP
30150-221, MG, Brazil. Electronic address: aloapd@hotmail.com. (4)Hospital Santa 
Casa de Misericórdia de Belo Horizonte, Av. Francisco Sales 1111, Belo Horizonte 
CEP 30150-221, MG, Brazil. Electronic address: caetanoaguirre@hotmail.com.
(5)Hospital Santa Casa de Misericórdia de Belo Horizonte, Av. Francisco Sales
1111, Belo Horizonte CEP 30150-221, MG, Brazil. Electronic address:
afenelon@terra.com.br. (6)Hospital Universitário da Universidade Federal de Juiz 
de Fora, Rua Catulo Breviglieri s/n, Juiz de Fora CEP 36036-110, MG, Brazil.
Electronic address: abrahallack@ig.com.br. (7)Hospital Pequeno Príncipe, Rua
Desembargador Motta 1070, Curitiba CEP 80250-060, PR, Brazil. Electronic address:
ednacarboni@bol.com.br. (8)Hospital Erasto Gaertner, Rua Dr. Ovande do Amaral
201, Curitiba CEP 81520-060, PR, Brazil. Electronic address:
albonei@yahoo.com.br. (9)Setor de Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento-Instituto Hermes
Pardini, Av. das Nações 2448, Portaria A, Vespasiano CEP 33200-000, MG, Brazil.
Electronic address: alessandro.ferreira@labhpardini.com.br. (10)Laboratório
BIOCOD Biotecnologia Ltda., Av. das Nações 2448, Portaria A, Vespasiano CEP
33200-000, MG, Brazil; Setor de Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento-Instituto Hermes
Pardini, Av. das Nações 2448, Portaria A, Vespasiano CEP 33200-000, MG, Brazil.
Electronic address: julianaassumpcao@yahoo.com.br.

Internal tandem duplications (ITD) of FLT3 gene occur in about a third of acute
promyelocytic leukemias (APL). We investigated the patterns of blood count,
surface antigen, expression, chromosome aberrations, PML-RARa isoform, gene
expression profile (GEP) and survival in 34 APL patients according to FLT3-ITD
status. 97% had a t(15;17) and all of them carried PML-RARa gene fusion, 8
(23.5%) had a FLT3-ITD mutation. Presence of ITD was associated with higher Hb
and WBC levels, bcr3 isoform, CD34 expression, CD2 or CD2/CD34 expression. In a
multivariate analysis, Hb>9.6g/dL and WBC=20 × 10(9)/L were important factors for
predicting ITD presence. GEP showed that FLT3-ITD carriers clustered separately, 
even when as few as 5 genes were considered. This study provides further evidence
that FLT3-ITDs carriers constitute a biologically distinct group of APL patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25530565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Leukemia. 2015 May;29(5):1153-62. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.334. Epub 2014 Dec 16.

Critical role of retinoid/rexinoid signaling in mediating transformation and
therapeutic response of NUP98-RARG leukemia.

Qiu JJ(1), Zeisig BB(2), Li S(3), Liu W(4), Chu H(5), Song Y(6), Giordano A(7),
Schwaller J(8), Gronemeyer H(9), Dong S(5), So CW(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medicine, Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA [2] Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)King's College
London, Leukaemia and Stem Cell Biology Group, Department of Haematologial
Medicine, London UK. (3)1] Department of Medicine, Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA [2] Department of Oncology, Xijing
Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(4)Department of Oncology, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China. (5)Department of Medicine, Dan L. Duncan
Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (6)Department of
Pharmacology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (7)1] Sbarro
Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine & Center for Biotechology,
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA [2] Department of Medicine, Surgery &
Neuroscience, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. (8)University Children's
Hospital Basel (UKBB), Department of Biomedicine, Hebelstrasse 20, CH-4031 Basel,
Switzerland. (9)Equipe Labellisée Ligue Contre le Cancer, Department of
Functional Genomics and Cancer, Institut Génétique de Biologie Moléculaire et
Cellulaire (IGBMC), CNRS/INSERM/UdS/CERBM, C.U. de Strasbourg, BP 10142,
Illkirch-Cedex, France.

While the nucleoporin 98-retinoic acid receptor gamma (NUP98-RARG) is the first
RARG fusion protein found in acute leukemia, its roles and the molecular basis in
oncogenic transformation are currently unknown. Here, we showed that homodimeric 
NUP98-RARG not only acquired unique nuclear localization pattern and ability of
recruiting both RXRA and wild-type NUP98, but also exhibited similar
transcriptional properties as RARA fusions found in acute promyelocytic leukemia 
(APL). Using murine bone marrow retroviral transduction/transformation assay, we 
further demonstrated that NUP98-RARG fusion protein had gained transformation
ability of primary hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells, which was critically
dependent on the C-terminal GLFG domain of NUP98 and the DNA binding domain (DBD)
of RARG. In contrast to other NUP98 fusions, cells transformed by the NUP98-RARG 
fusion were extremely sensitive to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) treatment.
Interestingly, while pan-RXR agonists, SR11237 and LGD1069 could specifically
inhibit NUP98-RARG transformed cells, mutation of the RXR interaction domain in
NUP98-RARG had little effect on its transformation, revealing that therapeutic
functions of rexinoid can be independent of the direct biochemical interaction
between RXR and the fusion. Together, these results indicate that deregulation of
the retinoid/rexinoid signaling pathway has a major role and may represent a
potential therapeutic target for NUP98-RARG-mediated transformation.

PMID: 25510432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;31(4):850-4.

[Effect of siRNA targeting PML-RARa fusion gene on activity of the acute
promyelocytic leukemia cell line NB4].

[Article in Chinese]

Luo H, Pan Y, Hao X, Cao X.

This study aims to investigate the effects of small interference RNA (siRNA)
targeting PML-RARa mRNA on the activity of the acute promyelocytic leukemia cell 
line NB4. The proliferation inhibition was evaluated by MTT assay and
colony-formation inhibiting test. Apoptosis was determined by flow cytometry
after siRNA treatment. The results showed that the cell growth of siRNA treated
group was inhibited, and the apoptosis of NB4 could be induced. The siRNA
targeting PML-RARa mRNA might be a valid therapy of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

PMID: 25508432  [PubMed - in process]


95. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 12;9(12):e115185. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115185.
eCollection 2014.

First emergence of acrAB and oqxAB mediated tigecycline resistance in clinical
isolates of Klebsiella pneumoniae pre-dating the use of tigecycline in a Chinese 
hospital.

Zhong X(1), Xu H(2), Chen D(2), Zhou H(3), Hu X(4), Cheng G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning, PR China; Department of Pharmacy, Beijing
Hospital, Beijing, PR China. (2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Beijing
Hospital, Beijing, PR China. (3)State Key Laboratory for Infectious Disease
Prevention and Control, National Institute for Communicable Disease Control and
Prevention, Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, PR China;
Collaborative Innovation Centre for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, Hangzhou, PR China. (4)Department of Pharmacy, Beijing Hospital,
Beijing, PR China. (5)Department of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy, Shenyang
Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, PR China.

Tigecycline is one of the few therapeutic options for treating infections caused 
by some multi-drug resistant pathogens, such as Klebsiella pneumoniae. However,
tigecycline-resistant K. pneumoniae has been discovered recently in China. From
2009 to 2013, nine tigecycline-resistant K. pneumoniae isolates were identified
in our hospital. Six of nine strains were identified before using tigecycline. To
investigate the efflux-mediated resistance mechanisms of K. pneumoniae, the
expression of efflux pump genes (acrA, acrB, tolC, oqxA and oqxB) and pump
regulators (acrR, marA, soxS, rarA, rob and ramA) were examined by real-time
RT-PCR. Molecular typing of the tigecycline resistant strains was performed. ST11
was the predominant clone of K. pneumoniae strains, while ST1414 and ST1415 were 
novel STs. Efflux pump inhibitor (EPI)-carbonyl cyanide chlorophenylhydrazone
(CCCP) was able to reverse the resistance patterns of 5 resistant K. pneumoniae
strains. In comparison with strain A111, a tigecycline-susceptible strain
(negative control), we found that the expression levels of efflux pump genes and 
pump regulators were higher in a majority of resistant strains. Higher expression
levels of regulators rarA (2.41-fold, 9.55-fold, 28.44-fold and 18.31-fold,
respectively) and pump gene oqxB (3.87-fold, 31.96-fold, 50.61-fold and
29.45-fold, respectively) were observed in four tigecycline resistant strains
(A363, A361, A368, A373, respectively). Increased expression of acrB was
associated with ramA and marA expression. To our knowledge, studies on
tigecycline resistance mechanism in K. pneumoniae are limited especially in
China. In our study, we found that both efflux pump AcrAB-TolC and OqxAB
contributed to tigecycline resistance in K. pneumoniae isolates.

PMCID: PMC4264890
PMID: 25503276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2015 May;37(4):e234-7. doi:
10.1097/MPH.0000000000000293.

Extramedullary relapse in RARA rearrangement-negative acute promyelocytic
leukemia successfully treated in combination with chemotherapy, local
radiotherapy, and cord blood transplantation.

Igarashi K(1), Hori T, Yamamoto M, Inazawa N, Noguchi H, Suzuki N, Somekawa Y,
Sasaki M, Tsutsumi H, Hatakeyama N.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pediatrics, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine
Department of Pathology, Teine-Keijinkai Hospital Hokkaido Medical Center for
Child Health and Rehabilitation Departments of §Otolaryngology <U+2225>Pathology, JR
Sapporo Hospital, Sapporo ¶Department of Pediatrics, Asahikawa Medical
University, Asahikawa, Japan.

RARA rearrangement-negative acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is uncommon, and
its extramedullary relapse is extremely rare. We report a 5-year-old girl with
RARA rearrangement-negative APL, which recurred solely at the external auditory
canal and mastoid air cells. She was successfully treated with chemotherapy,
local radiotherapy, and unrelated cord blood transplantation. She has maintained 
complete remission for 24 months after transplantation. The clinical features and
our therapeutic strategy in this patient will provide valuable information for
extramedullary relapse of RARA rearrangement-negative APL.

PMID: 25493455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 May;135(5):1267-74.e1-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2014.10.025. Epub 2014 Dec 4.

Allergenicity of peanut component Ara h 2: Contribution of conformational versus 
linear hydroxyproline-containing epitopes.

Bernard H(1), Guillon B(1), Drumare MF(1), Paty E(2), Dreskin SC(3), Wal JM(1),
Adel-Patient K(1), Hazebrouck S(4).

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UR 496, Unité d'Immuno-Allergie Alimentaire, Jouy-en-Josas, France; CEA,
iBiTecS/Service de Pharmacologie et d'Immunoanalyse, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(2)Université Paris Descartes-Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital 
Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France. (3)Division of Allergy and Clinical
Immunology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, Colo. 
(4)INRA, UR 496, Unité d'Immuno-Allergie Alimentaire, Jouy-en-Josas, France; CEA,
iBiTecS/Service de Pharmacologie et d'Immunoanalyse, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
Electronic address: stephane.hazebrouck@cea.fr.

BACKGROUND: The 2S-albumin Ara h 2 is the most potent peanut allergen and a good 
predictor of clinical reactivity in allergic children. Posttranslational
hydroxylation of proline residues occurs in DPYSP(OH)S motifs, which are repeated
2 or 3 times in different isoforms.
OBJECTIVES: We investigated the effect of proline hydroxylation on IgE binding
and the relative contributions of linear and conformational epitopes to Ara h 2
allergenicity.
METHODS: Peptides containing DPYSP(OH)S motifs were synthesized. A recombinant
variant of Ara h 2 without DPYSP(OH)S motifs was generated by means of deletion
mutagenesis. IgE reactivity of 18 French and 5 American patients with peanut
allergy toward synthetic peptides and recombinant allergens was assessed by using
IgE-binding inhibition assays and degranulation tests of humanized rat basophilic
leukemia cells.
RESULTS: Hydroxyproline-containing peptides exhibited an IgE-binding activity
equivalent to that of the unfolded Ara h 2. In contrast, corresponding peptides
without hydroxyprolines displayed a very weak IgE-binding capacity. Despite
removal of the DPYSP(OH)S motifs, the deletion variant still displayed Ara h 2
conformational epitopes. The IgE-binding capacity of Ara h 2 was then
recapitulated with an equimolar mixture of a hydroxylated peptide and the
deletion variant. Hydroxylated peptides of 15 and 27 amino acid residues were
also able to trigger cell degranulation.
CONCLUSIONS: Sensitization toward linear and conformational epitopes of Ara h 2
is variable among patients with peanut allergy. Optimal IgE binding to linear
epitopes of Ara h 2 requires posttranslational hydroxylation of proline residues.
The absence of hydroxyprolines could then affect the accuracy of
component-resolved diagnostics by using rAra h 2.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25483599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;31(4):850-4.

[Effect of siRNA targeting PML-RARa fusion gene on activity of the acute
promyelocytic leukemia cell line NB4].

[Article in Chinese]

Luo H, Pan Y, Hao X, Cao X.

This study aims to investigate the effects of small interference RNA (siRNA)
targeting PML-RARa mRNA on the activity of the acute promyelocytic leukemia cell 
line NB4. The proliferation inhibition was evaluated by MTT assay and
colony-formation inhibiting test. Apoptosis was determined by flow cytometry
after siRNA treatment. The results showed that the cell growth of siRNA treated
group was inhibited, and the apoptosis of NB4 could be induced. The siRNA
targeting PML-RARa mRNA might be a valid therapy of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

PMID: 25464801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 May;135(5):1367-74.e1-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2014.09.048. Epub 2014 Nov 22.

"Default" versus "pre-atopic" IgG responses to foodborne and airborne
pathogenesis-related group 10 protein molecules in birch-sensitized and nonatopic
children.

Hofmaier S(1), Hatzler L(1), Rohrbach A(1), Panetta V(2), Hakimeh D(1), Bauer
CP(3), Hoffman U(3), Forster J(4), Zepp F(5), Schuster A(6), Stock P(1), Wahn
U(1), Keil T(7), Lau S(1), Matricardi PM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Pneumology & Immunology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (2)L'altrastatistica srl, Consultancy & Training,
Biostatistics Office, Rome, Italy. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Technical
University of Munich, Munich, Germany. (4)Department of Pediatrics St Hedwig, St 
Josefs Hospital, Freiburg, Germany. (5)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent
Medicine, Johannes Gutenberg University Medical Centre, Mainz, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Pneumology, Heinrich-Heine-University, 
Düsseldorf, Germany. (7)Institute of Social Medicine, Epidemiology and Health
Economics, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Institute of
Clinical Epidemiology and Biometry, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(8)Department of Paediatric Pneumology & Immunology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: paolo.matricardi@charite.de.

BACKGROUND: The route and dose of exposure are believed to be relevant factors in
the sensitization process. Pathogenesis-related group 10 protein (PR-10)
molecules are a family of allergenic proteins shared by many pollens (eg, birch
and alder) and foods (eg, apple, peach, and soy). Children are exposed to both
pollen-derived (inhaled) and food-derived (ingested) PR-10 molecules.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to investigate the role of route and dose of exposure in the
evolution of IgG and IgE responses to recombinant PR-10 molecules.
METHODS: The German Multicentre Allergy Study examined a birth cohort born in
1990. Blood samples were collected at the ages of 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 10, and 13
years. Participants were included in the present analysis if they had (1) at
least 1 serum sample at each of the 4 age periods or time points (1-3 years, 5-7 
years, 10 years, and 13 years) and (2) IgE responses to birch (children with
birch atopy) or no IgE response at all to 9 common aeroallergens and food
allergens (nonatopic children). Therefore serum IgE antibodies to a panel of 4
airborne and 5 foodborne extracts, as well as to Bet v 1, were measured in
singleplex assays, whereas IgG and IgE antibodies to a panel of 3 airborne PR-10 
molecules (rBet v 1, rAln g 1, and rCor a 1.0101) and 7 foodborne PR-10 molecules
(rCor a 1.0401, rMal d 1, rPru p 1, rGly m 4, rAra h 8, rApi g 1, and rDau c 1)
were tested by using a multiplex microarray.
RESULTS: In the present analyses we included 28 children with birch atopy and
randomly selected 28 nonatopic children from the 190 children fulfilling the
inclusion criteria. Two different patterns of IgG responses to PR-10 molecules
were identified. Among nonatopic subjects, a "default" IgG response was directed 
mostly against foodborne PR-10, started often before age 2 years, stayed weak,
and was mostly transient. Among all atopic subjects, the default IgG response at 
age 1 year was overwhelmed after age 2 years by an "pre-atopic" IgG response,
which started with or shortly before the IgE response and was intense and
persistent. This atopic IgG response, as well as the IgE response, involved
progressively more foodborne PR-10 proteins with frequencies and levels related
to their homology with Bet v 1.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that children have a default antibody response
to PR-10 molecules, which is early, weak, and transient; does not involve IgE;
and is initiated by foodborne PR-10. By contrast, an atopic antibody response to 
PR-10 molecules is delayed, strong, and persistent; involves both IgG and IgE;
and is initiated by airborne PR-10.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25458000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Med Oncol. 2015 Jan;32(1):382. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0382-0. Epub 2014 Nov 27.

Occurrence of BCR/ABL fusion gene in a patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Zhang LJ(1), Gan YM, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Huai'an First People's Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Huai'an, 223300, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China.

PMID: 25428388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. BMC Health Serv Res. 2014 Nov 19;14:559. doi: 10.1186/s12913-014-0559-4.

Using qualitative mixed methods to study small health care organizations while
maximising trustworthiness and authenticity.

Phillips CB(1), Dwan K(2), Hepworth J(3), Pearce C(4), Hall S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, Peter Baume Building 42A, Australian National University,
Canberra, ACT, 2601, Australia. Christine.phillips@anu.edu.au. (2)Australian
Primary Health Care Research Institute, Australian National University, Canberra,
Australia. kathryn.dwan@anu.edu.au. (3)School of Public Health and Social Work,
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia.
julie.hepworth@qut.edu.au. (4)Inner East Medicare Local, Burwood, Victoria,
Australia. chris_pearce@mac.com. (5)Medical School, Australian National
University, Canberra, Australia. sally.hall@anu.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: The primary health care sector delivers the majority of health care
in western countries through small, community-based organizations. However,
research into these healthcare organizations is limited by the time constraints
and pressure facing them, and the concern by staff that research is peripheral to
their work. We developed Q-RARA-Qualitative Rapid Appraisal, Rigorous Analysis-to
study small, primary health care organizations in a way that is efficient,
acceptable to participants and methodologically rigorous.
METHODS: Q-RARA comprises a site visit, semi-structured interviews, structured
and unstructured observations, photographs, floor plans, and social scanning
data. Data were collected over the course of one day per site and the qualitative
analysis was integrated and iterative.
RESULTS: We found Q-RARA to be acceptable to participants and effective in
collecting data on organizational function in multiple sites without disrupting
the practice, while maintaining a balance between speed and trustworthiness.
CONCLUSIONS: The Q-RARA approach is capable of providing a richly textured,
rigorous understanding of the processes of the primary care practice while also
allowing researchers to develop an organizational perspective. For these reasons 
the approach is recommended for use in small-scale organizations both within and 
outside the primary health care sector.

PMCID: PMC4245737
PMID: 25407663  [PubMed - in process]


102. Mol Cytogenet. 2014 Oct 22;7(1):67. doi: 10.1186/s13039-014-0067-6. eCollection
2014.

Genomic amplification of MYC as double minutes in a patient with APL-like
leukemia.

Poddighe PJ(1), Wessels H(1), Merle P(2), Westers M(2), Bhola S(1), Loonen A(2), 
Zweegman S(2), Ossenkoppele GJ(2), Wondergem MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, De Boelelaan
1117, PK 0X011, Amsterdam, 1081 HV The Netherlands. (2)Department of Haematology,
VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a subtype of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) characterized by a PML-RARA fusion due to a translocation
t(15;17). Its sensitivity to treatment with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), which
causes differentiation of the abnormal promyelocytes, combined with anthracycline
based chemotherapy makes it the best curable subtype of acute myeloid leukemia. A
rapid and accurate diagnosis is needed in the first place to prevent (more)
bleeding problems. Here we present a patient with a leukemia with an APL-like
morphology but no detectable PML-RARA fusion, as demonstrated by RT-PCR and
cytogenetic analysis.
RESULTS: Unexpectedly, karyotyping revealed numerous double minutes (dmins).
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with DNA probes specific for the
MYC-region showed the presence of multiple MYC amplicons. SNP-array analysis
uncovered amplification of the 8q24.13-q24.21 region, including the MYC-gene,
flanked by deletions in 8q24.13 and 8q24.21-q24.22, and a homozygous deletion in 
9p21.3, flanked by heterozygous deletions in the same chromosome region.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis was revised to AML, not otherwise specified (AML, NOS)
and therefore therapy with ATRA was discontinued.

PMCID: PMC4228273
PMID: 25392715  [PubMed]


103. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 4;9(11):e111082. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111082.
eCollection 2014.

Establishment of a humanized APL model via the transplantation of
PML-RARA-transduced human common myeloid progenitors into immunodeficient mice.

Matsushita H(1), Yahata T(2), Sheng Y(3), Nakamura Y(3), Muguruma Y(3), Matsuzawa
H(4), Tanaka M(5), Hayashi H(5), Sato T(5), Damdinsuren A(6), Onizuka M(7), Ito
M(8), Miyachi H(6), Pandolfi PP(9), Ando K(10).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Cancer Stem Cell, Tokai University School of Medicine,
Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan; Medical Research Institute, Tokai University, Isehara, 
Kanagawa, Japan; Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tokai University School of
Medicine, Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan. (2)Research Center for Cancer Stem Cell,
Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan; Medical Research
Institute, Tokai University, Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan; Department of Cell
Transplantation, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Research Center for Cancer Stem Cell, Tokai University School of Medicine,
Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan. (4)Research Center for Cancer Stem Cell, Tokai
University School of Medicine, Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan; Support Center for
Medical Research and Education, Tokai University, Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan.
(5)Support Center for Medical Research and Education, Tokai University, Isehara, 
Kanagawa, Japan. (6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tokai University School of
Medicine, Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan. (7)Division of Hematology and Oncology,
Department of Internal Medicine, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara,
Kanagawa, Japan. (8)Central Institute for Experimental Animals, Kawasaki,
Kanagawa, Japan. (9)Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer
Center, Departments of Medicine and Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. 
(10)Research Center for Cancer Stem Cell, Tokai University School of Medicine,
Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan; Medical Research Institute, Tokai University, Isehara, 
Kanagawa, Japan; Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan.

Recent advances in cancer biology have revealed that many malignancies possess a 
hierarchal system, and leukemic stem cells (LSC) or leukemia-initiating cells
(LIC) appear to be obligatory for disease progression. Acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL), a subtype of acute myeloid leukemia characterized by the
formation of a PML-RARa fusion protein, leads to the accumulation of abnormal
promyelocytes. In order to understand the precise mechanisms involved in human
APL leukemogenesis, we established a humanized in vivo APL model involving
retroviral transduction of PML-RARA into CD34(+) hematopoietic cells from human
cord blood and transplantation of these cells into immunodeficient mice. The
leukemia well recapitulated human APL, consisting of leukemic cells with abundant
azurophilic abnormal granules in the cytoplasm, which expressed CD13, CD33 and
CD117, but not HLA-DR and CD34, were clustered in the same category as human APL 
samples in the gene expression analysis, and demonstrated sensitivity to ATRA. As
seen in human APL, the induced APL cells showed a low transplantation efficiency 
in the secondary recipients, which was also exhibited in the transplantations
that were carried out using the sorted CD34- fraction. In order to analyze the
mechanisms underlying APL initiation and development, fractionated human cord
blood was transduced with PML-RARA. Common myeloid progenitors (CMP) from
CD34(+)/CD38(+) cells developed APL. These findings demonstrate that CMP are a
target fraction for PML-RARA in APL, whereas the resultant CD34(-) APL cells may 
share the ability to maintain the tumor.

PMCID: PMC4219701
PMID: 25369030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Oct;22(5):1235-8. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2014.05.009.

[Expression of musashi-2 gene in leukemia stem cells from acute myeloid leukemia 
patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Ye AF(1), Han YX(1), Zhang SH(2), Li HY(1), Chen CQ(1), Wu JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Internal Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou 325000, Zhejiang Province, China. (2)Key Laboratory
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University Medical College, Shanghai
200433, China. E-mail: shenghuizhang1@126.com.

This study was aimed to detect the expression of Musashi-2 (Msi2) in acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) and investigate the relationship between Msi2 and other
clinical parameters, especially CD34. A total RNA was extracted from bone marrow 
of newly diagnosed AML patietns. The Msi2 mRNA expression in newly diagnosed AML 
patients was detected with real-time fluorescence quantitative RT-PCR. The
expression level of CD34 in above-menthioned patients was detected by flow
cytometry (FCM). The relationship between the expression of Msi2 mRNA and
clinical outcome in AML patients was analysed. The results showed that (1)the
expression of Msi2 mRNA in newly diagnosed AML patients was much higher than that
in healthy volunteers (P < 0.05) , especially in M1, M4 and M5 patients; (2)the
expression level of Msi2 did not correlate with age, sex, white blood cell count 
of peripheral blood, AML1/ETO and PML/RARa fusion gene (P > 0.05); (3) Msi2
expression level in patients with CD34(+) cells was significantly higher than
that in patients with CD34(-) cells (P < 0.05). It is concluded that the Msi2
mRNA expresses in leukamia stem cells, the high expression of Msi2 mRNA has been 
found in newly diagnosed AML patients, especially in M1, M4 and M5 patients, the 
high expression also has been observed in patients with CD34(+).

PMID: 25338564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Oncol. 2015 Feb;9(2):355-64. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2014.09.005. Epub 2014 Sep
22.

Enhanced expression of retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) induces
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and disruption of mammary acinar structures.

Doi A(1), Ishikawa K(2), Shibata N(3), Ito E(4), Fujimoto J(5), Yamamoto M(3),
Shiga H(6), Mochizuki H(6), Kawamura Y(6), Goshima N(7), Semba K(8), Watanabe
S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Medical Bioscience, School of Advanced Science 
and Engineering, Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo
162-8480, Japan. Electronic address: ad0i_i0da@yahoo.co.jp. (2)Department of Life
Science and Medical Bioscience, School of Advanced Science and Engineering,
Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8480, Japan; Japan
Biological Informatics Consortium (JBiC), 2-45 Aomi, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8073,
Japan. Electronic address: IshikawaKosuke@gmail.com. (3)Department of Life
Science and Medical Bioscience, School of Advanced Science and Engineering,
Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8480, Japan.
(4)Division of Gene Expression Analysis, Translational Research Center (Tokyo
Branch), Fukushima Medical University, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 151-0051, Japan.
(5)Department of Life Science and Medical Bioscience, School of Advanced Science 
and Engineering, Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo
162-8480, Japan; Japan Biological Informatics Consortium (JBiC), 2-45 Aomi,
Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8073, Japan. (6)Japan Biological Informatics Consortium
(JBiC), 2-45 Aomi, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8073, Japan. (7)Quantitative Proteomics
Team, Molecular Profiling Research Center for Drug Discovery (molprof), National 
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 2-4-7 Aomi,
Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-0064, Japan. (8)Department of Life Science and Medical
Bioscience, School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Waseda University, 2-2
Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8480, Japan; Division of Gene Function
Analysis, Translational Research Center, Fukushima Medical University, 1
Hikarigaoka, Fukushima-city, Fukushima 960-1295, Japan. Electronic address:
ksemba@waseda.jp.

The early steps of mammary tumorigenesis include loss of epithelial cell
polarity, escape from anoikis, and acquisition of proliferative capacity. The
genes responsible for these processes are predicted to be early diagnostic
markers or new therapeutic targets. Here we tested 51 genes coamplified with
ERBB2 in the 17q12-21 amplicon for these tumorigenic activities using an MCF10A
3D culture-based screening system. We found that overexpression of retinoic acid 
receptor a (RARA) disrupted normal acinar structure and induced
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The mRNA levels of known EMT-inducing
factors, including SLUG, FOXC2, ZEB1, and ZEB2, were significantly increased upon
RARA overexpression. Knockdown of ZEB1 suppressed the RARA-mediated EMT
phenotype. These results suggest that overexpression of RARA enhances malignant
transformation during mammary tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25300573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Oct 7;16(5):450. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0450-6.

DNA methylation profiling in the Carolina Breast Cancer Study defines cancer
subclasses differing in clinicopathologic characteristics and survival.

Conway K, Edmiston SN, May R, Kuan PF, Chu H, Bryant C, Tse CK, Swift-Scanlan T, 
Geradts J, Troester MA, Millikan RC.

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, with several intrinsic
subtypes differing by hormone receptor (HR) status, molecular profiles, and
prognosis. However, the role of DNA methylation in breast cancer development and 
progression and its relationship with the intrinsic tumor subtypes are not fully 
understood.
METHODS: A microarray targeting promoters of cancer-related genes was used to
evaluate DNA methylation at 935 CpG sites in 517 breast tumors from the Carolina 
Breast Cancer Study, a population-based study of invasive breast cancer.
RESULTS: Consensus clustering using methylation (ß) values for the 167 most
variant CpG loci defined four clusters differing most distinctly in HR status,
intrinsic subtype (luminal versus basal-like), and p53 mutation status.
Supervised analyses for HR status, subtype, and p53 status identified 266
differentially methylated CpG loci with considerable overlap. Genes relatively
hypermethylated in HR+, luminal A, or p53 wild-type breast cancers included
FABP3, FGF2, FZD9, GAS7, HDAC9, HOXA11, MME, PAX6, POMC, PTGS2, RASSF1, RBP1, and
SCGB3A1, whereas those more highly methylated in HR-, basal-like, or p53 mutant
tumors included BCR, C4B, DAB2IP, MEST, RARA, SEPT5, TFF1, THY1, and SERPINA5.
Clustering also defined a hypermethylated luminal-enriched tumor cluster 3 that
gene ontology analysis revealed to be enriched for homeobox and other
developmental genes (ASCL2, DLK1, EYA4, GAS7, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB13, IHH, IPF1,
ISL1, PAX6, TBX1, SOX1, and SOX17). Although basal-enriched cluster 2 showed
worse short-term survival, the luminal-enriched cluster 3 showed worse long-term 
survival but was not independently prognostic in multivariate Cox proportional
hazard analysis, likely due to the mostly early stage cases in this dataset.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that epigenetic patterns are strongly
associated with HR status, subtype, and p53 mutation status and may show
heterogeneity within tumor subclass. Among HR+ breast tumors, a subset exhibiting
a gene signature characterized by hypermethylation of developmental genes and
poorer clinicopathologic features may have prognostic value and requires further 
study. Genes differentially methylated between clinically important tumor subsets
have roles in differentiation, development, and tumor growth and may be critical 
to establishing and maintaining tumor phenotypes and clinical outcomes.

PMCID: PMC4303129
PMID: 25287138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Br J Haematol. 2015 Mar;168(6):904-8. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13157. Epub 2014 Oct 4.

GTF2I-RARA is a novel fusion transcript in a t(7;17) variant of acute
promyelocytic leukaemia with clinical resistance to retinoic acid.

Li J(1), Zhong HY, Zhang Y, Xiao L, Bai LH, Liu SF, Zhou GB, Zhang GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology/Institute of Molecular Haematology, the Second
Xiang-Ya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China.

PMID: 25284716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Blood. 2014 Dec 11;124(25):3772-80. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-03-561852. Epub 2014 
Sep 25.

Clearance of PML/RARA-bound promoters suffice to initiate APL differentiation.

Vitaliano-Prunier A(1), Halftermeyer J(1), Ablain J(1), de Reynies A(2), Peres
L(1), Le Bras M(1), Metzger D(3), de Thé H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France; INSERM Unité
Mixte de Recherche 944, Equipe Labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le
Cancer, Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Paris, France; Centre National de
la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7212, Hôpital St. Louis,
Paris, France; (2)Programme Cartes d'Identité des Tumeurs, Ligue Nationale contre
le Cancer, Paris, France; (3)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et 
Cellulaire, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de
Recherche 7104, INSERM U 964, Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France;
(4)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France; INSERM Unité
Mixte de Recherche 944, Equipe Labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le
Cancer, Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Paris, France; Centre National de
la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7212, Hôpital St. Louis,
Paris, France; Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Service de Biochimie,
Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France; and Collège de France, Paris, France.

PML/RARA, a potent transcriptional inhibitor of nuclear receptor signaling,
represses myeloid differentiation genes and drives acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL). Association of the retinoid X receptor-a (RXRA) coreceptor to PML/RARA is 
required for transformation, with RXRA promoting its efficient DNA binding. APL
is exquisitely sensitive to retinoic acid (RA) and arsenic trioxide (arsenic),
which both trigger cell differentiation in vivo. Whereas RA elicits
transcriptional activation of PML/RARA targets, how arsenic triggers
differentiation remains unclear. Here we demonstrate that extinction of PML/RARA 
triggers terminal differentiation in vivo. Similarly, ablation of retinoid X
receptors loosens PML/RARA DNA binding, inducing terminal differentiation of APL 
cells ex vivo or in vivo. RXRA sumoylation directly contributes to
PML/RARA-dependent transformation ex vivo, presumably by enhancing
transcriptional repression. Thus, APL differentiation is a default program
triggered by clearance of PML/RARA-bound promoters, rather than obligatory active
transcriptional activation, explaining how arsenic elicits APL maturation through
PML/RARA degradation.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 25258343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2015 Apr;103(4):235-42. doi:
10.1002/bdra.23321. Epub 2014 Sep 24.

Genome-wide mapping of copy number variations in patients with both anorectal
malformations and central nervous system abnormalities.

Dworschak GC(1), Draaken M, Hilger AC, Schramm C, Bartels E, Schmiedeke E,
Grasshoff-Derr S, Märzheuser S, Holland-Cunz S, Lacher M, Jenetzky E, Zwink N,
Schmidt D, Nöthen MM, Ludwig M, Reutter H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Anorectal malformations (ARM) have a prevalence of around 1 in 2500
live births. In around 50% of patients, the malformation is isolated, while in
the remainder it arises within the context of complex genetic abnormalities or a 
defined genetic syndrome. Recent studies have implicated rare copy number
variations (CNVs) in both isolated and nonisolated ARM, and identified plausible 
candidate genes.
METHODS: In the present study, array-based molecular karyotyping was performed to
identify causative CNVs in 32 sporadic ARM patients with comorbid abnormalities
of the central nervous system (CNS). This phenotype was selected to enrich for
rare CNVs, since previous research has implicated rare CNVs in both CNS
abnormalities and ARM.
RESULTS: In five patients, a probable disease-causing CNV was identified
(del6q14.3q16.3, del14q32.2, del17q12q21.2, and two patients with del22q11.21).
In three of these patients, the CNVs were de novo. For the remaining two
patients, no parental DNA was available. Deletions at 22q11.21 and 6q14.3 have
been associated with both CNS abnormalities and ARM. In contrast, deletions at
14q32.2 have only been described in patients with CNS abnormalities, and the
del17q12q21.2 is a novel CNV. Expression studies in mice suggest that NEUROD2 and
RARA, which reside within the newly identified del17q12q21.2 region, are
candidate genes for the formation of microcephaly and ARM.
CONCLUSION: The present data suggest that CNVs are a frequent cause of the ARM
with CNS abnormalities phenotype, and that array-analysis is indicated in such
patients.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25250690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Clin Oncol. 2014 Nov 20;32(33):3692-6. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2014.56.5549. Epub 2014
Sep 22.

Postremission therapy in acute promyelocytic leukemia: room for improvement?

Lancet JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL Jeffrey.Lancet@moffitt.org.

Comment on
    J Clin Oncol. 2014 Nov 20;32(33):3729-35.

A 29-year-old white man presented to the hospital with a 3-week history of
fatigue, generalized weakness, gingival swelling and bleeding, and headaches.
Laboratory work revealed WBC 30.4 k/µL, hemoglobin 7.9 g/dL, and platelets 16
k/µL. The WBC differential showed 64% blasts and 24% promyelocytes. Coagulation
studies revealed prothrombin time (PT) 13.5 seconds, internationalized normalized
ratio (INR) 1.3, fibrinogen 199 mg/dL, D-dimer greater than 1.0 µg/mL, and fibrin
split products greater than 40 µg/mL. A bone-marrow aspirate with biopsy was
performed, yielding the diagnosis of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), with
t(15;17)(q23;q21.1) in all metaphases. Induction therapy commenced with
daunorubicin, cytarabine (Ara-C), and all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), and
complete remission was documented 5 weeks later. PML-RARA fusion transcripts were
still detected by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. He is now
referred to you for consideration of postremission therapy in the setting of
high-risk acute promyelocytic leukemia in first remission.

PMID: 25245443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Int Med Res. 2014 Dec;42(6):1363-73. doi: 10.1177/0300060514540630. Epub 2014
Sep 15.

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia with a PML-RARA insertional translocation and a
chromosome 21 abnormality in XYY syndrome: case report.

He Y(1), Li X(1), Wang D(1), Zhang E(1), Hu Y(1), Wang W(1), Huang R(1), Xiao
R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China. (2)Department of Haematology,
The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong
Province, China rose.xiao@nasyn.com.

The concomitant presence of the XYY syndrome with haematological malignancies is 
rare. This report presents a case of acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) with the
promyelocytic leukaemia-retinoic acid receptor alpha (PML-RARA) gene insertional 
translocation and a chromosome 21 abnormality in a 29-year-old XYY male patient. 
Karyotype analysis revealed an abnormal karyotype of 47,XYY [14]/46,XYY,-21[16]. 
Fluorescence in situ hybridization and reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction analysis showed the existence of a PML-RARA fusion gene. The patient was
treated by all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and chemotherapy. Laboratory results
revealed that the coagulopathy improved and the patient achieved complete
remission, based on bone-marrow morphology. The patient then received sequential 
monthly therapy using arsenic trioxide, followed by ATRA, followed by
chemotherapy; he has survived disease-free for 36 months. Our findings suggest
that the additional chromosomal abnormalities involving the sex chromosomes and
chromosome 21 did not affect the prognosis of APL, and that the sequential
treatment strategy had a good clinical effect without being associated with
severe side-effects.

© The Author(s) 2014 Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav.

PMID: 25223426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Jul 15;7(8):5363-8. eCollection 2014.

Tetraploidy acute promyelocytic leuemia with double t(15;17)/PML-RARA, a case
report with review of literature.

Dalia SM(1), Horna P(2), Zhang L(2).

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer and Research Institute, Division of Hematological
Malignancies and The University of South Florida Tampa, Florida, USA. (2)H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer and Research Institute, Department of Hematopathology and
Laboratory Medicine Tampa, Florida, USA.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) with tetraploidy chromosome harboring
t(15;17)(q23;a21) is extremely rare. To date, there are 14 such cases reports
that describe this entity, mostly found in Eastern hemisphere. Herein we
described a 51-year-old man with a diagnosis of tetraploid acute promyelocytic
leukemia with double (15;17) translocations and compare the prototypically
clinicopathologic, genetic and molecular findings with those reported in the
literature.

PMCID: PMC4152114
PMID: 25197424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2015 Jan;70(1):81-8. doi: 10.1093/jac/dku340. Epub 2014
Sep 4.

Differential contribution of AcrAB and OqxAB efflux pumps to multidrug resistance
and virulence in Klebsiella pneumoniae.

Bialek-Davenet S(1), Lavigne JP(2), Guyot K(3), Mayer N(4), Tournebize R(5),
Brisse S(6), Leflon-Guibout V(4), Nicolas-Chanoine MH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Service de Microbiologie, Hôpital Beaujon, AP-HP, Clichy, France Institut
Pasteur, Microbial Evolutionary Genomics, Paris, France CNRS, UMR3525, Paris,
France. (2)INSERM U1047, Université Montpellier 1, UFR de Médecine, Nîmes, France
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, CHU Caremeau, Nîmes, France. (3)Service de
Microbiologie, Hôpital Beaujon, AP-HP, Clichy, France Faculté de Médecine Paris
Diderot, Paris, France. (4)Service de Microbiologie, Hôpital Beaujon, AP-HP,
Clichy, France. (5)Institut Pasteur, Pathogénie Microbienne Moléculaire, Paris,
France INSERM U786, Paris, France. (6)Institut Pasteur, Microbial Evolutionary
Genomics, Paris, France CNRS, UMR3525, Paris, France. (7)Service de
Microbiologie, Hôpital Beaujon, AP-HP, Clichy, France Faculté de Médecine Paris
Diderot, Paris, France INSERM UMR 1149, Université Paris 7, Paris, France
mhn.chanoine@bjn.aphp.fr.

OBJECTIVES: In Klebsiella pneumoniae, overexpression of the AcrAB efflux pump and
the more recently described OqxAB efflux pump has been linked to an antibiotic
cross-resistance phenotype, but the mechanisms of regulation are largely unknown.
Moreover, while AcrAB has been shown to participate in K. pneumoniae virulence,
the contribution of OqxAB has not yet been assessed.
METHODS: In the present study we investigated a K. pneumoniae clinical isolate
(KPBj1 E+), displaying cross-resistance to quinolones, chloramphenicol and
cefoxitin, and its phenotypic revertant (KPBj1 Rev, susceptible to antibiotics)
by using whole-genome sequencing, RT-PCR, complementation and a Caenorhabditis
elegans virulence model.
RESULTS: We detected a point mutation in the oqxR repressor gene of KPBj1 E+,
which overexpressed genes rarA, encoding a transcriptional regulator, and oqxB,
but not acrB. Complementation with wild-type oqxR restored antibiotic
susceptibility and normalized rarA and oqxB expression levels. Whole-genome
sequencing showed that KPBj1 Rev had lost the entire rarA-oqxABR locus, situated 
close to an integration hot spot of phage P4. This large deletion seemed
responsible for the significantly lower virulence potential of strain KPBj1 Rev
compared with KPBj1 E+. Moreover, we found that KPBj1 E+ <U+0394>acrB was significantly 
less virulent than its parental strain.
CONCLUSIONS: This work demonstrates the role of the overexpression of efflux pump
OqxAB, due to a mutation in gene oqxR, in the antibiotic resistance phenotype of 
a clinical isolate, and suggests that the presence of AcrAB, associated with
overexpression of OqxAB, is required for high virulence potential.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25193085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Singapore Med J. 2014 Aug;55(8):443-7.

Clinical characteristics, outcome and early induction deaths in patients with
acute promyelocytic leukaemia: a five-year experience at a tertiary care centre.

Karim F(1), Shaikh U, Adil SN, Khurshid M.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology, Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Aga Khan
University Hospital, Stadium Road, Karachi 74800, Pakistan.
farheen.mahar@aku.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) is a distinct clinical and
biological subtype of acute myeloid leukaemia. APL is notorious for causing early
death during induction therapy, resulting in induction failure. The aim of our
study was to report the clinical characteristics, outcome and early induction
deaths with regard to patients with APL seen at our hospital.
METHODS: This was a retrospective study carried out at Aga Khan University
Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan. Patients aged > 15 years diagnosed with APL within
the period September 2007-September 2012 were included in the study.
RESULTS: Within the study period, 26 patients were diagnosed with APL based on
morphology and the detection of t(15;17)(q24.1;q21.1) and promyelocytic
leukaemia-retinoic acid receptor alpha (PML-RARA). The male to female ratio was
1:1. The median age of the patients was 41 (range 16-72) years. In all, there
were 13 (50.0%) high-risk patients, and early induction death rate was 61.5%.
Causes of early induction deaths (n = 16) included haemorrhage in 7 (43.8%)
patients, differentiation (ATRA) syndrome in 7 (43.8%) and infection in 2
(12.5%). The survival rate among patients who survived the early period was 70%
at 42 months. The relapse rate was 30%.
CONCLUSION: Early induction death rate was very high in patients with APL. The
most common cause of early induction death in our study was haemorrhage. Outcome 
among patients with APL was found to be better among those who survived the
initial period.

PMCID: PMC4294096
PMID: 25189308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014 Nov;58(11):6982-5. doi: 10.1128/AAC.03808-14.
Epub 2014 Sep 2.

Mechanisms of tigecycline resistance among Klebsiella pneumoniae clinical
isolates.

Sheng ZK(1), Hu F(1), Wang W(1), Guo Q(1), Chen Z(1), Xu X(1), Zhu D(1), Wang
M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Antibiotics, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 
Key Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacology of Antibiotics, Ministry of Health,
Shanghai, China. (2)Institute of Antibiotics, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China Key Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacology of Antibiotics, Ministry 
of Health, Shanghai, China mgwang@fudan.edu.cn.

Of 26 tigecycline-nonsusceptible Klebsiella pneumoniae (TNSKP) clinical isolates,
25 had nonsynonymous mutations in ramR and/or acrR (23 in ramR and 10 in acrR).
Eight TNSKP isolates possessed overexpression of ramA, acrB, rarA, and oqxB
simultaneously, while 8 and 1 TNSKP strains had upregulation of ramA and acrB and
of rarA and oqxB, respectively. Thus, resistance mechanisms of 9 TNSKP isolates
cannot be explained by the present pathways. This study underscores the role of
RamA in TNSKP and suggests the presence of novel tigecycline resistance
mechanisms.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4249433
PMID: 25182649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Int J Cancer. 2014 Nov 15;135(10):2262-72. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29081. Epub 2014 Aug 
14.

Retinoic acid signaling in cancer: The parable of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Ablain J(1), de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris Cedex 
10, France; INSERM U 944, Equipe labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le
Cancer, Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris Cedex 10, 
France; CNRS UMR 7212, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris Cedex 10, France.

Inevitably fatal some 40 years, acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) can now be
cured in more than 95% of cases. This clinical success story is tightly linked to
tremendous progress in our understanding of retinoic acid (RA) signaling. The
discovery of retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) was followed by the cloning of
the chromosomal translocations driving APL, all of which involve RARA. Since
then, new findings on the biology of nuclear receptors have progressively
enlightened the basis for the clinical efficacy of RA in APL. Reciprocally, the
disease offered a range of angles to approach the cellular and molecular
mechanisms of RA action. This virtuous circle contributed to make APL one of the 
best-understood cancers from both clinical and biological standpoints. Yet, some 
important questions remain unanswered including how lessons learnt from
RA-triggered APL cure can help design new therapies for other malignancies.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 25130873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Autophagy. 2014 Oct 1;10(10):1726-37. doi: 10.4161/auto.29592. Epub 2014 Jul 18.

MIR125B1 represses the degradation of the PML-RARA oncoprotein by an
autophagy-lysosomal pathway in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Zeng CW(1), Chen ZH(1), Zhang XJ(1), Han BW(1), Lin KY(1), Li XJ(1), Wei PP(1),
Zhang H(2), Li Y(3), Chen YQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the Ministry of Education; State Key
Laboratory for Biocontrol; School of Life Science; Sun Yat-sen University;
Guangzhou, China. (2)China-America Cancer Research Institute; Key Laboratory for 
Medical Molecular Diagnostics of Guangdong Province; Guangdong Medical College;
Dongguan, China. (3)Institute of Hematology; Medical College; Jinan University;
Guangzhou, China.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by the t(15;17)-associated
PML-RARA fusion gene. We have previously found that MIR125B1 is highly expressed 
in patients with APL and may be associated with disease pathogenesis; however,
the mechanism by which MIR125B1 exerts its oncogenic potential has not been fully
elucidated. Here, we demonstrated that MIR125B1 abundance correlates with the
PML-RARA status. MIR125B1 overexpression enhanced PML-RARA expression and
inhibited the ATRA-induced degradation of the PML-RARA oncoprotein. RNA-seq
analysis revealed a direct link between the PML-RARA degradation pathway and
MIR125B1-arrested differentiation. We further demonstrated that the
MIR125B1-mediated blockade of PML-RARA proteolysis was regulated via an
autophagy-lysosomal pathway, contributing to the inhibition of APL
differentiation. Furthermore, we identified DRAM2 (DNA-damage regulated autophagy
modulator 2), a critical regulator of autophagy, as a novel target that was at
least partly responsible for the function of MIR125B1 involved in autophagy.
Importantly, the knockdown phenotypes for DRAM2 are similar to the effects of
overexpressing MIR125B1 as impairment of PML-RARA degradation, inhibition of
autophagy, and myeloid cell differentiation arrest. These effects of MIR125B1 and
its target DRAM2 were further confirmed in an APL mouse model. Thus, MIR125B1
dysregulation may interfere with the effectiveness of ATRA-mediated
differentiation through an autophagy-dependent pathway, representing a novel
potential APL therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC4198358
PMID: 25126724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Oncol Lett. 2014 Sep;8(3):1001-1008. Epub 2014 Jul 2.

Coexistence of t(15;17) and t(15;16;17) detected by fluorescence in situ
hybridization in a patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia: A case report and
literature review.

Zhang R(1), Kim YM(2), Wang X(2), Li Y(3), Pang H(2), Lee JY(4), Li S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA ; Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated
Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. (3)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated
Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA ; Department of Pathology, College of Medicine,
Korea University, Seoul 136-705, Republic of Korea.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by the t(15;17)(q22;q21),
which results in the fusion of the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene at 15q22
with the retinoic acid a-receptor (RARA) gene at 17q21. The current study
presents the case of a 54-year-old female with APL carrying the atypical PML/RARA
fusion signal due to a novel complex variant translocation
t(15;16;17)(q22;q24;q21), as well as the classical PML/RARA fusion signal.
Subsequent array comparative genomic hybridization revealed somatic, cryptic
deletions on 3p25.3, 8q23.1 and 12p13.2-p13.1, and a duplication on 8q11.2;
however, no genetic material loss or gain was observed in the breakpoint regions 
of chromosomes 15, 16 or 17. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
report of the coexistence of two abnormal clones, one classical and one variant, 
presenting simultaneously in addition to cryptic chromosome segmental imbalances 
in an adult APL patient.

PMCID: PMC4114661
PMID: 25120648  [PubMed]


119. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 13;9(8):e104906. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104906.
eCollection 2014.

The DNA binding property of PML/RARA but not the integrity of PML nuclear bodies 
is indispensable for leukemic transformation.

Liu X(1), Yuan H(1), Peres L(2), Chen S(1), Chen Z(1), de The H(3), Zhou J(1),
Zhu J(3).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-LIA124, Sino-French Research Center for Life Sciences and Genomics, State
Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Rui-Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (2)Université de Paris
7/INSERM/CNRS UMR 944/7151, Equipe Labellisée No. 11 Ligue Nationale Contre le
Cancer, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France. (3)CNRS-LIA124, Sino-French Research
Center for Life Sciences and Genomics, State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, 
Rui-Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China; Université de Paris 7/INSERM/CNRS UMR 944/7151, Equipe Labellisée No. 11
Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France.

PML/RARA is the oncoprotein driving acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). It
suppresses genes expression by recruitment of a number of transcriptional
repressors, resulting in differentiation block and malignant transformation of
hematopoietic cells. Here, we found that mice primary hematopoietic progenitor
cells (HPCs), transduced by DNA-binding-defective PML/RARA mutants, were
deficient in colony formation. Further experiments showed that
DNA-binding-defective PML/RARA mutants could not repress the transcription of
retinoic acid regulated genes. Intriguingly, there were no significant
differences of the micro-speckled intracellular distribution between the mutants 
and wild-type PML/RARA. Some retinoic acid target genes regulated by PML/RARA are
involved in not only differentiation block but also hematopoietic cell
self-renewal. Altogether, our data demonstrate that direct DNA-binding is
essential for PML/RARA to immortalize hematopoietic cells, while disruption of
PML-nuclear body does not seem to be a prerequisite for hematopoietic cell
transformation.

PMCID: PMC4131979
PMID: 25119106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Leukemia. 2015 Mar;29(3):660-7. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.243. Epub 2014 Aug 11.

WT1 mutations are secondary events in AML, show varying frequencies and impact on
prognosis between genetic subgroups.

Krauth MT(1), Alpermann T(2), Bacher U(2), Eder C(2), Dicker F(2), Ulke M(2),
Kuznia S(2), Nadarajah N(2), Kern W(2), Haferlach C(2), Haferlach T(2),
Schnittger S(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany [2] Division of Hematology 
and Hemostaseology, Department of Internal Medicine I, Medical University Vienna,
Vienna, Austria. (2)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany.

To investigate frequency and prognostic impact of Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) mutations
(mut), we analyzed 3157 unselected acute myeloid leukemia patients for WT1mut in 
exons 7 and 9. In total, 188 WT1 mutations were detected (exon 7: n=150, exon 9: 
n=38); 141 were frameshift, 24 missense, 14 non-sense, 7 splice site and 2 indel 
mutations. In 175/3157 (5.5%) patients, a WT1mut was found. Higher frequencies
were detected in patients with biallelic CEBPAmut (13.6%; P=0.001), followed by
t(15;17)/PML-RARA (11.0%, P=0.004), and FLT3-ITD (8.5%, P<0.001). WT1mut were
rare in DNMT3Amut (4.4%, P=0.014), ASXL1mut (1.7%, P<0.001), IDH2R140 (1.7%,
P=0.001) and IDH1R132 (0.9%, P<0.001), and not detected in complex karyotypes
(P=0.047). They were more frequent in females than in males (6.6 vs 4.7%;
P=0.014) and in patients <60 years (P<0.001). Analysis of paired samples of 35
patients revealed a relatively unstable character of WT1mut (65.7% retained,
34.3% lost WT1mut at relapse). In the total cohort and subgroups with high WT1mut
incidences (biallelic CEBPAmut, PML-RARA), WT1mut had no impact on prognosis. In 
normal karyotype AML, WT1mut patients had shorter event-free survival (EFS) (10.8
vs 17.9 m, P=0.008). In multivariate analysis, WT1mut had an independent adverse 
impact on EFS (P=0.002, hazard ratio (HR): 1.64) besides FLT3-ITD status
(P<0.001, HR: 1.71) and age (P<0.001, HR: 1.28).

PMID: 25110071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014 Oct;58(10):6151-6. doi: 10.1128/AAC.03053-14.
Epub 2014 Aug 4.

IS5 element integration, a novel mechanism for rapid in vivo emergence of
tigecycline nonsusceptibility in Klebsiella pneumoniae.

Nielsen LE(1), Snesrud EC(2), Onmus-Leone F(2), Kwak YI(2), Avilés R(3), Steele
ED(4), Sutter DE(5), Waterman PE(2), Lesho EP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Multidrug-Resistant Organism Repository and Surveillance Network (MRSN),
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA
Lindsey.e.nielsen2.mil@mail.mil. (2)Multidrug-Resistant Organism Repository and
Surveillance Network (MRSN), Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver
Spring, Maryland, USA. (3)Soto Cano Air Base, Comayagua, Honduras. (4)MRSN, San
Antonio Military Medical Center, Fort Sam Houston, San Antonio, Texas, USA.
(5)Division of Pediatric Infectious Disease, San Antonio Military Medical Center,
Fort Sam Houston, San Antonio, Texas, USA.

Tigecycline nonsusceptibility is concerning because tigecycline is increasingly
relied upon to treat carbapenem- or colistin-resistant organisms. In
Enterobacteriaceae, tigecycline nonsusceptibility is mediated by the AcrAB-TolC
efflux pump, among others, and pump activity is often a downstream effect of
mutations in their transcriptional regulators, cognate repressor genes, or
noncoding regions, as demonstrated in Enterobacteriaceae and Acinetobacter
isolates. Here, we report the emergence of tigecycline nonsusceptibility in a
longitudinal series of multidrug-resistant (MDR) and extensively drug-resistant
(XDR) Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates collected during tigecycline therapy and the
elucidation of its resistance mechanisms. Clinical isolates were recovered prior 
to and during tigecycline therapy of a 2.5-month-old Honduran neonate.
Antimicrobial susceptibility tests to tigecycline determined that the MIC
increased from 1 to 4 µg/ml prior to the completion of tigecycline therapy.
Unlike other studies, we did not find increased expression of ramA, ramR, oqxA,
acrB, marA, or rarA genes by reverse transcription-quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR).
Whole-genome sequencing revealed an IS5 insertion element in nonsusceptible
isolates 85 bp upstream of a putative efflux pump operon, here named kpgABC,
previously unknown to be involved in resistance. Introduction of the kpgABC genes
in a non-kpgABC background increased the MIC of tigecycline 4-fold and is
independent of a functional AcrAB-TolC pump. This is the first report to propose 
a function for kpgABC and identify an insertion element whose presence correlated
with the in vivo development of tigecycline nonsusceptibility in K. pneumoniae.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4187979
PMID: 25092708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Zookeys. 2014 Jul 8;(424):91-100. doi: 10.3897/zookeys.424.7670. eCollection
2014.

Descriptions of three new species of the Termitophilous tribe Termitopaediini in 
China (Coleoptera, Staphylinidae, Aleocharinae).

Song XB(1), Li LZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, Shanghai
Normal University, 100 Guilin Road, Xuhui District, Shanghai 20023.

Three new species belonging to two genera of the aleocharine tribe
Termitopaediini Seevers, viz., Dioxeuta rara Song & Li, sp. n., D. yunnanensis
Song & Li, sp. n., and Termitopulex sinensis Song & Li, sp. n. from Baihualing
Natural Reserve (Southwest China: Yunnan) are described and illustrated. This is 
the first record of Termitopulex Fauvel, 1899 from China.

PMCID: PMC4106102
PMID: 25061397  [PubMed]


123. Gene Expr Patterns. 2014 Sep;16(1):8-22. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2014.07.002. Epub
2014 Jul 21.

Transcriptome analysis in cardiomyocyte-specific differentiation of murine
embryonic stem cells reveals transcriptional regulation network.

Gan L(1), Schwengberg S(2), Denecke B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research Aachen (IZKF Aachen), RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. (2)Axiogenesis AG, Köln, Germany.
(3)Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research Aachen (IZKF Aachen), RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. Electronic address:
bernd.denecke@rwth-aachen.de.

The differentiation to cardiomyocytes is a prerequisite and an important part of 
heart development. A good understanding of the complicated cardiomyocyte
differentiation process benefits cardiogenesis study. Embryonic stem cells
(ESCs), cell lines with infinite ability to proliferate and to be differentiated 
into all cell types of the adult body, are important research tools for
investigation of differentiation and meanwhile good models for developmental
research. In the current study, genome-wide gene expression of ESCs is profiled
through high throughput platform during cardiomyocyte-specific differentiation
and maturation. Gene expression patterns of undifferentiated ESCs and ESC-derived
cardiomyocytes provide a global overview of genes involved in
cardiomyocyte-specific differentiation, whereas marker gene expression profiles
of both ESC-related genes and cardiac-specific genes presented the expression
pattern shift during differentiation in a pure ESC-derived cardiomyocyte cell
culture system. The differentiation and maturation process was completed at day
19 after initiation of differentiation, according to our gene expression profile 
results. Functional analysis of regulated genes reveals over-represented
biological processes, molecular functions and pathways during the differentiation
and maturation process. Finally, transcription factor regulation networks were
engineered based on gene expression data. Within these networks, the number of
identified important regulators (Trim28, E2f4, Foxm1, Myc, Hdac1, Rara, Mef2c,
Nkx2-5, Gata4) and possible key co-regulation modules (Nkx2-5 - Gata4 - Tbx5, Myc
- E2F4) could be expanded. We demonstrate that a more comprehensive picture of
cardiomyocyte differentiation and its regulation can be achieved solely by
studying gene expression patterns. The results from our study contribute to a
better and more accurate understanding of the regulation mechanisms during
cardiomyocyte differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25058891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cancer Genet. 2014 Jun;207(6):253-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2014.05.010. Epub
2014 May 29.

An ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) with spliced long-type PML-RARA fusion transcripts in a 
case of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Hu X(1), Ai G(1), Meng X(1), Hou J(1), Wei R(1), Tao Y(1), Zhang Q(1), Han Y(1), 
Shi J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Hematology, Shanghai Tenth 
People's Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
Electronic address: shijumei@hotmail.com.

The ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) is a relatively rare chromosomal rearrangement in acute
promyelocytic leukemia patients. We describe herein a case of APL with a poor
prognosis and ider(17)(q10)t(15;17)(q22;q12), which was confirmed by fluorescence
in situ hybridization. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
and sequencing of PCR products were used to detect the PML-RARA fusion gene and
delineate the sequence of the fusion transcripts. We found that the PML-RARA
fusion gene of this patient was the long isoform, which only generated
transcripts of a splice variant lacking PML exon 5 and a splice variant lacking
PML exons 5 and 6. Although the clinical and prognostic significance of patients 
with an ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) remains unclear, a combination of cytogenetics and 
molecular biology analysis should be performed to obtain further information
about this chromosomal abnormality.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25052141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Prep Biochem Biotechnol. 2015;45(5):438-46. doi: 10.1080/10826068.2014.940972.

Purification and recombinant expression of major peanut allergen Ara h 1.

Wu Z(1), Yan F, Wei X, Li X, Tong P, Yang A, Tang R, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)a State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology , Nanchang University , 
Nanchang , P.R. China.

Reaction to peanut, as one of the major food allergens, has become an
increasingly common life-threatening disorder. Although peanut allergens have
been extensively identified, Ara h 1 is still too expensive to be applied in food
safety or clinical utility. In this study, the purification, expression, and
immunological analyses of Ara h 1 are investigated. It was shown that a high
purity (>95%) of Ara h 1 could be prepared by either purification or expression. 
Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), Western
blot, and mass spectroscopy were used to identify the Ara h 1, and it was found
that natural Ara h 1 (nAra h 1) and expressed Ara h 1 (rAra h 1) have the same
properties, including amino acid sequence. In particular, rAra h 1 reacted
positively with anti-nAra h 1 serum, showing their similar immunological
property. Thus, by either purification or expression, Ara h 1 could be prepared
with low cost, as performed in the present work. SDS-PAGE, mag trix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectroscopy (MALDI-TOF MS), and 
immunological analysis confirmed that both forms of Ara h 1 had the same
properties.

PMID: 25036339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Sep;12(9):1283-91. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0080. Epub 
2014 Jul 17.

Extrinsic apoptosis is impeded by direct binding of the APL fusion protein
NPM-RAR to TRADD.

Chattopadhyay A(1), Hood BL(2), Conrads TP(2), Redner RL(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(2)University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Women's
Health Integrated Research Center at Inova Health System, Annandale, Virginia.
(3)University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
redner@pitt.edu.

A subset of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cases has been characterized by
the t(5;17)(q35;q21) translocation variant, which fuses nucleophosmin (NPM) to
retinoic acid receptor a (RARA). The resultant NPM-RAR fusion protein blocks
myeloid differentiation and leads to a leukemic phenotype similar to that caused 
by the t(15;17)(q22;q21) PML-RAR fusion. The contribution of the N-terminal 117
amino acids of NPM contained within NPM-RAR has not been well studied. As a
molecular chaperone, NPM interacts with a variety of proteins implicated in
leukemogenesis. Therefore, a proteomic analysis was conducted to identify novel
NPM-RAR-associated proteins. TNF receptor type I-associated DEATH domain protein 
(TRADD) was identified as a relevant binding partner for NPM-RAR. This
interaction was validated by coprecipitation and colocalization analysis.
Biologic assessment found that NPM-RAR expression impaired TNF-induced signaling 
through TRADD, blunting TNF-mediated activation of caspase-3 (CASP3) and
caspase-8 (CASP8), to ultimately block apoptosis.IMPLICATIONS: This study
identifies a novel mechanism through which NPM-RAR affects leukemogenesis.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4163521
PMID: 25033841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Ann Hematol. 2014 Dec;93(12):2001-10. doi: 10.1007/s00277-014-2142-9. Epub 2014
Jul 2.

Internal tandem duplication of the FLT3 gene confers poor overall survival in
patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia treated with all-trans retinoic acid
and anthracycline-based chemotherapy: an International Consortium on Acute
Promyelocytic Leukemia study.

Lucena-Araujo AR(1), Kim HT, Jacomo RH, Melo RA, Bittencourt R, Pasquini R,
Pagnano K, Fagundes EM, Chauffaille Mde L, Chiattone CS, Lima AS, Ruiz-Argüelles 
G, Undurraga MS, Martinez L, Kwaan HC, Gallagher R, Niemeyer CM, Schrier SL,
Tallman MS, Grimwade D, Ganser A, Berliner N, Ribeiro RC, Lo-Coco F, Löwenberg B,
Sanz MA, Rego EM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil.

Activating internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutations in the fms-like tyrosine
kinase 3 (FLT3) gene (FLT3-ITD) are associated with poor outcome in acute myeloid
leukemia, but their prognostic impact in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
remains controversial. Here, we screened for FLT3-ITD mutations in 171 APL
patients, treated with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and anthracycline-based
chemotherapy. We identified FLT3-ITD mutations in 35 patients (20 %). FLT3-ITD
mutations were associated with higher white blood cell counts (P < 0.0001),
relapse-risk score (P = 0.0007), higher hemoglobin levels (P = 0.0004), higher
frequency of the microgranular morphology (M3v) subtype (P = 0.03), and the short
PML/RARA (BCR3) isoform (P < 0.0001). After a median follow-up of 38 months,
FLT3-ITD(positive) patients had a lower 3-year overall survival rate (62 %)
compared with FLT3-ITD(negative) patients (82 %) (P = 0.006). The prognostic
impact of FLT3-ITD on survival was retained in multivariable analysis (hazard
ratio: 2.39, 95 % confidence interval [CI] 1.17-4.89; P = 0.017). Nevertheless,
complete remission (P = 0.07), disease-free survival (P = 0.24), and the
cumulative incidence of relapse (P = 0.94) rates were not significantly different
between groups. We can conclude that FLT3-ITD mutations are associated with
several hematologic features in APL, in particular with high white blood cell
counts. In addition, FLT3-ITD may independently predict a shorter survival in
patients with APL treated with ATRA and anthracycline-based chemotherapy.

PMID: 24981688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2014 Jun;55(6):692-6.

[T315I positive promyelocytic crisis of chronic myeloid leukemia].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamamoto E(1), Yamazaki E, Ishiyama Y, Koyama S, Ishii Y, Hattori Y, Nakajima Y, 
Tachibana T, Miyazaki T, Hagihara M, Tomita N, Ishigatsubo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Immunology, Yokohama City
University Graduate School of Medicine.

Promyelocytic crisis (PMC) of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is relatively
rare. We report a patient who progressed to PMC with a T315I mutation during the 
initial treatment with dasatinib for CML. He obtained hematological remission
after combination therapy with all-trans retinoic acid and chemotherapy for PMC, 
and PML-RARA was not detected by FISH analysis. Arsenic trioxide (ATO) and
imatinib therapy induced a second complete cytogenetic response, and PML-RARA
mRNA detected by real-time quantitative RT-PCR dropped below the detection limit.
Finally, allogeneic stem cell transplantation was performed. This case suggests
that combination therapy with imatinib and ATO achieves favorable outcomes for
PMC.

PMID: 24975339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Leukemia. 2015 Jan;29(1):157-68. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.162. Epub 2014 May 20.

Constitutive IRF8 expression inhibits AML by activation of repressed immune
response signaling.

Sharma A(1), Yun H(1), Jyotsana N(1), Chaturvedi A(1), Schwarzer A(2), Yung E(3),
Lai CK(3), Kuchenbauer F(4), Argiropoulos B(5), Görlich K(1), Ganser A(1),
Humphries RK(6), Heuser M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, 
Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. (2)Institute of Experimental
Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. (3)Terry Fox Laboratory, 
British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital Medical Center, Ulm, 
Germany. (5)Department of Medical Genetics, HSC, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Alberta, Canada. (6)1] Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada [2] Department of Medicine, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Myeloid differentiation is blocked in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), but the
molecular mechanisms are not well characterized. Meningioma 1 (MN1) is
overexpressed in AML patients and confers resistance to all-trans retinoic
acid-induced differentiation. To understand the role of MN1 as a transcriptional 
regulator in myeloid differentiation, we fused transcriptional activation (VP16) 
or repression (M33) domains with MN1 and characterized these cells in vivo.
Transcriptional activation of MN1 target genes induced myeloproliferative disease
with long latency and differentiation potential to mature neutrophils. A large
proportion of differentially expressed genes between leukemic MN1 and
differentiation-permissive MN1VP16 cells belonged to the immune response pathway 
like interferon-response factor (Irf) 8 and Ccl9. As MN1 is a cofactor of MEIS1
and retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA), we compared chromatin occupancy between 
these genes. Immune response genes that were upregulated in MN1VP16 cells were
co-targeted by MN1 and MEIS1, but not RARA, suggesting that myeloid
differentiation is blocked through transcriptional repression of shared target
genes of MN1 and MEIS1. Constitutive expression of Irf8 or its target gene Ccl9
identified these genes as potent inhibitors of murine and human leukemias in
vivo. Our data show that MN1 prevents activation of the immune response pathway, 
and suggest restoration of IRF8 signaling as therapeutic target in AML.

PMID: 24957708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2014 Nov;36(8):e546-8. doi:
10.1097/MPH.0000000000000183.

Therapy-induced secondary acute myeloid leukemia with t(11;19)(q23;p13.1) in a
pediatric patient with relapsed acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Dang DN(1), Morris HD, Feusner JH, Koduru P, Wilson K, Timmons CF, Cavalier M,
Luu HS.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Parkland Health and Hospital System, Children's
Medical Center Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology-Oncology, UT
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX Department of Pediatrics, Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital & Research Center Oakland, Oakland, CA.

Acute myeloid leukemia is classified based upon recurrent cytogenetic
abnormalities. The t(15;17)(q24.1;q21.1) abnormality is found in 5% to 8% of de
novo acute myeloid leukemia and is diagnostic of acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL). The translocation results in fusion of the retinoic acid receptor-a (RARA)
gene at 17q21.1 and the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene at 15q24.1. Standard
APL therapy is a combination of all-trans retinoic acid and anthracycline-based
chemotherapy. Anthracycline treatment is associated with secondary clonal
chromosomal aberrations that can lead to therapy-related secondary myeloid
neoplasms. We present a pediatric case of relapsed APL coexistent with
treatment-associated secondary myeloid neoplasm with t(11;19)(q23;p13.1).

PMID: 24942021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 11;9(2):e99003. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099003. eCollection
2014.

Human retinal transmitochondrial cybrids with J or H mtDNA haplogroups respond
differently to ultraviolet radiation: implications for retinal diseases.

Malik D(1), Hsu T(1), Falatoonzadeh P(1), Cáceres-del-Carpio J(1), Tarek M(2),
Chwa M(1), Atilano SR(1), Ramirez C(1), Nesburn AB(3), Boyer DS(4), Kuppermann
BD(1), Jazwinski SM(5), Miceli MV(5), Wallace DC(6), Udar N(1), Kenney MC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Gavin Herbert Eye Institute, University California Irvine, Irvine, California,
United States of America. (2)Gavin Herbert Eye Institute, University California
Irvine, Irvine, California, United States of America; Department of
Ophthalmology, El-Minya University, El-Minya, Egypt. (3)Gavin Herbert Eye
Institute, University California Irvine, Irvine, California, United States of
America; Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America. (4)Retina-Vitreous Associates Medical Group; Beverly Hills, California, 
United States of America. (5)Tulane Center for Aging, Tulane University, New
Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America. (6)Center for Mitochondrial and
Epigenomic Medicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America. (7)Gavin Herbert Eye Institute,
University California Irvine, Irvine, California, United States of America;
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University California Irvine,
Irvine, California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: It has been recognized that cells do not respond equally to
ultraviolet (UV) radiation but it is not clear whether this is due to genetic,
biochemical or structural differences of the cells. We have a novel cybrid
(cytoplasmic hybrids) model that allows us to analyze the contribution of
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) to cellular response after exposure to sub-lethal dose 
of UV. mtDNA can be classified into haplogroups as defined by accumulations of
specific single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Recent studies have shown that J
haplogroup is high risk for age-related macular degeneration while the H
haplogroup is protective. This study investigates gene expression responses in J 
cybrids versus H cybrids after exposure to sub-lethal doses of UV-radiation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Cybrids were created by fusing platelets isolated
from subjects with either H (n = 3) or J (n = 3) haplogroups with
mitochondria-free (Rho0) ARPE-19 cells. The H and J cybrids were cultured for 24 
hours, treated with 10 mJ of UV-radiation and cultured for an additional 120
hours. Untreated and treated cybrids were analyzed for growth rates and gene
expression profiles. The UV-treated and untreated J cybrids had higher growth
rates compared to H cybrids. Before treatment, J cybrids showed lower expression 
levels for CFH, CD55, IL-33, TGF-A, EFEMP-1, RARA, BCL2L13 and BBC3. At 120 hours
after UV-treatment, the J cybrids had decreased CFH, RARA and BBC3 levels but
increased CD55, IL-33 and EFEMP-1 compared to UV-treated H cybrids.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: In cells with identical nuclei, the cellular response to
sub-lethal UV-radiation is mediated in part by the mtDNA haplogroup. This
supports the hypothesis that differences in growth rates and expression levels of
complement, inflammation and apoptosis genes may result from population-specific,
hereditary SNP variations in mtDNA. Therefore, when analyzing UV-induced damage
in tissues, the mtDNA haplogroup background may be important to consider.

PMCID: PMC4053329
PMID: 24919117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 11;9(6):e99223. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099223. eCollection
2014.

Establishment of a simple and rapid identification method for Listeria spp. by
using high-resolution melting analysis, and its application in food industry.

Ohshima C(1), Takahashi H(1), Phraephaisarn C(2), Vesaratchavest M(3),
Keeratipibul S(4), Kuda T(1), Kimura B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Technology, Faculty of Marine Science, Tokyo
University of Marine Science and Technology, Minato, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Research
and Development Center of BETAGRO Group, Klong Luang, Pathumthani, Thailand;
Program in Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 
Thailand. (3)Research and Development Center of BETAGRO Group, Klong Luang,
Pathumthani, Thailand. (4)Department of Food Technology, Faculty of Science,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(9): e107342..

Listeria monocytogenes is the causative bacteria of listeriosis, which has a
higher mortality rate than that of other causes of food poisoning. Listeria spp.,
of which L. monocytogenes is a member, have been isolated from food and
manufacturing environments. Several methods have been published for identifying
Listeria spp.; however, many of the methods cannot identify newly categorized
Listeria spp. Additionally, they are often not suitable for the food industry,
owing to their complexity, cost, or time consumption. Recently, high-resolution
melting analysis (HRMA), which exploits DNA-sequence differences, has received
attention as a simple and quick genomic typing method. In the present study, a
new method for the simple, rapid, and low-cost identification of Listeria spp.
has been presented using the genes rarA and ldh as targets for HRMA. DNA
sequences of 9 Listeria species were first compared, and polymorphisms were
identified for each species for primer design. Species specificity of each HRM
curve pattern was estimated using type strains of all the species. Among the 9
species, 7 were identified by HRMA using rarA gene, including 3 new species. The 
remaining 2 species were identified by HRMA of ldh gene. The newly developed HRMA
method was then used to assess Listeria isolates from the food industry, and the 
method efficiency was compared to that of identification by 16S rDNA sequence
analysis. The 2 methods were in coherence for 92.6% of the samples, demonstrating
the high accuracy of HRMA. The time required for identifying Listeria spp. was
substantially low, and the process was considerably simplified, providing a
useful and precise method for processing multiple samples per day. Our newly
developed method for identifying Listeria spp. is highly valuable; its use is not
limited to the food industry, and it can be used for the isolates from the
natural environment.

PMCID: PMC4053416
PMID: 24918440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2014 Mar;27(1):53-61. doi:
10.1016/j.beha.2014.04.002. Epub 2014 Apr 12.

Can we say farewell to monitoring minimal residual disease in acute promyelocytic
leukaemia?

Grimwade D(1), Jovanovic JV(2), Hills RK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Lab, Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's
College London School of Medicine, 8th Floor, Tower Wing, Guy's Hospital, London 
SE1 9RT, UK. Electronic address: david.grimwade@genetics.kcl.ac.uk. (2)Cancer
Genetics Lab, Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London
School of Medicine, 8th Floor, Tower Wing, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK.
(3)Department of Haematology, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.

Molecularly targeted therapies have transformed the management of PML-RARA+ acute
promyelocytic leukaemia (APL), with survival rates now exceeding 80% in clinical 
trials. This raises questions about the relevance of post-remission monitoring
for PML-RARA transcripts, which has been widely used to predict relapse, guiding 
early intervention to prevent disease progression and the inherent risk of fatal 
bleeding. Given the treatability of haematological relapse, survival benefits
would only be seen if monitoring could identify patients who could be salvaged if
treated early but not later on, although it could be argued that early deployment
of arsenic trioxide (ATO) can avoid inducing hyperleucocytosis and the associated
differentiation syndrome, which frequently complicate treatment of frank relapse.
However, given the low rates of relapse now observed in patients presenting with 
standard risk disease (i.e. presenting WBC<10×10(9)/l) who achieve early
molecular remission, subsequent sequential minimal residual disease (MRD)
monitoring confers only a marginal benefit, so could be avoided in this group.
However, sequential MRD monitoring may still be of value in patients with high
risk APL, although evidence tends to come from historically controlled studies.
Therefore, there may remain a role for MRD monitoring in the most clinically
challenging subsets of APL, but the continuing debate highlights the need for
robust evidence in developing a more individualized approach to management of
other subtypes of acute leukaemia.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24907017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2014 Mar;27(1):39-52. doi:
10.1016/j.beha.2014.04.003. Epub 2014 Apr 12.

Have all-trans retinoic acid and arsenic trioxide replaced all-trans retinoic
acid and anthracyclines in APL as standard of care.

Iland HJ(1), Wei A(2), Seymour JF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Haematology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Missenden Road,
Camperdown, NSW 2050, Australia; University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006,
Australia. Electronic address: harry@email.cs.nsw.gov.au. (2)Department of
Haematology, The Alfred Hospital, Commercial Road, Melbourne, VIC 3004,
Australia; Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. Electronic address:
andrew.wei@monash.edu. (3)Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 7, St. Andrews Place,
East Melbourne, VIC 3002, Australia; University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC
3010, Australia. Electronic address: john.seymour@petermac.org.

Until recently, the standard of care in the treatment of APL has involved the
combination of all-trans retinoic acid with anthracycline-based chemotherapy
during both induction and consolidation. Additionally, the intensity of
consolidation chemotherapy has evolved according to a universally accepted
relapse-risk stratification algorithm based on the white cell and platelet counts
at presentation. That standard of care is being challenged by the increasing
incorporation of arsenic trioxide into front-line treatment protocols, based on
two complementary observations. The first is the undoubted anti-leukaemic
activity of arsenic trioxide as shown in the relapsed and refractory setting, and
in the initial management of low- and intermediate-risk patients. The second is
an improved understanding of the action of both all-trans retinoic acid and
arsenic trioxide in mediating APL cell eradication, with increasing recognition
that PML-RARA fusion protein degradation rather than direct induction of terminal
differentiation is the primary mechanism for their ability to eliminate leukaemia
initiating cells. As a result, we believe the standard of care for initial
therapy in APL is shifting towards an all-trans retinoic acid plus arsenic
trioxide-based approach, with additional chemotherapy reserved for patients with 
high-risk disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24907016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2014 Mar;27(1):19-31. doi:
10.1016/j.beha.2014.04.009. Epub 2014 May 2.

Triple A therapy: the molecular underpinnings of the unique sensitivity of
leukemic promyelocytes to anthracyclines, all-trans-retinoic acid and arsenic
trioxide.

Nichol JN(1), Garnier N(1), Miller WH Jr(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Oncology, Segal Cancer
Comprehensive Centre, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Sir Mortimer B
Davis Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montréal, Quebec H3T 1E2,
Canada. (2)Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Oncology, Segal
Cancer Comprehensive Centre, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Sir
Mortimer B Davis Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montréal, Quebec H3T
1E2, Canada. Electronic address: wmiller@ldi.jgh.mcgill.ca.

If looking for a mnemonic to remember the relevant facts about acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL), one just has to remember that APL is a disease of
A's. It is acute and it is highly sensitive to treatment with anthracyclines,
all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) and arsenic trioxide (ATO). The presence of fusions 
involving the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) is without question the central
player driving APL and dictating the response of this disease to these
therapeutic agents. However, beyond this knowledge, the molecular mechanisms that
contribute to the complicated pathogenesis and the response to treatment of APL
are not completely defined. As more is understood about this hematological
malignancy, there are more opportunities to refine and improve treatment based on
this knowledge. In this review article, we discuss the response of APL to these
"A" therapies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24907014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Zootaxa. 2014 Jan 7;3753:226-32. doi: 10.11646/zootaxa.3753.3.2.

Inocellia rara sp. nov. (Raphidioptera: Inocelliidae), a new snakefly species
from Taiwan, with remarks on systematics and biogeography of the Inocelliidae of 
the island.

Liu X(1), Aspöck H(2), Aspöck U(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193,
China.; Email: xingyue_liu@yahoo.com. (2)Institute of Specific Prophylaxis and
Tropical Medicine, Medical Parasitology, Medical University (MUW),
Kinderspitalgasse 15, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Email:
horst.aspoeck@meduniwien.ac.at. (3)Department of Evolutionary Biology, University
of Vienna, Althanstraße 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Email:
ulrike.aspoeck@nhm-wien.ac.at.

A new species of the snakefly genus Inocellia Schneider, 1843 from Taiwan is
described: Inocellia rara sp. nov. It represents the third species in the family 
Inocelliidae and the first record of the Inocellia fulvostigmata species group
from Taiwan.

PMID: 24872293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2014 May 27;134(10):1052-5. doi: 10.4045/tidsskr.13.1508.
eCollection 2014.

[Acute promyelocytic leukaemia].

[Article in Norwegian]

Reikvam H(1), Hovland R(2), Bruserud Ø(3).

Author information: 
(1)King's College London School of Medicine Cancer Genetics Lab Department of
Medical and Molecular Genetics Guy's Hospital London * Noverande adresse:
Medisinsk avdeling, Haukeland universitetssjukehus. (2)Senter for medisinsk
genetikk og molekylærmedisin Haukeland universitetssjukehus. (3)Medisinsk
avdeling Haukeland universitetssjukehus og Klinisk institutt 2 Det
medisinsk-odontologiske fakultet Universitetet i Bergen.

Comment in
    Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2014 May 27;134(10):1017.

BACKGROUND: Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) is a subtype of acute myeloid
leukaemia (AML) with unique biological and clinical features and unique
therapeutic requirements. The article provides a brief description of the
development, pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment of APL.
METHOD: The article is based on the authors' own experience and reviews of key
articles and national and international guidelines.
RESULTS: The disease is caused by a single genetic event, namely the
translocation t(15;17), which gives rise to the oncoprotein PML-RARA. Clinical
and morphological characteristics arouse suspicion of the disease, and the
diagnosis is verified by detecting the translocation. At the time of diagnosis
most patients have severe coagulopathy and the predominant clinical manifestation
is bleeding. Early mortality is due to severe haemorrhage, usually intracranial. 
Early treatment start with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) on suspicion of APL is 
essential to reduce this early mortality. ATRA is also an important part of
continued treatment, in combination with anthracycline-based chemotherapy and
possibly arsenic. After this treatment, the prognosis for disease-free long-term 
survival is > 90%. There are also safe and effective treatment options for
elderly patients with complex comorbidities.
INTERPRETATION: With APL it is particularly important to start disease-targeting 
therapy in the form of ATRA quickly because of the high risk of serious
haemorrhages and high early mortality. If serious haemorrhages are avoided, the
prognosis is very good.

PMID: 24865730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014 Jul 15;307(2):G205-18. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00105.2014. Epub 2014 May 15.

Biological functional annotation of retinoic acid alpha and beta in mouse liver
based on genome-wide binding.

He Y(1), Tsuei J(1), Wan YJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California
Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, California. (2)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of California Davis Medical Center, Sacramento,
California yjywan@ucdavis.edu.

Retinoic acid (RA) has diverse biological effects. The liver stores vitamin A,
generates RA, and expresses receptors for RA. The current study examines the
hepatic binding profile of two RA receptor isoforms, RARA (RARa) and RARB (RARß),
in response to RA treatment in mouse livers. Our data uncovered 35,521, and
14,968 genomic bindings for RARA and RARB, respectively. Each expressed unique
and common bindings, implying their redundant and specific roles. RARB has higher
RA responsiveness than RARB. RA treatment generated 18,821 novel RARB bindings
but only 14,798 of RARA bindings, compared with the control group. RAR frequently
bound the consensus hormone response element [HRE; (A/G)G(G/T)TCA], which often
contained the motifs assigned to SP1, GABPA, and FOXA2, suggesting potential
interactions between those transcriptional factors. Functional annotation coupled
with principle component analysis revealed that the function of RAR target genes 
were motif dependent. Taken together, the cistrome of RARA and RARB revealed
their extensive biological roles in the mouse liver. RAR target genes are
enriched in various biological processes. The hepatic RAR genome-wide binding
data can help us understand the global molecular mechanisms underlying RAR and
RA-mediated gene and pathway regulation.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4101682
PMID: 24833708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Ann Hematol. 2014 Sep;93(9):1473-81. doi: 10.1007/s00277-014-2085-1. Epub 2014
Apr 25.

FIP1L1 presence in FIP1L1-RARA or FIP1L1-PDGFRA differentially contributes to the
pathogenesis of distinct types of leukemia.

Iwasaki J(1), Kondo T, Darmanin S, Ibata M, Onozawa M, Hashimoto D, Sakamoto N,
Teshima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kita 15 Nishi 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido, 060-8638, Japan.

FIP1-like 1 (FIP1L1) is associated with two leukemogenic fusion genes:
FIP1L1-retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) and FIP1L1-platelet-derived growth
factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA). Analyses of a series of deletion mutants revealed
that the FIP1 motif in FIP1L1-RARA plays a pivotal role in its homodimerization
and transcriptional repressor activity. However, in FIP1L1-PDGFRA, the C-terminal
PDGFRA portion possesses the ability of forming a homodimer by itself, making
FIP1L1 dispensable for constitutive activation of this kinase. Both the
full-length and the C-terminal PDGFRA portion of FIP1L1-PDGFRA could transform
the IL-3-dependent hematopoietic cell line, BAF-B03. Moreover, when either the
full-length or the C-terminal PDGFRA portion of FIP1L1-PDGFRA was introduced in
these cells, they grew in the absence of IL-3. The cells having the C-terminal
PDGFRA portion of FIP1L1-PDGFRA, however, were partially IL-3 dependent, whereas 
the cells having the full-length FIP1L1-PDGFRA became completely IL-3 independent
for their growth. Taken together, these results show that FIP1L1 differentially
contributes to the pathogenesis of distinct types of leukemia.

PMID: 24763514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Am J Hematol. 2014 Aug;89(8):E103-8. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23735. Epub 2014 Apr 28.

A phase I dose escalation study of oral bexarotene in combination with
intravenous decitabine in patients with AML.

Welch JS(1), Niu H, Uy GL, Westervelt P, Abboud CN, Vij R, Stockerl-Goldstein KE,
Jacoby M, Pusic I, Schroeder MA, Dipersio JF, Cashen AF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University, 
St Louis, Missouri.

The response rate of non-M3 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) to all trans retinoic
acid has been limited. Using Affymetrix expression arrays, we found that in
diverse AML blasts RXRA was expressed at higher levels than RARA and that mouse
Ctsg-PML-RARA leukemia responded to bexarotene, a ligand for RXRA. We therefore
performed a phase I study of combination bexarotene and decitabine in elderly and
relapsed AML patients. We found that this combination was well tolerated,
although outcomes were modest (1 CRi, and 3 PR among 19 patients). Correlative
studies found that patients with clinical response had increased differentiation 
to bexarotene both in vivo and ex vivo, suggesting that pre-treatment analysis
might identify a more susceptible subgroup of patients.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4108244
PMID: 24723466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Expert Rev Hematol. 2014 Jun;7(3):347-57. doi: 10.1586/17474086.2014.903794. Epub
2014 Apr 10.

RARA fusion genes in acute promyelocytic leukemia: a review.

De Braekeleer E(1), Douet-Guilbert N, De Braekeleer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Histologie, Embryologie et Cytogénétique, Faculté de Médecine et
des Sciences de la Santé, Université de Brest, Brest, France.

The t(15;17)(q24;q21), generating a PML-RARA fusion gene, is the hallmark of
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). At present, eight other genes fusing with
RARA have been identified. The resulting fusion proteins retain domains of the
RARA protein allowing binding to retinoic acid response elements (RARE) and
dimerization with the retinoid X receptor protein (RXRA). They participate in
protein-protein interactions, associating with RXRA to form hetero-oligomeric
complexes that can bind to RARE. They have a dominant-negative effect on
wild-type RARA/RXRA transcriptional activity. Moreover, RARA fusion proteins can 
homodimerize, conferring the ability to regulate an expanded repertoire of genes 
normally not affected by RARA. RARA fusion proteins behave as potent
transcriptional repressors of retinoic acid signalling, inducing a
differentiation blockage at the promyelocyte stage which can be overcome with
therapeutic doses of ATRA or arsenic trioxide. However, resistance to these two
drugs is a major problem, which necessitates development of new therapies.

PMID: 24720386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Rev Invest Clin. 2013 Sep-Oct;65(5):392-8.

Clinical features and treatment outcomes of pediatric acute promyelocytic
leukemia in a Mexican pediatric hospital.

Dorantes-Acosta E(1), Medina-Sanson A, Jaimes-García Y, López-Martínez B.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Hemato-Oncología, Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gómez.

INTRODUCTION: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a distinct type of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) characterized by chromosomal translocations involving the 
retinoid acid receptor a (RARA) gene on chromosome 17. APL is a relatively rare
blood disease that is highly curable with current treatment strategies; however, 
patient outcomes are heterogeneous in countries with limited resources.
Promyelocytic leukemia accounts for 20-25% of all AML cases in Latin American
countries.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We conducted a study from July 2007 to July 2012 and
applied the IC-APL2006 protocol. This case study reports the results from eleven 
patients with AML M3 (five males and six females). In all cases, the diagnoses
were made by aspirating bone marrow and evaluating the t(15:17) or t(11:17)
transcript. In eight cases, the molecular biology-based diagnostics for the
PLM-RARa transcript were positive, and they were negative in two cases. One
patient was positive for the PLZF-RARa transcript.
RESULTS: The mean WBC at the time of diagnosis was 10.1 x 10(9)/L, and the mean
platelet count was 17.1 x 10(9)/L. The mean percentage of abnormal promyelocytes 
in the bone marrow aspirates was 68%. Of the eleven patients, four presented with
disseminated intravascular coagulation. All of the patients began treatment with 
transretinoic acid (ATRA) (45 mg/m(2)/day), which led to 4 cases of ATRA
syndrome. There were 2 relapses, and the patient died in one case. The remaining 
ten patients were alive after the median follow-up period of 33.6 months (range
from 11 to 60 months).
CONCLUSION: The authors report on a series of cases involving pediatric patients 
with AML M3 seen at a single institution; the patients were stratified and
treated with a standard protocol to obtain satisfactory results. Although the
number of patients is limited, the health outcomes are relevant. To our
knowledge, this is the first series of pediatric APL patients in Mexico who were 
treated with the IC-APL2006 protocol.

PMID: 24687338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Eur J Haematol. 2014 Oct;93(4):354-8. doi: 10.1111/ejh.12326. Epub 2014 Apr 26.

PML-RARA fusion resulting from a cryptic insertion of RARA gene into PML gene
without the reciprocal RARA-PML fusion: clinical, cytogenetic, and molecular
characterization and prognosis.

Fan H(1), Ortega V, Fanasch HM, Wang Y, Holder KN, Higgins RA, Mendiola C,
Mohamed G, Vadlamudi K, Velagaleti G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA.

We describe a case of acute promyelocytic leukemia in a 61-yr-old woman with a
cryptic insertion of RARA gene into PML gene. Using a combination of cytogenetic 
and molecular methods, we confirmed the insertion and presence of the PML-RARA
transcript and lack of the reciprocal RARA-PML transcript. Although such cryptic 
insertions leading to a PML-RARA fusion have been previously reported, we show
that such variant insertions, based on our case, appear to have the same
prognostic significance as the classical t(15;17)(q22;q21).

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24673420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Feb;22(1):232-6. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2014.01.046.

[Research advance on the role of ubiquitin proteasome pathway in acute
promyelocytic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu TT(1), Wu DJ(2), Ye BD(3), Shao KD(3), Sun J(4), Zhou YH(3).

Author information: 
(1)The First Clinical Medical College of Zhejiang Traditional Chinese Medical
University, Hangzhou 310053, Zhejiang Province, China. (2)Department of
Hematology, Zhejiang Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Hangzhou 310006,
Zhejiang Province, China. E-mail: wdj850@163.com. (3)Department of Hematology,
Zhejiang Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Hangzhou 310006, Zhejiang
Province, China. (4)Center of Bone Marrow Transplantation, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Zhejiang University Medical College, Hangzhou 310003, Zhejiang
Province, China.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by PML-RARa expression.
Ubiquitin proteasome-pathway (UPP) plays a key role in all-trans retinoid acid
(ATRA) and arsenic trioxide (ATO)-induced degradation. In addition, the
regulations of cell cycle and transcription are also related to this pathway.
Deeply studying the role of ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in APL contributes to
elucidate the mechanisms of some drugs and explode the clinical therapeutical
insight for APL. In this article, the constitution of UPP, the role of
UPP-mediated protein modification in APL, the application of
ubiquitination-associated drugs in APL are reviewed.

PMID: 24598685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Feb;22(1):11-5. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2014.01.003.

[Clinical characteristics of newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia patients with
NPM1 mutation].

[Article in Chinese]

Wei H(1), Zhang YQ(1), Lin D(1), Wang Y(1), Zhou CL(1), Liu BC(1), Li W(1), Rao
Q(1), Wang M(1), Mi YC(1), Wang JX(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology & Blood Disease Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin 300020, China. (2)Institute of
Hematology & Blood Disease Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking
Union Medical College, Tianjin 300020, China. E-mail: wangjx@ihcams.ac.cn.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the clinical characteristics of
newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients with NPM1 mutation in exon 
12 and to explore the relationship between NPM1 mutation and FLT3-ITD, IDH1
mutation. The AML clinical data and bone marrow samples of patients were
collected. The diagnosis and classification were based on WHO criteria. The
genomic DNA was extracted and NPM1 mutation was detected by sequencing after PCR.
The specimens of 389 AML patients were tested. The results showed that the NPM1
mutation was found in 14.1% samples (55/389). The incidence of FLT3-ITD mutation 
was 14.7% (57/389) . The incidence of IDH1 mutation was 6.4% (25/389) . NPM1
mutation was not detected in AML with AML1-ETO, PML-RARA or CBF-MYH11 fusion
genes. The incidences of FLT3-ITD and IDH1 mutation were 29.1% and 12.7%
respectively in AML with NPM1 mutation. The incidences of FLT3-ITD and IDH1
mutation were 12.3% and 5.4% respectively in AML without NPM1 mutation. The
incidences of FLT3-ITD and IDH1 mutation were significantly higher in AML with
NPM1 mutation than that in AML without NPM1 mutation. The incidence of NPM1
mutation in normal karyotype AML was 26.5% (35/132) which significantly higher
than that in other AML. The AML with NPM1 mutation characterized by older age,
high platelet number, higher incidence in AML-M5, lower CD34 positive cells, more
possible co-existence with FLT3-ITD and IDH1 mutation and other clinical
features. The complete remission rate after one cycle of induction chemotherapy
was 69.8% in AML without NPM1 mutation. The complete remission rate after one
cycle of induction chemotherapy was 72.2% in AML with NPM1 mutation, there was no
significant difference between them (P = 0.07). It is concluded that AML with
NPM1 mutation has distinct clinical features. NPM1 mutation can co-exists with
FLT3-ITD and IDH1 mutation, but not with AML1-ETO, PML-RARA or CBF-MYH11 fusion
genes.

PMID: 24598642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Cancer Discov. 2014 Mar;4(3):OF20. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-RW2014-019. Epub
2014 Jan 23.

PML nuclear bodies mediate the therapeutic response of APL cells.

[No authors listed]

PML-RARA degradation and PML nuclear body reformation underlie APL clearance by
retinoic acid (RA).

PMID: 24596215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Nutrients. 2014 Mar 3;6(3):950-73. doi: 10.3390/nu6030950.

Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A1: friend or foe to female metabolism?

Petrosino JM(1), Disilvestro D(2), Ziouzenkova O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA. petrosino.5@osu.edu. (2)Department of Human Sciences, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. disilvestro.4@osu.edu. (3)Department of
Human Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
ziouzenkova.1@osu.edu.

In this review, we summarize recent advances in understanding vitamin A-dependent
regulation of sex-specific differences in metabolic diseases, inflammation, and
certain cancers. We focus on the characterization of the aldehyde dehydrogenase-1
family of enzymes (ALDH1A1, ALDH1A2, ALDH1A3) that catalyze conversion of
retinaldehyde to retinoic acid. Additionally, we propose a "horizontal transfer
of signaling" from estrogen to retinoids through the action of ALDH1A1. Although 
estrogen does not directly influence expression of Aldh1a1, it has the ability to
suppress Aldh1a2 and Aldh1a3, thereby establishing a female-specific mechanism
for retinoic acid generation in target tissues. ALDH1A1 regulates adipogenesis,
abdominal fat formation, glucose tolerance, and suppression of thermogenesis in
adipocytes; in B cells, ALDH1A1 plays a protective role by inducing oncogene
suppressors Rara and Pparg. Considering the conflicting responses of Aldh1a1 in a
multitude of physiological processes, only tissue-specific regulation of Aldh1a1 
can result in therapeutic effects. We have shown through successful implantation 
of tissue-specific Aldh1a1-/- preadipocytes that thermogenesis can be induced in 
wild-type adipose tissues to resolve diet-induced visceral obesity in females. We
will briefly discuss the emerging role of ALDH1A1 in multiple myeloma, the
regulation of reproduction, and immune responses, and conclude by discussing the 
role of ALDH1A1 in future therapeutic applications.

PMCID: PMC3967171
PMID: 24594504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Urol. 2014 Sep;192(3):981-9. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2014.02.095. Epub 2014 Mar 1.

An intricate network of conserved DNA upstream motifs and associated
transcription factors regulate the expression of uromodulin gene.

Srivastava R(1), Micanovic R(2), El-Achkar TM(3), Janga SC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biohealth Informatics, School of Informatics and Computing,
Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Indiana
University and Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana; 
Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, School of Medicine, Indiana 
University and Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana. 
(3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Indiana
University and Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana; 
Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, School of Medicine, Indiana 
University and Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana. 
Electronic address: telachka@iu.edu. (4)Department of Biohealth Informatics,
School of Informatics and Computing, Indiana University Purdue University
Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana; Department of Medical and Molecular
Genetics, School of Medicine, Indiana University and Roudebush Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana; Center for Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, School of Medicine, Indiana University and Roudebush Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana. Electronic address:
scjanga@iupui.edu.

PURPOSE: Uromodulin is a kidney specific glycoprotein whose expression can
modulate kidney homeostasis. However, the set of sequence specific transcription 
factors that regulate the uromodulin gene UMOD and their upstream binding
locations are not well characterized. We built a high resolution map of its
transcriptional regulation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We applied in silico phylogenetic footprinting on the
upstream regulatory regions of a diverse set of human UMOD orthologs to identify 
conserved binding motifs and corresponding position specific weight matrices. We 
further analyzed the predicted binding motifs by motif comparison, which
identified transcription factors likely to bind these discovered motifs.
Predicted transcription factors were then integrated with experimentally known
protein-protein interactions available from public databases and tissue specific 
expression resources to delineate important regulators controlling UMOD
expression.
RESULTS: Analysis allowed the identification of a reliable set of binding motifs 
in the upstream regulatory regions of UMOD to build a high confidence compendium 
of transcription factors that could bind these motifs, such as GATA3, HNF1B, SP1,
SMAD3, RUNX2 and KLF4. ENCODE deoxyribonuclease I hypersensitivity sites in the
UMOD upstream region of the mouse kidney confirmed that some of these binding
motifs were open to binding by predicted transcription factors. The transcription
factor-transcription factor network revealed several highly connected
transcription factors, such as SP1, SP3, TP53, POU2F1, RARB, RARA and RXRA, as
well as the likely protein complexes formed between them. Expression levels of
these transcription factors in the kidney suggest their central role in
controlling UMOD expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings will form a map for understanding the regulation
of uromodulin expression in health and disease.

Copyright © 2014 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24594405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2014 Jan 20;53(4):927-9.

Omnia praeclara rara. The quest for ingenol heats up.

Appendino G.

PMID: 24588025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. BMC Genomics. 2013;14 Suppl 5:S10. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-S5-S10. Epub 2013
Oct 16.

Analysis of schizophrenia and hepatocellular carcinoma genetic network with
corresponding modularity and pathways: novel insights to the immune system.

Huang KC, Yang KC, Lin H, Tsao Tsun-Hui T, Lee WK, Lee SA, Kao CY.

BACKGROUND: Schizophrenic patients show lower incidences of cancer, implicating
schizophrenia may be a protective factor against cancer. To study the genetic
correlation between the two diseases, a specific PPI network was constructed with
candidate genes of both schizophrenia and hepatocellular carcinoma. The network, 
designated schizophrenia-hepatocellular carcinoma network (SHCN), was analysed
and cliques were identified as potential functional modules or complexes. The
findings were compared with information from pathway databases such as KEGG,
Reactome, PID and ConsensusPathDB.
RESULTS: The functions of mediator genes from SHCN show immune system and cell
cycle regulation have important roles in the eitology mechanism of schizophrenia.
For example, the over-expressing schizophrenia candidate genes, SIRPB1, SYK and
LCK, are responsible for signal transduction in cytokine production; immune
responses involving IL-2 and TREM-1/DAP12 pathways are relevant for the etiology 
mechanism of schizophrenia. Novel treatments were proposed by searching the
target genes of FDA approved drugs with genes in potential protein complexes and 
pathways. It was found that Vitamin A, retinoid acid and a few other immune
response agents modulated by RARA and LCK genes may be potential treatments for
both schizophrenia and hepatocellular carcinoma.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study showing specific mediator genes in the SHCN 
which may suppress tumors. We also show that the schizophrenic protein
interactions and modulation with cancer implicates the importance of immune
system for etiology of schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC3852078
PMID: 24564241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Cancer Genet. 2014 Jan-Feb;207(1-2):48-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2014.01.001.
Epub 2014 Jan 16.

Cytogenetically cryptic and FISH-negative PML/RARA rearrangement in acute
promyelocytic leukemia detected only by PCR: an exceedingly rare phenomenon.

Blanco EM(1), Curry CV(2), Lu XY(3), Sarabia SF(2), Redell MS(4), Lopez-Terrada
DH(2), Roy A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX;
Department of Pathology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX. (2)Department of
Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX; Department of
Pathology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX; Department of Pediatrics,
Section of Hematology-Oncology, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas Children's
Hospital, Houston, TX. (3)Department of Hematopathology, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Hematology-Oncology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX. (5)Department
of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX; Department of
Pathology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX; Department of Pediatrics,
Section of Hematology-Oncology, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas Children's
Hospital, Houston, TX. Electronic address: aroy@bcm.edu.

PMID: 24561214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Br J Haematol. 2014 May;165(4):497-503. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12775. Epub 2014 Feb 14.

Arsenic trioxide during consolidation for patients with previously untreated
low/intermediate risk acute promyelocytic leukaemia may eliminate the need for
maintenance therapy.

Coutre SE(1), Othus M, Powell B, Willman CL, Stock W, Paietta E, Levitan D,
Wetzler M, Attar EC, Altman JK, Gore SD, Maher T, Kopecky KJ, Tallman MS, Larson 
RA, Appelbaum FR.

Author information: 
(1)Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.

Aa total of 105 patients (age =18 years) with newly diagnosed low or intermediate
risk acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) were treated with a standard induction
and consolidation regimen including arsenic trioxide (ATO). Sixty-eight patients 
who were polymerase chain reaction (PCR) negative for PML-RARA post-consolidation
were randomized to either 1 year of maintenance with tretinoin, mercaptopurine
and methotrexate, or observation. Enrollment in this non-inferiority trial was
stopped prematurely due to slow accrual. With a median follow up of 36·1 months, 
the overall survival of the 105 patients was 93%, and there have been no relapses
in the patients randomized to maintenance or observation. These results
demonstrate that cures can be expected in >90% of patients with low and
intermediate risk APL and suggest that maintenance therapy may not be needed if
patients are treated with an intensive post-remission regimen including ATO. This
trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT00492856.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4064464
PMID: 24528179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Blood. 2014 Mar 27;123(13):2066-74. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-12-469833. Epub 2014 
Feb 3.

Loss of imprinting at the 14q32 domain is associated with microRNA overexpression
in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Manodoro F(1), Marzec J, Chaplin T, Miraki-Moud F, Moravcsik E, Jovanovic JV,
Wang J, Iqbal S, Taussig D, Grimwade D, Gribben JG, Young BD, Debernardi S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Haemato-Oncology and.

Distinct patterns of DNA methylation characterize the epigenetic landscape of
promyelocytic leukemia/retinoic acid receptor-a (PML-RARa)-associated acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL). We previously reported that the microRNAs (miRNAs) 
clustered on chromosome 14q32 are overexpressed only in APL. Here, using
high-throughput bisulfite sequencing, we identified an APL-associated
hypermethylation at the upstream differentially methylated region (DMR), which
also included the site motifs for the enhancer blocking protein CCCTC-binding
factor (CTCF). Comparing the profiles of diagnostic/remission paired patient
samples, we show that hypermethylation was acquired in APL in a monoallelic
manner. The cytosine guanine dinucleotide status of the DMR correlated with
expression of the miRNAs following a characteristic position-dependent pattern.
Moreover, a signature of hypermethylation was also detected in leukemic cells
from an established transgenic PML-RARA APL mouse model at the orthologous region
on chromosome 12, including the CTCF binding site located upstream from the mouse
miRNA cluster. These results, together with the demonstration that the region
does not show DNA methylation changes during myeloid differentiation, provide
evidence that 14q32 hypermethylation is implicated in the pathogenesis of APL. We
propose a model in which loss of imprinting at the 14q32 domain leads to
overexpression of the miRNAs in APL.

PMID: 24493669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Blood Res. 2013 Dec;48(4):250-3. doi: 10.5045/br.2013.48.4.250. Epub 2013 Dec 24.

Comparison of laboratory characteristics between acute promyelocytic leukemia and
other subtypes of acute myeloid leukemia with disseminated intravascular
coagulation.

Lee HJ(1), Park HJ(1), Kim HW(1), Park SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hematology-Oncology, Chosun University
Hospital, Gwangju, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is an acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
subtype with distinctive cell morphology, molecular presentation, clinical
course, and treatment. About 90% of APL patients present with hemorrhagic
complications due to disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). When APL is
suspected, all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) treatment is recommended even before
confirmation by molecular tests. Specific criteria for differentiating
unconfirmed APL from other AML subtypes with DIC are currently lacking. We aimed 
to achieve the early diagnosis of APL from other AML types with DIC by
restricting the DIC criteria.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed 29 patients newly diagnosed with AML
accompanied by DIC from January 2005 to January 2013.
RESULTS: Fibrin degradation products (FDP) (77.7 µg/mL vs. 23.7 µg/mL, p=0.026), 
D-dimer (7,376.2 ng/mL vs. 1,315.2 ng/mL, p=0.018), and TIBC (264.4 µg/dL vs.
206.8 µg/dL, P=0.046) were higher, while fibrinogen (133.8 mg/dL vs. 373.2 mg/dL,
p<0.001), WBC (14.988×10(9)/L vs. 70.755×10(9)/L, p=0.015), and ESR (7.1 mm/h vs.
50.0 mm/h, p <0.001) were lower in APL patients than in the patients with other
AML subtypes. FDP =27 µg/mL, D-dimer =2,071 ng/mL, and fibrinogen =279 mg/dL were
our threshold values. These markers may be characteristic to APL and helpful in
presumptive diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: APL may be differentiated from other AML subtypes by core markers of 
DIC (FDP, D-dimer, and fibrinogen). We suggest that clinicians set new diagnostic
thresholds by restricting the DIC criteria. These findings support the early
initiation of ATRA, prior to confirmation by PML-RARA molecular testing.

PMCID: PMC3894382
PMID: 24466548  [PubMed]


155. Ann Hematol. 2014 Jun;93(6):949-55. doi: 10.1007/s00277-014-2007-2. Epub 2014 Jan
25.

Analysis of class I and II aberrations in Iraqi childhood acute myeloid leukemia 
using filter paper cards.

Al-Kzayer LF(1), Uyen le TN, Al-Jadiry MF, Al-Hadad SA, Al-Badri SA, Ghali HH,
Ameen NA, Liu T, Matsuda K, Abdulkadhim JM, Al-Shujairi TA, Matti ZI, Hasan JG,
Al-Abdullah HM, Al-Ani MH, Saber PA, Khalil HM, Inoshita T, Kamata M, Koike K,
Sakashita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 3-1-1, Asahi,
Matsumoto, 390-8621, Nagano, Japan.

The lack of molecular diagnosis in the field of cancer in Iraq has motivated us
to perform a genetic analysis of pediatric acute myelogenous leukemia (AML),
including class I and II aberrations. Peripheral blood or bone marrow cells were 
collected from 134 AML children aged =15 years. Flinders Technology Associates
(FTA) filter paper cards were used to transfer dried blood samples from five
Iraqi hospitals to Japan. DNA sequencing was performed to identify class I
mutations. Nested RT-PCR was used to detect class II aberrations, except that MLL
rearrangement was detected according to long distance inverse-PCR. NPM1 and
FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3-internal tandem duplication (FLT3-ITD) mutations were 
analyzed by GeneScan using DNA template. Among 134 Iraqi pediatric AML samples,
the most prevalent FAB subtype was M2 (33.6 %) followed by M3 (17.9 %). Class I
mutations: 20 (14.9 %), 8 (6.0 %), and 8 (6.0 %) patients had FLT3-ITD, FLT3-TKD,
and KIT mutations, respectively. Class II mutations: 24 (17.9 %), 19 (14.2 %),
and 9 (6.7 %) children had PML-RARA, RUNX1-RUNX1T1, and CBFB-MYH11 transcripts,
respectively. MLL rearrangements were detected in 25 (18.7 %) patients. NPM1
mutation was detected in seven (5.2 %) cases. Collectively, approximately 30 % of
AML children were proved to carry favorable prognostic genetic abnormalities,
whereas approximately 10 % had high FLT3-ITD allelic burden and needed a special 
treatment plan including allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) was frequent among Iraqi pediatric AML. It is 
likely that molecular diagnosis using FTA cards in underdeveloped countries could
guide doctors towards an appropriate treatment strategy.

PMID: 24464319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Mitochondrial DNA. 2015;26(5):744-6. doi: 10.3109/19401736.2013.845768. Epub 2014
Jan 27.

Mitochondrial DNA sequence of Onychostoma rara.

Zeng CF(1), Li XL(1), Li CW(1), Huang XR(1), Wan YW(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Hunan Fisheries Science Institute , Hunan Changsha , People's Republic of
China.

The complete mitochondrial genome sequence of Onychostoma rara was determined to 
be 16,590 bp in length and contains 13 protein-coding genes (PCGs), 22 tRNA
genes, large (rrnL) and small (rrnS) rRNA and the non-coding control region. Its 
total A<U+2009>+<U+2009>T content is 55.65%. We also analyzed the structure of control region, 
6 CSBs (CSB-1, CSB-2, CSB-3, CSB-D, CSB-E and CSB-F) and 2 bp tandem repeat were 
detected.

PMID: 24460173  [PubMed - in process]


157. Blood. 2014 Mar 6;123(10):1535-43. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-09-526590. Epub 2014
Jan 21.

Immune evasion by oncogenic proteins of acute myeloid leukemia.

Elias S(1), Yamin R, Golomb L, Tsukerman P, Stanietsky-Kaynan N, Ben-Yehuda D,
Mandelboim O.

Author information: 
(1)The Lautenberg Center for General and Tumor Immunology, Institute for Medical 
Research Israel-Canada, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem,
Israel;

PML-RARA and AML1-ETO are important oncogenic fusion proteins that play a central
role in transformation to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Whether these fusion
proteins render the tumor cells with immune evasion properties is unknown. Here
we show that both oncogenic proteins specifically downregulate the expression of 
CD48, a ligand of the natural killer (NK) cell activating receptor 2B4, thereby
leading to decreased killing by NK cells. We demonstrate that this process is
histone deacetylase (HDAC)-dependent, that it is mediated through the
downregulation of CD48 messenger RNA, and that treatment with HDAC inhibitors
(HDACi) restores the expression of CD48. Furthermore, by using chromatin
immunoprecepitation (ChIP) experiments, we show that AML1-ETO directly interacts 
with CD48. Finally, we show that AML patients who are carrying these specific
translocations have low expression of CD48.

PMCID: PMC3981677
PMID: 24449212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2013;14(9):849-58.

Novel treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia: As2O3, retinoic acid and
retinoid pharmacology.

Zhu G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oncology of George Zhu, 422407, Beijing, China.
sansan4240732@163.com.

Erratum in
    Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2014;15(12):1187. Mische, Sarah E [removed]; Seigneres,
Beatrice [removed].

Acute promyelocytic leukemia(APL), a specific characteristic of t(15;17)
chromosome translocation, represents 5% to 15% of cases of acute nonlymphocytic
leukemia. An alternative approach is to consider retinoic acid(all-trans RA, ATRA
or 13-cis RA or 9-cis RA) plus chemotherapy or RA plus As2O3 regimens as now
novel therapy. Molecular gene analyses are conclusive in vivo evidence that
oncogenic PML/RARa plays a crucial role in APL leukemogenesis. As a novel
approach to APL treatment, one possible the action of RA, A consense sequence
(5'-TCAGGTCATGACCTGA-3') has been postulated for the thyroid hormone (TRE) and
retinoic acid responsive element (RARE) containing half palindromes, which
located in the promoter region of target genes. High dose (100-fold) of
RA-RARE-PML/RARa complex in intracellular localization appears to relieve
repressor from DNA binding, including corepressors N-CoR, SMRT and HDACs, release
PML/RARa- mediated transcriptional repression, and release histone deacetylase
activity from PMLRARa. The resulting PML/RARa oncoprotein proteolytic degradation
through the autophagy-lysosome pathway and the ubiquitin SUMO-proteasome system
(UPS), as well as caspase 3 (cleavage site Asp522 within a-helics region of PML
component of the fusion protein) or neutrophil elastase, or lysosomal protease
enzyme induction. PML protein relocalizes into the wild-type nuclear body
(PML-NB) configuration or/and wild-type RARa upregulated. An effect to relieve
the blockade (inhibition) of PML/RARA-mediated RA dependent promyelocytic
differentiation, and retinoic acid in APL therapy (see Figure in the full text,
George Zhu, 1991). Here, like v-erbA, PML/RARa is a (strong) transcriptional
repressor of the RA receptor (RAR) complex, and PML/RARa fusion receptor gene act
as conditional oncogenic receptor (translocated chimeric retinoic acid a
signaling) or oncogenic PML/RARa may participate in leukemogenesis of APL through
blocking RA-mediated promyelocytic differentiation. This is first described in
eukaryotes.

PMID: 24433507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Nat Med. 2014 Feb;20(2):167-74. doi: 10.1038/nm.3441. Epub 2014 Jan 12.

Activation of a promyelocytic leukemia-tumor protein 53 axis underlies acute
promyelocytic leukemia cure.

Ablain J(1), Rice K(2), Soilihi H(2), de Reynies A(3), Minucci S(4), de Thé H(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris,
France. [2] INSERM UMR 944, Equipe Labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le
Cancer, Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France.
[3] CNRS UMR 7212, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France. [4]. (2)1] Université Paris 
Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France. [2] INSERM UMR
944, Equipe Labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, Institut
Universitaire d'Hématologie, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France. [3] CNRS UMR 7212,
Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France. (3)Programme Cartes d'Identité des Tumeurs,
Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, Paris, France. (4)1] Department of Experimental
Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy. [2] Department of
Biosciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. (5)1] Université Paris Diderot,
Sorbonne Paris Cité, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France. [2] INSERM UMR 944, Equipe
Labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, Institut Universitaire
d'Hématologie, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France. [3] CNRS UMR 7212, Hôpital St.
Louis, Paris, France. [4] Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Service de
Biochimie, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2014 Feb;20(2):123-4.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is driven by the promyelocytic leukemia
(PML)-retinoic acid receptor-a (PML-RARA) fusion protein, which interferes with
nuclear receptor signaling and PML nuclear body (NB) assembly. APL is the only
malignancy definitively cured by targeted therapies: retinoic acid (RA) and/or
arsenic trioxide, which both trigger PML-RARA degradation through nonoverlapping 
pathways. Yet, the cellular and molecular determinants of treatment efficacy
remain disputed. We demonstrate that a functional Pml-transformation-related
protein 53 (Trp53) axis is required to eradicate leukemia-initiating cells in a
mouse model of APL. Upon RA-induced PML-RARA degradation, normal Pml elicits NB
reformation and induces a Trp53 response exhibiting features of senescence but
not apoptosis, ultimately abrogating APL-initiating activity. Apart from
triggering PML-RARA degradation, arsenic trioxide also targets normal PML to
enhance NB reformation, which may explain its clinical potency, alone or with RA.
This Pml-Trp53 checkpoint initiated by therapy-triggered NB restoration is
specific for PML-RARA-driven APL, but not the RA-resistant promyelocytic leukemia
zinc finger (PLZF)-RARA variant. Yet, as NB biogenesis is druggable, it could be 
therapeutically exploited in non-APL malignancies.

PMID: 24412926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Gene. 2014 Mar 10;537(2):343-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.12.056. Epub 2014 Jan 4.

Molecular characterization of near-complete trisomy 17p syndrome from inverted
duplication in association with cryptic deletion of 17pter.

Park CH(1), Kim HJ(1), Lee ST(1), Seo JM(2), Kim SH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine & Genetics, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Surgery, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School 
of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Laboratory Medicine &
Genetics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: sunnyhk@skku.edu.

Trisomy of the short arm of chromosome 17 (T17P) is a genomic disorder presenting
with growth retardation, motor and mental retardation and constitutional physical
anomalies including congenital heart defects. Here we report a case of
near-complete T17P of which the genomic dosage aberrations were delineated by
chromosomal microarray along with conventional diagnostic modalities. A
9-year-old Korean boy was admitted because of esophageal obstruction. He showed
clinical manifestations of T17P, along with atypical features of scoliosis,
corpus callosum agenesis, and seizure. Chromosome analyses revealed an inverted
duplication of the chromosomal segment between 17p11.2 and 17p13.3. Chromosomal
microarray revealed a duplication of the most of the short arm of chromosome 17
(size ~19.09 Mb) along with a cryptic deletion of a small segment of 17p terminal
end (17pter) (~261 Kb). This is the first report of molecular characterization of
near-complete T17P from inverted duplication in association with 17pter
microdeletion. The fine delineation of the extent of genomic aberration by
SNP-based microarray could help us better understand the molecular mechanism and 
genotype-phenotype correlations in T17P syndrome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24393711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Br J Haematol. 2014 Jan;164(2):280-5. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12578. Epub 2013 Sep 24.

Erythroid-extrinsic regulation of normal erythropoiesis by retinoic acid
receptors.

Dewamitta SR(1), Joseph C, Purton LE, Walkley CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine at St. Vincent's Hospital, St. Vincent's Institute of
Medical Research, University of Melbourne, Fitzroy, Vic., Australia.

Vitamin A and its derivatives (retinoids) are important regulators of
haematopoiesis, acting via retinoic acid receptors (RARs). Epidemiological
studies indicated an association of vitamin A deficiency with anaemia in humans. 
To define the requirements of RARs in erythropoiesis, we evaluated erythroid
parameters in RAR germ-line deficient and conditional knock out mice with
erythroid specific deletion of RARs. Adult RAR<U+03B3>(-/-) mice were anaemic, however, 
Epor-Cre Rara(fl/fl) , Epor-Cre Rarg(fl/fl) and Epor-Cre Rara(fl/fl) g(fl/fl)
mice were normal, indicating a lack of an erythroid intrinsic RAR function.
Therefore, erythroid-specific RAR function is dispensable for erythropoiesis and 
RAR<U+03B3> plays an erythroid extrinsic role in erythropoiesis.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24383846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2013 Nov 25;67:1083-9.

[Acute promyelocytic leukemia--modern approach to disease pathogenesis and
differentiation treatment].

[Article in Polish]

Podhorecka M(1), Macheta A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Klinika Hematoonkologii i Transplantacji Szpiku, Uniwersytet Medyczny w
Lublinie.

During last decades acute promyelocytic leukemia, once considered the deadly
disease, has evolved to the most treatable of all subtypes of acute myeloid
leukemias. The intense clinical and basic research has led to a rational approach
to treatment in which the use of the differentiating agent all-trans-retinoic
acid has proven to be effective first-line therapy. Arsenic trioxide, used for
relapsed disease, further improved the survival rate of patients. The classical
model presented the therapeutic success as a result of over-coming of the
differentiation block characteristic of neoplastic cells. However, the resent in 
vivo and ex vivo studies, seem to show that the induction of differentiation
process is not required to cure acute promyelocytic leukemia. Rather than
inducing differentiation, targeting clonogenic leukemia initiating cells or
destroying PML-RARa fusion protein may represent a more effective therapeutic
goal in this type of leukemia.

PMID: 24379249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Exp Med. 2013 Dec 16;210(13):2793-802. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131121.

Synergy against PML-RARa: targeting transcription, proteolysis, differentiation, 
and self-renewal in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Dos Santos GA(1), Kats L, Pandolfi PP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Program, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center; and 2 Department
of Medicine and 3 Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a hematological malignancy driven by a
chimeric oncoprotein containing the C terminus of the retinoic acid receptor-a
(RARa) fused to an N-terminal partner, most commonly promyelocytic leukemia
protein (PML). Mechanistically, PML-RARa acts as a transcriptional repressor of
RARa and non-RARa target genes and antagonizes the formation and function of PML 
nuclear bodies that regulate numerous signaling pathways. The empirical
discoveries that PML-RARa-associated APL is sensitive to both all-trans-retinoic 
acid (ATRA) and arsenic trioxide (ATO), and the subsequent understanding of the
mechanisms of action of these drugs, have led to efforts to understand the
contribution of molecular events to APL cell differentiation, leukemia-initiating
cell (LIC) clearance, and disease eradication in vitro and in vivo. Critically,
the mechanistic insights gleaned from these studies have resulted not only in a
better understanding of APL itself, but also carry valuable lessons for other
malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3865469
PMID: 24344243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:170452. doi: 10.1155/2013/170452. Epub 2013 Nov 14.

Peanut sensitization profiles in Italian children and adolescents with specific
IgE to peanuts.

Calamelli E(1), Caffarelli C, Ricci G.

Author information: 
(1)UO Pediatria, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, University of
Bologna, Via Massarenti 11, 40138 Bologna, Italy.

Peanuts are one of the most relevant foods implicated in IgE-mediated adverse
reactions in pediatric population. This study aimed to evaluate the pattern of
sensitization towards five peanut allergenic components (rAra h 1, 2, 3, 8 and 9)
in a population of Italian children and adolescents with specific IgE (sIgE) to
peanut. rAra h 9 was the main allergen implicated in peanut sensitization (58%), 
followed by rAra h 8 (35%), rAra h 2 (27%), rAra h 3 (23%) and rAra h 1 (12.5%). 
rAra h 1, 2, and 3 were the main allergenic components in young children: 8/13
(62%) between 2 and 5 years, 8/23 (35%) between 6 and 11 years, and 3/12 (25%)
between 1 and 16 years. No differences were found among the levels of sIgE
towards rAra h 1, 2, 3, and 9 in the three groups; in contrast, the levels of
sIgE against rAra h 8 showed an increasing trend according to age. In conclusion 
rAra h 1, 2, and 3 were the prevalent sensitizing allergens during the first
years of life in Italian patients with sIgE to peanuts ("genuine" allergy); in
contrast rAra h 9 and 8 were mainly involved in school-age children and
adolescents with pollen allergy ("secondary" sensitization).

PMCID: PMC3845422
PMID: 24324955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Allergy. 2013 Dec;68(12):1546-54. doi: 10.1111/all.12261. Epub 2013 Nov 23.

Identification of Maillard reaction products on peanut allergens that influence
binding to the receptor for advanced glycation end products.

Mueller GA(1), Maleki SJ, Johnson K, Hurlburt BK, Cheng H, Ruan S, Nesbit JB,
Pomés A, Edwards LL, Schorzman A, Deterding LJ, Park H, Tomer KB, London RE,
Williams JG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Structural Biology, National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent immunological data demonstrated that dendritic cells
preferentially recognize advanced glycation end product (AGE)-modified proteins, 
upregulate expression of the receptor for AGE (RAGE), and consequently bias the
immune response toward allergy.
METHODS: Peanut extract was characterized by mass spectrometry (MS) to elucidate 
the specific residues and specific AGE modifications found in raw and roasted
peanuts and on rAra h 1 that was artificially glycated by incubation with glucose
or xylose. The binding of the RAGE-V1C1 domain to peanut allergens was assessed
by PAGE and Western analysis with anti-Ara h 1, 2, and 3 antibodies. IgE binding 
to rAra h 1 was also assessed using the same methods.
RESULTS: AGE modifications were found on Ara h 1 and Ara h 3 in both raw and
roasted peanut extract. No AGE modifications were found on Ara h 2. Mass
spectrometry and Western blot analysis demonstrated that RAGE binds selectively
to Ara h 1 and Ara h 3 derived from peanut extract, whereas the analysis failed
to demonstrate Ara h 2 binding to RAGE. rAra h 1 with no AGE modifications did
not bind RAGE; however, after AGE modification with xylose, rAra h 1 bound to
RAGE.
CONCLUSIONS: AGE modifications to Ara h 1 and Ara h 3 can be found in both raw
and roasted peanuts. Receptor for AGE was demonstrated to selectively interact
with AGE-modified rAra h 1. If sensitization to peanut allergens occurs in
dendritic cells via RAGE interactions, these cells are likely interacting with
modified Ara h 1 and Ara h 3, but not Ara h 2.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd This article has
been contributed to by US Government employees and their work is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMCID: PMC3915869
PMID: 24266677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Balkan J Med Genet. 2013 Jun;16(1):49-54. doi: 10.2478/bjmg-2013-0017.

Analysis of microsatellite polymorphisms in South Indian patients with non
syndromic cleft lip and palate.

Xavier D(1), Arif Y, Murali R, Kishore Kumar S, Vipin Kumar S, Tamang R,
Thangaraj K, Bhaskar L.

Author information: 
(1)Sree Balaji Dental College and Hospital, Chennai, India.

Non syndromic cleft lip and/or palate (NSCLP) is a complex congenital anomaly
with varying incidence among patients of different geographical origins. Multiple
contributing factors are known to trigger the cleft formation. There are several 
genes involved in the aetiology of NSCLP and they are different in different
populations. The genetic components of clefts that underlie the susceptibility to
respond to the environment still remain unclear. In this study, five
microsatellite polymorphisms from five candidate genes were employed to analyze
the association between these genes and NSCLP in 83 patients and 90 controls.
Genotyping was performed by separating and visualizing the fluorescently-labeled 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products. The association of the five
microsatellite polymorphisms with NSCLP was tested by using the CLUMP v1.9
program that uses the Monte Carlo method. The genotypic distribution is in
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the control group for only the MSX1 and DLX3 genes.
The RARA microsatellite was significantly associated with NSCLP. Our results
suggest that the RARA gene is involved in pathogenesis of cleft lip and palate in
South Indians.

PMCID: PMC3835296
PMID: 24265584  [PubMed]


167. JAMA Dermatol. 2014 Feb;150(2):138-45. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2013.6908.

Recurrent melanocytic nevi and melanomas in dermoscopy: results of a multicenter 
study of the International Dermoscopy Society.

Blum A(1), Hofmann-Wellenhof R(2), Marghoob AA(3), Argenziano G(4), Cabo H(5),
Carrera C(6), Costa Soares de Sá B(7), Ehrsam E(8), González R(9), Malvehy J(6), 
Manganoni AM(10), Puig S(6), Simionescu O(11), Tanaka M(12), Thomas L(13), Tromme
I(14), Zalaudek I(2), Kittler H(15).

Author information: 
(1)Public, Private, and Teaching Practice of Dermatology, Konstanz, Germany.
(2)Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. (3)Dermatology Service, Department 
of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. (4)Skin 
Cancer Unit, Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova IRCCS, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(5)Medical Research Institute "A. Lanari," University of Buenos Aires, Buenos
Aires, Argentina. (6)Melanoma Unit, Department of Dermatology, Hospital Clinic
Barcelona, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS),
Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en red de enfermedades raras (CIBERER)
Enfermedades rara, Barcelona, Spain. (7)Skin Cancer and Dermatology Center,
Hospital AC Camargo São Paulo, Brazil. (8)Public and Private Practice of
Dermatology, Lille, France. (9)Departamento de Introducción a la Clínica,
Facultad de Medicina, UANL, Monterrey, México. (10)Department of Dermatology,
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy. (11)First Dermatological Clinic, Carol
Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Colentina Hospital, Bucharest,
Romania. (12)Department of Dermatology, Tokyo Women's Medical University Medical 
Center East, Tokyo, Japan. (13)Department of Dermatology, Lyon 1 University
Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Pierre Bénite, France. (14)Department of
Dermatology, Centre du Cancer, Cliniques Universitaires St Luc, Université
Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (15)Department of Dermatology, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

IMPORTANCE Differentiating recurrent nevi from recurrent melanoma is challenging.
OBJECTIVE To determine dermoscopic features to differentiate recurrent nevi from 
melanomas. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS Retrospective observational study of
15 pigmented lesion clinics from 12 countries; 98 recurrent nevi (61.3%) and 62
recurrent melanomas (38.8%) were collected from January to December 2011. MAIN
OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Scoring the dermoscopic features, patterns, and colors in
correlation with the histopathologic findings. RESULTS In univariate analysis,
radial lines, symmetry, and centrifugal growth pattern were significantly more
common dermoscopically in recurrent nevi; in contrast, circles, especially if on 
the head and neck area, eccentric hyperpigmentation at the periphery, a chaotic
and noncontinuous growth pattern, and pigmentation beyond the scar's edge were
significantly more common in recurrent melanomas. Patients with recurrent
melanomas were significantly older than patients with recurrent nevi (mean [SD]
age, 63.1 [17.5] years vs 30.2 [12.4] years) (P<.001), and there was a
significantly longer time interval between the first procedure and the second
treatment (median time interval, 25 vs 8 months) (P<.001). In a multivariate
analysis, pigmentation beyond the scar's edge (P=.002), age (P<.001), and
anatomic site (P=.002) were significantly and independently associated with the
diagnosis of recurrent melanoma in dermoscopy. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE
Dermoscopically, pigmentation beyond the scar's edge is the strongest clue for
melanoma. Dermoscopy is helpful in evaluating recurrent lesions, but final
interpretation requires taking into account the patient age, anatomic site, time 
to recurrence, growth pattern, and, if available, the histopathologic findings of
the first excision.

PMID: 24226788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Br J Cancer. 2013 Nov 26;109(11):2819-28. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.510. Epub 2013
Nov 7.

Synthetic phosphoethanolamine has in vitro and in vivo anti-leukemia effects.

Ferreira AK(1), Santana-Lemos BA, Rego EM, Filho OM, Chierice GO, Maria DA.

Author information: 
(1)1] Biochemistry and Biophysical Laboratory, Institute Butantan, São Paulo,
Brazil [2] Experimental Physiopathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: We recently showed that synthetic phosphoethanolamine reduces tumour 
growth and inhibits lung metastasis in vivo. Here, we investigated its
anti-leukaemia effects using acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) as a model.
METHODS: Cytotoxic effects of Pho-s on leukaemia cells were evaluated by MTT
assay. Leukaemic cells obtained from hCG-PML-RARa transgenic mice were
transplanted to NOD/SCID mice. After the animals were diagnosed as leukaemic,
treatment started with Pho-s using all-trans retinoid acid or daunorubicin as
positive control or and saline control. Cell morphology and immunophenotyping
were used to detect the undifferentiated blast cells in the spleen, liver and
bone marrow. The induction of apoptosis in vitro and in malignant leukaemic
clones was evaluated.
RESULTS: Synthetic phosphoethanolamine is cytotoxic and induces apoptosis through
the mitochondrial pathway in vitro to leukaemia cell lines. In vivo Pho-s
exhibits anti-proliferative effects in APL model reducing the number of CD117(+) 
and Gr-1(+) immature myeloid cells in the BM, spleen and liver. Synthetic
phosphoethanolamine impairs the expansion of malignant clones CD34(+)/CD117(+),
CD34(+) and Gr-1(+) in the BM. In addition, Pho-s induces apoptosis of immature
cells in the spleen and liver, a notable effect.
CONCLUSION: Synthetic phosphoethanolamine has anti-leukaemic effects in an APL
model by inhibiting malignant clone expansion, suggesting that it is an
interesting compound for leukaemia treatment.

PMCID: PMC3844899
PMID: 24201752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Mol Diagn. 2014 Jan;16(1):56-67. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2013.08.004. Epub 2013
Nov 2.

Validation and implementation of targeted capture and sequencing for the
detection of actionable mutation, copy number variation, and gene rearrangement
in clinical cancer specimens.

Pritchard CC(1), Salipante SJ(2), Koehler K(3), Smith C(3), Scroggins S(3), Wood 
B(4), Wu D(3), Lee MK(5), Dintzis S(6), Adey A(7), Liu Y(6), Eaton KD(8), Martins
R(8), Stricker K(8), Margolin KA(8), Hoffman N(3), Churpek JE(9), Tait JF(3),
King MC(10), Walsh T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington. Electronic address: cpritch@uw.edu. (2)Department of Laboratory
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington; Department of Genome
Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington. (3)Department of
Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington. (4)Department
of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington; Department
of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington. (5)Division of
Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington. (6)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington. (7)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington. (8)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington. (9)Section of Hematology and Oncology,
Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. (10)Department 
of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington; Division of
Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington.

Recent years have seen development and implementation of anticancer therapies
targeted to particular gene mutations, but methods to assay clinical cancer
specimens in a comprehensive way for the critical mutations remain
underdeveloped. We have developed UW-OncoPlex, a clinical molecular diagnostic
assay to provide simultaneous deep-sequencing information, based on >500× average
coverage, for all classes of mutations in 194 clinically relevant genes. To
validate UW-OncoPlex, we tested 98 previously characterized clinical tumor
specimens from 10 different cancer types, including 41 formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue samples. Mixing studies indicated reliable mutation
detection in samples with = 10% tumor cells. In clinical samples with = 10% tumor
cells, UW-OncoPlex correctly identified 129 of 130 known mutations [sensitivity
99.2%, (95% CI, 95.8%-99.9%)], including single nucleotide variants, small
insertions and deletions, internal tandem duplications, gene copy number gains
and amplifications, gene copy losses, chromosomal gains and losses, and
actionable genomic rearrangements, including ALK-EML4, ROS1, PML-RARA, and
BCR-ABL. In the same samples, the assay also identified actionable point
mutations in genes not previously analyzed and novel gene rearrangements of MLL
and GRIK4 in melanoma, and of ASXL1, PIK3R1, and SGCZ in acute myeloid leukemia. 
To best guide existing and emerging treatment regimens and facilitate integration
of genomic testing with patient care, we developed a framework for data analysis,
decision support, and reporting clinically actionable results.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the Association
for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3873496
PMID: 24189654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2013 Nov;137(11):1669-73. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2012-0565-OA.

Immunostaining for rapid diagnosis of acute promyelocytic leukemia with the
tetramethylrhodamine-5-isothiocyanate-conjugated anti-promyelocytic leukemia
monoclonal antibody PG-M3.

Alayed KM(1), Medeiros LJ, Phan D, Ojiaku C, Patel J, Yap JP, McCord Y, Woods JS,
Konoplev S, Bueso-Ramos CE, Reyes SR.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston (Drs Alayed, Medeiros, Konoplev, and Bueso-Ramos, Mr Phan,
Ms Ojiaku, Ms Patel, Ms McCord, Mr Yap, and Ms Woods); and the Department of
Pathology, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (Dr
Alayed).

CONTEXT: Anti-promyelocytic leukemia (PML) immunofluorescence staining is a known
diagnostic tool for rapid diagnosis of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL).
OBJECTIVE: We describe our methods using the recently developed, commercially
available, tetramethylrhodamine-5-isothiocyanate-labeled PG-M3 anti-PML antibody 
for APL testing.
DESIGN: Immunofluorescence staining with the
tetramethylrhodamine-5-isothiocyanate-labeled PG-M3 antibody was used to detect
PML-RARA in bone marrow aspirate and/or peripheral blood smears from 30 patients 
with acute leukemia. The results were compared with those of concurrent testing
with our in-house polyclonal anti-PML antibody and with established tests.
RESULTS: All APL cases showed a positive (fine/microgranular) immunofluorescence 
staining pattern, whereas non-APL cases showed a negative (chunky/macrogranular) 
pattern. These results, which were available within 2 hours, were validated by
testing with the polyclonal anti-PML antibody and with established cytogenetic
and molecular testing methods.
CONCLUSIONS: We validated the utility of the
tetramethylrhodamine-5-isothiocyanate-labeled anti-PML antibody PG-M3 for the
diagnosis of APL. Our results indicate that immunofluorescence staining with this
antibody is a rapid and reliable method for the diagnosis of APL.

PMID: 24168508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Leuk Lymphoma. 2014 Jul;55(7):1523-32. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2013.842985. Epub
2014 Feb 4.

Arsenic trioxide in front-line therapy of acute promyelocytic leukemia (C9710):
prognostic significance of FLT3 mutations and complex karyotype.

Poiré X(1), Moser BK, Gallagher RE, Laumann K, Bloomfield CD, Powell BL, Koval G,
Gulati K, Holowka N, Larson RA, Tallman MS, Appelbaum FR, Sher D, Willman C,
Paietta E, Stock W.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, The University of Chicago Medical Center ,
Chicago, IL , USA.

Comment in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2014 Jul;55(7):1444-6.

The addition of arsenic trioxide (ATO) to frontline therapy of acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) has been shown to result in significant improvements
in disease-free survival (DFS). FLT3 mutations are frequently observed in APL,
but its prognostic significance remains unclear. We analyzed 245 newly diagnosed 
adult patients with APL treated on intergroup trial C9710 and evaluated
previously defined biological and prognostic factors and their relationship to
FLT3 mutations and to additional karyotypic abnormalities. FLT3 mutations were
found in 48% of patients, including 31% with an internal tandem duplication
(FLT3-ITD), 14% with a point mutation (FLT3-D835) and 2% with both mutations. The
FLT3-ITD mutant level was uniformly low, < 0.5. Neither FLT3 mutation had an
impact on remission rate, induction death rate, DFS or overall survival (OS). The
addition of ATO consolidation improved outcomes regardless of FLT3 mutation type 
or level, initial white blood cell count, PML-RARA isoform type or transcript
level. The presence of a complex karyotype was strongly associated with an
inferior OS independently of post-remission treatment. In conclusion, the
addition of ATO to frontline therapy overcomes the impact of previously described
adverse prognostic factors including FLT3 mutations. However, complex karyotype
is strongly associated with an inferior OS despite ATO therapy.

PMCID: PMC4273565
PMID: 24160850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Autophagy. 2013 Dec;9(12):2175-7. doi: 10.4161/auto.26559. Epub 2013 Oct 8.

Autophagy: friend or foe in the treatment of fusion protein-associated leukemias?

Torgersen ML(1), Simonsen A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences; University of Oslo; Oslo, Norway.

Both radiation and chemotherapeutic drugs induce autophagy in tumor cells, and
whether this contributes to cell death or survival is debated. Although a
prodeath role has been reported in certain contexts, treatment-induced autophagy 
often exerts a prosurvival function by preventing apoptosis and delaying
necrosis. Interestingly, a more specific role of autophagy has been demonstrated 
in certain subtypes of leukemia. The fusion oncoproteins PML-RARA and BCR-ABL,
the main oncogenic drivers of acute promyelocytic leukemia and chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML), respectively, have recently been identified as autophagy
substrates and their degradation by autophagy shown to contribute to treatment.
However, this does not seem to be a general feature of leukemic fusion
oncoproteins, as we recently found that AML1-ETO, the most frequently occurring
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) fusion protein, is not an autophagy substrate.
Rather we demonstrate a clear prosurvival role of autophagy in this AML subtype
and that addition of autophagy inhibitors in the treatment regimen might be
beneficial.

PMID: 24145192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Sci China Life Sci. 2013 Nov;56(11):1020-7. doi: 10.1007/s11427-013-4561-6. Epub 
2013 Oct 16.

Potential antitumor mechanisms of phenothiazine drugs.

Qi L(1), Ding Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, 510515, China.

In this study, three kinds of phenothiazine drugs were analyzed to explore their 
potential antitumor mechanisms. First, target proteins that could interact with
chlorpromazine, fluphenazine and trifluoperazine were predicted. Then, the target
proteins of the three drugs were intersected. Cell signaling pathway enrichment
and related disease enrichment were conducted for the intersected proteins to
extract the enrichment categories associated with tumors. By regulation network
analysis of the protein interactions, the mechanisms of action of these target
proteins in tumor tissue were clarified, thus confirming the potential antitumor 
mechanisms of the phenothiazine drugs. The final results of cell signaling
pathway enrichment and related disease enrichment showed that the categories with
the highest score were all found in tumors. Target proteins belonging to the
tumor category included signaling pathway members such as Wnt, MAPK and retinoic 
acid receptor. Moreover, another target protein, MAPK8, could indirectly act on
target proteins CDK2, IGF1R, GSK3B, RARA, FGFR2 and MAPK10, thereby affecting
tumor cell division and proliferation. Therefore, phenothiazine drugs may have
potential antitumor effects, and tumor-associated target proteins play important 
roles in the process of cell signaling transduction cascades.

PMID: 24132550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Acta Reumatol Port. 2013 Jan-Mar;38(1):49-50.

Concomitant alopecia areata and hypertrichosis after infliximab therapy: rara
avis.

Akarsu S, Tok F, Tekin L.

We present a 37 year-old man with HLA-B27 positive ankylosing spondylitis for the
last 3 years. Interestingly, he developed both alopecia areata and hypertrichosis
simultaneously following infliximab treatment. Reporting this interesting patient
of ours -to our best notice for the first time in the literature- we call
attention of clinicians to the contradistinctive effects of anti-TNF-a agents on 
hair growth cycle.

PMID: 24131912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2013 Nov;24(7):665-70. doi: 10.1111/pai.12125.

Component-resolved diagnostics for the evaluation of peanut allergy in a
low-prevalence area.

Suratannon N(1), Ngamphaiboon J, Wongpiyabovorn J, Puripokai P, Chatchatee P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Erratum in
    Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2014 Mar;25(2):204.

BACKGROUND: Major allergenic components of peanut from distinct geographical
regions are widely dispersed. Most of the diagnostic studies are from countries
with a high prevalence. There have been only few reports of allergen component
sensitizations from countries with a low prevalence of peanut allergy. We aimed
to investigate roles of component-resolved diagnostic (CRD) to differentiate
peanut allergy and peanut tolerance in the Asian population from a country with
low prevalence of peanut allergy.
METHODS: Participants with peanut sensitization were enrolled. Clinical reactions
were determined. Skin prick test (SPT) and specific IgE (sIgE) to peanut and
related allergen components were performed.
RESULTS: Forty subjects with peanut sensitization were included. The mean wheal
sizes of SPT and peanut sIgE were not good predictors for differentiating peanut 
reactions. SIgE to rAra h 2 was more often found in patients with peanut allergy 
and anaphylaxis. sIgE to rAra h 9 was also more frequent in the peanut-allergic
group but not related to severe reactions. In the peanut-tolerant group, despite 
positive SPT and/or sIgE to peanut, 90% had negative sIgE to rAha h 2 and rAra h 
9. Combining rAra h 2 and rAra h 9 resulted in high performance of the test with 
sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive
value of 84%, 90%, 0.89, and 0.86, respectively. The ratio between rAra h 2 sIgE 
to peanut sIgE of 0.6 can be helpful in predicting patients who will develop
severe reaction. SIgE to cross-reactive carbohydrate determinants (CCD) was
exclusively found in the peanut-tolerant group (33.3% vs. 0%, p = 0.012).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identifies three allergen components: rAra h 2, rAra h 9, 
and CCD as important components in the diagnosis of peanut allergy in an Asian
country with low prevalence. The ratio between rArah h 2 sIgE to peanut sIgE can 
be used for predicting patients who will develop anaphylaxis.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24112427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Ethnopharmacol. 2013 Nov 25;150(2):700-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.09.036. Epub 
2013 Oct 2.

Korean red ginseng extract induces proliferation to differentiation transition of
human acute promyelocytic leukemia cells via MYC-SKP2-CDKN1B axis.

Jo S(1), Lee H, Kim S, Lee CH, Chung H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Graduate School of Biomedical Science and
Bioengineering, Hanyang University, 222 Wangsimni-ro, Seongdong-gu, Seoul
133-791, Republic of Korea; Hanyang Biomedical Research Institute, Hanyang
University, 222 Wangsimni-ro, Seongdong-gu, Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: joejo0517@hotmail.com.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Korean red ginseng has been used as traditional
medicine in East Asia. Recent scientific research revealed multiple effects of
Korean red ginseng, including anticancer activity. To evaluate the effect of
Korean red ginseng extract (KRGE) in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) and
elucidate its molecular mechanism.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: NB4 cells were treated with 1mg/ml KRGE for 48 h and
examined for cell proliferation and differentiation. Cell cycle distribution of
KRGE-treated cells was analyzed and the expression level of G1 phase regulators
was determined. MYC was overexpressed by retroviral transduction and its effect
on SKP2 and CDKN1B gene expression, cell proliferation, cell cycle and
differentiation was evaluated in KRGE-treated cells.
RESULTS: KRGE alone was sufficient to induce granulocytic differentiation
accompanied with growth inhibition. KRGE treatment resulted in cell cycle arrest 
at the G1 phase with augmented Cdkn1b proteins without changes in transcript
levels. Cycloheximide treatment revealed reduced degradation of Cdkn1b protein by
KRGE. In addition, KRGE treatment reduced expression of MYC and SKP2 genes, both 
at mRNA and protein levels. Upon ectopic expression of MYC, the effect of KRGE
was reversed with lesser reduction and induction of SKP2 gene and Cdkn1b protein,
respectively. Taken together, these results suggest a sequential molecular
mechanism from MYC reduction, SKP2 reduction, Cdkn1b protein stabilization, G1
phase arrest to granulocytic differentiation by KRGE in human APL.
CONCLUSIONS: KRGE induces leukemic proliferation to differentiation transition in
APL through modulation of the MYC-SKP2-CDKN1B axis.

© 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24095829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2013 Sep;17(18):2504-11.

Regulation different network analysis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and
osteoarthritis (OA).

Yin F(1), Luo SL, Yuan F, Peng Z, Zhou W, Fang L, Cai JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University, Pudong
New district, Shanghai, China. dr_jfc@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease
characterized by chronic synovitis that progresses to destruction of cartilage
and bone.
AIM: The purpose of this study was to employ microarray analysis combined with
bioinformatics techniques to evaluate differential gene expression in BM-derived 
mononuclear cells obtained from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) or
osteoarthritis (OA) to study the pathogenesis of this disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Gene expression profiles in BM-derived mononuclear cells
from 9 RA and 10 OA patients were obtained from GEO.
RESULTS: The bone marrow (BM) mononuclear cells showed 2581 up-regulated and 649 
down-regulated genes in RA patients relative to the OA group: Our analysis
indicated that several differentially expressed genes might play crucial roles in
RA development, including SP1, RARA, ETS1, ETS2, FOS and ESR1.
CONCLUSIONS: Further analysis predicted these genes might be involved in RA
through cancer related pathways and immunity related pathways. Furthermore, these
genes may serve as novel therapeutic targets for the treatment of RA.

PMID: 24089231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2013 Nov 13;5(21):10889-94. doi: 10.1021/am403090y.
Epub 2013 Oct 18.

Direct electrochemical DNA detection originated from the self-redox signal of
sulfonated polyaniline enhanced by graphene oxide in neutral solution.

Yang T(1), Meng L, Wang X, Wang L, Jiao K.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Eco-chemical Engineering (Ministry of Education), College of
Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and Technology
, Qingdao 266042, China.

In this paper, a type of direct DNA impedance detection using the self-redox
signal change of sulfonated polyaniline (SPAN) enhanced by graphene oxide (GNO)
was reported, here SPAN is a copolymer obtained from aniline and
m-aminobenzenesulfonic acid. The resulting nanocomposite was characterized by
scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, Fourier transform
infrared spectroscopy, cyclic voltammetry, and electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy. The p-p planar structure of GNO and the carboxyl groups on the
surface of GNO ensured it could act as an excellent substrate for adsorption and 
polymerization of aniline monomer. Because of the existence of GNO, the
electrochemical activities of SPAN were enhanced obviously. Because of abundant
sulfonic acid groups, the resulting nanocomposite showed obvious self-redox
signal even at physiological pH, which is beneficial for biosensing field. DNA
probes with amine groups could be covalently attached to the modified electrode
surface through the acyl chloride cross-linking reaction of sulfonic groups and
amines. When the flexible probe DNA was successfully grafted, the electrode was
coated and electron transfer between electrode and buffer was restrained. Thus,
the inner impedance value of SPAN (rather than using outer classic EIS probe,
[Fe(CN)6](3-/4-)) increased significantly. After hybridization, the rigid helix
opened the electron channel, which induced impedance value decreased
dramatically. As an initial application of this system, the PML/RARA fusion gene 
sequence formed from promyelocytic leukemia (PML) and retinoic acid receptor
alpha (RARA) was successfully detected.

PMID: 24088603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 24;8(9):e75815. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075815. eCollection
2013.

MicroRNA-150 expression induces myeloid differentiation of human acute leukemia
cells and normal hematopoietic progenitors.

Morris VA(1), Zhang A, Yang T, Stirewalt DL, Ramamurthy R, Meshinchi S, Oehler
VG.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington, United States of America ; Division of Hematology, Department of
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of
America.

In acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and blast crisis (BC) chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML) normal differentiation is impaired. Differentiation of immature
stem/progenitor cells is critical for normal blood cell function. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs or miRs) are small non-coding RNAs that interfere with gene expression by
degrading messenger RNAs (mRNAs) or blocking protein translation. Aberrant miRNA 
expression is a feature of leukemia and miRNAs also play a significant role in
normal hematopoiesis and differentiation. We have identified miRNAs
differentially expressed in AML and BC CML and identified a new role for miR-150 
in myeloid differentiation. Expression of miR-150 is low or absent in BC CML and 
AML patient samples and cell lines. We have found that expression of miR-150 in
AML cell lines, CD34+ progenitor cells from healthy individuals, and primary BC
CML and AML patient samples at levels similar to miR-150 expression in normal
bone marrow promotes myeloid differentiation of these cells. MYB is a direct
target of miR-150, and we have identified that the observed phenotype is
partially mediated by MYB. In AML cell lines, differentiation of miR-150
expressing cells occurs independently of retinoic acid receptor a (RARA)
signaling. High-throughput gene expression profiling (GEP) studies of the AML
cell lines HL60, PL21, and THP-1 suggest that activation of CEPBA, CEBPE, and
cytokines associated with myeloid differentiation in miR-150 expressing cells as 
compared to control cells contributes to myeloid differentiation. These data
suggest that miR-150 promotes myeloid differentiation, a previously
uncharacterized role for this miRNA, and that absent or low miR-150 expression
contributes to blocked myeloid differentiation in acute leukemia cells.

PMCID: PMC3782459
PMID: 24086639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Dec;1833(12):3218-27. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.09.012. Epub 2013 Sep 27.

Aldehyde dehydrogenase-1a1 induces oncogene suppressor genes in B cell
populations.

Yasmeen R(1), Meyers JM, Alvarez CE, Thomas JL, Bonnegarde-Bernard A, Alder H,
Papenfuss TL, Benson DM Jr, Boyaka PN, Ziouzenkova O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA.

The deregulation of B cell differentiation has been shown to contribute to
autoimmune disorders, hematological cancers, and aging. We provide evidence that 
the retinoic acid-producing enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase 1a1 (Aldh1a1) is an
oncogene suppressor in specific splenic IgG1(+)/CD19(-) and IgG1(+)/CD19(+) B
cell populations. Aldh1a1 regulated transcription factors during B cell
differentiation in a sequential manner: 1) retinoic acid receptor alpha (Rara) in
IgG1(+)/CD19(-) and 2) zinc finger protein Zfp423 and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (Pparg) in IgG1(+)/CD19(+) splenocytes. In 
Aldh1a1(-/-) mice, splenic IgG1(+)/CD19(-) and IgG1(+)/CD19(+) B cells acquired
expression of proto-oncogenic genes c-Fos, c-Jun, and Hoxa10 that resulted in
splenomegaly. Human multiple myeloma B cell lines also lack Aldh1a1 expression;
however, ectopic Aldh1a1 expression rescued Rara and Znf423 expressions in these 
cells. Our data highlight a mechanism by which an enzyme involved in vitamin A
metabolism can improve B cell resistance to oncogenesis.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC3853404
PMID: 24080087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Biol Chem. 2014 Feb;395(2):239-50. doi: 10.1515/hsz-2013-0206.

Roasting and lipid binding provide allergenic and proteolytic stability to the
peanut allergen Ara h 8.

Petersen A, Rennert S, Kull S, Becker WM, Notbohm H, Goldmann T, Jappe U.

Abstract Ara h 8 is the peanut allergen homologous to the birch pollen allergen
Bet v 1. Because Bet v 1 has been shown to bind lipophilic ligands, the aim of
this investigation was to determine the impact of lipid binding and roasting on
the Ara h 8 structure and their influences on allergenicity. For the
characterization of natural Ara h 8 (nAra h 8) from roasted and unroasted
peanuts, circular dichroism spectroscopy, hydrophobic binding assay,
immunohistochemistry, and immunoblot with sera of peanut allergic patients were
performed and compared with results from recombinant Ara h 8 (rAra h 8) and Bet v
1. rAra h 8 displayed stronger hydrophobicity than rBet v 1. Patients' sera
showed IgE reactivity with rAra h 8 and nAra h 8 from roasted peanuts, whereas
fewer sera recognized nAra h 8 from unroasted peanuts. Simulated gastric
digestion experiments demonstrated low proteolytic stability of rAra h 8, whereas
the stability of nAra h 8 was increasingly higher in unroasted and roasted
peanuts. The results demonstrate that IgE reactivity and thermal and proteolytic 
stability are reinforced in nAra h 8 after roasting, most likely due to Maillard 
reactions, lipid oxidations, and lipophilic associations. These aspects must be
considered when estimating the allergenicity of Bet v 1-homologous proteins.

PMID: 24057594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2013 Sep;13(9):1035-43. doi:
10.1586/14737140.2013.833681.

Treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia with arsenic trioxide: clinical results
and open questions.

Lengfelder E(1), Hofmann WK, Nowak D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Mannheim, Mannheim,
Germany.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a rare form of acute myeloid leukemia. The 
specific translocation t(15;17), which results in the fusion gene PML-RARA is the
diagnostic and pathomechanistic hallmark of APL. By combination, treatment
consisting of the differentiating agent all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), which
targets this molecular lesion, and cytotoxic chemotherapy, cure can be achieved
in over 70% of patients. Recently, arsenic trioxide (ATO) has emerged to be the
most active single agent in the treatment of APL. Previous studies employing ATO 
in relapse settings reported average complete remission rates of 85% and a mean
overall survival of over 60%. In recent approaches installing ATO in first-line
treatment, ATO-induced response rates comparable to previous combination regimen.
The results of these newer studies indicate that the backbone of chemotherapy can
be dramatically reduced or completely replaced by ATO and ATRA with similar or
even better outcome.

PMID: 24053202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Jan;95(1):83-93. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1112608. Epub 2013 Sep 13.

The tumor suppressor gene DAPK2 is induced by the myeloid transcription factors
PU.1 and C/EBPa during granulocytic differentiation but repressed by PML-RARa in 
APL.

Humbert M(1), Federzoni EA, Britschgi A, Schläfli AM, Valk PJ, Kaufmann T,
Haferlach T, Behre G, Simon HU, Torbett BE, Fey MF, Tschan MP.

Author information: 
(1)1.Division of Experimental Pathology, TP2, University of Bern, Murtenstrasse
31, P.O. Box 62, CH-3010 Bern, Switzerland. mario.tschan@pathology.unibe.ch.

DAPK2 is a proapoptotic protein that is mostly expressed in the hematopoietic
tissue. A detailed DAPK2 expression analysis in two large AML patient cohorts
revealed particularly low DAPK2 mRNA levels in APL. DAPK2 levels were restored in
APL patients undergoing ATRA therapy. PML-RARA is the predominant lesion in APL
causing transcriptional repression of genes important for neutrophil
differentiation. We found binding of PML-RARA and PU.1, a myeloid master
regulator, to RARA and PU.1 binding sites in the DAPK2 promoter. Ectopic
expression of PML-RARA in non-APL, as well as knocking down PU.1 in APL cells,
resulted in a significant reduction of DAPK2 expression. Restoring DAPK2
expression in PU.1 knockdown APL cells partially rescued neutrophil
differentiation, thereby identifying DAPK2 as a relevant PU.1 downstream
effector. Moreover, low DAPK2 expression is also associated with C/EBPa-mutated
AML patients, and we found C/EBPa-dependent regulation of DAPK2 during APL
differentiation. In conclusion, we identified first inhibitory mechanisms
responsible for the low DAPK2 expression in particular AML subtypes, and the
regulation of DAPK2 by two myeloid transcription factors underlines its
importance in neutrophil development.

PMCID: PMC3868189
PMID: 24038216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Sep 10;51(2):247-60. doi: 10.1530/JME-12-0129. Print 2013 
Oct.

Aromatase activity induction in human adipose fibroblasts by retinoic acids via
retinoic acid receptor a.

Wilde J(1), Erdmann M, Mertens M, Eiselt G, Schmidt M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biochemistry II, Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller
University Jena, Nonnenplan 4, <br/>07743 Jena, Germany.

Estrogen synthesis in adipose tissue is associated with the development of breast
cancer. Tumors are preferentially found in breast quadrants with strongest
expression of the cytochrome P450 aromatase (encoded by the gene CYP19A1).
Several promoters regulated by various hormonal factors drive aromatase
expression in human breast adipose fibroblasts (BAFs). As adipose tissue is a
major source of retinoids, in this study, we investigated their role in the
regulation of aromatase expression. The retinoids all-trans-retinoic acid (at-RA)
and 9-cis-RA induce aromatase activity in human BAFs. In BAFs, at-RA induces
aromatase gene expression via promoter I.4. In 3T3-L1 cells, both retinoids
specifically drive luciferase reporter gene expression under the control of
aromatase promoter I.4, whereas other promoters active in human adipose tissue
are insensitive. Activation by retinoids depends on a 467<U+200A>bp fragment (-256/+211)
of promoter I.4 containing four putative retinoic acid response elements (RAREs).
Site-directed mutagenesis revealed that only RARE2 (+91/+105) mediates the
retinoid-dependent induction of reporter gene activity. In 3T3-L1 preadipocytes
and human BAFs, RA receptor a (RARa (RARA)) expression is predominant, whereas
RARß (RARB) or RAR<U+03B3> (RARG) expression is low. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays with nuclear extracts obtained from human BAFs and 3T3-L1 cells identified
a specific RARE2-binding complex. Retinoids enhanced complex formation, whereas
pre-incubation with anti-RARa antibodies prohibited the binding of RARa to RARE2.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed RA-dependent binding of RARa to the
RARE2-containing promoter region in vivo. Furthermore, we provide evidence that
RARE2 is also necessary for the basal activation of promoter I.4 in these cells. 
Taken together, these findings indicate a novel retinoid-dependent mechanism of
aromatase activity induction in adipose tissue.

PMID: 24023268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2013 Aug;54(8):759-63.

[Atypical onset of therapy-related acute promyelocytic leukemia after combined
modality therapy including (89)Sr for metastatic breast cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Utsu Y(1), Aotsuka N, Masuda S, Matsuura Y, Wakita H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Japanese Red Cross Narita Hospital.

A 51-year-old woman diagnosed as having left breast cancer with axillary lymph
node and liver metastases seven years earlier was seen in our office because of
severe pancytopenia. She had received chemotherapy including several cycles of
doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide and docetaxel followed by hormone therapy
containing leuprorelin and tamoxifen over four years. For management of bone pain
due to metastasis, she had also undergone stereotaxic radiation therapy of the
neck one and a half years earlier and unsealed internal radiation therapy with
(89)Sr injection five months prior to the current presentation, Subsequently,
myelosuppression progressively worsened and she finally required a blood
transfusion. Although bone marrow examination showed severe hypoplasia, but
neither blastic nor dysplastic, a test for PML-RARA fluorescence in situ
hybridization was positive. After administration of all-trans retinoic acid,
hematogenesis improved within three weeks. Neither disseminated intravascular
coagulation nor retinoic acid syndrome was observed during the course of her
illness. This is the first report describing acute promyelocytic leukemia after
administration of (89)Sr, to our knowledge, and with an atypical onset and
progression. As the number of cancer survivors increases due to improvements in
medical intervention, clinicians must take more notice of special characteristics
of therapy-related leukemia modified by previous treatments.

PMID: 24005436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Aug;21(4):872-8. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2013.04.012.

Expression of PML-RARa is up-regulated during ATRA and arsenics combined
induction without influence on long-term prognosis of acute promyelocytic
leukemia.

Zhu HH(1), Qin YZ, Lai YY, Shi HX, Liu YR, Jiang B, Huang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Peking University People's Hospital; Peking
University Institute of Hematology, Beijing 100044, China.

The early molecular kinetics during all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) plus
arsenic-based induction therapy and its prognostic value for acute promyelocytic 
leukemia (APL) remain unclear. This study was purposed to investigate the
molecular and cytogenetic kinetics and its clinical significance in treatment of 
APL with ATRA plus arsenic-based induction. The molecular and cytogenetic
kinetics was assessed by real-time quantitative RT-PCR and interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in 32 newly diagnosed APL patients. The
results showed that the median PML-RARa transcript levels (PML-RARa/ABL) were
very significantly up-regulated at 14 days of induction therapy compared with
that of pre-treatment (40.10% vs 57.74%, P < 0.01), and then decreased at 28 days
of induction therapy and at the end of consolidation therapy (6.97% and 0%),
respectively. The total of 65.62% and 31.25% patients showed up-regulation of
PML-RARa transcript at 14 and 28 days after induction, as compared with
pretreatment. The PML-RARa copies per APL cell before treatment, and at 14 and 28
days after induction were calculated as 0.9, 2.2, 1.4 by the formula of
PML-RARA/ABL(%)×2/APL cells (%). With the median follow-up time of 22 months, 32 
patients were still in continuous clinical remission and no molecular relapse
occurred. Up-regulation of PML-RARa expression during the induction had no effect
on outcomes of APL patients. It is concluded that up-regulation of PML-RARa
expression is a common event during induction therapy with ATRA plus arsenics.
Up-regulation of PML-RARa expression during induction therapy hasn't influenced
the long-term prognosis of APL.

PMID: 23998577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2013 Sep-Oct;47(5):818-27.

[DNA structural features on the borders of ERBB2 amplicons in breast cancer].

[Article in Russian]

Matsenko NIu, Kovalenko SP.

In 25-30% of breast cancer tumor cases amplification of chromosome fragment
around the ERBB2 underlies the increased expression of genes adjacent to ERBB2.
Increased expression of genes within ERBB2-containing am- plicons may have an
impact not only on the growth and development of the tumor, but on the
sensitivity of the tumor to different types of anti-cancer therapies. The initial
cause of amplification and the exact borders of ERBB2-amplified chromosome
fragment are still not completely characterized. No specific DNA sequences were
found on the junction regions at intrachromosomal DNA amplification. We
hypothesized that amplification borders can be specified by DNA structural
peculiarities rather than the particular DNA sequence. This study focused on the 
mapping of ERBB2 amplification borders in breast cancer and the search for
unusual structural features of DNA at the borders of the identified amplicons.
The copy number of 10 genes adjacent to ERBB2 were evaluated by real time PCR in 
162 breast cancer samples. Several ERBB2-containing amplicons of various lengths 
were revealed. In the majority of the analyzed samples, the borders of these
amplicons were located within ZNFNIA3 and RARA genes. A bioinformatics analysis
of the nucleotide sequence peculiarities around ERBB2 gene revealed the presence 
of AT-rich DNA regions with high degree of flexibility. These regions were able
to form stable secondary structures. Positions of these sites strongly coincide
with the positions of the ERBB2-containing amplicon borders found in real time
PCR experiments. On the base of results obtained one can suppose that the
structural features of DNA are involved in the formation of ERBB2-containing
amplicon borders in breast cancer cells and the data are of importance for
understanding the mechanisms of oncogene amplification.

PMID: 25509354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. BMC Genomics. 2013 Aug 14;14:550. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-550.

Barnacle: detecting and characterizing tandem duplications and fusions in
transcriptome assemblies.

Swanson L(1), Robertson G, Mungall KL, Butterfield YS, Chiu R, Corbett RD,
Docking TR, Hogge D, Jackman SD, Moore RA, Mungall AJ, Nip KM, Parker JD, Qian
JQ, Raymond A, Sung S, Tam A, Thiessen N, Varhol R, Wang S, Yorukoglu D, Zhao Y, 
Hoodless PA, Sahinalp SC, Karsan A, Birol I.

Author information: 
(1)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency,
Vancouver, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Chimeric transcripts, including partial and internal tandem
duplications (PTDs, ITDs) and gene fusions, are important in the detection,
prognosis, and treatment of human cancers.
RESULTS: We describe Barnacle, a production-grade analysis tool that detects such
chimeras in de novo assemblies of RNA-seq data, and supports prioritizing them
for review and validation by reporting the relative coverage of co-occurring
chimeric and wild-type transcripts. We demonstrate applications in large-scale
disease studies, by identifying PTDs in MLL, ITDs in FLT3, and reciprocal fusions
between PML and RARA, in two deeply sequenced acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
RNA-seq datasets.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analyses of real and simulated data sets show that, with
appropriate filter settings, Barnacle makes highly specific predictions for three
types of chimeric transcripts that are important in a range of cancers: PTDs,
ITDs, and fusions. High specificity makes manual review and validation efficient,
which is necessary in large-scale disease studies. Characterizing an extended
range of chimera types will help generate insights into progression, treatment,
and outcomes for complex diseases.

PMCID: PMC3751903
PMID: 23941359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Egypt Natl Canc Inst. 2013 Sep;25(3):115-20. doi: 10.1016/j.jnci.2013.02.002.
Epub 2013 May 28.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein a gene expression in Egyptian patients with acute 
myeloid leukemia.

Kassem N(1), Fahmy Ael-G, Desoky M, Medhat N, Zawam HM.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Chemical Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo
University, Cairo, Egypt. nkkassem@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Transcription factors play a crucial role in myeloid differentiation 
and lineage determination. Tumor suppressor protein C/EBPa is a key regulator of 
granulocytic differentiation whose functional inactivation has become a
pathophysiological signature of myeloid leukemia. Given the role that
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein a (C/EBP a) plays in myelopoiesis, we anticipated 
that their expression might be disrupted in myeloid neoplasms.
PURPOSE: To estimate the expression of C/EBPa mRNA in patients with acute myeloid
leukemia and correlate its expression with the pathogenesis of the disease.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Forty AML patients and 20 age and sex matched healthy
controls were included in the study. Blood samples of patients and controls were 
analyzed for CEBPa mRNA expression by quantitative RT-real time PCR using TaqMan 
technology & <U+0394><U+0394>Ct method for calculation of gene expression.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine (72.5%) patients out of the 40 showed low expression levels 
of CEBPa mRNA below the cutoff value with median of 0.19 (range:0-0.87). While
eleven (27.5%) patients out of the 40 showed higher expression levels of CEBPa
above the cutoff value with median of 1.52 (range:1.07-2). Seven patients out of 
the 11 showed higher expression levels of CEBPa mRNA belong to the M3 subtype of 
AML harboring the t(15;17) PML-RARa translocation.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the majority of the AML patients analyzed, express
low levels of C/EBPa mRNA. However, a subset of patients represented by the M3
subtype, express higher levels of C/EBPa.

Copyright © 2013. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 23932747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Leuk Lymphoma. 2014 Jun;55(6):1383-7. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2013.830303. Epub
2013 Sep 18.

NPM-RAR, not the RAR-NPM reciprocal t(5;17)(q35;q21) acute promyelocytic leukemia
fusion protein, inhibits myeloid differentiation.

Pollock SL(1), Rush EA, Redner RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute,
University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh, PA , USA.

The t(5;17) variant of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) fuses the nucleophosmin
(NPM) gene at 5q35 with the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) at 17q12-22. We
have previously shown that leukemic cells express both NPM-RAR and RAR- NPM
reciprocal translocation products. In this study we investigated the potential
role of both proteins in modulating myeloid differentiation. Expression of
NPM-RAR inhibited vitamin D3/transforming growth factor ß (TGFß)-mediated
differentiation of U937 cells by more than 50%. In contrast, RAR-NPM expression
did not alter vitamin D3/TGFß-induced differentiation of U937 clones. These
results indicate that NPM-RAR, not RAR-NPM, is the prime mediator of myeloid
differentiation arrest in t(5;17) APL.

PMID: 23927396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Toxicology. 2013 Sep 15;311(3):205-15. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2013.07.001. Epub 2013 
Jul 10.

Impairment of autophagy: from hereditary disorder to drug intoxication.

Aki T(1), Funakoshi T, Unuma K, Uemura K.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Forensic Medicine, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan. aki.legm@tmd.ac.jp

At first, the molecular mechanism of autophagy was unveiled in a unicellular
organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae (budding yeast), followed by the discovery that
the basic mechanism of autophagy is conserved in multicellular organisms
including mammals. Although autophagy was considered to be a non-selective bulk
protein degradation system to recycle amino acids during periods of nutrient
starvation, it is also believed to be an essential mechanism for the selective
elimination of proteins/organelles that are damaged under pathological
conditions. Research advances made using autophagy-deficient animals have
revealed that impairments of autophagy often underlie the pathogenesis of
hereditary disorders such as Danon, Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, and Huntington's
diseases, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. On the other hand, there are many
reports that drugs and toxicants, including arsenic, cadmium, paraquat,
methamphetamine, and ethanol, induce autophagy during the development of their
toxicity on many organs including heart, brain, lung, kidney, and liver. Although
the question as to whether autophagic machinery is involved in the execution of
cell death or not remains controversial, the current view of the role of
autophagy during cell/tissue injury is that it is an important, often essential, 
cytoprotective reaction; disturbances in cytoprotective autophagy aggravate
cell/tissue injuries. The purpose of this review is to provide (1) a gross
summarization of autophagy processes, which are becoming more important in the
field of toxicology, and (2) examples of important studies reporting the
involvement of perturbations in autophagy in cell/tissue injuries caused by acute
as well as chronic intoxication.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23851159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Front Oncol. 2013 Jul 4;3:171. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2013.00171. eCollection 2013.

PML, SUMOylation, and Senescence.

Ivanschitz L(1), De Thé H, Le Bras M.

Author information: 
(1)University Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Hôpital St. Louis , Paris ,
France ; INSERM UMR 944, Equipe labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le
Cancer, Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Hôpital St. Louis , Paris , France 
; CNRS UMR 7212, Hôpital St. Louis , Paris , France.

Since its discovery, 25<U+2009>years ago, promyelocytic leukemia (PML) has been an
enigma. Implicated in the oncogenic PML/RARA fusion, forming elusive intranuclear
domains, triggering cell death or senescence, controlled by and perhaps
controlling SUMOylation there are multiple PML-related issues. Here we review
the reciprocal interactions between PML, senescence, and SUMOylation, notably in 
the context of cellular transformation.

PMCID: PMC3701148
PMID: 23847762  [PubMed]


193. Arch Med Sci. 2013 Jun 20;9(3):569-75. doi: 10.5114/aoms.2012.30956. Epub 2012
Oct 8.

Pivotal regulatory network and genes in osteosarcoma.

Luo Y(1), Deng Z, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Spine Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central-South University,
Changsha, Hunan, P.R. China.

INTRODUCTION: Understanding the transcriptional regulatory networks that map out 
the coordinated responses of transcription factors and target genes would
represent a significant advance in the analysis of osteosarcoma, a common primary
bone malignancy. The objective of our study was to interpret the mechanisms of
osteosarcoma through the regulation network construction.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Using GSE14359 datasets downloaded from Gene Expression
Omnibus data, we first screened the differentially expressed genes in
osteosarcoma. We explored the regulation relationship between transcription
factors and target genes using Cytoscape. The underlying molecular mechanisms of 
these crucial target genes were investigated by Gene Ontology function and Kyoto 
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 1836 differentially expressed were identified and 98
regulatory relationships were constructed between 32 transcription factors and
their 60 differentially expressed target genes. Furthermore, BCL2-like 1
(BCL2L1), tumor protein p53 (TP53), v-rel reticuloendotheliosis viral oncogene
homolog A (avian) (RELA), interleukin 6 (IL6), retinoic acid receptor, alpha
(RARA), nuclear factor I/C (CCAAT-binding transcription factor) (NFIC), and
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein, beta (CEBPB) formed a small pivotal network, in
which IL-6 could be regulated by TP53, NFIC, RARA, and CEBPB, but BCL2L1 may be
only regulated by TP53 and RELA. These genes had been demonstrated to be involved
in osteosarcoma progression via various biological processes and pathways,
including regulation of cell apoptosis, proliferation, antigen processing and
presentation pathway, and phosphatidylinositol signaling system.
CONCLUSIONS: In general, we have obtained a regulatory network and several
pathways that may play important roles in osteosarcoma, identified several
pivotal genes in osteosarcoma, and predicted several potential key genes for
osteosarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3701964
PMID: 23847684  [PubMed]


194. Clin Breast Cancer. 2013 Oct;13(5):401-8. doi: 10.1016/j.clbc.2013.02.001. Epub
2013 Jul 3.

Retinoic acid receptor alpha amplifications and retinoic acid sensitivity in
breast cancers.

Alsafadi S(1), Even C, Falet C, Goubar A, Commo F, Scott V, Quidville V, Albiges 
L, Dieci MV, Guegan J, Lazar V, Ahomadegbe JC, Delaloge S, André F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U981 "Identification of molecular predictors and new targets for cancer
treatment", Gustave Roussy Cancer Institute, Villejuif, France.

BACKGROUND: Molecular segmentation of breast cancer allows identification of
small groups of patients who present high sensitivity to targeted agents. A
patient, with chemo- and trastuzumab-resistant HER2-overexpressing breast cancer,
who presented concomitant acute promyelocytic leukemia, showed a response in her 
breast lesions to retinoic acid, arsenic, and aracytin. We therefore investigated
whether RARA gene amplification could be associated with sensitivity to retinoic 
acid derivatives in breast cancers.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Array comparative genomic hybridization and gene
expression arrays were used to characterize RARA amplifications and expression in
103 breast cancer samples. In vitro activity of ATRA was characterized in T47D,
SKBR3, and BT474 cell lines.
RESULTS: Retinoic acid receptor alpha was gained or amplified in 27% of
HER2-positive and 13% of HER2-negative breast cancer samples. Retinoic acid
receptor alpha can be coamplified with HER2. Retinoic acid receptor alpha copy
number changes could be correlated with messenger RNA expression.
All-trans-retinoic acid reduced cell viability of RARA-amplified, but not
RARA-normal, cell lines through apoptosis. Gene expression arrays showed that
ATRA-induced apoptosis in RARA-amplified cell lines was related to an increase in
CASP1 and IRF1.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study suggest that breast cancers exhibiting RARA
amplifications could be sensitive to retinoic acid. A phase II trial will
evaluate this hypothesis in the clinical setting.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23830798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2013 Jun;54(6):574-8.

[Acute promyelocytic leukemia presenting with central nervous system involvement 
at initial diagnosis].

[Article in Japanese]

Sakurai T(1), Kuroda H, Yamada M, Arihara Y, Jyomen W, Hirako T, Abe T, Fujii S, 
Maeda M, Fujita M, Kato J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hematology/Clinical Oncology, Internal
Medicine, Steel Memorial Muroran General Hospital.

We describe a rare case of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) presenting with
central nervous system (CNS) involvement at the time of initial diagnosis. A
58-year-old male was hospitalized with palpitations, dyspnea, high grade fever,
photophobia, and disturbance of consciousness in March 2010. APL was diagnosed by
bone marrow (BM) examination. The cytogenetic analysis of BM cells demonstrated
t(15;17)(q22;q11), and PML-RARA chimeric gene was detected by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction assay. Magnetic resonance imaging of the 
brain revealed several high intensity regions in the cerebrum and cerebellum. CNS
involvement was diagnosed based on the appearance of APL blasts in cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF). The patient was treated with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), and
systemic chemotherapy consisting of idarubicin and cytarabine according to the
Japan Adult Leukemia Study Group (JALSG) APL 204 protocol. He was then treated
with continuous intrathecal administration of cytotoxic drugs (methotrexate,
cytarabine, prednisolone) after systemic chemotherapy, achieving complete
remission (CR) in both BM and the CNS. To date, he has been maintained in
complete molecular remission in both BM and the CSF for 28 months, to date.

PMID: 23823097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Mol Diagn. 2013 Sep;15(5):678-86. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2013.04.003. Epub 2013 
Jun 25.

Novel real-time polymerase chain reaction assay for simultaneous detection of
recurrent fusion genes in acute myeloid leukemia.

Dolz S(1), Barragán E, Fuster Ó, Llop M, Cervera J, Such E, De Juan I, Palanca S,
Murria R, Bolufer P, Luna I, Gómez I, López M, Ibáñez M, Sanz MA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Department of Clinical Chemistry, University 
Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain.

The recent World Health Organization classification recognizes different subtypes
of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) according to the presence of several recurrent
genetic abnormalities. Detection of these abnormalities and other molecular
changes is of increasing interest because it contributes to a refined diagnosis
and prognostic assessment in AML and enables monitoring of minimal residual
disease. These genetic abnormalities can be detected using single RT-PCR,
although the screening is still labor intensive and costly. We have developed a
novel real-time RT-PCR assay to simultaneously detect 15 AML-associated
rearrangements that is a simple and easily applicable method for use in clinical 
diagnostic laboratories. This method showed 100% specificity and sensitivity (95%
confidence interval, 91% to 100% and 92% to 100%, respectively). The procedure
was validated in a series of 105 patients with AML. The method confirmed all
translocations detected using standard cytogenetics and fluorescence in situ
hybridization and some additional undetected rearrangements. Two patients
demonstrated two molecular rearrangements simultaneously, with BCR-ABL1
implicated in both, in addition to RUNX1-MECOM in one patient and PML-RARA in
another. In conclusion, this novel real-time RT-PCR assay for simultaneous
detection of multiple AML-associated fusion genes is a versatile and sensitive
method for reliable screening of recurrent rearrangements in AML.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the Association
for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23806810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2013 Aug;51(8):631-40. doi: 10.5414/CP201874.

The effect of genetic polymorphisms of RARA gene on the adverse effects profile
of isotretinoin-treated acne patients.

Alzoubi KH(1), Khabour OF, Hassan RE, Qarqaz F, Al-Azzam S, Mhaidat N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Jordan University of Science and Technology, 
Irbid, Jordan. khalzoubi@just.edu.jo

OBJECTIVE: Isotretinoin is a vitamin A-derived medication that is associated with
significant adverse effects including arthralgia/ myalgia, nose bleeds, headache,
dyslipidemia, liver dysfunction and depression. The mechanism for development of 
such adverse effects remains elusive, and it is not known why adverse effects
develop only in some patients. In this study, we examined the association between
rs9303285, rs2715554 and rs4890109 genetic polymorphisms in the retinoic acid
receptor alpha (RARA), one of the main targets of isotretinoin, and the adverse
effects of oral isotretinoin therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Clinical adverse effects data were collected from patient 
file and by patient interview. Lipids and liver enzymes were measured in blood
samples collected from acne patients (n = 300) at baseline and during oral
isotretinoin treatment. RARA polymorphisms were genotyped using polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP).
RESULTS: Three-locus haplotype (Rs2715554 C/T - Rs4890109 G/T - Rs9303285 T/C)
analysis showed that frequencies of CTG and TTG haplotypes are significantly
associated with occurrence of arthralgia, myalgia, nose bleeds and headache in
patients treated with isotretinoin. In addition, TCG haplotype was associated
with nose bleeds and headache, whereas TTT haplotype was associated with
arthralgia and myalgia. Furthermore, levels of AST were increased, and AST%
change was more, after 1 month of treatment in patients with the TC genotype of
rs2715554 polymorphism. Finally, allele T of rs9303285 was found to be protective
against developing depression in the patients treated with isotretinoin.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest an association between polymorphisms of RARA
gene and some of some common adverse effects of oral isotretinoin.

PMID: 23782583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Acta Haematol. 2013;130(3):176-80. doi: 10.1159/000348551. Epub 2013 Jun 5.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia with a rare PML exon 4/ RARA exon 3 fusion
transcript variant.

Oh SJ(1), Park TS, Lee JY, Mun YC, Seong CM, Marschalek R, Meyer C, Chung WS, Huh
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.

PMID: 23751413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Exp Ther Med. 2013 May;5(5):1332-1338. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Characteristics of the four subtypes of myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative
neoplasms.

Wu H(1), Bian S, Chu J, Zhong X, Sun H, Zhang B, Lu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory of Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, 
Jinan, Shandong 250021;

The aim of the present study was to investigate the characteristics of the four
subtypes of myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasms (MDS/MPNs) in order to
improve current knowledge and to aid their diagnosis. A total of 53 cases of
MDS/MPNs were analyzed using routine blood cell analysis and morphological,
cytogenetic and molecular genetic characteristics were investigated. Numerical
data for several groups were compared using a single-factor analysis of variance.
The Student-Newman-Keuls test was used to compare the means of two groups. The
proportions were compared using a Chi-square test or Fisher's exact test.
Analysis of the patients with MDS/MPNs revealed that 46 patients (86.8%) had
paleness and fatigue, and blood analysis revealed hemoglobin (Hb) levels of
83.1±24.6 g/l, a white blood cell (WBC) count of 19.8±8.1×10(9)/l and a platelet 
(PLT) count of 158.7±108.2×10(12)/l. Immature neutrophils and monocytes were
identified in the peripheral blood at levels of 0.058±0.031 and 0.152±0.034%,
respectively. There were 23 cases (43.4%) with dyserythropoiesis and 36 cases
(67.9%) had dysgranulopoiesis. Fifteen cases were immunologically characterized
using flow cytometry (FCM), of which 13 cases showed abnormalities on blasts and 
myelocytes. Karyotyping was performed in 27 cases of MDS/MPN and 12 (44.4%) were 
identified as abnormal. In 23 cases, testing for BCR/ABL1, AML-ETO, CBF-MYH11A,
PML-RARA, E2A-PBX1, TEL-AML1, SIL-TAL1 returned negative results. The JAK2V617F
mutation was positive in one of five cases. The majority of MDS/MPN cases had
anemia, cytosis, low-grade blasts and immature neutrophils in the peripheral
blood and dysplasia in the bone marrow. Immunological abnormalities and abnormal 
karyotypes occurred frequently in MDS/MPNs and although there were no statistical
differences between the four subtypes, these were able to aid diagnosis. No
specific molecular abnormalities were identified in MDS/MPNs.

PMCID: PMC3671785
PMID: 23737874  [PubMed]


200. Hematol Oncol Stem Cell Ther. 2013 Mar;6(1):42-5. doi:
10.1016/j.hemonc.2013.02.004. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

A rare case with typical acute promyelocytic leukemia morphology associated with 
isolated isochromosome 17q without RARa rearrangement.

Duan Y(1), Nie J, Zhang Z, Zhou L, Zhu F, Zhang H, Zhu H, Shang W.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliated Hospital of Taishan Medical University, Taian, Shandong, China.
duansuper@yahoo.cn

Isolated isochromosome 17q has rarely been reported in hematologic tumor
patients. A 37-year-old man was admitted with fever and weakness. Blood routine
test showed anemia and thrombocytopenia. The morphology and immunology of bone
marrow cells conform to classic acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). But the
karyotype showed isolated isochromosome 17q without t(15;17) (q22;q12). Rverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for PML -RARa was negative and
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis showed no RARa gene
rearrangements.The patient responded poorly to all trans retinoic acid and
traditional chemotherapy with daunorubicin and cytarabine and survived only 43
days after diagnosis. The pathogenesis and the best treatment choice for this
kind of patients are not clear currently.

Copyright © 2013 King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23664605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Exp Hematol. 2013 Sep;41(9):769-71. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2013.04.011. Epub 2013 
May 6.

A unique PML-RARa rearrangement involving chromosomes 11, 15, and 17 in a patient
with acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Sadrzadeh H, Kerr DA, Dal Cin P, Lindeman NI, Hasserjian RP, Ballen KK, Fathi AT.

PMID: 23660071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 21;110(21):E1898-905. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1222797110. Epub 2013 May 6.

Kif7 is required for the patterning and differentiation of the diaphragm in a
model of syndromic congenital diaphragmatic hernia.

Coles GL(1), Ackerman KG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Genetics, Center for Pediatric Biomedical Research,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a common birth defect that results in a 
high degree of neonatal morbidity and mortality, but its pathological mechanisms 
are largely unknown. Therefore, we performed a forward genetic screen in mice to 
identify unique genes, models, and mechanisms of abnormal diaphragm development. 
We identified a mutant allele of kinesin family member 7 (Kif7), the disorganized
diaphragm (dd). Embryos homozygous for the dd allele possess communicating
diaphragmatic hernias, central tendon patterning defects, and increased cell
proliferation with diaphragmatic tissue hyperplasia. Because the patterning of
the central tendon is undescribed, we analyzed the expression of genes regulating
tendonogenesis in dd/dd mutant embryos, and we determined that retinoic acid (RA)
signaling was misregulautted. To further investigate the role of Kif7 and RA
signaling in the development of the embryonic diaphragm, we established primary
mesenchymal cultures of WT embryonic day 13.5 diaphragmatic cells. We determined 
that RA signaling is necessary for the expression of tendon markers as well as
the expression of other CDH-associated genes. Knockdown of Kif7, and retinoic
acid receptors alpha (Rara), beta (Rarb), and gamma (Rarg) indicated that RA
signaling is dependent on these genes to promote tendonogenesis within the
embryonic diaphragm. Taken together, our results provide evidence for a model in 
which inhibition of RA receptor signaling promotes CDH pathogenesis through a
complex gene network.

PMCID: PMC3666741
PMID: 23650387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Genome Biol Evol. 2013;5(5):1032-7. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evt068.

The type F6 neurotoxin gene cluster locus of group II clostridium botulinum has
evolved by successive disruption of two different ancestral precursors.

Carter AT(1), Stringer SC, Webb MD, Peck MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gut Health and Food Safety, Institute of Food Research, Norwich 
Research Park, Norwich, United Kingdom. andrew.carter@ifr.ac.uk

Genome sequences of five different Group II (nonproteolytic) Clostridium
botulinum type F6 strains were compared at a 50-kb locus containing the
neurotoxin gene cluster. A clonal origin for these strains is indicated by the
fact that sequences were identical except for strain Eklund 202F, with 10
single-nucleotide polymorphisms and a 15-bp deletion. The essential topB gene
encoding topoisomerase III was found to have been split by the apparent insertion
of 34.4 kb of foreign DNA (in a similar manner to that in Group II C. botulinum
type E where the rarA gene has been disrupted by a neurotoxin gene cluster). The 
foreign DNA, which includes the intact 13.6-kb type F6 neurotoxin gene cluster,
bears not only a newly introduced topB gene but also two nonfunctional botulinum 
neurotoxin gene remnants, a type B and a type E. This observation combined with
the discovery of bacteriophage integrase genes and IS4 elements suggest that
several rounds of recombination/horizontal gene transfer have occurred at this
locus. The simplest explanation for the current genotype is that the ancestral
bacterium, a Group II C. botulinum type B strain, received DNA firstly from a
strain containing a type E neurotoxin gene cluster, then from a strain containing
a type F6 neurotoxin gene cluster. Each event disrupted the previously functional
neurotoxin gene. This degree of successive recombination at one hot spot is
without precedent in C. botulinum, and it is also the first description of a
Group II C. botulinum genome containing more than one neurotoxin gene sequence.

PMCID: PMC3673618
PMID: 23645598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Virchows Arch. 2013 Jun;462(6):619-32. doi: 10.1007/s00428-013-1419-z. Epub 2013 
May 4.

Retinoid acid receptor expression is helpful to distinguish between adenoma and
well-differentiated carcinoma in the thyroid.

Gauchotte G(1), Lacomme S, Brochin L, Tournier B, Cahn V, Monhoven N, Piard F,
Klein M, Martinet N, Rochette-Egly C, Vignaud JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, CHU, Nancy, France. g.gauchotte@chu-nancy.fr

Retinoid receptors (RRs) play a key role in cell proliferation and
differentiation. We characterized the expression of RA receptors and retinoid X
receptors (RARs and RXRs) in a series of 111 thyroid tumors and investigated the 
mechanisms responsible for their deregulation: hypermethylation of the RARB2
promoter, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the regions of RARB and RXRA, and
altered expression of CRBP1 and enzymes involved in RA biosynthesis (RDH10 and
RALDH2). Expression of RALDH2 and RDH10 was conserved in 100 % of adenomas and in
90 and 98 %, respectively, of carcinomas, whereas staining for CRBP1 was
decreased in 9 % of FAs and 28 % of carcinomas, mainly anaplastic carcinomas (55 
%). We found an abnormal expression of RARA, RARB, RXRA, and RXRB in 67, 69, 66, 
and 73 %, respectively, of thyroid carcinomas (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>78) and in 9, 9, 9, and 33 %
of follicular adenomas (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>33) (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). An abnormal staining pattern of at
least two of these markers had 90 % sensitivity and 91 % specificity for a
diagnosis of malignancy. Promoter hypermethylation of RARB2 was observed in some 
anaplastic carcinomas (14 %). LOH was found to be common at the RARB locus
(3p24-3p25) and the RXRA locus (9q34), respectively, in 44 and 55 % of carcinomas
and in 27 and 43 % of adenomas. In conclusion, immunohistochemical staining for
RARs and RXRs may help in the differential diagnosis between well-differentiated 
carcinoma and follicular adenoma. Further investigation should be carried out to 
determine whether the characterization of RR expression might identify patients
who could benefit from therapy with RA derivatives.

PMID: 23639973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Aug;1836(1):146-57. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2013.04.004. 
Epub 2013 Apr 26.

The HER2 amplicon in breast cancer: Topoisomerase IIA and beyond.

Jacot W(1), Fiche M, Zaman K, Wolfer A, Lamy PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Oncologie Médicale, CRLC Val d'Aurelle-Paul Lamarque, Montpellier,
F-34298, France. William.Jacot@montpellier.unicancer.fr

HER2 gene amplification is observed in about 15% of breast cancers. The subgroup 
of HER2-positive breast cancers appears to be heterogeneous and presents complex 
patterns of gene amplification at the locus on chromosome 17q12-21. The molecular
variations within the chromosome 17q amplicon and their clinical implications
remain largely unknown. Besides the well-known TOP2A gene encoding Topoisomerase 
IIA, other genes might also be amplified and could play functional roles in
breast cancer development and progression. This review will focus on the current 
knowledge concerning the HER2 amplicon heterogeneity, its clinical and biological
impact and the pitfalls associated with the evaluation of gene amplifications at 
this locus, with particular attention to TOP2A and the link between TOP2A and
anthracycline benefit. In addition it will discuss the clinical and biological
implications of the amplification of ten other genes at this locus (MED1, STARD3,
GRB7, THRA, RARA, IGFPB4, CCR7, KRT20, KRT19 and GAST) in breast cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23628726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Br J Haematol. 2013 Jul;162(1):93-7. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12362. Epub 2013 Apr 30.

The short isoform of the long-type PML-RARA fusion gene in acute promyelocytic
leukaemia lacks sensitivity to all-trans-retinoic acid.

Tan Y(1), Bian S, Xu Z, Chen X, Qi X, Ren F, Li L, Guo H, Xu A, Zhang L, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Second Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, 382
Wuyi Road, Taiyuan, China.

Alternative splicing is associated with human disease. In acute promyelocytic
leukaemia (APL) patients with the long (L)-type promyelocytic leukaemia-retinoic 
acid receptor a fusion gene (PML-RARA), three alternative splicing isoforms can
be detected: E5(+)E6(+), E5(-)E6(+), and E5(-)E6(-). This study is the first to
demonstrate that alternative splicing of L-type PML-RARA is associated with time 
to achieve complete remission (CR) in APL. Higher expression of the E5(-)E6(-)
isoform, the short isoform, was related to longer time to achieve CR. Each
isoform was constructed into recombinant lentiviral vector and transfected into
U937 cells. Compared with the E5(-)E6(+) and E5(+)E6(+) groups, the U937 cells
with E5(-)E6(-) showed lower sensitivity to all-trans-retinoic acid treatment.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23627671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:164501. doi: 10.1155/2013/164501. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

FISH detection of PML-RARA fusion in ins(15;17) acute promyelocytic leukaemia
depends on probe size.

Campbell LJ(1), Oei P, Brookwell R, Shortt J, Eaddy N, Ng A, Chew E, Browett P.

Author information: 
(1)Victorian Cancer Cytogenetics Service, St Vincent's Hospital Melbourne,
Fitzroy, VIC 3065, Australia. lynda.campbell@svhm.org.au

The diagnosis of acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) is usually confirmed by
cytogenetics showing the characteristic t(15;17), but a minority of patients have
a masked PML/RARA fusion. We report ten patients with APL and no evidence of the 
t(15;17), in whom the insertion of RARA into PML could not be demonstrated by
initial FISH studies using a standard dual fusion probe but was readily
identified using smaller probes. Given the need for rapid diagnosis of APL, it is
important to be aware of the false negative rate for large PML/RARA FISH probes
in the setting of masked rearrangements.

PMCID: PMC3625549
PMID: 23607089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Blood Res. 2013 Mar;48(1):31-4. doi: 10.5045/br.2013.48.1.31. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Current routine practice and clinico-pathological characteristics associated with
acute promyelocytic leukemia in Korea.

Ahn S(1), Park JS, Jeong SH, Lee HW, Park JE, Kim MH, Kim YS, Lee HS, Park TS,
You E, Rheem I, Park J, Huh JY, Kang MS, Cho SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, 
Korea.

BACKGROUND: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) can be life threatening,
necessitating emergency therapy with prompt diagnosis by morphologic findings,
immunophenotyping, cytogenetic analysis, or molecular studies. This study aimed
to assess the current routine practices in APL and the clinico-pathologic
features of APL.
METHODS: We reviewed the medical records of 48 Korean patients (25 men, 23 women;
median age, 51 (20-80) years) diagnosed with APL in 5 university hospitals
between March 2007 and February 2012.
RESULTS: The WBC count at diagnosis and platelet count varied from 0.4 to 81.0
(median 2.0)×10(9)/L and 2.7 to 124.0 (median 54.5)×10(9)/L, respectively. The
median values for prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time were
14.7 (11.3-44.1) s and 29 (24-62) s, respectively. All but 2 patients (96%)
showed a fibrin/fibrinogen degradation product value of >20 µg/mL. The D-dimer
median value was 5,000 (686-55,630) ng/mL. The t(15;17)(q22;q12 and PML-RARA
fusion was found in all patients by chromosome analysis and/or multiplex reverse 
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), with turnaround times of 8
(2-19) d and 7 (2-13) d, respectively. All patients received induction
chemotherapy: all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) alone (N=11, 26%), ATRA+idarubicin
(N=25, 58%), ATRA+cytarabine (N=3, 7%), ATRA+idarubicin+cytarabine (N=4, 9%).
CONCLUSION: Since APL is a medical emergency and an accurate diagnosis is a
prerequisite for prompt treatment, laboratory support to implement faster
diagnostic tools to confirm the presence of PML-RARA is required.

PMCID: PMC3625006
PMID: 23589792  [PubMed]


209. J Exp Med. 2013 Apr 8;210(4):647-53. doi: 10.1084/jem.20122337. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

Uncoupling RARA transcriptional activation and degradation clarifies the bases
for APL response to therapies.

Ablain J(1), Leiva M, Peres L, Fonsart J, Anthony E, de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, France.

In PML/RARA-driven acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), retinoic acid (RA) induces
leukemia cell differentiation and transiently clears the disease. Molecularly, RA
activates PML/RARA-dependent transcription and also initiates its
proteasome-mediated degradation. In contrast, arsenic, the other potent anti-APL 
therapy, only induces PML/RARA degradation by specifically targeting its PML
moiety. The respective contributions of RA-triggered transcriptional activation
and proteolysis to clinical response remain disputed. Here, we identify synthetic
retinoids that potently activate RARA- or PML/RARA-dependent transcription, but
fail to down-regulate RARA or PML/RARA protein levels. Similar to RA, these
uncoupled retinoids elicit terminal differentiation, but unexpectedly fail to
impair leukemia-initiating activity of PML/RARA-transformed cells ex vivo or in
vivo. Accordingly, the survival benefit conferred by uncoupled retinoids in APL
mice is dramatically lower than the one provided by RA. Differentiated APL blasts
sorted from uncoupled retinoid-treated mice retain PML/RARA expression and
reinitiate APL in secondary transplants. Thus, differentiation is insufficient
for APL eradication, whereas PML/RARA loss is essential. These observations unify
the modes of action of RA and arsenic and shed light on the potency of their
combination in mice or patients.

PMCID: PMC3620357
PMID: 23509325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Parasitol Res. 2013 May;112(5):1983-90. doi: 10.1007/s00436-013-3356-9. Epub 2013
Mar 2.

Ultrastructural characterization of male and female Physaloptera rara (Spirurida:
Physalopteridae): feline stomach worms.

Naem S(1), Asadi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Urmia University, 
Urmia, Iran. sorayanaem@yahoo.com

Physaloptera rara (Spirurida: Physalopteridae) has been found in dogs, coyotes,
raccoons, wolves, foxes, cats, and bobcats in North America. The parasites'
developmental cycles involve insects, including beetles, cockroaches, and
crickets, as intermediate hosts. The nematodes firmly attach to the wall of the
stomach and duodenum, where they feed on the mucosa and suck blood. Frequent
movement of these nematodes results in erosions and ulcers in the
gastrointestinal tract. The present study reports the morphological features of
adult P. rara using scanning electron microscopy. Adult worms were removed from
the stomach of an infected domestic cat. Male and female worms measured 25-29 and
27-41 mm, respectively. The worms were stout and the cuticle was reflected over
the lips to form a large cephalic collarette with fine transverse striations. The
worms possessed two large, simple triangular lateral pseudolabia, each armed with
one external tooth, three internal teeth, two submedian cephalic papillae, an
amphid, and three porous-like circumscribed regions. The internal margins of the 
lips had a pair of cuticular folds. At the anterior end of both male and female
worms, an excretory pore was located on the ventral side and a pair of lateral
ciliated cervical papillae was seen. The vulva was anterior to the middle of the 
body of female worms. The tail ends of the female worms were stumpy, with two
large phasmids near their extremities. The males' tails bore large lateral alae. 
Ventral ornamentation, in male worms, was composed of three different cuticular
patterns; coblestone-like formations, longitudinal cuticular ridges, and rows of 
bead-like structures. The spicules were unequal and dissimilar; the right spicule
had a thick end and the left spicule had a sharp tip. At the posterior end of the
males, four pairs of stalked precloacal papillae, three pairs of postcloacal
papillae, and two phasmids were present. Three and four sessile papillae were
seen directly anterior and posterior to the cloaca, respectively. The middle
papilla of the three sessile papillae, directly anterior to cloaca was different 
in shape and size.

PMID: 23455940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Leukemia. 2013 Jul;27(7):1548-57. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.68. Epub 2013 Mar 4.

Notch signaling in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Grieselhuber NR(1), Klco JM, Verdoni AM, Lamprecht T, Sarkaria SM, Wartman LD,
Ley TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Stem Cell Biology, Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is initiated by the PML-RARA (PR) fusion
oncogene and has a characteristic expression profile that includes high levels of
the Notch ligand Jagged-1 (JAG1). In this study, we used a series of
bioinformatic, in vitro, and in vivo assays to assess the role of Notch signaling
in human APL samples, and in a PML-RARA knock-in mouse model of APL
(Ctsg-PML-RARA). We identified a Notch expression signature in both human primary
APL cells and in Kit+Lin-Sca1+ cells from pre-leukemic Ctsg-PML-RARA mice. Both
genetic and pharmacologic inhibition of Notch signaling abrogated the enhanced
self-renewal seen in hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells from pre-leukemic
Ctsg-PML-RARA mice, but had no influence on cells from age-matched wild-type
mice. In addition, six of nine murine APL tumors tested displayed diminished
growth in vitro when Notch signaling was inhibited pharmacologically. Finally, we
found that genetic inhibition of Notch signaling with a dominant-negative
Mastermind-like protein reduced APL growth in vivo in a subset of tumors. These
findings expand the role of Notch signaling in hematopoietic diseases, and
further define the mechanistic events important for PML-RARA-mediated
leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3872828
PMID: 23455394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57241. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057241. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

Chiari malformation type I: a case-control association study of 58 developmental 
genes.

Urbizu A(1), Toma C, Poca MA, Sahuquillo J, Cuenca-León E, Cormand B, Macaya A.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Neurology Research Group, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Chiari malformation type I (CMI) is a disorder characterized by hindbrain
overcrowding into an underdeveloped posterior cranial fossa (PCF), often causing 
progressive neurological symptoms. The etiology of CMI remains unclear and is
most likely multifactorial. A putative genetic contribution to CMI is suggested
by familial aggregation and twin studies. Experimental models and human
morphometric studies have suggested an underlying paraxial mesoderm
insufficiency. We performed a case-control association study of 303 tag single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) across 58 candidate genes involved in early
paraxial mesoderm development in a sample of 415 CMI patients and 524 sex-matched
controls. A subgroup of patients diagnosed with classical, small-PCF CMI by means
of MRI-based PCF morphometry (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>186), underwent additional analysis. The genes 
selected are involved in signalling gradients occurring during segmental
patterning of the occipital somites (FGF8, Wnt, and retinoic acid pathways and
from bone morphogenetic proteins or BMP, Notch, Cdx and Hox pathways) or in
placental angiogenesis, sclerotome development or CMI-associated syndromes.
Single-marker analysis identified nominal associations with 18 SNPs in 14 genes
(CDX1, FLT1, RARG, NKD2, MSGN1, RBPJ1, FGFR1, RDH10, NOG, RARA, LFNG, KDR,
ALDH1A2, BMPR1A) considering the whole CMI sample. None of these overcame
corrections for multiple comparisons, in contrast with four SNPs in CDX1, FLT1
and ALDH1A2 in the classical CMI group. Multiple marker analysis identified a
risk haplotype for classical CMI in ALDH1A2 and CDX1. Furthermore, we analyzed
the possible contributions of the most significantly associated SNPs to different
PCF morphometric traits. These findings suggest that common variants in genes
involved in somitogenesis and fetal vascular development may confer
susceptibility to CMI.

PMCID: PMC3578784
PMID: 23437350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Neurobiol Dis. 2013 Jun;54:404-13. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.01.014. Epub 2013 Jan 
29.

Histone modification mapping in human brain reveals aberrant expression of
histone H3 lysine 79 dimethylation in neural tube defects.

Zhang Q(1), Xue P, Li H, Bao Y, Wu L, Chang S, Niu B, Yang F, Zhang T.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of Child Development and Nutriomics, Capital 
Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing 100020, China. maureenzq@hotmail.com

Neural tube defects (NTDs) are severe, common birth defects that result from
failure of neural tube closure, but their pathological mechanisms are not yet
fully understood. Histone modifications have an important role in gene regulation
during fetal development. We therefore hypothesized that the human NTDs may be
partly caused by an imbalance in metabolism, perhaps caused by nutritional
deficiencies, that leads to aberrant histone modifications. Here, we report a
screen of fetal brain histone modifications using 2D nano-LC strong cation
exchange reverse phase (SCX/RP) MS/MS and the identification of 61 unique
post-translational modification sites on histones H1, H2a, H2b, H3, and H4. Of
these, 38 sites are novel (not already found in the Uniprot database).
Furthermore, we compared the histone modification patterns between normal brains 
and NTD brains special of which maternal folate levels were lower than of normal 
control. The results showed that histone H3 lysine 79 dimethylation (H3K79me2)
and a novel identified site, H2bK5 monomethylation (H2bK5me1), were completely
absent in individuals with NTDs. Follow-up Western blotting validated the
decreased H3K79me2 expression in brains with NTDs, but the amplified samples
experiments displayed that decreased H3K79me2 expression was not suitable for all
samples with NTDs. Furthermore, folate-free treated mouse embryonic stem cells
induced the decreased H3K79me2 level. Subsequently, our ChIP results in normal
fetal brain tissues showed that H3K79me2 binds to SUFU, RARA and ITGA3 which
induce NTDs phenotype after knockout in mice, and in NTDs brain tissues the
bindings of H3K79me2 to these three genes were significantly altered. Taken
together, our study indicated that low folate treatment might attenuate H3K79
dimethylation, further affect its regulate activation on target genes, some of
which are NTDs-resulting associated, lastly interrupt early embryo developing.
Our study increases the understanding of normal fetal brain histone modifications
and provides a platform for investigating histone modifications in neural disease
and also has an insight into a potential role of aberrant histone modification in
etiology of NTDs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23376398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2013 Mar;22(1):10-21. doi: 10.1097/PDM.0b013e31825b8326.

Modified array-based comparative genomic hybridization detects cryptic and
variant PML-RARA rearrangements in acute promyelocytic leukemia lacking classic
translocations.

Gruver AM(1), Rogers HJ, Cook JR, Ballif BC, Schultz RA, Batanian JR, Fesler MJ, 
Tubbs RR.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH
44195, USA. gruvera@ccf.org

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is typically defined at the molecular level by
a reciprocal translocation of the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) and retinoic acid 
receptor a (RARA) genes. An accurate diagnosis of APL is critical for appropriate
choice of therapy and prognostic assessment. Cryptic and variant rearrangements
in APL are discoverable by a variety of molecular methods including fluorescence 
in situ hybridization (FISH), reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, or
gene sequencing. Rare reports of FISH-negative APL harboring cryptic
rearrangements of PML-RARA detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction or sequencing have been described. Here, we describe the detection of
cryptic or variant PML-RARA rearrangements by translocation-based comparative
genomic hybridization (tCGH), a recently described modification of traditional
CGH technology that facilitates the detection of balanced translocations by means
of the linear amplification of a potential translocation breakpoint region(s), in
2 unusual cases of APL. One tumor lacked detectable t(15;17) by karyotype and
FISH, and the other tumor lacked the typical morphologic and immunophenotypic
features of APL and had a variant 3-way translocation involving PML and RARA.
PML-RARA translocations were identified by tCGH in both cases providing
confirmation of the diagnosis of APL. These data emphasize the benefit of using
complementary molecular methods including tCGH for detecting cryptic and variant 
PML-RARA translocations in unusual cases of APL.

PMID: 23370423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Acta Haematol. 2013;130(1):23-6. doi: 10.1159/000345828. Epub 2013 Jan 29.

An unusual cytogenetic rearrangement originating from two different abnormalities
in chromosome 6 in a child with acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Matos RR(1), Mkrtchyan H, Amaral BA, Liehr T, de Souza MT, Ney-Garcia DR, Santos 
N, Marques-Salles TJ, Ribeiro RC, Figueiredo AF, Silva ML.

Author information: 
(1)Bone Marrow Unit, Cytogenetics Department, National Cancer Institute, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is usually associated with a favorable
outcome, but about 10% of patients tend to relapse. The genetic hallmark of APL
is a balanced translocation involving chromosomes 15 and 17, and the PML-RARa
gene fusion is found in more than 90% of these cases. Other chromosomal
abnormalities are commonly found in APL, but their clinical significance has yet 
to be determined. Here we report a case of childhood APL that was studied by
conventional cytogenetics along with molecular cytogenetic techniques. The
patient showed a complex karyotype with an unusual cytogenetic rearrangement
originating from two different abnormalities in a single chromosome 6. Our case
is an exceptional example of a cryptic cytogenetic anomaly in APL and underscores
the importance of detailed genetic characterization.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23363773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Internist (Berl). 2013 Feb;54(2):171-8. doi: 10.1007/s00108-012-3154-y.

[Acute myeloid leukemia. Genetic diagnostics and molecular therapy].

[Article in German]

Schlenk RF(1), Döhner K, Döhner H.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Innere Medizin III, Universitätsklinikum Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee
23, 89081, Ulm.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a genetically heterogeneous disease. The genetic 
diagnostics have become an essential component in the initial work-up for disease
classification, prognostication and prediction. More and more promising molecular
targeted therapeutics are becoming available. A prerequisite for individualized
treatment strategies is a fast pretherapeutic molecular screening including the
fusion genes PML-RARA, RUNX1-RUNX1T1 and CBFB-MYH11 as well as mutations in the
genes NPM1, FLT3 and CEBPA. Promising new therapeutic approaches include the
combination of all- trans retinoic acid and arsentrioxid in acute promyelocytic
leukemia, the combination of intensive chemotherapy with KIT inhibitors in
core-binding factor AML and FLT3 inhibitors in AML with FLT3 mutation, as well as
gemtuzumab ozogamicin therapy in patients with low and intermediate cytogenetic
risk profiles. With the advent of the next generation sequencing technologies it 
is expected that new therapeutic targets will be identified. These insights will 
lead to a further individualization of AML therapy.

PMID: 23358744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2013 May;68(5):1011-8. doi: 10.1093/jac/dks530. Epub 2013
Jan 24.

Genetic characterization of tigecycline resistance in clinical isolates of
Enterobacter cloacae and Enterobacter aerogenes.

Veleba M(1), De Majumdar S, Hornsey M, Woodford N, Schneiders T.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infection and Immunity, Queen's University Belfast, Health Sciences
Building, 97 Lisburn Road, Belfast BT9 7AE, UK.

OBJECTIVES: The intrinsically encoded ramA gene has been linked to tigecycline
resistance through the up-regulation of efflux pump AcrAB in Enterobacter
cloacae. The molecular basis for increased ramA expression in E. cloacae and
Enterobacter aerogenes, as well as the role of AraC regulator rarA, has not yet
been shown. To ascertain the intrinsic molecular mechanism(s) involved in
tigecycline resistance in Enterobacter spp., we analysed the expression levels of
ramA and rarA and corresponding efflux pump genes acrAB and oqxAB in Enterobacter
spp. clinical isolates.
METHODS: The expression levels of ramA, rarA, oqxA and acrA were tested by
quantitative real-time RT-PCR. The ramR open reading frames of the
ramA-overexpressing strains were sequenced; strains harbouring mutations were
transformed with wild-type ramR to study altered ramA expression and tigecycline 
susceptibility.
RESULTS: Tigecycline resistance was mediated primarily by increased ramA
expression in E. cloacae and E. aerogenes. Only the ramA-overexpressing E.
cloacae isolates showed increased rarA and oqxA expression. Upon complementation 
with wild-type ramR, all Enterobacter spp. containing ramR mutations exhibited
decreased ramA and acrA expression and increased tigecycline susceptibility.
Exceptions were one E. cloacae strain and one E. aerogenes strain, where a
decrease in ramA levels was not accompanied by lower acrA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased ramA expression due to ramR deregulation is the primary
mediator of tigecycline resistance in clinical isolates of E. cloacae and E.
aerogenes. However, some ramA-overexpressing isolates do not show changes in
ramR, suggesting alternate pathways of ramA regulation; the rarA regulator and
the oqxAB efflux pump may also play a role in tigecycline resistance in E.
cloacae.

PMID: 23349441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Parasitol Res. 2013 Mar;112(3):1097-103. doi: 10.1007/s00436-012-3236-8. Epub
2013 Jan 23.

Community structure of helminth parasites of the "Cururu" toad, Rhinella icterica
(Anura: Bufonidae) from southern Brazil.

Dos Santos VG(1), Amato SB, Borges-Martins M.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biologia Animal, Departamento de Zoologia,
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul,
Brazil. santosvgt@gmail.com

Sixty specimens of the "cururu" toad, Rhinella icterica (Spix 1824) (Bufonidae), 
were collected in Campo Belo do Sul, State of Santa Catarina, Brazil, between May
2009 and January 2011, and were examined for the presence of helminth parasites. 
Nine species of adult helminths were found: Catadiscus cohni, Rudolphitrema
rudolphii, Cylindrotaenia sp., Rhabdias fuelleborni, Strongyloides sp.,
Cosmocerca rara, Cosmocerca brasiliensis, Aplectana elenae, and Oxyascaris sp.,
in addition to an unidentified adult nematode species. Females of cosmocercid
nematodes, proteocephalan plerocercoid, and acanthocephalan cystacanth were found
but not identified for lack absolute of taxonomic characters. The sex of the
anurans had no influence on prevalence, abundance, and richness of helminth
species. Length and body mass of hosts did not influence the prevalence and
richness of helminths, while the abundance of R. fuelleborni was significantly
correlated with both parameters.

PMID: 23340719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Korean J Hematol. 2012 Dec;47(4):307-8. doi: 10.5045/kjh.2012.47.4.307. Epub 2012
Dec 24.

Molecular methods for genomic analyses of variant PML-RARA or other RARA-related 
chromosomal translocations in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Kim MJ(1), Yang JJ, Meyer C, Marschalek R, Park TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Graduate School, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Korea.

PMCID: PMC3538805
PMID: 23320012  [PubMed]


220. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Apr;57(4):1603-9. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01998-12.
Epub 2013 Jan 14.

Elucidating the regulon of multidrug resistance regulator RarA in Klebsiella
pneumoniae.

De Majumdar S(1), Veleba M, Finn S, Fanning S, Schneiders T.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infection and Immunity, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, United
Kingdom.

RarA is an AraC-type regulator in Klebsiella pneumoniae, which, when
overexpressed, confers a low-level multidrug-resistant (MDR) phenotype linked to 
the upregulation of both the acrAB and oqxAB efflux genes. Increased rarA
expression has also been shown to be integral in the development of tigecycline
resistance in the absence of ramA in K. pneumoniae. Given its phenotypic role in 
MDR, microarray analyses were performed to determine the RarA regulon.
Transcriptome analysis was undertaken using strains Ecl8<U+0394>rarA/pACrarA-2
(rarA-expressing construct) and Ecl8<U+0394>rarA/pACYC184 (vector-only control) using
bespoke microarray slides consisting of probes derived from the genomic sequences
of K. pneumoniae MGH 78578 (NC_009648.1) and Kp342 (NC_011283.1). Our results
show that rarA overexpression resulted in the differential expression of 66 genes
(42 upregulated and 24 downregulated). Under the COG (clusters of orthologous
groups) functional classification, the majority of affected genes belonged to the
category of cell envelope biogenesis and posttranslational modification, along
with genes encoding the previously uncharacterized transport proteins (e.g.,
KPN_03141, sdaCB, and leuE) and the porin OmpF. However, genes associated with
energy production and conversion and amino acid transport/metabolism (e.g., nuoA,
narJ, and proWX) were found to be downregulated. Biolog phenotype analyses
demonstrated that rarA overexpression confers enhanced growth of the
overexpresser in the presence of several antibiotic classes (i.e., beta-lactams
and fluoroquinolones), the antifungal/antiprotozoal compound clioquinol,
disinfectants (8-hydroxyquinoline), protein synthesis inhibitors (i.e.,
minocycline and puromycin), membrane biogenesis agents (polymyxin B and
amitriptyline), DNA synthesis (furaltadone), and the cytokinesis inhibitor
(sanguinarine). Both our transcriptome and phenotypic microarray data support and
extend the role of RarA in the MDR phenotype of K. pneumoniae.

PMCID: PMC3623357
PMID: 23318802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. FASEB J. 2013 Apr;27(4):1468-78. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-210971. Epub 2013 Jan 8.

DNA methylation associated with polycomb repression in retinoic acid receptor ß
silencing.

Moison C(1), Senamaud-Beaufort C, Fourrière L, Champion C, Ceccaldi A, Lacomme S,
Daunay A, Tost J, Arimondo PB, Guieysse-Peugeot AL.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-Pierre Fabre, Unité de Service et de Recherche 3388, Epigenetic Targeting
of Cancer, Centre de Recherche et Développement Pierre Fabre, Toulouse, France.

Retinoic acid receptor ß 2 (RARß2) is a tumor suppressor gene whose loss of
expression is recurrent in prostate cancers. Here we studied the epigenetic
mechanisms leading to its stable silencing. First, we characterized all RARß
isoforms in 6 human tumor cell lines (prostate DU145, LNCaP, PC3, lung A549,
breast Hs578T, and colon HCT116) by RT-PCR and Western blot. We excluded loss of 
heterozygosity (2D-FISH) and loss of RARa expression, an upstream regulator, as
origin of RARß2 silencing. All data concluded to an epigenetic silencing. In
agreement, a DNA methylation inhibitor restored its expression. Second RARß2 loss
of expression was found associated with different epigenetic profiles in LNCaP
and DU145 cells. According to bisulfite sequencing and ChIP analysis, we observed
heavy methylation (97%) of the RARß2 promoter with repressive histone mark
H3K9me3 in LNCaP. While DNA methylation and polycomb repression are described to 
be mutually exclusive at CpG-rich promoters, we observed that in DU145, moderate 
DNA methylation (36%) and H3K9me3 mark were present concomitantly with H3K27me3, 
a signature of polycomb repression. In summary, we provide new insights on how
the RARß2 promoter is silenced, reveal the existence of two distinct repressive
chromatin profiles at the same locus, and support a polycomb-mediated epigenetic 
repression process in prostate cancer.

PMID: 23299856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Med Oncol. 2013 Mar;30(1):409. doi: 10.1007/s12032-012-0409-3. Epub 2013 Jan 6.

A PML/RARA chimeric gene on chromosome 12 in a patient with acute promyelocytic
leukemia (M4) associated with a new variant translocation:
t(12;15;17)(q24;q24;q11).

Bennour A(1), Tabka I, Youssef YB, Zaier M, Hizem S, Khelif A, Saad A, Sennana H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytogenetics, Molecular Genetics and Reproductive Biology,
Farhat Hached University Teaching Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia. aydabennour@yahoo.fr

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is genetically characterized by a reciprocal
translocation between chromosomes 15 and 17, t(15;17)(q22;q21), which results in 
the fusion gene PML-RARA. A small proportion of patients with APL have complex or
simple variants of this translocation. With conventional cytogenetic methods,
these translocations are detected in about 70-90 % of patients, with most of the 
negative results due to technical problems or cryptic variants. Those masked
PML/RARA fusions can be identified by molecular analyses such as reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). We report the case of a 58-year-old man showing
morphological, cytochemical, and immunophenotypic features of hypergranular APL
(FAB-M4). PML-RARA transcripts were not evident on RT-PCR. Although cytogenetic
tests revealed the presence of an apparently balanced translocation
t(15;17)(q24;q11) with an abnormal chromosome 12 that characterized a M3
leukemia. This karyotypic interpretation was confirmed by FISH with the use of
painting probes of chromosomes 12, 15, and 17 and a PML-RARA dual-color DNA
probe. FISH showed a PML-RARA fusion gene on the der(12) instead of the der(15). 
The patient was treated with an all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) plus
anthracycline-based protocol and achieved complete remission, with no recurrence 
to date. These results illustrate the usefulness of combining cytogenetics and
FISH methods to evidence the PML/RARA fusion gene in cases with morphologic
suspicion of APL with variant or cryptic t(15;17).

PMID: 23292868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Intern Med. 2013;52(1):55-62. Epub 2013 Jan 1.

Clinical features and treatment outcomes of six patients with disseminated
intravascular coagulation resulting from acute promyelocytic leukemia and treated
with recombinant human soluble thrombomodulin at a single institution.

Kawano N(1), Kuriyama T, Yoshida S, Yamashita K, Ochiai H, Nakazaki S, Tasaki A, 
Ueda A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Miyazaki Prefectural Miyazaki Hospital,
Japan. kawanoriaki@yahoo.co.jp

OBJECTIVE: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by the
proliferation of blasts with distinct morphology and promyelocytic
leukemia-retinoic acid receptor alpha (PML-RARA) transcripts. Although the
treatment outcome is dramatically improved by all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA),
life-threatening bleeding from enhanced fibrinolytic-type disseminated
intravascular coagulation (DIC) remains a serious clinical problem, and a
standard treatment has not been established. However, recent reports indicate
that recombinant human soluble thrombomodulin (rTM) is effective against DIC.
METHODS: To elucidate the clinical characteristics and outcomes of DIC resulting 
from APL, we retrospectively analyzed 10 patients with DIC resulting from APL at 
our institution over a six year period. Of the 10 patients, four were treated
with serine protease inhibitors (SPI) and six were treated with rTM. The
diagnosis of DIC was based on the diagnostic criteria of the Japanese Ministry of
Health and Welfare. In addition to treating APL with ATRA, rTM was administered
for six consecutive days.
RESULTS: The DIC was resolved within seven days after initiating treatment in
25.0% (1/4) of the patients in the SPI group and 66.6% (4/6) of the patients in
the rTM group. Although the rTM group consisted of patients with life-threatening
bleeding who required RCC transfusion, a prompt resolution rate and reduced DIC
score without progression of bleeding was achieved in this group. All patients
were alive after the 28-day observation period.
CONCLUSION: Based on the present findings, rTM administration may be an
effective, safe, and feasible therapeutic modality, producing a rapid resolution 
without progression of hemorrahage.

PMID: 23291674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Blood. 2013 Feb 21;121(8):1432-5. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-04-423129. Epub 2013
Jan 3.

OBFC2A/RARA: a novel fusion gene in variant acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Won D(1), Shin SY, Park CJ, Jang S, Chi HS, Lee KH, Lee JO, Seo EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Ulsan College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia is characterized by the rearrangement of the
retinoic acid receptor a (RARA) gene and its fusion with other genes. We report a
novel case of variant acute promyelocytic leukemia with the karyotype der
(2)t(2;17)(q32;q21). Array comparative genomic hybridization revealed distinct
chromosome breakpoints within the RARA and
oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide-binding fold containing 2A (OBFC2A) genes.
Sequence analysis of the OBFC2A/RARA transcript showed that exon 5 of OBFC2A was 
fused with exon 3 of RARA through the same breakpoint as in previously described 
fusions of RARA. The single-stranded DNA binding protein encoded by OBFC2A is
critical for genomic stability. Retention of the OB fold domain of OBFC2A in the 
fusion protein suggests the possibility of homodimerization. The leukemic cells
from the patient showed neutrophilic differentiation in the in vitro all-trans
retinoic acid assay. Mutation or rearrangement of the OBFC2A gene has not been
previously reported in congenital or acquired disorders.

PMID: 23287866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Leukemia. 2013 Jul;27(7):1606-10. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.371. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

All-trans retinoic acid and arsenic trioxide resistance of acute promyelocytic
leukemia with the variant STAT5B-RARA fusion gene.

Strehl S, König M, Boztug H, Cooper BW, Suzukawa K, Zhang SJ, Chen HY,
Attarbaschi A, Dworzak MN.

PMID: 23271512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Leuk Res. 2013 Apr;37(4):383-5. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2012.11.014. Epub 2012 Dec
20.

Influence of time to complete remission and duration of all-trans retinoic acid
therapy on the relapse risk in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia
receiving AIDA protocols.

Breccia M(1), Minotti C, Latagliata R, Loglisci G, Salaroli A, Loglisci MG,
Lo-Coco F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Hematology, Sapienza University,
Rome, Italy. breccia@bce.uniroma1.it

Despite the impressive results obtained with standard chemotherapy, approximately
20% of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patients undergo disease relapse
thereby requiring salvage therapy. Few data is available on long-term prognosis
in relation to time to complete remission (CR): we reviewed 142 patients treated 
with AIDA protocols and we found that 42 out of 142 (29.6%) patients achieved CR 
after 35 days (median time, 42 days). No significant differences in presenting
features, including FAB subtype, type of PML/RARA transcript and relapse risk at 
presentation between the two patient groups achieving CR > or <35 days were
revealed, except for male sex and older age that were significantly associated
with delayed CR. Rate of relapse was 31% in patients with delayed CR compared to 
17% in the group of patients who achieved CR<35 days (p=0.001), with a 5-year CIR
of 29.6% compared to 12% (p=0.03). APL patients with delayed CR should be more
closely monitored during follow-up for early identification of relapse and prompt
administration of pre-emptive salvage therapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23259988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Dec;20(6):1297-301.

[Analysis of DNMT3a mutation in childhood acute myeloid leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou JF(1), Zhang L, Zeng HM, Wang YQ, Yi XL, An WB, Chang LX, Zou Y, Chen YM,
Zhu XF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Diagnosis and Therapy of Childhood Hematologic Diseaces, Blood
Disease Hospital & Institute of Hematology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences &
Peking Union Medical College, Tianjing 300020, China.

Within the past few years, the invention of next-generation sequencing has
revealed several new genes associated with tumor formation and development, for
example DNMT3a. This gene is an independent prognostic factor for acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). The objective of this study was to analyze the DNMT3a mutation in
childhood AML in a single center. PCR amplification of the entire coding region
of DNMT3a was performed using 23 overlapping primer pairs in 57 patients who were
diagnosed in Blood Disease Hospital of Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, then 
the directly sequencing was underwent. The results showed that no DNMT3a mutation
was found in these patients including the hotspot R882. But AML1/ETO mutation was
found in 10 patients, CBFB/MYH11 mutation in 3 patients, PML/RARa mutation in 13 
patients, FLT3/ITD mutation in 5 patients, FLT3/TKD mutation in 1 patient,
PML/RARa and FLT3/TKD mutation coexisted in 2 patients. It is concluded that
DNMT3a mutations are rare in childhood AML, and different mechanisms of myeloid
leukemogenesis between childhood and adults maybe involved.

PMID: 23257420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Oncogene. 2013 Oct 24;32(43):5167-75. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.537. Epub 2012 Dec 3.

The deubiquitinating enzyme USP37 regulates the oncogenic fusion protein
PLZF/RARA stability.

Yang WC(1), Shih HM.

Author information: 
(1)1] Molecular Medicine Program, Taiwan International Graduate Program (TIGP),
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan [2] Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, School of Life Science, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan
[3] Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is predominantly characterized by chromosomal 
translocations between the retinoic acid receptor, alpha (RARA) gene and the
promyelocytic leukemia (PML) or promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger (PLZF) gene.
In APL cells with PML/RARA fusions, arsenic trioxide and all-trans retinoic acid 
treatments specifically target the fusion protein for proteasome-dependent
degradation, thereby promoting cellular differentiation and clinical remission of
disease. In contrast, APL cells expressing PLZF/RARA fusion proteins are largely 
resistant to similar treatments and prognosis for patients with this
translocation is poor. Understanding the molecular mechanisms regulating
PLZF/RARA protein stability would provide novel therapeutic targets for
PLZF/RARA-associated APL. Toward this end, we have performed an RNAi-based screen
to identify factors affecting PLZF/RARA stability. Among the factors identified
was the ubiquitin-specific peptidase 37 (USP37). We showed that USP37 interacted 
with PLZF/RARA through the PLZF moiety and sustained PLZF/RARA steady state
levels. Domain mapping study revealed that N-terminal domain of USP37 is required
for the PLZF/RARA interaction and protein regulation. Furthermore, overexpression
or depletion of USP37 caused an increase or decrease of PLZF/RARA protein
half-life, correlating with down- or upregulation of PLZF/RARA
poly-ubiquitination, respectively. By PLZF/RARA-transduced primary mouse
hematopoietic progenitor cells, we demonstrated that Usp37 knockdown alleviated
PLZF/RARA-mediated target gene suppression and cell transformation potential.
Altogether, our findings of USP37-modulating PLZF/RARA stability and cell
transformation suggest that USP37 is a potential therapeutic target for
PLZF/RARA-associated APL.

PMID: 23208507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Clin Chim Acta. 2013 Jan 16;415:276-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2012.10.059. Epub 2012 
Nov 13.

Rapid detection of PML-RARA fusion gene by novel high-speed droplet-reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction: possibility for molecular diagnosis
without lagging behind the morphological analyses.

Sueki A(1), Matsuda K, Taira C, Yamaguchi A, Koeda H, Takagi F, Kobayashi Y,
Sugano M, Honda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shinshu University Hospital, 3-1-1 Asahi,
Matsumoto, 390-8621, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is an aggressive disease requiring
prompt diagnosis and treatment. Rapid detection of the PML-RARA fusion gene
provides the molecular basis for a highly effective therapy with all-trans
retinoic acid. We developed a rapid assay by novel droplet-reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (droplet-RT-PCR) for the detection of the
PML-RARA fusion gene in APL patients.
METHODS: RNA was extracted from 7 samples obtained from 5 APL patients with the
PML-RARA fusion gene confirmed by nested RT-PCR and fluorescence in situ
hybridization. Using these 7 samples, we evaluated the reaction time and
amplification efficiency of the droplet-RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Using the droplet-RT-PCR, we could detect the PML-RARA fusion gene in
all 7 samples. The reaction time for 50 cycles of droplet-RT-PCR was 27 min. The 
amplification by the droplet-RT-PCR assay was considered positive for the
PML-RARA fusion gene in less than 22 min, at the point when the fluorescence
exceeded the threshold level.
CONCLUSIONS: Our novel droplet-RT-PCR assay is specific for the detection of the 
PML-RARA fusion gene and has a markedly reduced reaction time. Thus, the novel
droplet-RT-PCR assay contributes to the rapid diagnosis of APL without lagging
behind the morphological assessment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23159843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Acta Haematol. 2013;129(1):48-54. doi: 10.1159/000342493. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Translocation t(11;17) in de novo myelodysplastic syndrome not associated with
acute myeloid or acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Baljevic M(1), Abdel-Wahab O, Rampal R, Maslak PG, Klimek VM, Rosenblat TL, Douer
D, Levine RL, Tallman MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. mub2007@nyp.org

Translocation t(11;17) is a well-recognized variant of acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL) and has also been identified in patients with mixed-lineage
leukemia (MLL) non-APL acute myeloid leukemia. Here, we describe two patients
bearing translocation t(11;17) presenting with a clinical diagnosis of de novo
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS): the first with sole karyotypic abnormality
46,XY,t(11;17)(p11.2; p13) and the second where it represented one of the two
karyotypic abnormalities
46,XX,del(5)(q13q33)46,XX,del(5)(q13q33),t(11;17)(q24;q23). Molecular
characterization of both cases failed to identify fusion transcripts involving
MLL or PLZF-RARA and no collaborating somatic mutations commonly found among MDS 
patients were seen in either case, suggesting the presence of an as yet
unidentified oncogenic fusion protein.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23147462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Haematologica. 2013 Mar;98(3):424-7. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.057067. Epub 2012
Nov 9.

PML-RARa co-operates with Sox4 in acute myeloid leukemia development in mice.

Omidvar N(1), Maunakea ML, Jones L, Sevcikova S, Yin B, Himmel KL, Tennant TR, Le
Beau MM, Largaespada DA, Kogan SC.

Author information: 
(1)Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Laboratory
Medicine, University of California San Francisco, USA. OmidvarN@cf.ac.uk

Acute promyelocytic leukemia is characterized by a chromosomal translocation
involving the retinoic acid receptor alpha gene. To identify co-operating
pathways to leukemogenesis, we crossed MRP8-PML/RARA transgenic mice with BXH-2
mice which harbor an endogenous murine leukemia virus that causes acute myeloid
leukemia. Approximately half of the leukemias that arose in this cross showed
features of acute promyelocytic leukemia. We identified 22 proviral insertion
sites in acute promyelocytic-like leukemias and focused our analysis on insertion
at Sox4, a HMG box transcription factor. Using a transplant model, co-operation
between PML-RARa and Sox4 was confirmed with increased penetrance and reduced
latency of disease. Interestingly, karyotypic analysis revealed cytogenetic
changes suggesting that the factors combined to initiate but not complete
leukemic transformation. The cooperation between these transcription factors is
consistent with the paradigm of multiple routes to the disease and reinforces the
concept that transcription factor networks are important therapeutic targets in
myeloid leukemias.

PMCID: PMC3659942
PMID: 23144197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Ann Lab Med. 2012 Nov;32(6):445-9. doi: 10.3343/alm.2012.32.6.445. Epub 2012 Oct 
17.

Additional genomic aberrations identified by single nucleotide polymorphism
array-based karyotyping in an acute myeloid leukemia case with isolated del(20q) 
abnormality.

Hahm C(1), Mun YC, Seong CM, Chung WS, Huh J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.

Prognosis is known to be better in cases with isolated chromosomal abnormalities 
than in those with complex karyotypes. Accordingly, del(20q) as an isolated
abnormality must be distinguished from cases in which it is associated with other
chromosomal rearrangements for a better stratification of prognosis. We report a 
case of an isolated del(20q) abnormality with additional genomic aberrations
identified using whole-genome single nucleotide polymorphism array (SNP-A)-based 
karyotyping. A 39-yr-old man was diagnosed with AML without maturation. Metaphase
cytogenetic analysis (MC) revealed del(20)(q11.2) as the isolated abnormality in 
100% of metaphase cells analyzed, and FISH analysis using D20S108 confirmed the
20q deletion in 99% of interphase cells. Using FISH, other rearrangements such as
BCR/ABL1, RUNX1/RUNX1T1, PML/RARA, CBFB/MYH11, and MLL were found to be negative.
SNP-A identified an additional copy neutral loss of heterozygosity (CN-LOH) in
the 11q13.1-q25 region. Furthermore, SNP-A allowed for a more precise definition 
of the breakpoints of the 20q deletion (20q11.22-q13.31). Unexpectedly, the
terminal regions showed gain on chromosome 20q. The patient did not achieve
complete remission; 8 months later, he died from complications of leukemic cell
infiltrations into the central nervous system. This study suggests that a
presumably isolated chromosomal abnormality by MC may have additional genomic
aberrations, including CN-LOH, which could be associated with a poor prognosis.
SNP-A-based karyotyping may be helpful for distinguishing true isolated cases
from cases in combination with additional genomic aberrations not detected by MC.

PMCID: PMC3486942
PMID: 23130347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. BMC Microbiol. 2012 Oct 31;12:245. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-12-245.

Analysis of a unique Clostridium botulinum strain from the Southern hemisphere
producing a novel type E botulinum neurotoxin subtype.

Raphael BH(1), Lautenschlager M, Kalb SR, de Jong LI, Frace M, Lúquez C, Barr JR,
Fernández RA, Maslanka SE.

Author information: 
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30329, USA.
BRaphael@cdc.gov

BACKGROUND: Clostridium botulinum strains that produce botulinum neurotoxin type 
E (BoNT/E) are most commonly isolated from botulism cases, marine environments,
and animals in regions of high latitude in the Northern hemisphere. A strain of
C. botulinum type E (CDC66177) was isolated from soil in Chubut, Argentina.
Previous studies showed that the amino acid sequences of BoNT/E produced by
various strains differ by < 6% and that the type E neurotoxin gene cluster
inserts into the rarA operon.
RESULTS: Genetic and mass spectral analysis demonstrated that the BoNT/E produced
by CDC66177 is a novel toxin subtype (E9). Toxin gene sequencing indicated that
BoNT/E9 differed by nearly 11% at the amino acid level compared to BoNT/E1. Mass 
spectrometric analysis of BoNT/E9 revealed that its endopeptidase substrate
cleavage site was identical to other BoNT/E subtypes. Further analysis of this
strain demonstrated that its 16S rRNA sequence clustered with other Group II C.
botulinum (producing BoNT types B, E, and F) strains. Genomic DNA isolated from
strain CDC66177 hybridized with fewer probes using a Group II C. botulinum
subtyping microarray compared to other type E strains examined. Whole genome
shotgun sequencing of strain CDC66177 revealed that while the toxin gene cluster 
inserted into the rarA operon similar to other type E strains, its overall genome
content shared greater similarity with a Group II C. botulinum type B strain
(17B).
CONCLUSIONS: These results expand our understanding of the global distribution of
C. botulinum type E strains and suggest that the type E toxin gene cluster may be
able to insert into C. botulinum strains with a more diverse genetic background
than previously recognized.

PMCID: PMC3558463
PMID: 23113872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Korean Med Sci. 2012 Oct;27(10):1155-61. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2012.27.10.1155.
Epub 2012 Oct 2.

Rapid detection of prognostically significant fusion transcripts in acute
leukemia using simplified multiplex reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction.

Cho YU(1), Chi HS, Park CJ, Jang S, Seo EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Ulsan College of Medicine and
Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.

Multiplex reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (mRT-PCR) has recently 
emerged as an alternative to cytogenetics. We designed and used simplified
mRT-PCR system as a molecular screen for acute leukemia. Fifteen fusion
transcripts were included: BCR-ABL1, PML-RARA, ZBTB16-RARA, RUNX1-RUNX1T1,
CBFB-MYH11, DEK-NUP214, TCF3-PBX1, ETV6-RUNX1, MLL-AFF1, MLL-MLLT4, MLL-MLLT3,
MLL-MLLT10, MLL-ELL, MLL-MLLT1, and MLL-MLLT6. A total of 121 diagnostic acute
leukemia specimens were studied, comparing the mRT-PCR system with standard
cytogenetics. Fifty-six cases (46.3%) had fusion transcripts revealed by our
mRT-PCR assay. The concordance rate between mRT-PCR and cytogenetics was 91.7%.
However, false negative results were found in three cases who have inv(16),
t(4;11) or t(11;19)(q23;p13.1), respectively. Seven cryptic translocations
including ETV6-RUNX1, MLL-MLLT3, MLL-MLLT4, and PML-RARA were detected. This
mRT-PCR assay is a useful screening tool in acute leukemia because it provides
rapid and reliable detection of clinically important chimeric transcripts. In
addition, cryptic translocations provide additional genetic information that
could be clinically useful.

PMCID: PMC3468750
PMID: 23091311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Korean J Hematol. 2012 Sep;47(3):229-32. doi: 10.5045/kjh.2012.47.3.229. Epub
2012 Sep 25.

ZBTB16-RARa variant of acute promyelocytic leukemia with tuberculosis: a case
report and review of literature.

Palta A(1), Dhiman P, Cruz SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Government Medical College and Hospital, Chandigarh, 
India.

A 23-year-old male presented with pulmonary tuberculosis and swelling of both
lower limbs. He was put on antitubercular treatment. Hemogram showed mild anemia 
and Pseudo Pelger-huet cells. The bone marrow (BM) examination showed 52%
promyelocytes with regular round to oval nuclei, few granules and were positive
for CD13 and CD33, and negative for HLA-DR. Cytogenetic analysis of the BM
aspirate revealed an apparently balanced t(11;17)(q23;q21). Final diagnosis
rendered was acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) with t(11;17)(q23;q21);
ZBTB16/RARA. APL is a distinct subtype of acute myeloid leukemia. The variant APL
with t(11;17)(q23;q21) cases that are associated with the ZBTB16/RARA fusion gene
have been reported as being resistant to all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA).
Therefore, differential diagnosis of variant APL with t(11;17)(q23;q12) from
classical APL with t(15;17)(q22;q12); PML-RARA is very important. Here we have
discussed the importance of distinct morphology of variant APL and also
significance of rare presentation with tuberculosis.

PMCID: PMC3464342
PMID: 23071480  [PubMed]


236. Blood Cancer J. 2012 Oct 12;2:e92. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2012.39.

The increased expression of 14q32 small nucleolar RNA transcripts in
promyelocytic leukemia cells is not dependent on PML-RARA fusion gene.

Cohen Y(1), Hertzog K, Reish O, Mashevich M, Garach-Jehoshua O, Bar-Chaim A,
Trakhtenbrot L, Kornberg A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Assaf Harofeh Medical Center, Zerifin, Israel.

Comment in
    Leukemia. 2014 Jan;28(1):233-6.

PMCID: PMC3483620
PMID: 23064740  [PubMed]


237. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46529. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046529. Epub 2012 Oct 8.

Expression and function of PML-RARA in the hematopoietic progenitor cells of
Ctsg-PML-RARA mice.

Wartman LD(1), Welch JS, Uy GL, Klco JM, Lamprecht T, Varghese N, Nagarajan R,
Ley TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Stem Cell Biology, Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

Because PML-RARA-induced acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a morphologically 
differentiated leukemia, many groups have speculated about whether its leukemic
cell of origin is a committed myeloid precursor (e.g. a promyelocyte) versus an
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell (HSPC). We originally targeted PML-RARA
expression with CTSG regulatory elements, based on the early observation that
this gene was maximally expressed in cells with promyelocyte morphology. Here, we
show that both Ctsg, and PML-RARA targeted to the Ctsg locus (in Ctsg-PML-RARA
mice), are expressed in the purified KLS cells of these mice
(KLS<U+200A>=<U+200A>Kit(+)Lin(-)Sca(+), which are highly enriched for HSPCs), and this
expression results in biological effects in multi-lineage competitive
repopulation assays. Further, we demonstrate the transcriptional consequences of 
PML-RARA expression in Ctsg-PML-RARA mice in early myeloid development in other
myeloid progenitor compartments [common myeloid progenitors (CMPs) and
granulocyte/monocyte progenitors (GMPs)], which have a distinct gene expression
signature compared to wild-type (WT) mice. Although PML-RARA is indeed expressed 
at high levels in the promyelocytes of Ctsg-PML-RARA mice and alters the
transcriptional signature of these cells, it does not induce their self-renewal. 
In sum, these results demonstrate that in the Ctsg-PML-RARA mouse model of APL,
PML-RARA is expressed in and affects the function of multipotent progenitor
cells. Finally, since PML/Pml is normally expressed in the HSPCs of both humans
and mice, and since some human APL samples contain TCR rearrangements and express
T lineage genes, we suggest that the very early hematopoietic expression of
PML-RARA in this mouse model may closely mimic the physiologic expression pattern
of PML-RARA in human APL patients.

PMCID: PMC3466302
PMID: 23056333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 9;109(41):16582-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1214936109. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

Retinoic acid induces Sertoli cell paracrine signals for spermatogonia
differentiation but cell autonomously drives spermatocyte meiosis.

Raverdeau M(1), Gely-Pernot A, Féret B, Dennefeld C, Benoit G, Davidson I,
Chambon P, Mark M, Ghyselinck NB.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 7104, Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 964, Université de
Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.

Direct evidence for a role of endogenous retinoic acid (RA), the active
metabolite of vitamin A in the initial differentiation and meiotic entry of
spermatogonia, and thus in the initiation of spermatogenesis is still lacking. RA
is synthesized by dedicated enzymes, the retinaldehyde dehydrogenases (RALDH),
and binds to and activates nuclear RA receptors (RARA, RARB, and RARG) either
within the RA-synthesizing cells or in the neighboring cells. In the present
study, we have used a combination of somatic genetic ablations and
pharmacological approaches in vivo to show that during the first, prepubertal,
spermatogenic cycle (i) RALDH-dependent synthesis of RA by Sertoli cells (SC),
the supporting cells of the germ cell (GC) lineage, is indispensable to initiate 
differentiation of A aligned into A1 spermatogonia; (ii) RARA in SC mediates the 
effects of RA, possibly through activating Mafb expression, a gene whose
Drosophila homolog is mandatory to GC differentiation; (iii) RA synthesized by
premeiotic spermatocytes cell autonomously induces meiotic initiation through
controlling the RAR-dependent expression of Stra8. Furthermore, we show that RA
of SC origin is no longer necessary for the subsequent spermatogenic cycles but
essential to spermiation. Altogether, our data establish that the effects of RA
in vivo on spermatogonia differentiation are indirect, via SC, but direct on
meiotic initiation in spermatocytes, supporting thereby the notion that, contrary
to the situation in the female, RA is necessary to induce meiosis in the male.

PMCID: PMC3478620
PMID: 23012458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Cancer Genet. 2012 Oct;205(10):537-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.07.017. Epub
2012 Sep 13.

Microarray, gene sequencing, and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction 
analyses of a cryptic PML-RARA translocation.

Koshy J(1), Qian YW, Bhagwath G, Willis M, Kelley TW, Papenhausen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston,
Galveston, TX, USA.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a well-defined subtype of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) specifically characterized by the t(15;17)(q22;q12) translocation.
The t(15;17) results in the fusion of the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) and
retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) genes. Rare cryptic fusions often associated 
with small genomic insertions can best be detected by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) although conventional
chromosomal studies or even fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analyses
appear normal. We report here an APL clone with a cryptic PML-RARA fusion that
returned negative results by both karyotyping and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH), but returned positive results by RT-PCR analysis. A single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) microarray analysis was used in this case to help
resolve the discordance, revealing a 49-kilobase intragenic PML gene duplication.
A dual color dual fusion PML-RARA FISH probe set identified a small, extra PML
signal in a chromosome other than 15 or 17. Although coinsertion of a RARA
sequence could be detected by neither FISH nor array, the RT-PCR positivity is
consistent with this fusion "ectopic" to the natural gene loci. The findings
highlight the clinical utility of microarray in cases of cryptic PML-RARA fusion.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22982005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Leukemia. 2012 Sep;26(9):1976-85. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.125. Epub 2012 May 8.

Flow cytometric immunobead assay for fast and easy detection of PML-RARA fusion
proteins for the diagnosis of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Dekking EH(1), van der Velden VH, Varro R, Wai H, Böttcher S, Kneba M, Sonneveld 
E, Koning A, Boeckx N, Van Poecke N, Lucio P, Mendonça A, Sedek L, Szczepanski T,
Kalina T, Kanderová V, Hoogeveen P, Flores-Montero J, Chillón MC, Orfao A,
Almeida J, Evans P, Cullen M, Noordijk AL, Vermeulen PM, de Man MT, Dixon EP,
Comans-Bitter WM, van Dongen JJ; EuroFlow Consortium (EU-FP6,
LSHB-CT-2006-018708).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The PML-RARA fusion protein is found in approximately 97% of patients with acute 
promyelocytic leukemia (APL). APL can be associated with life-threatening
bleeding complications when undiagnosed and not treated expeditiously. The
PML-RARA fusion protein arrests maturation of myeloid cells at the promyelocytic 
stage, leading to the accumulation of neoplastic promyelocytes. Complete
remission can be obtained by treatment with all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) in
combination with chemotherapy. Diagnosis of APL is based on the detection of
t(15;17) by karyotyping, fluorescence in situ hybridization or PCR. These
techniques are laborious and demand specialized laboratories. We developed a fast
(performed within 4-5 h) and sensitive (detection of at least 10% malignant cells
in normal background) flow cytometric immunobead assay for the detection of
PML-RARA fusion proteins in cell lysates using a bead-bound anti-RARA capture
antibody and a phycoerythrin-conjugated anti-PML detection antibody. Testing of
163 newly diagnosed patients (including 46 APL cases) with the PML-RARA
immunobead assay showed full concordance with the PML-RARA PCR results. As the
applied antibodies recognize outer domains of the fusion protein, the assay
appeared to work independently of the PML gene break point region. Importantly,
the assay can be used in parallel with routine immunophenotyping for fast and
easy diagnosis of APL.

PMCID: PMC3437408
PMID: 22948489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Blood. 2012 Oct 11;120(15):2963-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-03-419622. Epub 2012 
Aug 20.

A novel hierarchical prognostic model of AML solely based on molecular mutations.

Grossmann V(1), Schnittger S, Kohlmann A, Eder C, Roller A, Dicker F, Schmid C,
Wendtner CM, Staib P, Serve H, Kreuzer KA, Kern W, Haferlach T, Haferlach C.

Author information: 
(1)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany.

The karyotype is so far the most important prognostic parameter in acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML). Molecular mutations have been analyzed to subdivide AML with
normal karyotype into prognostic subsets. The aim of this study was to develop a 
prognostic model for the entire AML cohort solely based on molecular markers. One
thousand patients with cytogenetic data were investigated for the following
molecular alterations: PML-RARA, RUNX1-RUNX1T1, CBFB-MYH11, FLT3-ITD, and
MLL-PTD, as well as mutations in NPM1, CEPBA, RUNX1, ASXL1, and TP53. Clinical
data were available in 841 patients. Based on Cox regression and Kaplan-Meier
analyses, 5 distinct prognostic subgroups were identified: (1) very favorable:
PML-RARA rearrangement (n = 29) or CEPBA double mutations (n = 42; overall
survival [OS] at 3 years: 82.9%); (2) favorable: RUNX1-RUNX1T1 (n = 35),
CBFB-MYH11 (n = 31), or NPM1 mutation without FLT3-ITD (n = 186; OS at 3 years:
62.6%); (3) intermediate: none of the mutations leading to assignment into groups
1, 2, 4, or 5 (n = 235; OS at 3 years: 44.2%); (4) unfavorable: MLL-PTD and/or
RUNX1 mutation and/or ASXL1 mutation (n = 203; OS at 3 years: 21.9%); and (5)
very unfavorable: TP53 mutation (n = 80; OS at 3 years: 0%; P < .001). This
comprehensive molecular characterization provides a more powerful model for
prognostication than cytogenetics.

PMID: 22915647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Am J Hematol. 2013 Mar;88(3):236. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23320. Epub 2012 Aug 22.

Observation of Auer rods in crushed cells helps in the diagnosis of acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Osman Ahmed S(1), Deplano S, May PC, Bain BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, St Mary's
Hospital, Praed Street, London, W2 1NY. b.bain@ic.ac.uk

PMID: 22911923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(5):1809-17.

Retinoid receptors in gastric cancer: expression and influence on prognosis.

Hu KW(1), Chen FH, Ge JF, Cao LY, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, the First Hospital of Anhui Medical University,
School of Pharmacology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China.

BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer is frequently lethal despite aggressive multimodal
therapies, and new treatment approaches are therefore needed. Retinoids are
potential candidate drugs: they prevent cell differentiation, proliferation and
malignant transformation in gastric cancer cell lines. They interact with nuclear
retinoid receptors (the retinoic acid receptors [RARs] and retinoid X receptors
[RXRs]), which function as transcription factors, each with three subclasses, a, 
ß and <U+03B3>. At present, little is known about retinoid expression and influence on
prognosis in gastric cancers.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the expression of the subtypes 
RARa, RARß, RAR<U+03B3>, RXRa, RXRß, RXR<U+03B3> by immunohistochemistry in 147 gastric cancers
and 51 normal gastric epithelium tissues for whom clinical follow-up data were
available and correlated the results with clinical characteristics. In addition, 
we quantified the expression of retinoid receptor mRNA using real- time PCR
(RT-PCR) in another 6 gastric adenocarcinoma and 3 normal gastric tissues. From
2008 to 2010, 80 patients with gastric cancers were enrolled onto therapy with
all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA).
RESULTS: RARa, RARß, RAR<U+03B3> and RXR<U+03B3> positively correlated with each other
(p<0.001) and demonstrated significantly lower levels in the carcinoma tissue
sections (p<0.01), with lower RARß, RAR<U+03B3> and RXRa expression significantly
related to advanced stages (p<=0.01). Tumors with poor histopathologic grade had 
lower levels of RARa and RARß in different histological types of gastric
carcinoma (p<0.01). Patients whose tumors exhibited low levels of RARa expression
had significantly lower overall survival compared with patients who had higher
expression levels of this receptor (p<0.001, HR=0.42, 95.0% CI 0.24-0.73), and
patients undergoing ATRA treatment had significantly longer median survival times
(p=0.007, HR=0.41, 95.0% CI 0.21-0.80).
CONCLUSIONS: Retinoic acid receptors are frequently expressed in epithelial
gastric cancer with a decreased tendency of expression and RARa may be an
indicator of a positive prognosis. This study provides a molecular basis for the 
therapeutic use of retinoids against gastric cancer.

PMID: 22901127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Case Rep Med. 2012;2012:236174. doi: 10.1155/2012/236174. Epub 2012 Jul 17.

Disseminated exfoliative dermatitis associated with all-transretinoic Acid in the
treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Ipek Y(1), Hulya D, Melih A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Istanbul Medical
Faculty, Istanbul University, 34093 Istanbul, Turkey.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a biologically and clinically separate type
of acute myeloid leukemia characterized by a translocation involving the retinoic
acid receptor-alpha (RARa) locus on chromosome 17, the great majority of which is
t(15; 17)(q24.1; q21.1) (Collins (1998), Melnick and Licht (1999), and Grimwade
(1999)). Retinoic acid is a critical ligand in the differentiation pathway of
multiple tissues, mediated through binding to an RAR. All-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA) is a subgroup of the retinoid family, which induces complete remission
(CR) in APL by causing differentiation and apoptosis in immature malignant
promyelocytes rather than inducing cell death by cytotoxicity (Warrell et al.
(1993), Liu et al. (2000), and Cassinat et al. (2001)). ATRA-associated toxicity 
consisting of headache, fever, weakness, fatigue, dry skin, dermatitis,
gastrointestinal disorders, and hypertriglyceridemia has been shown to be mild
(Kurzrock et al. (1993)). Herein, we describe a patient with APL that developed
an erythematous reaction of the whole body followed by desquamation and
exfoliation during ATRA therapy.

PMCID: PMC3405663
PMID: 22848226  [PubMed]


245. Oncol Lett. 2012 Aug;4(2):237-240. Epub 2012 May 9.

The importance of molecular cytogenetic analysis prior to using cell lines in
research: The case of the KG-1a leukemia cell line.

Pelliccia F(1), Ubertini V, Bosco N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology, Sapienza University, I-00185 Rome,
Italy.

KG-1 and its less differentiated subline KG-1a are leukemia cell lines used in
research in a number of laboratories. The karyotypes of the two lines were
initially identical. In the following years, further analysis revealed that the
cell lines had acquired additional karyotypical abnormalities and differed in the
presence of certain typical chromosomal rearrangements. To obtain cytogenetic
authentication prior to the use of the two cell lines, we analyzed their
karyotype by combining DAPI- and CMA-chromosome bandings and a fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH)-based approach by using BAC clones useful for the
identification of chromosome regions of interest. Sequences of the MYC, PLZF,
RARA and BCR genes, that are known to play a critical role in leukemogenesis, and
certain BAC clones mapped to five known common fragile sites (CFS) were used for 
the FISH analysis. A telomeric probe (TTAGGG)n and a set of BAC clones were used 
to characterize the marker chromosome der(1) that was observed in the cell line
KG-1a. The existence of notable differences between the karyotype of the KG-1a
cell line previously described, and that described in this study, demonstrate
that the use of established cancer cell lines should be preceded by cytogenetic
and/or molecular characterization.

PMCID: PMC3402744
PMID: 22844360  [PubMed]


246. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2012 Sep;23(6):573-81. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-3038.2012.01332.x. Epub 2012 Jul 26.

Measurement of Ara h 1-, 2-, and 3-specific IgE antibodies is useful in diagnosis
of peanut allergy in Japanese children.

Ebisawa M(1), Movérare R, Sato S, Maruyama N, Borres MP, Komata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy, Clinical Research Center for Allergology and
Rheumatology, Sagamihara National Hospital, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan.
m-ebisawa@sagamihara-hosp.gr.jp

BACKGROUND: Food challenges are time-consuming, expensive, and not always
possible to perform. Therefore, new tools to diagnose food allergy are desired.
The aim was to evaluate IgE antibodies to peanut allergens in the diagnosis of
peanut allergy in Japanese children using ImmunoCAP(®) and IgE immunoblotting.
METHODS: The study included 2-13-yr-old consecutive patients (n = 57) referred to
our specialist clinic for investigation of current peanut allergy using food
challenge. All children had a previous doctor's diagnosis of peanut allergy and
were on elimination diet. Serum samples were analyzed for IgE reactivity to
peanut, recombinant (r) Ara h 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, and 9. IgE immunoblotting (n = 23)
was performed using extracts from raw and roasted peanut.
RESULTS: Twenty-six of the children failed (allergic group), and 31 passed the
peanut challenge (tolerant group). The rAra h 2 ImmunoCAP test was superior in
its ability to differentiate between children in the allergic and tolerant groups
with a sensitivity and specificity of 88% and 84%, respectively (cutoff, 0.35
kU(A)/l). The combination of rAra h 1, 2, and 3 resulted in a higher specificity 
(94%) when IgE to all of them was the criteria for positivity. ImmunoCAP
generally showed a good agreement with immunoblotting using both raw and roasted 
peanut for IgE reactivity to Ara h 1, 2, and 3.
CONCLUSIONS: Measurement of IgE antibodies to rAra h 1, 2, and 3 is useful in the
diagnosis of peanut allergy and in the investigation of reactions to raw and
roasted peanut.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22831547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Front Oncol. 2012 Jul 17;2:74. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2012.00074. eCollection 2012.

The promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger protein: two decades of molecular
oncology.

Suliman BA(1), Xu D, Williams BR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research, Monash Institute of Medical Research, Monash
University Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

The promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger (PLZF) protein, also known as Zbtb16 or
Zfp145, was first identified in a patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia,
where a reciprocal chromosomal translocation t(11;17)(q23;q21) resulted in a
fusion with the RARA gene encoding retinoic acid receptor alpha. The wild-type
Zbtb16 gene encodes a transcription factor that belongs to the POK (POZ and
Krüppel) family of transcriptional repressors. In addition to nine Krüppel-type
sequence-specific zinc fingers, which make it a member of the Krüppel-like zinc
finger protein family, the PLZF protein contains an N-terminal BTB/POZ domain and
RD2 domain. PLZF has been shown to be involved in major developmental and
biological processes, such as spermatogenesis, hind limb formation,
hematopoiesis, and immune regulation. PLZF is localized mainly in the nucleus
where it exerts its transcriptional repression function, and many
post-translational modifications affect this ability and also have an impact on
its cytoplasmic/nuclear dissociation. PLZF achieves its transcriptional
regulation by binding to many secondary molecules to form large multi-protein
complexes that bind to the regulatory elements in the promoter region of the
target genes. These complexes are also capable of physically interacting with its
target proteins. Recently, PLZF has become implicated in carcinogenesis as a
tumor suppressor gene, since it regulates the cell cycle and apoptosis in many
cell types. This review will examine the major advances in our knowledge of PLZF 
biological activities that augment its value as a therapeutic target,
particularly in cancer and immunological diseases.

PMCID: PMC3398472
PMID: 22822476  [PubMed]


248. Cell. 2012 Jul 20;150(2):264-78. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.023.

The origin and evolution of mutations in acute myeloid leukemia.

Welch JS(1), Ley TJ, Link DC, Miller CA, Larson DE, Koboldt DC, Wartman LD,
Lamprecht TL, Liu F, Xia J, Kandoth C, Fulton RS, McLellan MD, Dooling DJ, Wallis
JW, Chen K, Harris CC, Schmidt HK, Kalicki-Veizer JM, Lu C, Zhang Q, Lin L,
O'Laughlin MD, McMichael JF, Delehaunty KD, Fulton LA, Magrini VJ, McGrath SD,
Demeter RT, Vickery TL, Hundal J, Cook LL, Swift GW, Reed JP, Alldredge PA, Wylie
TN, Walker JR, Watson MA, Heath SE, Shannon WD, Varghese N, Nagarajan R, Payton
JE, Baty JD, Kulkarni S, Klco JM, Tomasson MH, Westervelt P, Walter MJ, Graubert 
TA, DiPersio JF, Ding L, Mardis ER, Wilson RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Most mutations in cancer genomes are thought to be acquired after the initiating 
event, which may cause genomic instability and drive clonal evolution. However,
for acute myeloid leukemia (AML), normal karyotypes are common, and genomic
instability is unusual. To better understand clonal evolution in AML, we
sequenced the genomes of M3-AML samples with a known initiating event (PML-RARA) 
versus the genomes of normal karyotype M1-AML samples and the exomes of
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) from healthy people. Collectively,
the data suggest that most of the mutations found in AML genomes are actually
random events that occurred in HSPCs before they acquired the initiating
mutation; the mutational history of that cell is "captured" as the clone expands.
In many cases, only one or two additional, cooperating mutations are needed to
generate the malignant founding clone. Cells from the founding clone can acquire 
additional cooperating mutations, yielding subclones that can contribute to
disease progression and/or relapse.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3407563
PMID: 22817890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2012;4(1):e2012042. doi: 10.4084/MJHID.2012.042.
Epub 2012 Jun 20.

Incidence of Common Fusion Transcripts in Adult and Pediatric Acute Myeloid
Leukemia (AML) Cases: Experience of a Tertiary Care Research institute.

Bhatia P(1), Binota J, Varma N, Marwaha R, Malhotra P, Varma S.

Author information: 
(1)Assistant Professor- Pediatrics, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education 
and Research, Chandigarh.

INTRODUCTION: The incidence of common fusion transcripts in AML is 40-45%, but
data from Indian sub-continent is limited. AIMS #ENTITYSTARTX00026;
OBJECTIVES: The aim of the present study is to note the incidence of common
fusion transcripts of AML1-ETO, PML-RARA and CBFß-MYH11 in adult and pediatric
AML cases. MATERIALS #ENTITYSTARTX00026;
METHODS: A total of 116 AML cases diagnosed on bone marrow, cytochemistry and
Flow-cytometry over a period of 2 year were enrolled and bone marrow samples in
EDTA were processed by multiplex RT-PCR assay.
RESULTS: Of 116 cases, 96 (83%) were adult and 20 (17%) pediatric cases. A total 
of 39/116 (33.6%) cases showed positivity for fusion transcripts of which 28/96
(29.16%) were adult and 11/20 (55%) pediatric cases. Of the 28 positive adult
cases, 14/96 (14.58%) were positive for AML1-ETO, 12/96 (12.5%) for PML-RARA and 
2/96 (2.08%) for CBFß-MYH11. In the 11 positive pediatric cases, 6/20 (30%) were 
positive for AML1-ETO, 3/20 (15%) for PML-RARA and 2/20 (10%) for CBFß-MYH11.
DISCUSSION #ENTITYSTARTX00026;
CONCLUSION: The incidence of the common fusion transcripts in our pilot study is 
in accordance with that described in western studies. It is important to identify
these transcripts as they provide useful prognostic information to the treating
clinician.

PMCID: PMC3395706
PMID: 22811791  [PubMed]


250. J Cell Biol. 2012 Jul 9;198(1):11-21. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201112044.

The cell biology of disease: Acute promyelocytic leukemia, arsenic, and PML
bodies.

de Thé H(1), Le Bras M, Lallemand-Breitenbach V.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité Mixte de
Recherche 944, Equipe labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, 2
University Paris-Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
hugues.dethe@inserm.fr

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is driven by a chromosomal translocation whose
product, the PML/retinoic acid (RA) receptor a (RARA) fusion protein, affects
both nuclear receptor signaling and PML body assembly. Dissection of APL
pathogenesis has led to the rediscovery of PML bodies and revealed their role in 
cell senescence, disease pathogenesis, and responsiveness to treatment. APL is
remarkable because of the fortuitous identification of two clinically effective
therapies, RA and arsenic, both of which degrade PML/RARA oncoprotein and,
together, cure APL. Analysis of arsenic-induced PML or PML/RARA degradation has
implicated oxidative stress in the biogenesis of nuclear bodies and SUMO in their
degradation.

PMCID: PMC3392943
PMID: 22778276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Cancer Genet. 2012 Jun;205(6):327-31. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.02.007.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia with a STAT5b-RARa fusion transcript defined by
array-CGH, FISH, and RT-PCR.

Chen H(1), Pan J, Yao L, Wu L, Zhu J, Wang W, Liu C, Han Q, Du G, Cen J, Xue Y,
Wu D, Sun M, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Jingjiang People's Hospital, the Seventh Affiliated Hospital of Yangzhou
University, Jiangsu Province, PR China.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by the generation of the
PML-RARa fusion transcript as a result of a reciprocal chromosomal rearrangement,
t(15;17)(q22;q12), with breakpoints within the PML gene and the RARa gene. In a
small proportion of APL cases, RARa is fused with a number of alternative partner
genes. The signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 beta (STAT5b) is
one of the variant partners. Here, we describe one rare case with all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA) -unresponsive APL characterized by the STAT5b-RARa fusion
transcript. Morphology and immunophenotypic analyses indicated the typical
features of APL; however, cytogenetic analysis exhibited a normal karyotype, and 
importantly, results of interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) or
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis indicated that 
PML-RARa expression was negative. FISH analysis with the RARa dual-color
break-apart rearrangement probe indicated a submicroscopic deletion of the 3' end
of one RARA gene. Indeed, the STAT5b-RARa fusion transcript was found in this
case by array-based comparative genomic hybridization and nested RT-PCR. To the
best of our knowledge, we report here only the sixth APL patient in the world
with the STAT5b-RARa fusion transcript. Additional clinical studies concerning
the prognosis, response to therapy, and pathogenesis of APL patients with
STAT5b-RARa fusion are necessary.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22749039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2012 Jun;56(6):986-95. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201100827.

Expression of recombinant Ara h 6 in Pichia pastoris but not in Escherichia coli 
preserves allergic effector function and allows assessment of specific mutations.

Zhuang Y(1), Durrani S, Hodges BD, Dreskin SC, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology,
University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

SCOPE: Ara h 6 has recently been recognized as an important peanut allergen.
Recombinant allergens have been used for analysis of IgE binding, but have not
been used to analyze the allergic effector activity that is more relevant to
allergic reactions.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Ara h 6 was expressed as a recombinant protein in both
Escherichia coli and Pichia pastoris (rAra h 6-E. coli and rAra h 6-Pichia,
respectively). Effector activity was assayed by measuring degranulation of RBL
SX-38 cells sensitized with IgE from patients with severe peanut allergy.
Compared to native Ara h 6 (nAra h 6), rAra h 6-Pichia had intact effector
function whereas rAra h 6-E. coli had significantly reduced function. The lower
effector activity in rAra h 6-E. coli compared to nAra h 6 and rAra h 6-Pichia
did not appear to be due to differences in posttranslational modifications
(analyzed by mass spectrometry and staining for carbohydrates) and may be due to 
subtle alteration(s) of folding seen on CD analysis and on nonreduced gels.
Finally, we introduced point mutations in four important IgE-binding linear
epitopes of Ara h 6 and found dramatically reduced allergic effector activity.
CONCLUSION: Our studies demonstrate the utility of fully functional rAra h
6-Pichia as a starting point for analysis of specific mutations that adversely
affect allergic effector function.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22707273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e31984. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031984. Epub 2012 May 31.

Dynamic network of transcription and pathway crosstalk to reveal molecular
mechanism of MGd-treated human lung cancer cells.

Shao L(1), Wang L, Wei Z, Xiong Y, Wang Y, Tang K, Li Y, Feng G, Xing Q, He L.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China.

Recent research has revealed various molecular markers in lung cancer. However,
the organizational principles underlying their genetic regulatory networks still 
await investigation. Here we performed Network Component Analysis (NCA) and
Pathway Crosstalk Analysis (PCA) to construct a regulatory network in human lung 
cancer (A549) cells which were treated with 50 uM motexafin gadolinium (MGd), a
metal cation-containing chemotherapeutic drug for 4, 12, and 24 hours. We
identified a set of key TFs, known target genes for these TFs, and signaling
pathways involved in regulatory networks. Our work showed that putative
interactions between these TFs (such as ESR1/Sp1, E2F1/Sp1, c-MYC-ESR,
Smad3/c-Myc, and NFKB1/RELA), between TFs and their target genes (such as
BMP41/Est1, TSC2/Myc, APE1/Sp1/p53, RARA/HOXA1, and SP1/USF2), and between
signaling pathways (such as PPAR signaling pathway and Adipocytokines signaling
pathway). These results will provide insights into the regulatory mechanism of
MGd-treated human lung cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3365074
PMID: 22693540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Blood. 2012 Jul 26;120(4):847-57. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-388496. Epub 2012
Jun 12.

The arsenic-based cure of acute promyelocytic leukemia promotes cytoplasmic
sequestration of PML and PML/RARA through inhibition of PML body recycling.

Lång E(1), Grudic A, Pankiv S, Bruserud O, Simonsen A, Bjerkvig R, Bjørås M, Bøe 
SO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and Centre of
Molecular Biology and Neuroscience, Oslo University Hospital and University of
Oslo, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway.

Arsenic in the form of arsenic trioxide (ATO) is used as a therapeutic drug for
treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). The mechanism by which this
agent cures this disease was previously shown to involve direct interactions
between ATO and the promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML), as well as accelerated 
degradation of the APL-associated fusion oncoprotein PML/retinoic acid receptor a
(RARA). Here we investigated the fate of PML-generated nuclear structures called 
PML bodies in ATO-treated cells. We found that ATO inhibits formation of progeny 
PML bodies while it stabilizes cytoplasmic precursor compartments, referred to as
cytoplasmic assemblies of PML and nucleoporins (CyPNs), after cell division. This
block in PML body recycling is readily detected at pharmacologic relevant ATO
concentrations (0.02-0.5µM) that do not cause detectable cell-cycle defects, and 
it does not require modification of PML by SUMOylation. In addition, PML and
PML/RARA carrying mutations previously identified in ATO-resistant APL patients
are impeded in their ability to become sequestered within CyPNs. Thus, ATO may
inhibit nuclear activities of PML and PML/RARA in postmitotic cells through
CyPN-dependent cytoplasmic sequestration.

PMID: 22692509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Haematologica. 2012 Nov;97(11):1731-5. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.065714. Epub
2012 Jun 11.

Allogeneic stem cell transplantation for advanced acute promyelocytic leukemia in
the ATRA and ATO era.

Ramadan SM(1), Di Veroli A, Camboni A, Breccia M, Iori AP, Aversa F, Cupelli L,
Papayannidis C, Bacigalupo A, Arcese W, Lo-Coco F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopathology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Italy.
safaanci@yahoo.com

The role of allogeneic stem cell transplant in advanced acute promyelocytic
leukemia patients who received standard first- and second-line therapy is still
unknown. We report the outcome of 31 acute promyelocytic leukemia patients
(median age 39 years) who underwent allogeneic transplant in second remission
(n=15) or beyond (n=16). Sixteen patients were real-time polymerase chain
reaction positive and 15 negative for PML/RARA pre-transplant. The 4-year overall
survival was 62% and 31% for patients transplanted in second remission and
beyond, respectively (P=0.05), and 64% and 27% for patients with pre-transplant
negative and positive real-time polymerase chain reaction, respectively (P=0.03).
The 4-year cumulative incidence of relapse was 32% and 44% for patients
transplanted in second remission and beyond, respectively (P=0.37), and 30% and
47% for patients transplanted with negative and positive real-time polymerase
chain reaction, respectively (P=0.30). Transplant-related mortality was 19.6%. In
conclusion, allogeneic transplant is effective in advanced acute promyelocytic
leukemia in the all-trans-retinoic acid and arsenic trioxide era, and should be
considered once relapse is diagnosed.

PMCID: PMC3487448
PMID: 22689684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Toxicol Sci. 2012;37(3):663-6.

Effect of dental amalgam on gene expression profiles in rat cerebrum, cerebellum,
liver and kidney.

Takahashi Y(1), Tsuruta S, Honda A, Fujiwara Y, Satoh M, Yasutake A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental Material Science, School of Dentistry, Aichi Gakuin
University, Aichi, Japan. yoshi@dpc.agu.ac.jp

Dental amalgam is a source of exposure to elemental mercury vapor in the general 
population. The aim of this study was to elucidate the effect of elemental
mercury vapor exposure from dental amalgam restorations on gene expression
profiles. Out of 26,962 rat genes, mercury vapor was found to increase the
expression of 1 gene (Atp1b3) and decrease the expression of 1 gene (Tap1) in the
cerebrum, increase the expression of 1 gene (Dnaja2) in the cerebellum, increase 
the expression of 2 genes (Actb and Timm23) and decrease the expression of 1 gene
(Spink3) in the liver, increase the expression of 2 genes (RT1-Bb and Mgat5) and 
decrease the expression of 6 genes (Tnfaip8, Rara, Slc2a4, Wdr12, Pias4 and
Timm13) in the kidney.

PMID: 22688007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012 Aug;56(8):4466-7. doi: 10.1128/AAC.06224-11.
Epub 2012 May 29.

Tigecycline resistance can occur independently of the ramA gene in Klebsiella
pneumoniae.

Veleba M(1), Schneiders T.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infection and Immunity, Queen's University Belfast, Medical Biology
Centre, Belfast, United Kingdom.

Tigecycline resistance in Klebsiella pneumoniae results from ramA upregulation
that causes the overexpression of the efflux pump, AcrAB-TolC. Tigecycline
mutants, derived from Ecl8<U+0394>ramA, can exhibit a multidrug resistance phenotype due
to increased transcription of the marA, rarA, acrAB, and oqxAB genes. These
findings support the idea that tigecycline or multidrug resistance in K.
pneumoniae, first, is not solely dependent on the ramA gene, and second, can
arise via alternative regulatory pathways in K. pneumoniae.

PMCID: PMC3421586
PMID: 22644034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012 Aug;56(8):4450-8. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00456-12.
Epub 2012 May 29.

Characterization of RarA, a novel AraC family multidrug resistance regulator in
Klebsiella pneumoniae.

Veleba M(1), Higgins PG, Gonzalez G, Seifert H, Schneiders T.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infection and Immunity, Queen's University Belfast, Medical Biology
Centre, Belfast, United Kingdom.

Transcriptional regulators, such as SoxS, RamA, MarA, and Rob, which upregulate
the AcrAB efflux pump, have been shown to be associated with multidrug resistance
in clinically relevant Gram-negative bacteria. In addition to the multidrug
resistance phenotype, these regulators have also been shown to play a role in the
cellular metabolism and possibly the virulence potential of microbial cells. As
such, the increased expression of these proteins is likely to cause pleiotropic
phenotypes. Klebsiella pneumoniae is a major nosocomial pathogen which can
express the SoxS, MarA, Rob, and RamA proteins, and the accompanying paper shows 
that the increased transcription of ramA is associated with tigecycline
resistance (M. Veleba and T. Schneiders, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
56:4466-4467, 2012). Bioinformatic analyses of the available Klebsiella genome
sequences show that an additional AraC-type regulator is encoded chromosomally.
In this work, we characterize this novel AraC-type regulator, hereby called RarA 
(Regulator of antibiotic resistance A), which is encoded in K. pneumoniae,
Enterobacter sp. 638, Serratia proteamaculans 568, and Enterobacter cloacae. We
show that the overexpression of rarA results in a multidrug resistance phenotype 
which requires a functional AcrAB efflux pump but is independent of the other
AraC regulators. Quantitative real-time PCR experiments show that rarA (MGH 78578
KPN_02968) and its neighboring efflux pump operon oqxAB (KPN_02969_02970) are
consistently upregulated in clinical isolates collected from various geographical
locations (Chile, Turkey, and Germany). Our results suggest that rarA
overexpression upregulates the oqxAB efflux pump. Additionally, it appears that
oqxR, encoding a GntR-type regulator adjacent to the oqxAB operon, is able to
downregulate the expression of the oqxAB efflux pump, where OqxR complementation 
resulted in reductions to olaquindox MICs.

PMCID: PMC3421627
PMID: 22644028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Microsc Res Tech. 2012 Aug;75(8):1147-9. doi: 10.1002/jemt.22069. Epub 2012 May
17.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization of three oncogenes on a leiomyoma.

Faruqi SA(1), Saquib M, Harsch C, Noumoff JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Crozer-Chester Medical Center, Upland, Pennsylvania 19013 USA.
shamim@zebraglobal.net

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization technique, expression of three
oncogenes, C-myc, RARa, and cyclin-D was tested on a uterine leiomyoma. C-myc and
RARa were amplified in approximately 30% and 90% of the cells, respectively.
Numerous small signals of C-myc were indicative of the presence of double
minutes. Amplification of RARa is being reported for the first time in a
leiomyoma. Cyclin-D was normal in diploid cells while it was highly amplified in 
polyploid cells. Low levels of amplified C-myc and cyclin-D cells seem to be the 
reason for this tumor to be benign, while RARa could not be effective without the
association of some other gene such as PML. Information presented here are
significant toward developing new curative strategies such as gene-specific drugs
and molecular manipulation to stop the activity of cancer gene. Further study may
elucidate that how fibroids grow and maintain their rare benign nature.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22593003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Cancer Discov. 2011 Jul;1(2):117-27. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0087.

The drug-induced degradation of oncoproteins: an unexpected Achilles' heel of
cancer cells?

Ablain J(1), Nasr R, Bazarbachi A, de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, UMR 944/7212, Paris, France.

Many targeted therapies against cancer are aimed at inhibiting the enzymatic
activity of kinases. Thus far, this approach has undoubtedly yielded significant 
clinical improvements, but has only rarely achieved cures. Other drugs, which
selectively elicit proteasome-dependent degradation of oncoproteins, induce the
loss of cancer cell self-renewal and promote cell differentiation and/or
apoptosis. In acute promyelocytic leukemia, the cooperative degradation of
PML/RARA by arsenic and retinoic acid cures most patients. In this condition and 
others, drug-induced proteolysis of oncoproteins is feasible and underlies
improved clinical outcome. Several transcription factors, nuclear receptors, or
fusion proteins driving cancer growth could be candidates for proteolysis-based
drug-discovery programs.

PMID: 22586354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012 Nov;59(5):959-60. doi: 10.1002/pbc.24199. Epub 2012
May 9.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia following aleukemic leukemia cutis harboring
NPM/RARA fusion gene.

Otsubo K, Horie S, Nomura K, Miyawaki T, Abe A, Kanegane H.

PMID: 22573339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Iran Biomed J. 2012;16(1):10-7.

Cytogenetic and FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 mutation analyses in acute
promyelocytic leukemia patients.

Yaghmaie M(1), Alimoghaddam K, Mozdarani H, Ghavamzadeh A, Hajhashemi M, Aznab M,
Ghaffari SH.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modarres
University, P. O. Box 14115-111, Tehran.

BACKGROUND: The secondary genetic changes other than the promyelocytic
leukemia-retinoic acid receptor (PML-RARA) fusion gene may contribute to the
acute promyelocytic leukemogenesis. Chromosomal alterations and mutation of FLT3 
(FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3) tyrosine kinase receptor are the frequent genetic
alterations in acute myeloid leukemia. However, the prognostic significance of
FLT3 mutations in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is not firmly established.
METHODS: In this study, the chromosomal abnormalities were analyzed by bone
marrow cytogenetic in 45 APL patients and FLT3 internal tandem duplications (ITD)
screening by fragment length analysis and FLT3 D835 mutation by melting curve
analysis were screened in 23 APL samples.
RESULTS: Cytogenetic study showed 14.3% trisomy 8 and 17.1% chromosomal
abnormalities other than t(15;17). About 13% of the patients had FLT3 ITD, and
26% had D835 point mutation. FLT3 ITD mutation was associated with higher white
blood cell count at presentation and poor prognosis.
CONCLUSION: The PML-RARA translocation alone may not be sufficient to induce
leukemia. Therefore, we assume that FLT3 mutations and the other genetic and
chromosomal alterations may cooperate with PML-RARA in the development of APL
disease.

PMCID: PMC3614257
PMID: 22562027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Oncol Rep. 2012 Jul;28(1):365-9. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1780. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Expression levels of HER2/neu and those of collocated genes at 17q12-21, in
breast cancer.

Glynn RW(1), Miller N, Mahon S, Kerin MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Clinical Science Institute, National University of
Ireland, Galway, Ireland.

HER2/neu is associated with poorer clinical outcome in breast cancer. Expression 
patterns of co-localised cancer-associated genes at 17q12-21 were examined using 
RT-PCR. The study group consisted of a 96-patient cohort. Relative quantity of
mRNA expression was calculated using the comparative cycle threshold method and
Qbase software. Results were analysed to detect expression patterns among the
genes, and to identify associations between expression levels and clinical data. 
Levels of HER2/neu correlated with those of GRB7 (r=0.551, p<0.001), RARA
(r=0.391, p<0.001), RPL19 (r=0.549, p<0.001) and LASP1 (r=0.399, p<0.001). GRB7
was significantly inversely associated with improved DFS at 60 months (p=0.036). 
RARA levels were greater in HER2/neu-positive as opposed to HER2/neu-negative
patients (p=0.021); levels were significantly higher in ER-positive patients,
relative to those who were ER-negative (p=0.003). Levels of RPL19 were
significantly higher in the HER2/neu-overexpressing (p=0.010) and luminal B
subtypes (p=0.007). LASP1 levels were higher in those patients who had been
classified clinically as HER2/neu-positive (p=0.004). This study reaffirms the
correlation between HER2/neu and the co-localised LASP1 and GRB7; the latter
target may hold additional significance in addition to being a surrogate marker
for HER2/neu expression. The relationship identified between RARA and
ER-positivity may herald an avenue for targeted therapy of these tumours.

PMID: 22552811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Pol J Pathol. 2012 Mar;63(1):8-17.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia: four distinct patterns by flow cytometry
immunophenotyping.

Gorczyca W(1).

Author information: 
(1)CSI Laboratories, Alpharetta, GA 30004, USA. wgorczyca@csilaboratories.com

A total of 97 acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patients with adequate flow
cytometry (FC) data, bone marrow aspirates and presence of t(15;17)/PML-RARA by
cytogenetics and/or FISH studies were analyzed for immunophenotypic pattern.
Leukemic cells had the following phenotype: CD11b-, CD11c-, CD13+, CD33+, CD45+, 
CD64+/-, CD117+, and HLA-DR-. A subset of cases showed also an expression of CD2,
CD4, CD34, and CD56. Based on the immunophenotype and side scatter properties
(SSC), four FC patterns were recognized. The majority of cases represented
classical (hypergranular) APL and were characterized by high SSC, positive CD117,
lack of CD34, heterogeneous CD13, and bright CD33 (pattern 1). Second most common
type, corresponding to the hypogranular (microgranular) variant of APL differed
from classical APL by low SSC and frequent co-expression of CD2 and CD34 (pattern
2). Rare cases of APL (pattern 3) showed a mixture of neoplastic cells (low
SSC/CD2+/CD13+/CD33+/CD34+/CD117+) and prominent population of benign
granulocytes/maturing myeloid precursors (high SSC/CD10+/-/CD16+/-/ CD117-). One 
case showed two APL populations, one with hypogranular and one with hypergranular
characteristics (pattern 4). Apart from a well-known FC pattern of hypergranular 
APL, we presented less common immunophenotypic variants of APL, which helps to
identify an additional group of patients who would benefit from fast confirmatory
FISH and/or PCR testing for t(15;17)/PML-RARA.

PMID: 22535601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Blood. 2012 May 24;119(21):4963-70. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-09-378117. Epub 2012 
Apr 12.

PU.1 is linking the glycolytic enzyme HK3 in neutrophil differentiation and
survival of APL cells.

Federzoni EA(1), Valk PJ, Torbett BE, Haferlach T, Löwenberg B, Fey MF, Tschan
MP.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Oncology/Hematology, Department of Clinical Research, University 
of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

The transcription factor PU.1 is a master regulator of myeloid differentiation
and function. On the other hand, only scarce information is available on
PU.1-regulated genes involved in cell survival. We now identified the glycolytic 
enzyme hexokinase 3 (HK3), a gene with cytoprotective functions, as
transcriptional target of PU.1. Interestingly, HK3 expression is highly
associated with the myeloid lineage and was significantly decreased in acute
myeloid leukemia patients compared with normal granulocytes. Moreover, HK3
expression was significantly lower in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) compared
with non-APL patient samples. In line with the observations in primary APL
patient samples, we observed significantly higher HK3 expression during
neutrophil differentiation of APL cell lines. Moreover, knocking down PU.1
impaired HK3 induction during neutrophil differentiation. In vivo binding of PU.1
and PML-RARA to the HK3 promoter was found, and PML-RARA attenuated PU.1
activation of the HK3 promoter. Next, inhibiting HK3 in APL cell lines resulted
in significantly reduced neutrophil differentiation and viability compared with
control cells. Our findings strongly suggest that HK3 is: (1) directly activated 
by PU.1, (2) repressed by PML-RARA, and (3) functionally involved in neutrophil
differentiation and cell viability of APL cells.

PMCID: PMC3367898
PMID: 22498738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Eur J Haematol. 2012 Jul;89(1):53-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2012.01785.x. Epub
2012 May 9.

Patient-specific analysis of FLT3 internal tandem duplications for the
prognostication and monitoring of acute myeloid leukemia.

Schiller J(1), Praulich I, Krings Rocha C, Kreuzer KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department I of Internal Medicine, University at Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: Internal tandem duplications (ITDs) of the fms-like tyrosine kinase 3
( FLT3) gene occur in 13-35% of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
FLT3-ITD is associated with poor clinical outcome and is an indication for
allogeneic stem cell transplantation (allo-SCT).
METHODS: To investigate FLT3-ITD length, position, and mutational load in AML
cases, we developed patient-specific quantitative real-time reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) assays and correlated the results with
established sensitive minimal residual disease (MRD) parameters and clinical
outcome.
RESULTS: In 409 patients with AML, FLT3-ITDs could be detected in 54 cases (13%).
Within our cohort, patients with FLT3-ITD = 45 base pairs had significantly
higher relapse rates (P = 0.03) and a worse overall survival (P = 0.03). Our
method could be applied to 97% of FLT3-ITD-positive patients and was as sensitive
as other MRD parameters such as PML-RARA , NPM1 mutations, or MLL -PTD
(correlation: r = 0.63; 0.99, and 0.99, respectively). MRD negativity predicted
lasting remission independent of allo-SCT (N = 7) or non-allo-SCT (N = 9). All
paired diagnostic/relapsed samples showed FLT3-ITD positivity. Compared with bone
marrow samples, FLT3-ITD analyses appeared to be equivalently sensitive in
peripheral blood.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that individualized monitoring of FLT3-ITD in patients
with AML may guide treatment decisions and should be evaluated for the indication
for allo-SCT.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22458420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Orv Hetil. 2012 Apr 8;153(14):531-40. doi: 10.1556/OH.2012.29334.

[Leukemia- and lymphoma-associated flow cytometric, cytogenetic, and molecular
genetic aberrations in healthy individuals].

[Article in Hungarian]

Jakó J(1), Szerafin L.

Author information: 
(1)Jósa András Oktatókórház Egészségügyi Szolgáltató Nonprofit Kft. Hematológiai 
Osztály Nyíregyháza Lukács Ödön u. 4. 4400. drjakojanos@freemail.hu

Most leukemia and lymphoma cases are characterized by specific flow cytometric,
cytogenetic and molecular genetic aberrations, which can also be detected in
healthy individuals in some cases. The authors review the literature concerning
monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis, and the occurrence of chromosomal translocations
t(14;18) and t(11;14), NPM-ALK fusion gene, JAK2 V617F mutation, BCR-ABL1 fusion 
gene, ETV6-RUNX1(TEL-AML1), MLL-AF4 and PML-RARA fusion gene in healthy
individuals. At present, we do not know the importance of these aberrations. From
the authors review it is evident that this phenomenon has both theoretical and
practical (diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic) significance.

PMID: 22450142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Int J Hematol. 2012 May;95(5):500-8. doi: 10.1007/s12185-012-1034-9. Epub 2012
Mar 10.

Quantification of PML/RARa transcript after induction predicts outcome in
children with acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Zhang L(1), Cao Z, Zou Y, Ruan M, Li Q, Wang J, Zhu X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Department of Pediatrics,
Institute of Hematology and Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.

Reports on the use of the real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(RQ-PCR) for childhood acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) therapy are scarce.
This study describes the prognostic significance of quantification of the
PML-RARa transcript in children with APL. Since January 2004, we have analyzed 40
children treated with all-trans-retinoic acid ± arsenic trioxide in induction.
Thirty-nine patients (97.5%) entered complete remission. The 5-year rates of
disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival in these patients were 73.1 and 
91.4%, respectively. By employing a standardized RQ-PCR protocol for minimal
residual disease (MRD) monitoring, we determined that less than 1 normalized copy
number (NCN) after induction indicates higher probability of a more favorable
treatment outcome. After induction therapy, thirteen out of 38 (34.2%) patients
in hematologic remission showed a negative RQ-PCR result (less than 1 NCN), which
was correlated with the lower probability of relapse (100 and 55.2% DFS at 5
years in the negative and positive RQ-PCR groups, respectively; P = 0.018).
PML/RARa-based MRD monitoring by RQ-PCR may allow us to identify subgroups of
patients at low risk of relapse after induction.

PMID: 22407853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Nat Med. 2012 Mar 11;18(4):605-11. doi: 10.1038/nm.2661.

Inhibition of the LSD1 (KDM1A) demethylase reactivates the all-trans-retinoic
acid differentiation pathway in acute myeloid leukemia.

Schenk T(1), Chen WC, Göllner S, Howell L, Jin L, Hebestreit K, Klein HU, Popescu
AC, Burnett A, Mills K, Casero RA Jr, Marton L, Woster P, Minden MD, Dugas M,
Wang JC, Dick JE, Müller-Tidow C, Petrie K, Zelent A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2012 May;11(5):352-3.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), a cytogenetically distinct subtype of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML), characterized by the t(15;17)-associated PML-RARA fusion,
has been successfully treated with therapy utilizing all-trans-retinoic acid
(ATRA) to differentiate leukemic blasts. However, among patients with non-APL
AML, ATRA-based treatment has not been effective. Here we show that, through
epigenetic reprogramming, inhibitors of lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1, also
called KDM1A), including tranylcypromine (TCP), unlocked the ATRA-driven
therapeutic response in non-APL AML. LSD1 inhibition did not lead to a
large-scale increase in histone 3 Lys4 dimethylation (H3K4(me2)) across the
genome, but it did increase H3K4(me2) and expression of
myeloid-differentiation-associated genes. Notably, treatment with ATRA plus TCP
markedly diminished the engraftment of primary human AML cells in vivo in
nonobese diabetic (NOD)-severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice, suggesting
that ATRA in combination with TCP may target leukemia-initiating cells.
Furthermore, initiation of ATRA plus TCP treatment 15 d after engraftment of
human AML cells in NOD-SCID <U+03B3> (with interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor <U+03B3> chain
deficiency) mice also revealed the ATRA plus TCP drug combination to have a
potent anti-leukemic effect that was superior to treatment with either drug
alone. These data identify LSD1 as a therapeutic target and strongly suggest that
it may contribute to AML pathogenesis by inhibiting the normal
pro-differentiative function of ATRA, paving the way for new combinatorial
therapies for AML.

PMCID: PMC3539284
PMID: 22406747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Cancer Res. 2012 May 1;72(9):2275-84. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3159. Epub
2012 Mar 9.

The SUMO E3-ligase PIAS1 regulates the tumor suppressor PML and its oncogenic
counterpart PML-RARA.

Rabellino A(1), Carter B, Konstantinidou G, Wu SY, Rimessi A, Byers LA, Heymach
JV, Girard L, Chiang CM, Teruya-Feldstein J, Scaglioni PP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

The ubiquitin-like SUMO proteins covalently modify protein substrates and
regulate their functional properties. In a broad spectrum of cancers, the tumor
suppressor PML undergoes ubiquitin-mediated degradation primed by CK2
phosphorylation. Here, we report that the SUMO E3-ligase inhibitor PIAS1
regulates oncogenic signaling through its ability to sumoylate PML and the
PML-RARA oncoprotein of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). PIAS1-mediated
SUMOylation of PML promoted CK2 interaction and ubiquitin/proteasome-mediated
degradation of PML, attenuating its tumor suppressor functions. In addition,
PIAS1-mediated SUMOylation of PML-RARA was essential for induction of its
degradation by arsenic trioxide, an effective APL treatment. Moreover, PIAS1
suppression abrogated the ability of arsenic trioxide to trigger apoptosis in APL
cells. Lastly, PIAS1 was also essential for PML degradation in non-small cell
lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cells, and PML and PIAS1 were inversely correlated in
NSCLC cell lines and primary specimens. Together, our findings reveal novel roles
for PIAS1 and the SUMOylation machinery in regulating oncogenic networks and the 
response to leukemia therapy.

©2012 AACR

PMCID: PMC3342450
PMID: 22406621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Ann Hematol. 2012 Oct;91(10):1645-8. doi: 10.1007/s00277-012-1439-9. Epub 2012
Mar 9.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia with trisomy 8 showing normal PML-RARA FISH signal
patterns: diagnostic application of long-distance polymerase chain reaction in
molecularly discrepant leukemia cases.

Yang JJ, Park TS, Kim MJ, Cho EH, Oh SH, Jeon BR, Oh D, Huh JY, Marschalek R,
Meyer C.

Comment on
    Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Dec;203(2):278-83.

PMID: 22402611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Hematol Oncol. 2012 Mar 7;5:5. doi: 10.1186/1756-8722-5-5.

Molecular alterations of isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 (IDH1 and IDH2)
metabolic genes and additional genetic mutations in newly diagnosed acute myeloid
leukemia patients.

Chotirat S(1), Thongnoppakhun W, Promsuwicha O, Boonthimat C, Auewarakul CU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 (IDH1 and IDH2) metabolic genes
encode cytosolic and mitochondrial enzymes that catalyze the conversion of
isocitrate to a-ketoglutarate. Acquired somatic mutations of IDH1 and IDH2 have
recently been reported in some types of brain tumors and a small proportion of
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cases.
METHODS: Two-hundred and thirty newly diagnosed AML patients were analyzed for
the presence of IDH1 and IDH2 heterozygous mutations by polymerase chain
reaction-denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (PCR-DHPLC) followed
by direct sequencing. Clinical and biological characteristics were analyzed and
correlated to the IDH mutational status. Coexisting mutations such as FLT3,
PML-RARA, RAS, AML1, and NPM1 mutations were additionally explored.
RESULTS: The prevalence of IDH1 and IDH2 mutations was 8.7% (20/230) and 10.4%
(24/230), respectively. Six missense mutations were identified among IDH1-mutated
cases; p.R132H (n = 8), p.R132C (n = 6), p.R132S (n = 2), p.R132G (n = 2),
p.R132L (n = 1), and p.I99M (n = 1). Two missense mutations were found in
IDH2-mutated cases; p.R140Q (n = 20) and p.R172K (n = 4). No patients had dual
IDH1 and IDH2 mutations. About 18% of AML with normal cytogenetics and 31% of
acute promyelocytic leukemia had IDH mutations. Half of the IDH-mutated cohort
had normal karyotype and the major FAB subtype was AML-M2. Interestingly, IDH1-
and IDH2-mutated cases predominantly had NPM1 mutations (60-74%) as compared to
the wild type (P < 0.001). Very few IDH-mutated cases had FLT3 and/or RAS
abnormalities and none of them had AML1 mutations. Older age and higher median
platelet counts were significantly associated with IDH2 mutations although the
clinical impact of either IDH1 or IDH2 mutations on patients' overall survival
could not be observed.
CONCLUSION: Overall, 19% of newly diagnosed AML patients had alterations of IDH
genes. No patients concurrently carried both IDH1 and IDH2 mutations suggesting
that these mutations were mutually exclusive. NPM1 mutation appears as a major
coexisting genetic mutation in IDH-mutated patients. Our present data failed to
support the prognostic relevance of IDH mutations although alterations of these
metabolic genes potentially have an important role in leukemia development.

PMCID: PMC3320529
PMID: 22397365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Blood. 2012 Mar 1;119(9):2177-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-395350.

CEBPE activation in PML-RARA cells by arsenic.

Hu Z, Saunthararajah Y.

Comment on
    Blood. 2011 Jun 2;117(22):5795-802.

PMID: 22383794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2012 Jan;53(1):97-104.

[Successful treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia complicated with autoimmune
hepatitis-induced portal hypertension with all-trans retinoic acid].

[Article in Japanese]

Ushiki T(1), Nikkuni K, Yoshida C, Shibasaki Y, Ishikawa T, Masuko M, Takai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and
Dental Sciences.

A 35-year-old man admitted to the hospital for oral hemorrhage was diagnosed with
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Remission from APL was achieved by induction 
therapy with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA); the PML/RARA fusion gene was not
detected on PCR analysis. Despite complete molecular remission, severe persistent
pancytopenia, massive ascites, and renal failure were observed. The liver surface
appeared rough and irregular on computed tomographic images. On the basis of the 
liver biopsy results, we diagnosed his condition as portal hypertension due to
autoimmune hepatitis. Indocyanine green test showed good residual function of the
liver, and therefore, 2 courses of consolidation therapy were administered;
chemotherapy was stopped because of severe pancytopenia due to portal
hypertension. Instead of continuing the consolidation therapy, maintenance
therapy involving 8 rounds of ATRA monotherapy (45 mg/m(2), days1~14) was
initiated. Portal hypertension did not progress further with this maintenance
therapy and therefore it was continued. The patient has been in remission from
APL ever since, and no relapses have occurred since the past 5 years. These
results suggest that ATRA can be used for long-term therapy in such cases.

PMID: 22374532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Indian J Hum Genet. 2011 Sep;17(3):235-7. doi: 10.4103/0971-6866.92093.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia with unusual karyotype.

Gowri M(1), Jahan SK, Kavitha, Prasannakumari, Madhumathi, Appaji L.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics Unit, Department of Pathology, Kidwai Memorial Institute of
Oncology, Bangalore - 560029, India.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML-M3) is associated with the translocation
t(15;17)(q22;q12-21) which disrupts the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene 
on chromosome 17 and the PML gene on chromosome 15. We report a two-year-old
patient with AML-M3 without the usual translocation t(15;17). Cytogenetic studies
demonstrated normal appearance of chromosome 15 while the abnormal 17 homologue
was apparently a derivative 17, der(17)(17qter-cen-q21:), the rearrangement
distinctly shows deletion at 17q21 band and the morphology corresponding to an
iso chromosome i(17q-). This case report is a rare cytogenetic presentation of
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APML).

PMCID: PMC3276997
PMID: 22346000  [PubMed]


276. Leukemia. 2012 Jul;26(7):1630-7. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.39. Epub 2012 Feb 15.

Valproic acid induces differentiation and transient tumor regression, but spares 
leukemia-initiating activity in mouse models of APL.

Leiva M(1), Moretti S, Soilihi H, Pallavicini I, Peres L, Mercurio C, Dal Zuffo
R, Minucci S, de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Universitaire d'Hematologie, Université de Paris 7/Centre National de
la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 7212/Inserm U944, Equipe
labellisée no. 11 Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, Hôpital St Louis, Paris,
France.

Aberrant histone acetylation was physiopathologically associated with the
development of acute myeloid leukemias (AMLs). Reversal of histone deacetylation 
by histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACis) activates a cell death program that
allows tumor regression in mouse models of AMLs. We have used several models of
PML-RARA-driven acute promyelocytic leukemias (APLs) to analyze the in vivo
effects of valproic acid, a well-characterized HDACis. Valproic acid
(VPA)-induced rapid tumor regression and sharply prolonged survival. However,
discontinuation of treatment was associated to an immediate relapse. In vivo, as 
well as ex vivo, VPA-induced terminal granulocytic differentiation. Yet, despite 
full differentiation, leukemia-initiating cell (LIC) activity was actually
enhanced by VPA treatment. In contrast to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) or
arsenic, VPA did not degrade PML-RARA. However, in combination with ATRA, VPA
synergized for PML-RARA degradation and LIC eradication in vivo. Our studies
indicate that VPA triggers differentiation, but spares LIC activity, further
uncouple differentiation from APL clearance and stress the importance of PML-RARA
degradation in APL cure.

PMID: 22333881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Oncotarget. 2011 Dec;2(12):1254-64.

Pooled shRNA screen for sensitizers to inhibition of the mitotic regulator
polo-like kinase (PLK1).

Liu-Sullivan N(1), Zhang J, Bakleh A, Marchica J, Li J, Siolas D, Laquerre S,
Degenhardt YY, Wooster R, Chang K, Hannon GF, Powers S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genome Center, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Woodbury, NY 11797, USA.

RNAi screening holds the promise of systemizing the search for combination
therapeutic strategies. Here we performed a pooled shRNA library screen to look
for promising targets to inhibit in combination with inhibition of the mitotic
regulator polo-like kinase (PLK1). The library contained ~4,500 shRNAs targeting 
various signaling and cancer-related genes and was screened in four lung cancer
cell lines using both high (IC80) and low (IC20) amounts of the PLK1 inhibitor
GSK461364. The relative abundance of cells containing individual shRNAs following
drug treatment was determined by microarray analysis, using the mock treatment
replicates as the normalizing reference. Overall, the inferred influences of
individual shRNAs in both high and low drug treatment were remarkably similar in 
all four cell lines and involved a large percentage of the library. To
investigate which functional categories of shRNAs were most prominent in
influencing drug response, we used statistical analysis of microarrays (SAM) in
combination with a filter for genes that had two or more concordant shRNAs. The
most significant functional categories that came out of this analysis included
receptor tyrosine kinases and nuclear hormone receptors. Through individual
validation experiments, we determined that the two shRNAs from the library
targeting the nuclear retinoic acid receptor gene RARA did indeed silence RARA
expression and as predicted conferred resistance to GSK461364. This led us to
test whether activation of RARA receptor with retinoids could sensitize cells to 
GSK461364. We found that retinoids did increase the drug sensitivity and enhanced
the ability of PLK1 inhibition to induce mitotic arrest and apoptosis. These
results suggest that retinoids could be used to enhance the effectiveness of
GSK461364 and provide further evidence that RNAi screens can be effective tools
to identify combination target strategies.

PMCID: PMC3282082
PMID: 22248814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Gene. 2012 Mar 10;495(2):120-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.12.041. Epub 2012 Jan 5.

Integrated analysis of mRNA and microRNA expression in mature neurons, neural
progenitor cells and neuroblastoma cells.

Liu DZ(1), Ander BP, Tian Y, Stamova B, Jickling GC, Davis RR, Sharp FR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and the M.I.N.D. Institute, University of California
at Davis, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA. dzliu@ucdavis.edu

Mature neurons (MNs), neural progenitor cells (NPCs) and neuroblastoma cells
(NBCs) are all neural-derived cells. However, MNs are unable to divide once
differentiated; NPCs are able to divide a limited number of times and
differentiate to normal brain cell types; whereas NBCs can divide an unlimited
number of times but rarely differentiate. Here, we perform whole transcriptome
(mRNA, miRNA) profiling of these cell types and compare expression levels of each
cell type to the others. Integrated mRNA-miRNA functional analyses reveal that:
1) several very highly expressed genes (e.g., Robo1, Nrp1, Epha3, Unc5c, Dcc,
Pak3, Limk4) and a few under-expressed miRNAs (e.g., miR-152, miR-146b,
miR-339-5p) in MNs are associated with one important cellular process-axon
guidance; 2) some very highly expressed mitogenic pathway genes (e.g., Map2k1,
Igf1r, Rara, Runx1) and under-expressed miRNAs (e.g., miR-370, miR-9, miR-672) in
NBCs are associated with cancer pathways. These results provide a library of
negative mRNAmiRNA networks that are likely involved in the cellular processes of
differentiation and division.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22244746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2011;3(1):e2011064. doi: 10.4084/MJHID.2011.064.
Epub 2011 Dec 20.

Newly diagnosed acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Avvisati G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unità Operativa Complessa di Ematologia, Trapianto di cellule staminali,
Medicina trasfusionale e Terapia cellulare. Università Campus Bio-Medico, Roma,
Italy.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) represents a medical emergency with a high
rate of early mortality. As a consequence, as soon as the diagnosis is suspected 
based upon cytologic criteria, it is necessary to start all- trans retinoic acid 
(ATRA) treatment without delay. For patients with newly diagnosed APL, induction 
therapy with ATRA plus anthracycline based chemotherapy is recommended. At
present the combination of arsenic trioxide plus ATRA should be considered for
patients who are not candidates for anthracycline-based therapy. For pediatric
and adult patients with APL aged < 60 years who achieve a CR with induction, I
recommend 3 intensive courses of consolidation chemotherapy associated to ATRA,
targeted on the basis of the risk group at diagnosis. In patients treated with a 
very intensive consolidation chemotherapy maintenance treatment can be omitted.
However If a maintenance treatment has to be adopted I suggest the use of
intermittent ATRA for 15 days every 3 months for a period of 2 years, rather than
ATRA associated to chemotherapy. Moreover, taking into account the medical
literature, a reduced dosage of ATRA ( 25 mg/m(2)) in pediatric patients and a
consolidation chemotherapy of reduced intensity in elderly patients is
recommended. Furthermore, in order to maximize survival, careful attention should
be reserved to the coagulopathy and to the appearance of the differentiation
syndrome. Finally, PCR for the PML/RARA fusion gene on a bone marrow specimen
every three months for two years, and then every six months for additional three 
years are needed during the follow-up.

PMCID: PMC3248341
PMID: 22220261  [PubMed]


280. J Cell Biochem. 2012 May;113(5):1787-99. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24050.

Promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies support a late step in DNA double-strand
break repair by homologous recombination.

Yeung PL(1), Denissova NG, Nasello C, Hakhverdyan Z, Chen JD, Brenneman MA.

Author information: 
(1)The Human Genetics Institute of New Jersey, Rutgers University, Piscataway,
New Jersey, USA.

The PML protein and PML nuclear bodies (PML-NB) are implicated in multiple
cellular functions relevant to tumor suppression, including DNA damage response. 
In most cases of acute promyelocytic leukemia, the PML and retinoic acid receptor
alpha (RARA) genes are translocated, resulting in expression of oncogenic
PML-RARa fusion proteins. PML-NB fail to form normally, and promyelocytes remain 
in an undifferentiated, abnormally proliferative state. We examined the
involvement of PML protein and PML-NB in homologous recombinational repair (HRR) 
of chromosomal DNA double-strand breaks. Transient overexpression of wild-type
PML protein isoforms produced hugely enlarged or aggregated PML-NB and reduced
HRR by ~2-fold, suggesting that HRR depends to some extent upon normal PML-NB
structure. Knockdown of PML by RNA interference sharply attenuated formation of
PML-NB and reduced HRR by up to 20-fold. However, PML-knockdown cells showed
apparently normal induction of H2AX phosphorylation and RAD51 foci after DNA
damage by ionizing radiation. These findings indicate that early steps in HRR,
including recognition of DNA double-strand breaks, initial processing of ends,
and assembly of single-stranded DNA/RAD51 nucleoprotein filaments, do not depend 
upon PML-NB. The HRR deficit in PML-depleted cells thus reflects inhibition of
later steps in the repair pathway. Expression of PML-RARa fusion proteins
disrupted PML-NB structure and reduced HRR by up to 10-fold, raising the
possibility that defective HRR and resulting genomic instability may figure in
the pathogenesis, progression and relapse of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3337353
PMID: 22213200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Blood. 2012 Mar 1;119(9):2122-5. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-385781. Epub 2011 Dec
29.

Prognostic value of monosomal karyotype in comparison to complex aberrant
karyotype in acute myeloid leukemia: a study on 824 cases with aberrant
karyotype.

Haferlach C(1), Alpermann T, Schnittger S, Kern W, Chromik J, Schmid C, Pielken
HJ, Kreuzer KA, Höffkes HG, Haferlach T.

Author information: 
(1)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Max-Lebsche-Platz 31, Munich, Germany.
claudia.haferlach@mll.com

In acute myeloid leukemia (AML) the subset with complex karyotype (CK) is
traditionally regarded as the worst prognostic group. However, = 3, = 4, or = 5
abnormalities have been variably used for its definition. Recently, monosomal
karyotype (MSK) was suggested to indicate an even inferior outcome. We tested
which definition fits best to identify the most unfavorable subgroup. After
excluding patients with t(15;17)/PML-RARA, t(8;21)/RUNX1-RUNX1T1, inv
(16)/t(16;16)/CBFB-MYH11, and normal karyotype, 824 patients with AML with
cytogenetic abnormalities were analyzed. Patients with MSK or CK defined as = 3, 
= 4, or = 5 abnormalities showed an inferior overall survival compared with the
respective remaining patients not fulfilling these criteria (for all, P < .001). 
Hazard ratios were 1.93, 1.68, 1.94, and 1.92. CK = 4 as a single parameter
identified the largest proportion of patients with very poor risk. However,
combining CK = 4 and MSK detected an even larger number of patients with very
unfavorable outcome (261 of 824; 31.7%).

PMID: 22207733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Med Oncol. 2012 Dec;29(4):2345-7. doi: 10.1007/s12032-011-0147-y. Epub 2011 Dec
29.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia associated with the PLZF-RARA fusion gene: two
additional cases with clinical and laboratorial peculiar presentations.

Rohr SS(1), Pelloso LA, Borgo A, De Nadai LC, Yamamoto M, Rego EM, de Lourdes L F
Chauffaille M.

Author information: 
(1)Disciplina de Hematologia e Hemoterapia, UNIFESP, Escola Paulista de Medicina,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Botucatu, 740-3.andar, São Paulo, SP, CEP 
04023-900, Brazil. sandra.rohr@gmail.com

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by the presence of the
t(15;17) and PML-RARa rearrangement, with good response to treatment with
retinoids. However, few cases of variant APL involving alternative chromosomal
aberrations have been reported, including t(11;17)(q23;q21) (Wells et al. in Nat 
Genet 17:109-113, 1; Arnould et al. in Hum Mol Genet 8:1741-1749, 2)
t(5;17)(q35;q12-21), t(11;17)(q13;q21) (Grimwade et al in Blood 96:1297-1308, 3) 
and der(17) (Rego et al. in Blood (ASH Annual Meeting Abstracts)114:Abstract 6,
4), whereby RARa is fused to the PLZF, NPM, NuMA, and STAT5b genes, respectively,
have been described. These cases are characterized by distinct morphology,
clinical presentation, and in respect to PLZF, a lack of differentiation response
to retinoids leading to the need of different approaches concerning diagnostic
methods and therapeutics. This paper describes two cases of APL associated with
the PLZF-RARA fusion gene enrolled in the IC-APL trial that is a non-randomized, 
multicenter study conducted in Brazil, Mexico, Chile and Uruguay with the aim to 
improve the treatment outcome of APL patients in developing countries. These
cases, although rare, offer a challenge to its early recognition and proper
conduction.

PMID: 22205181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 May;39(5):5387-91. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-1337-6. Epub 2011
Dec 14.

No evidence for PML-RARa bcr1 fusion gene in colorectal cancer.

Herreros-Villanueva M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación, Hospital General Yagüe, Avenida del Cid 96, 09005,
Burgos, Spain. herrerosvillanueva.marta@mayo.edu

Colorectal cancer is the third most prevalent cancer and a leading cause of
cancer death. Metastatic colorectal cancer patients are treated with anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibodies in combination with chemotherapy; however, the efficiency
is only 10-20% of such patients. An increasing amount of data has demonstrated
that response to anti-EGFR therapies is confined to patients with KRAS and BRAF
wild type tumors but still some of these patients are non responders to this
treatment. The presence of oncogenic deregulation of different members of EGFR
downstream signaling or crosstalk molecules could predict the lack of response in
these patients. In this study, 40 wild type KRAS and BRAF colorectal tumors were 
analyzed to elucidate whether PML-RARa bcr1 fusion gene may play a role in
colorectal carcinogenesis. Specifically we want to determine if this fusion could
be responsible for the inability to respond to anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies.
Here, for the first time it is reported, that PML-RARa bcr1 fusion is not
responsible for colorectal tumor development and also, this translocation is not 
predicting the lack of efficacy of anti-EGFR therapies in wild type KRAS and BRAF
colorectal cancer patients. These results also suggest that PML-RARa is unlikely 
to be a promising target for adjuvant therapy in colorectal cancer patients.

PMID: 22167334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Med Sci (Paris). 2011 Nov;27(11):973-8. doi: 10.1051/medsci/20112711013. Epub
2011 Nov 30.

[RXR, a key member of the oncogenic complex in acute promyelocytic leukemia].

[Article in French]

Halftermeyer J(1), Le Bras M, De Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut universitaire d'hématologie, Inserm U944, Hôpital Saint-Louis, 75010 
Paris, France. juliane.halftermeyer@gmail.com

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) is induced by fusion proteins always implying
the retinoic acid receptor RARa. Although PML-RARa and other fusion oncoproteins 
are able to bind DNA as homodimers, in vivo they are always found in association 
with the nuclear receptor RXRa (Retinoid X Receptor). Thus, RXRa is an essential 
cofactor of the fusion protein for the transformation. Actually, RXRa contributes
to several aspects of in vivo -transformation: RARa fusion:RXRa hetero-oligomeric
complexes bind DNA with a much greater affinity than RARa fusion homodimers.
Besides, PML-RARa:RXRa recognizes an enlarged repertoire of DNA binding sites.
Thus the association between fusion proteins and RXRa regulates more genes than
the homodimer alone. Titration of RXRa by the fusion protein may also play a role
in the transformation process, as well as post-translational modifications of
RXRa in the complex. Finally, RXRa is required for rexinoid-induced APL
differentiation. Thus, RXRa is a key member of the oncogenic complex.

© 2011 médecine/sciences  Inserm / SRMS.

PMID: 22130024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2011;3(1):e2011049. doi: 10.4084/MJHID.2011.049.
Epub 2011 Oct 24.

Epidemiology and treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia in latin america.

Rego EM(1), Jácomo RH.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Science and Technology in Stem Cell and Cell Therapy,
Division of Oncology/Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School 
of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo.

Distinct epidemiological characteristics have been described in Acute
Promielocytic Leukemia (APL). Populations from Latin America have a higher
incidence of APL and in some geographic areas a distinct distribution of the
PML-RARA isoforms is present. Here, we review the main differences in APL
epidemilogy in Latin America as well as treatment outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3219651
PMID: 22110899  [PubMed]


286. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2011;3(1):e2011045. doi: 10.4084/MJHID.2011.045.
Epub 2011 Oct 24.

Molecular pathogenesis of secondary acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Joannides M(1), Mays AN, Mistry AR, Hasan SK, Reiter A, Wiemels JL, Felix CA,
Coco FL, Osheroff N, Solomon E, Grimwade D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical & Molecular Genetics, King's College London School of
Medicine, UK.

Balanced chromosomal translocations that generate chimeric oncoproteins are
considered to be initiating lesions in the pathogenesis of acute myeloid
leukemia. The most frequent is the t(15;17)(q22;q21), which fuses the PML and
RARA genes, giving rise to acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). An increasing
proportion of APL cases are therapy-related (t-APL), which develop following
exposure to radiotherapy and/or chemotherapeutic agents that target DNA
topoisomerase II (topoII), particularly mitoxantrone and epirubicin. To gain
insights into molecular mechanisms underlying the formation of the t(15;17) we
mapped the translocation breakpoints in a series of t-APLs, which revealed
significant clustering according to the nature of the drug exposure. Remarkably, 
in approximately half of t-APL cases arising following mitoxantrone treatment for
breast cancer or multiple sclerosis, the chromosome 15 breakpoint fell within an 
8-bp "hotspot" region in PML intron 6, which was confirmed to be a preferential
site of topoII-mediated DNA cleavage induced by mitoxantrone. Chromosome 15
breakpoints falling outside the "hotspot", and the corresponding RARA breakpoints
were also shown to be functional topoII cleavage sites. The observation that
particular regions of the PML and RARA loci are susceptible to topoII-mediated
DNA damage induced by epirubicin and mitoxantrone may underlie the propensity of 
these agents to cause APL.

PMCID: PMC3219647
PMID: 22110895  [PubMed]


287. Indian J Hum Genet. 2011 May;17(2):54-8. doi: 10.4103/0971-6866.86174.

Characterization of cryptic rearrangements, deletion, complex variants of PML,
RARA in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Amare PK(1), Baisane C, Nair R, Menon H, Banavali S, Kabre S, Gujral S,
Subramaniam P.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Cytogenetics Laboratory, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, India.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by a reciprocal translocation
t(15;17)(q22;q21) leading to the disruption of Promyelocytic leukemia (PML) and
Retionic Acid Receptor Alpha (RARA) followed by reciprocal PML-RARA fusion in 90%
of the cases. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) has overcome the hurdles 
of unavailability of abnormal and/or lack of metaphase cells, and detection of
cryptic, submicroscopic rearrangements. In the present study, besides diagnostic 
approach we sought to analyze these cases for identification and characterization
of cryptic rearrangements, deletion variants and unknown RARA translocation
variants by application of D-FISH and RARA break-apart probe strategy on
interphase and metaphase cells in a large series of 200 cases of APL. Forty cases
(20%) had atypical PML-RARA and/or RARA variants. D-FISH with PML/RARA probe
helped identification of RARA insertion to PML. By application of D-FISH on
metaphase cells, we documented that translocation of 15 to 17 leads to 17q
deletion which results in loss of reciprocal fusion and/or residual RARA on
der(17). Among the complex variants of t(15;17), PML-RARA fusion followed by
residual RARA insertion closed to PML-RARA on der(15) was unique and unusual.
FISH with break-apart RARA probe on metaphase cells was found to be a very
efficient strategy to detect unknown RARA variant translocations like
t(11;17)(q23;q21), t(11;17)(q13;q21) and t(2;17)(p21;q21). These findings proved 
that D-FISH and break-apart probe strategy has potential to detect primary as
well as secondary additional aberrations of PML, RARA and other additional loci. 
The long-term clinical follow-up is essential to evaluate the clinical importance
of these findings.

PMCID: PMC3214318
PMID: 22090713  [PubMed]


288. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2011;3(1):e2011033. doi: 10.4084/MJHID.2011.033.
Epub 2011 Sep 8.

Treatment of Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia with AIDA Based Regimen. Update of a
Tunisian Single Center Study.

Jeddi R(1), Ghédira H, Ben Amor R, Ben Abdennebi Y, Karima K, Mohamed Z, Ben Neji
H, Aissaoui L, Ben Lakhal R, Ben Salah N, Menif S, Belhadjali Z, Ben Abid H,
Gouider E, Hafsia R, Saad A, Fenaux P, Meddeb B.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Department, Aziza Othmana University Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.

In Tunisia, the ATRA era began in 1998 with the use, consecutively, of two
regimens combining ATRA and an anthracycline with cytarabine (APL93), and without
cytarabine (LPA99). From 2004, 51 patients with confirmed APL either by t(15;17) 
or PML/RARA were treated according to the PETHEMA LPA 99 trial. Forty three
patients achieved CR (86%). The remaining seven patients had early death (one
died before treatment onset): four caused by differentiation syndrome (DS) and
three died from central nervous system hemorrhage. Multivariate analysis revealed
that female gender (P=0.045), baseline WBC> 10 G/L (P=0.041) and serum creatinine
> 1.4mg/dl (P=0.021) were predictive of mortality during induction. DS was
observed in 16 patients (32%) after a median onset time of 15 days from treatment
onset (range, 2-29). Body mass index = 30 (P=0.01) remained independent predictor
of DS. Occurrence of hypertensive peaks significantly predicted occurrence of DS 
(P=0.011) and was significantly associated with high BMI (p=0.003). With a median
follow-up of 50 months, 5 year cumulative incidence of relapse, event free and
overall survival were 4.7%, 74% and 78%, respectively.

PMCID: PMC3212966
PMID: 22084648  [PubMed]


289. Oncogene. 2012 Jul 19;31(29):3431-43. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.506. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

Synergistic antitumor activity of lapatinib and retinoids on a novel subtype of
breast cancer with coamplification of ERBB2 and RARA.

Paroni G(1), Fratelli M, Gardini G, Bassano C, Flora M, Zanetti A, Guarnaccia V, 
Ubezio P, Centritto F, Terao M, Garattini E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario
Negri, Milano, Italy.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), the only clinically available
cyto-differentiating agent, has potential for the therapy/chemoprevention of
breast carcinoma. Given the heterogeneous nature of this tumor, a rational use of
ATRA and derivatives (retinoids) in the clinic requires the identification of
patients that would benefit from retinoid-based protocols. Here, we demonstrate
that 23-32% of the human ERBB2(+) breast cancers show coamplification of retinoic
acid receptor alpha (RARA), encoding the retinoic acid receptor, RARa. This
represents a novel subtype of breast cancer characterized by remarkable
sensitivity to ATRA and RARa agonists, regardless of positivity to the estrogen
receptor, a known modulator of retinoid sensitivity. In
estrogen-receptor-negative cellular models showing coamplification of ERBB2 and
RARA, simultaneous targeting of the corresponding gene products with combinations
of lapatinib and ATRA causes synergistic growth inhibition, cyto-differentiation 
and apoptosis. This provides proof-of-principle that coamplification of ERBB2 and
RARA can be exploited for the stratified and targeted therapy of a novel subtype 
of breast cancer patients, with an approach characterized by tumor cell
selectivity and low predicted toxicity. The available cellular models were
exploited to define the molecular mechanisms underlying the antitumor activity of
combinations between lapatinib and ATRA. Global gene expression and functional
approaches provide evidence for three components of the
antiproliferative/apoptotic responses triggered by lapatinib+ATRA. Induction of
the retinoid-dependent RARRES3 protein by ATRA stabilizes the effect of lapatinib
inhibiting ERBB2 phosphorylation. Upregulation and activation of the
transcription factor FOXO3A integrates ATRA-dependent transcriptional and
lapatinib-dependent posttranscriptional signals, controlling the levels of
effector proteins like the antiapoptotic factor, BIRC5. Stimulation of the TGFß
pathway by ATRA mediates other components of the apoptotic process set in motion 
by simultaneous targeting of ERBB2 and RARa.

PMID: 22056878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Trends Mol Med. 2012 Jan;18(1):36-42. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2011.10.001. Epub
2011 Nov 4.

Curing APL through PML/RARA degradation by As2O3.

Lallemand-Breitenbach V(1), Zhu J, Chen Z, de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)University Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Hôpital St Louis 1, Avenue
Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris, Cedex 10, France.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a hematological malignancy driven by the
PML/RARA oncogene. The prognosis for patients with APL was revolutionized by two 
treatments: retinoic acid (RA) and As(2)O(3) (arsenic trioxide). These were both 
shown a posteriori to target PML/RARA, explaining their exquisite specificity for
APL. Arsenic, as a single agent, cures up to 70% of patients, whereas APL
patients treated with the combination of RA and As(2)O(3) reach a stunning 90%
cure rate. Recent physiopathological models highlight the key role of RA- and
As(2)O(3)-triggered PML/RARA degradation, and the molecular mechanisms underlying
As(2)O(3)-induced PML/RARA degradation have been recently clarified. As discussed
below, arsenic binding, oxidation, sumoylation on PML nuclear bodies, and
RNF4-mediated ubiquitination all contribute to the As(2)O(3)-triggered catabolism
of PML/RARA.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22056243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Biosens Bioelectron. 2012 Jan 15;31(1):182-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2011.10.015.
Epub 2011 Oct 18.

Ultrasensitive indicator-free and enhanced self-signal nanohybrid DNA sensing
platform based on electrochemically grown poly-xanthurenic acid/Fe2O3 membranes.

Zhang W(1), Yang T, Jiao K.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory Base of Eco-chemical Engineering, College of Chemistry
and Molecular Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao 
266042, China.

This paper describes a novel electrochemical DNA biosensor for simple, rapid, and
specific detection of PML/RARA fusion gene in acute promyelocytic leukemia by
using 18-mer single-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid as the capture probe.
Nanosized Fe(2)O(3) was first immobilized on the surface of a carbon paste
electrode (CPE). Then poly-xanthurenic acid (PXa), a new electroactive material, 
was electrogenerated by using the pulse potentiostatic method on the Fe(2)O(3)
substrate to form a unique and uniform nanorhombus structure. Due to the unique
binding ability of xanthurenic acid (Xa) with Fe(2)O(3), Xa monomers tended to be
adsorbed around nanosized Fe(2)O(3), and the electropolymerization efficiency was
greatly improved. Owing to the presence of abundant carboxyl groups, the capture 
probe was covalently attached on the carboxyl-terminated PXa/Fe(2)O(3)
nanorhombus membranes through the free amines of DNA sequences based on the
1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide and N-hydrosulfosuccinimide
cross-linking reaction. The covalently immobilized capture probe could
selectively hybridize with its target DNA to form double-stranded DNA on the
PXa/Fe(2)O(3)/CPE surface. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was adopted for
indicator-free monitoring of the hybridization reaction on the probe-captured
electrode. As a result, the efficient probe immobilization platform, coupled with
the ultrasensitive indicator-free impedance measurement, gave rise to a detection
limit of 2.8 fmol/L and a dynamic range spanning 8 orders of magnitude. The
excellent analytical properties of the proposed biosensor developed here holds
great promise for ultrasensitive detection of other biorecognition events and
diagnosis of diseases in practice.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22047973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Endocrinology. 2012 Jan;153(1):438-49. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1102. Epub 2011 Nov
1.

Spermatogonia differentiation requires retinoic acid receptor <U+03B3>.

Gely-Pernot A(1), Raverdeau M, Célébi C, Dennefeld C, Feret B, Klopfenstein M,
Yoshida S, Ghyselinck NB, Mark M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Institut
National de Santé et de Recherche Médicale Unité 964, Centre National de
Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 7104, Université de Strasbourg,
67404 Illkirch, France.

Vitamin A is instrumental to mammalian reproduction. Its metabolite, retinoic
acid (RA), acts in a hormone-like manner through binding to and activating three 
nuclear receptor isotypes, RA receptor (RAR)a (RARA), RARß, and RAR<U+03B3> (RARG).
Here, we show that 1) RARG is expressed by A aligned (A(al)) spermatogonia, as
well as during the transition from A(al) to A(1) spermatogonia, which is known to
require RA; and 2) ablation of Rarg, either in the whole mouse or specifically in
spermatogonia, does not affect meiosis and spermiogenesis but impairs the A(al)
to A(1) transition in the course of some of the seminiferous epithelium cycles.
Upon ageing, this phenomenon yields seminiferous tubules containing only
spermatogonia and Sertoli cells. Altogether, our findings indicate that RARG
cell-autonomously transduces, in undifferentiated spermatogonia of adult testes, 
a RA signal critical for spermatogenesis. During the prepubertal spermatogenic
wave, the loss of RARG function can however be compensated by RARA, as indicated 
by the normal timing of appearance of meiotic cells in Rarg-null testes.
Accordingly, RARG- and RARA-selective agonists are both able to stimulate Stra8
expression in wild-type prepubertal testes. Interestingly, inactivation of Rarg
does not impair expression of the spermatogonia differentiation markers Kit and
Stra8, contrary to vitamin A deficiency. This latter observation supports the
notion that the RA-signaling pathway previously shown to operate in Sertoli cells
also participates in spermatogonia differentiation.

PMID: 22045663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Cancer Genet. 2011 Sep;204(9):522-3. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.09.001.

Microgranular variant of acute promyelocytic leukemia with normal conventional
cytogenetics, negative PML/RARA FISH and positive PML/RARA transcripts by RT-PCR.

Lewis C, Patel V, Abhyankar S, Zhang D, Ketterling RP, McClure RF, Persons DL.

PMID: 22018276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2011 Dec;77(24):8625-34. doi: 10.1128/AEM.05155-11. Epub 
2011 Oct 14.

Analysis of Clostridium botulinum serotype E strains by using multilocus sequence
typing, amplified fragment length polymorphism, variable-number tandem-repeat
analysis, and botulinum neurotoxin gene sequencing.

Macdonald TE(1), Helma CH, Shou Y, Valdez YE, Ticknor LO, Foley BT, Davis SW,
Hannett GE, Kelly-Cirino CD, Barash JR, Arnon SS, Lindström M, Korkeala H, Smith 
LA, Smith TJ, Hill KK.

Author information: 
(1)Bioscience Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico
87545, USA.

A total of 41 Clostridium botulinum serotype E strains from different geographic 
regions, including Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Greenland, Japan, and the
United States, were compared by multilocus sequence typing (MLST), amplified
fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) analysis, variable-number tandem-repeat
(VNTR) analysis, and botulinum neurotoxin (bont) E gene sequencing. The strains, 
representing environmental, food-borne, and infant botulism samples collected
from 1932 to 2007, were analyzed to compare serotype E strains from different
geographic regions and types of botulism and to determine whether each of the
strains contained the transposon-associated recombinase rarA, involved with
bont/E insertion. MLST examination using 15 genes clustered the strains into
several clades, with most members within a cluster sharing the same BoNT/E
subtype (BoNT/E1, E2, E3, or E6). Sequencing of the bont/E gene identified two
new variants (E7, E8) that showed regions of recombination with other E subtypes.
The AFLP dendrogram clustered the 41 strains similarly to the MLST dendrogram.
Strains that could not be differentiated by AFLP, MLST, or bont gene sequencing
were further examined using three VNTR regions. Both intact and split rarA genes 
were amplified by PCR in each of the strains, and their identities were confirmed
in 11 strains by amplicon sequencing. The findings suggest that (i) the C.
botulinum serotype E strains result from the targeted insertion of the bont/E
gene into genetically conserved bacteria and (ii) recombination events (not
random mutations) within bont/E result in toxin variants or subtypes within
strains.

PMCID: PMC3233090
PMID: 22003031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24176. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024176. Epub 2011 Sep 20.

Characterisation of genome-wide PLZF/RARA target genes.

Spicuglia S(1), Vincent-Fabert C, Benoukraf T, Tibéri G, Saurin AJ,
Zacarias-Cabeza J, Grimwade D, Mills K, Calmels B, Bertucci F, Sieweke M, Ferrier
P, Duprez E.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Université de la Méditerranée,
Campus de Luminy, Marseille, France.

The PLZF/RARA fusion protein generated by the t(11;17)(q23;q21) translocation in 
acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) is believed to act as an oncogenic
transcriptional regulator recruiting epigenetic factors to genes important for
its transforming potential. However, molecular mechanisms associated with
PLZF/RARA-dependent leukaemogenesis still remain unclear.We searched for specific
PLZF/RARA target genes by ChIP-on-chip in the haematopoietic cell line U937
conditionally expressing PLZF/RARA. By comparing bound regions found in U937
cells expressing endogenous PLZF with PLZF/RARA-induced U937 cells, we isolated
specific PLZF/RARA target gene promoters. We next analysed gene expression
profiles of our identified target genes in PLZF/RARA APL patients and analysed
DNA sequences and epigenetic modification at PLZF/RARA binding sites. We identify
413 specific PLZF/RARA target genes including a number encoding transcription
factors involved in the regulation of haematopoiesis. Among these genes, 22 were 
significantly down regulated in primary PLZF/RARA APL cells. In addition,
repressed PLZF/RARA target genes were associated with increased levels of
H3K27me3 and decreased levels of H3K9K14ac. Finally, sequence analysis of
PLZF/RARA bound sequences reveals the presence of both consensus and degenerated 
RAREs as well as enrichment for tissue-specific transcription factor motifs,
highlighting the complexity of targeting fusion protein to chromatin. Our study
suggests that PLZF/RARA directly targets genes important for haematopoietic
development and supports the notion that PLZF/RARA acts mainly as an epigenetic
regulator of its direct target genes.

PMCID: PMC3176768
PMID: 21949697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Nov 1;29(31):4168-74. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.36.0107. Epub 2011
Sep 26.

Determining true HER2 gene status in breast cancers with polysomy by using
alternative chromosome 17 reference genes: implications for anti-HER2 targeted
therapy.

Tse CH(1), Hwang HC, Goldstein LC, Kandalaft PL, Wiley JC, Kussick SJ, Gown AM.

Author information: 
(1)PhenoPath Laboratories, 551 N. 34th St, Seattle, WA 98103, USA.

PURPOSE: The ratio of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) to CEP17 by
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) with the centromeric probe CEP17 is used
to determine HER2 gene status in breast cancer. Increases in CEP17 copy number
have been interpreted as representing polysomy 17. However, pangenomic studies
have demonstrated that polysomy 17 is rare. This study tests the hypothesis that 
the use of alternative chromosome 17 reference genes might more accurately assess
true HER2 gene status.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In all, 171 patients with breast cancer who had HER2 FISH
that had increased mean CEP17 copy numbers (> 2.6) were selected for additional
chromosome 17 studies that used probes for Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS), retinoic
acid receptor alpha (RARA), and tumor protein p53 (TP53) genes. A eusomic copy
number exhibited in one or more of these loci was used to calculate a revised
HER2-to-chromosome-17 ratio by using the eusomic gene locus as the reference.
RESULTS: Of 132 cases classified as nonamplified on the basis of their HER2:CEP17
ratios, 58 (43.9%) were scored as amplified by using alternative chromosome 17
reference gene probes, and 13 (92.9%) of 14 cases scored as equivocal were
reclassified as amplified. Among the cases with mean HER2 copy number of 4 to 6, 
41 (47.7%) of 86 had their HER2 gene status upgraded from nonamplified to
amplified, and four (4.7%) of 86 were upgraded from equivocal to amplified.
CONCLUSION: Our results support the findings of recent pangenomic studies that
true polysomy 17 is uncommon. Additional FISH studies that use probes to the SMS,
RARA, and TP53 genes are an effective way to determine the true HER2
amplification status in patients with polysomy 17 and they have important
potential implications for guiding HER2-targeted therapy in breast cancer.

PMID: 21947821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Cancer Res. 2011 Nov 15;71(22):6940-7. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-2091. Epub
2011 Sep 22.

A comprehensive view of nuclear receptor cancer cistromes.

Tang Q(1), Chen Y, Meyer C, Geistlinger T, Lupien M, Wang Q, Liu T, Zhang Y,
Brown M, Liu XS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China.

Nuclear receptors comprise a superfamily of ligand-activated transcription
factors that play important roles in both physiology and diseases including
cancer. The technologies of chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by array
hybridization (ChIP-chip) or massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) has been
used to map, at an unprecedented rate, the in vivo genome-wide binding (cistrome)
of nuclear receptors in both normal and cancer cells. We developed a curated
database of 88 nuclear receptor cistrome data sets and other associated
high-throughput data sets including 121 collaborating factor cistromes, 94
epigenomes, and 319 transcriptomes. Through integrative analysis of the curated
nuclear receptor ChIP-chip/seq data sets, we discovered novel factor-specific
noncanonical motifs that may have important regulatory roles. We also revealed a 
common feature of nuclear receptor pioneering factors to recognize relatively
short and AT-rich motifs. Most nuclear receptors bind predominantly to introns
and distal intergenetic regions, and binding sites closer to transcription start 
sites were found to be neither stronger nor more evolutionarily conserved.
Interestingly, while most nuclear receptors appear to be predominantly
transcriptional activators, our analysis suggests that the binding of ESR1, RARA,
and RARG has both activating and repressive effects. Through meta-analysis of
different omic data of the same cancer cell line model from multiple studies, we 
generated consensus cistrome and expression profiles. We further made
probabilistic predictions of the nuclear receptor target genes by integrating
cistrome and transcriptome data and validated the predictions using expression
data from tumor samples. The final database, with comprehensive cistrome,
epigenome, and transcriptome data sets and downstream analysis results,
constitutes a valuable resource for the nuclear receptor and cancer community.

©2011 AACR

PMCID: PMC3610570
PMID: 21940749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Int J Hematol. 2011 Oct;94(4):395-8. doi: 10.1007/s12185-011-0929-1. Epub 2011
Sep 17.

A new four-way variant t(5;17;15;20)(q33;q12;q22;q11.2) in acute promyelocytic
leukemia.

Yamanouchi J(1), Hato T, Niiya T, Miyoshi K, Azuma T, Sakai I, Yasukawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioregulatory Medicine, Ehime University Graduate School of
Medicine, 454 Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime 7910295, Japan. yamanouc@m.ehime-u.ac.jp

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by t(15;17)(q22;q21), which
results in the fusion of the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene at 15q22 with the 
retinoic acid alpha-receptor (RARA) at 17q21. We report a patient with APL
carrying a new complex variant translocation (5;17;15;20). Spectral karyotyping
analysis of bone marrow cells revealed t(5;17;15;20)(q33;q12;q22;q11.2).
Fluorescence in situ hybridization with a PML/RARA dual-color DNA probe showed a 
single fusion signal, and RT-PCR analysis showed PML/RARA fusion transcripts.
Complete remission was attained with a course of conventional chemotherapy with
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). To our knowledge, this is the first report of a
four-way translocation of 5q33 and 20q11 involvement in APL.

PMID: 21927800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jan;40(1):102-15. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr637. Epub 2011 Sep 
12.

Epigenetic regulation by RARa maintains ligand-independent transcriptional
activity.

Laursen KB(1), Wong PM, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Department of Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, NY 10065, USA.

Retinoic acid receptors (RARs) a, ß and <U+03B3> are key regulators of embryonic
development. Hematopoietic differentiation is regulated by RARa, and several
types of leukemia show aberrant RARa activity. Through microarray expression
analysis, we identified transcripts differentially expressed between F9 wild-type
(Wt) and RARa knockout cells cultured in the absence or presence of the
RAR-specific ligand all trans retinoic acid (RA). We validated the decreased
Mest, Tex13, Gab1, Bcl11a, Tcfap2a and HMGcs1 transcript levels, and increased
Slc38a4, Stmn2, RpL39l, Ref2L, Mobp and Rlf1 transcript levels in the RARa
knockout cells. The decreased Mest and Tex13 transcript levels were associated
with increased promoter CpG-island methylation and increased repressive histone
modifications (H3K9me3) in RARa knockout cells. Increased Slc38a4 and Stmn2
transcript levels were associated with decreased promoter CpG-island methylation 
and increased permissive histone modifications (H3K9/K14ac, H3K4me3) in RARa
knockout cells. We demonstrated specific association of RARa and RXRa with the
Mest promoter. Importantly, stable expression of a dominant negative, oncogenic
PML-RARa fusion protein in F9 Wt cells recapitulated the decreased Mest
transcript levels observed in RARa knockout cells. We propose that RARa plays an 
important role in cellular memory and imprinting by regulating the CpG
methylation status of specific promoter regions.

PMCID: PMC3245912
PMID: 21911359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Haematologica. 2011 Dec;96(12):1799-807. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.049007. Epub 
2011 Aug 22.

Clinical impact of FLT3 mutation load in acute promyelocytic leukemia with
t(15;17)/PML-RARA.

Schnittger S(1), Bacher U, Haferlach C, Kern W, Alpermann T, Haferlach T.

Author information: 
(1)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Max-Lebsche-Platz 31, Munich, Germany.
susanne.schnittger@mll.com

BACKGROUND: Combined treatment with all-trans-retinoic acid and chemotherapy is
extremely efficient in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia with
t(15;17)/PML-RARA, but up to 15% of patients relapse.
DESIGN AND METHODS: To further clarify the prognostic impact of parameters such
as FLT3 mutations, we comprehensively characterized the relation between genetic 
features and outcome in 147 patients (aged 19.7-86.3 years) with acute
promyelocytic leukemia.
RESULTS: Internal tandem duplications of the FLT3 gene (FLT3-ITD) were detected
in 47/147 (32.0%) and tyrosine kinase domain mutations (FLT3-TKD) in 19/147
(12.9%) patients. FLT3-ITD or FLT3-TKD mutation status did not have a significant
prognostic impact, whereas FLT3-ITD mutation load, as defined by a
mutation/wild-type ratio of less than 0.5 was associated with trends to a better 
2-year overall survival rate (86.7% versus 72.7%; P=0.075) and 2-year event-free 
survival rate (84.5% versus 62.1%, P=0.023) compared to the survival rates of
patients with a ratio of 0.5 or more. Besides the t(15;17), an additional
chromosomal abnormality was detected in 57 of 147 cases and did not show a
significant impact on survival. White blood cell counts of 10×10(9)/L or less
versus more than 10×10(9)/L were associated with a better 2-year overall survival
rate (88.3% versus 69.4%, respectively; P=0.015), as was male sex (P=0.040). In
multivariate analysis, only higher age had a significant adverse impact.
CONCLUSIONS: Prospective trials should further investigate the clinical impact of
the FLT3-ITD/wild-type mutation load aiming to evaluate whether this parameter
might be included in risk stratification in patients with acute promyelocytic
leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3232262
PMID: 21859732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Genes Cancer. 2011 Feb;2(2):160-5. doi: 10.1177/1947601911410300.

Treatment with 5-azacytidine accelerates acute promyelocytic leukemia
leukemogenesis in a transgenic mouse model.

Scaglioni PP(1), Cai LF, Majid SM, Yung TM, Socci ND, Kogan SC, Kopelovich L,
Pandolfi PP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY, USA.

A key oncogenic force in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is the ability of the
promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid receptor a (PML-RARA) oncoprotein to recruit
transcriptional repressors and DNA methyltransferases at retinoic acid-responsive
elements. Pharmacological doses of retinoic acid relieve transcriptional
repression inducing terminal differentiation/apoptosis of the leukemic blasts.
APL blasts often harbor additional recurrent chromosomal abnormalities, and
significantly, APL prevalence is increased in Latino populations. These
observations suggest that multiple genetic and environmental/dietary factors are 
likely implicated in APL. We tested whether dietary or targeted chemopreventive
strategies relieving PML-RARA transcriptional repression would be effective in a 
transgenic mouse model. Surprisingly, we found that 1) treatment with a
demethylating agent, 5-azacytidine, results in a striking acceleration of APL; 2)
a high fat, low folate/choline-containing diet resulted in a substantial but
nonsignificant APL acceleration; and 3) all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) is
ineffective in preventing leukemia and results in ATRA-resistant APL. Our
findings have important clinical implications because ATRA is a drug of choice
for APL treatment and indicate that global demethylation, whether through dietary
manipulations or through the use of a pharmacologic agent such as 5-azacytidine, 
may have unintended and detrimental consequences in chemopreventive regimens.

PMCID: PMC3111249
PMID: 21779489  [PubMed]


302. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 23;286(38):33369-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.225680. Epub
2011 Jul 18.

Tripartite motif 24 (Trim24/Tif1a) tumor suppressor protein is a novel negative
regulator of interferon (IFN)/signal transducers and activators of transcription 
(STAT) signaling pathway acting through retinoic acid receptor a (Rara)
inhibition.

Tisserand J(1), Khetchoumian K, Thibault C, Dembélé D, Chambon P, Losson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie
Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur, BP 10142, 67404 
Illkirch-Cedex, Communauté Urbaine de Strasbourg, France.

Recent genetic studies in mice have established that the nuclear receptor
coregulator Trim24/Tif1a suppresses hepatocarcinogenesis by inhibiting retinoic
acid receptor a (Rara)-dependent transcription and cell proliferation. However,
Rara targets regulated by Trim24 remain unknown. We report that the loss of
Trim24 resulted in interferon (IFN)/STAT pathway overactivation soon after birth 
(week 5). Despite a transient attenuation of this pathway by the induction of
several IFN/STAT pathway repressors later in the disease, this phenomenon became 
more pronounced in tumors. Remarkably, Rara haplodeficiency, which suppresses
tumorigenesis in Trim24(-/-) mice, prevented IFN/STAT overactivation. Moreover,
together with Rara, Trim24 bound to the retinoic acid-responsive element of the
Stat1 promoter and repressed its retinoic acid-induced transcription. Altogether,
these results identify Trim24 as a novel negative regulator of the IFN/STAT
pathway and suggest that this repression through Rara inhibition may prevent
liver cancer.

PMCID: PMC3190892
PMID: 21768647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Haematologica. 2011 Oct;96(10):1565-6. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.047134. Epub
2011 Jul 12.

FIP1L1/RARA with breakpoint at FIP1L1 intron 13: a variant translocation in acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Menezes J, Acquadro F, Perez-Pons de la Villa C, García-Sánchez F, Álvarez S,
Cigudosa JC.

PMCID: PMC3186322
PMID: 21750086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Korean J Pediatr. 2011 Mar;54(3):95-105. doi: 10.3345/kjp.2011.54.3.95. Epub 2011
Mar 31.

Recent advances in the diagnosis and management of childhood acute promyelocytic 
leukemia.

Yoo ES(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Ewha
Womans University, School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Since the successful introduction of all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) and its
combination with anthracycline-containing chemotherapy, the prognosis for acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) has markedly improved. With ATRA and
anthracycline-based-chemotherapy, the complete remission rate is greater than
90%, and the long-term survival rate is 70-89%. Moreover, arsenic trioxide (ATO),
which was introduced for APL treatment in 1994, resulted in excellent remission
rates in relapsed patients with APL, and more recently, several clinical studies 
have been designed to explore its role in initial therapy either alone or in
combination with ATRA. APL is a rare disease in children and is frequently
associated with hyperleukocytosis, which is a marker for higher risk of relapse
and an increased incidence of microgranular morphology. The frequency of
occurrence of the promyelocytic leukemia/retinoic acid receptor-alpha (PML/RARa) 
isoforms bcr 2 and bcr 3 is higher in children than in adults. Although recent
clinical studies have reported comparable long-term survival rates in patients
with APL, therapy for APL in children is challenging because of the risk of early
death and the potential long-term cardiac toxicity resulting from the need to use
high doses of anthracyclines. Additional prospective, randomized, large clinical 
trials are needed to address several issues in pediatric APL and to possibly
minimize or eliminate the need for chemotherapy by combining ATRA and ATO. In
this review article, we discuss the molecular pathogenesis, diagnostic progress, 
and most recent therapeutic advances in the treatment of children with APL.

PMCID: PMC3121002
PMID: 21738538  [PubMed]


305. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2011;156(3):282-90. doi: 10.1159/000323891. Epub 2011
Jun 29.

Evaluation of IgE antibodies to recombinant peanut allergens in patients with
reported reactions to peanut.

Movérare R(1), Ahlstedt S, Bengtsson U, Borres MP, van Hage M, Poorafshar M,
Sjölander S, Akerström J, van Odijk J.

Author information: 
(1)Phadia AB, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. robert.moverare@phadia.com

Comment in
    Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2011;156(3):231-3.

BACKGROUND: Peanut may cause severe reactions in allergic individuals. The
objective was to evaluate IgE antibodies to various recombinant (r) peanut and
birch pollen allergens in relation to IgE levels to whole peanut extract and
severe allergic reactions to peanut.
METHODS: Seventy-four Swedish peanut-allergic patients (age: 14-61 years)
reported previous peanut exposure and associated symptoms using a questionnaire. 
Their IgE reactivity to peanut, birch pollen and individual allergen components
was analyzed using ImmunoCAP.
RESULTS: Of the 48 subjects sensitized to Ara h 1, 2 or 3, 60% had
peanut-specific IgE levels >15 kU(A)/l, while 100% of the subjects without
detectable IgE to these allergens had low peanut-specific IgE levels (<10
kU(A)/l). The levels of IgE to rAra h 8, rBet v 1 and birch pollen were highly
correlated (r(S) = 0.94, p < 0.0001). Fifty-eight patients reported adverse
reactions after accidental or deliberate peanut exposure (oral, inhalation or
skin) of whom 41 had IgE to rAra h 1, 2 or 3. Symptoms of respiratory distress
were associated with sensitization to Ara h 1, 2 or 3 (56 vs. 18%, p < 0.01). Two
cases of anaphylaxis were reported among the individuals sensitized to Ara h 1-3.
IgE to rAra h 8, rAra h 9, profilin or cross-reactive carbohydrate determinants
were not associated with severe symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that IgE reactivity to Ara h 1, 2 and 3 is
associated with severe reactions after exposure to peanut in Swedish patients.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21720173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Infect Genet Evol. 2011 Oct;11(7):1616-23. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.06.002.
Epub 2011 Jun 25.

Variation in European harbour seal immune response genes and susceptibility to
phocine distemper virus (PDV).

McCarthy AJ(1), Shaw MA, Jepson PD, Brasseur SM, Reijnders PJ, Goodman SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Integrative and Comparative Biology, Faculty of Biological
Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.

Phocine distemper virus (PDV) has caused two mass mortalities of European harbour
seals (Phoca vitulina) in recent decades. Levels of mortality varied considerably
among European populations in both the 1988 and 2002 epidemics, with higher
mortality in continental European populations in comparison to UK populations.
High levels of genetic differentiation at neutral makers among seal populations
allow for the possibility that there could be potential genetic differences at
functional loci that may account for some of the variation in mortality. Recent
genome sequencing of carnivore species and development of genomic tools have now 
made it possible to explore the possible contribution of variation in candidate
genes from harbour seals in relation to the differential mortality patterns. We
assessed variation in eight genes (CD46, IFNG, IL4, IL8, IL10, RARa, SLAM and
TLR2) encoding key proteins involved in host cellular interactions with
Morbilliviruses and the relationship of variants to disease status. This work
constitutes the first genetic association study for Morbillivirus disease
susceptibility in a non-model organism, and for a natural mortality event. We
found no variation in harbour seals from across Europe in the protein coding
domains of the viral receptors SLAM and CD46, but SNPs were present in SLAM
intron 2. SNPs were also present in IL8 p2 and RARa exon 1. There was no
significant association of SLAM or RARa polymorphisms with disease status
implying no role of these genes in determining resistance to PDV induced
mortality, that could be detected with the available samples and the small number
of polymorphisms indentified. However there was significant differentiation of
allele frequencies among populations. PDV and other morbilliviruses are important
models for wildlife epidemiology, host switches and viral evolution. Despite a
negative result in this case, full sequencing of pinniped and other 'non-model'
carnivore genomes will help in refining understanding the role of host genetics
in disease susceptibility for these viruses.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21712101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Apr;132(3):925-35. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1642-8. 
Epub 2011 Jun 23.

Co-amplification of the HER2 gene and chromosome 17 centromere: a potential
diagnostic pitfall in HER2 testing in breast cancer.

Varga Z(1), Tubbs RR, Wang Z, Sun Y, Noske A, Kradolfer D, Bosshard G, Jochum W, 
Moch H, Öhlschlegel C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Surgical Pathology, University Hospital Zurich,
Schmelzbergstrasse 12, 8091 Zurich, Switzerland. zsuzsanna.varga@usz.ch

Co-amplification of the centromere on chromosome 17 (CEP17) and HER2 can occur in
breast cancer. Such aberrant patterns (clusters) on CEP17 can be misleading to
calculate the HER2/CEP17 ratio, and thus underreporting of HER2 amplification. We
identified 14 breast cancers retrospectively with HER2/CEP17 co-amplification and
performed FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridization) with additional chromosome 17
probes (17p11.1-q11.1, 17p11.2-p12, TP53 on 17p13.1, RARA on 17q21.1-3 and TOP2
on 17q21.3-22) to characterize the spanning of the amplicon in these cases.
Furthermore, the HER2 status was analyzed by means of HER2 silver in situ
hybridization (SISH) and immunohistochemistry (IHC). The co-amplification of
HER2/CEP17 was compared between the three institutions. TP53 was eusomic in all
cases, 17p11.2-p12 in 79% (11/14), whereas 17p11.1-q11.1 showed chromosomal gain 
in all cases. RARA was amplified in 10/14 cases (71%) and TOP2 in 3/14 cases
(21%). HER2 was amplified with FISH/SISH in all 14 cases. 9/14 tumors were 3+ IHC
positive (64%) and 3 cases were 2+ IHC positive. In our cohort the CEP17 amplicon
almost always involves the HER2 but not the TOP2 locus. Overall agreement on
HER2/CEP17 ratio (when applying ASCO/CAP guidelines) was only 64% (9/14 cases)
between the institutions. Discrepant ratios varied from 1.1 to 14.3. The
HER2/CEP17 co-amplification is not defined in the ASCO/CAP guidelines, and may
result in inaccurate HER2-FISH/SISH status, particularly if only the calculated
HER2/CEP17 ratio is reported. It is recommended to report separate CEP17 and HER2
signals in complex HER2/CEP17 patterns.

PMID: 21698407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Mar;27(3):324-6.

[Multiprobe fluorescence in situ hybridization panel in detection of the common
cytogenetic abnormalities of acute myeloid leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu LL(1), Liu XL, Du QF, Song LL, Cao R, Wei YQ, Xu N, Zhang JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou 510515, China.

AIM: To evaluate the value of multiprobe Fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) panel in detection of the common cytogenetic abnormalities in acute
myeloidleukemia( AML). And to investigate its association with clinical
diagnosis, chemotherapy and prognosis.
METHODS: Using the multiprobe AML/MDS panel designed to detect upto eight
different FISH probes, which was for AML1/ETO transfusion gene, PML-RARa
transfusion gene, CBFß/MYH11 transfusion gene, MLL breakapart, P53
deletion,Del(5q), Del(7q), Del(20q), 40 cases of AML were investigated. The
conventional karyotype analysis and the in-formation about the treatment
responses were also used for assessing.
RESULTS: 22 of the 40 AML cases were found to carry 7 types of cytogenetic
abnormalities by multiprobe FISH panel including AML1/ETO transfusion gene,
PML-RARa transfusion gene, MLL breakapart, P53 deletion, Del (5q), Del7q and
trisomy 8. However conventional karyotype analysis only discovered 11 cases with 
the corresponding cytogenetic abnormalities, the positive ratio was 57.5% in
multiprobe FISH panel higher than that in karyotype analysis (27.50%). Patiens
with AML1/ETO or PML-RARa transfusion gene are easily to reach CR in the first
induction chemotherapy, while the Del(7q), MLL breakapart, complex cytogenetic
abnormalities may indicate poor prognosis.
CONCLUSION: Mutiprobe FISH panel is more rapid, accurate and effective for
detecting the common cytogenetic abnormalities in AML, compared with the
conventional karyotype analysis and common FISH analysis.

PMID: 21638933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2011 Oct;33(7):e326-9. doi:
10.1097/MPH.0b013e31820998de.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia with complex translocation t(5;17;15)(q35;q21;q22): 
case report and review of the literature.

Cho SR(1), Park SJ, Kim HJ, Park IJ, Choi JR, Jung HJ, Park JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, 
Republic of Korea.

The t(15;17)(q22;q21), resulting in PML-RARA fusion gene, is a characteristic
chromosomal translocation in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). We report a
pediatric APL case with a 3-way translocation: t(5;17;15)(q35;q21;q22). Complete 
blood cell counts of a 12-year-old girl, of pale appearance, showed pancytopenia 
with increased blasts. Morphology and immunophenotype of the leukemic cells were 
compatible with APL. Karyotype analysis showed t(5;17;15)(q35;q21;q22) and
add(7)(q32). We detected the PML-RARA fusion gene by both reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and fluorescent in situ hybridization
analysis. The patient underwent successful treatment with cytarabine with
all-trans retinoic acid and anthracycline-based therapy.

PMID: 21617563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Blood. 2011 Aug 11;118(6):1600-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-329433. Epub 2011
May 25.

Missense mutations in PML-RARA are critical for the lack of responsiveness to
arsenic trioxide treatment.

Goto E(1), Tomita A, Hayakawa F, Atsumi A, Kiyoi H, Naoe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

Comment in
    Blood. 2011 Aug 11;118(6):1432-4.

Arsenic trioxide (As2O3) is a highly effective treatment for patients with
refractory/relapsed acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), but resistance to As2O3
has recently been seen. In the present study, we report the findings that 2 of 15
patients with refractory/relapsed APL treated with As2O3 were clinically As2O3
resistant. Leukemia cells from these 2 patients harbored missense mutations in
promyelocytic leukemia gene-retinoic acid receptor-a gene (PML-RARA) transcripts,
resulting in amino acid substitutions of A216V and L218P in the PML B2 domain.
When wild-type or mutated PML-RARA (PR-WT and PR-B/L-mut, respectively) were
overexpressed in HeLa cells, immunoblotting showed SUMOylated and/or oligomerized
protein bands in PR-WT but not in PR-B/L-mut after As2O3 treatment.
Protein-localization analysis indicated that PR-WT in the soluble fraction was
transferred to the insoluble fraction after treatment with As2O3, but PR-B/L-mut 
was stably detected in fractions both with and without As2O3. Immunofluorescent
microscopy analysis showed PR-WT localization as a microgranular pattern in the
cytoplasm without As2O3 and as a macrogranular pattern with As2O3. PR-B/L-mut was
diffusely observed in the cytoplasm with and without As2O3. Nearly identical
localization patterns were observed in patients' primary cells. Therefore, B2
domain mutations may play an important role in aberrant molecular responses
toAs2O3 and may be critical for As2O3 resistance in APL.

PMID: 21613260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Med Oncol. 2012 Jun;29(2):1209-16. doi: 10.1007/s12032-011-9946-4. Epub 2011 May 
5.

Characterization of arsenic-induced cytogenetic alterations in acute
promyelocytic leukemia cell line, NB4.

Yaghmaie M(1), Mozdarani H, Alimoghaddam K, Ghaffari SH, Ghavamzadeh A,
Hajhashemi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, P.O.Box 14115-111, Tehran, Iran.

Gain or loss of genes plays important roles in leukemogenesis of APL via
cooperation with PML-RARA. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was applied 
to investigate the DNA copy number changes of hTERT, ERG, CDKN1B (P27), CDKN2A
(P16), and TP53 genes in an acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cell line (NB4).
Five bacterial artificial chromosome probes (BAC) for 9p21.3, 17p13.1, 12p13.2,
5p15.33, 21q22.2 regions were prepared using sequence independent amplification
(SIA) and were hybridized to NB4 cells treated with different doses of arsenic
trioxide (As(2)O(3); ATO) at various time intervals. NB4 cells were also
karyotyped by G-banded chromosome analysis 24 h after culture initiation. FISH
analysis prior to treatment showed CDKN1B, CDKN2A, and TP53 gene deletion but ERG
and hTERT gene amplification. After treatment with ATO, the number of the NB4
cells with deleted CDKN1B and CDKN2A as well as the counts of the cells with
hTERT amplification was significantly reduced in time- and does-dependent
manners. In addition, we observed expressive increase in signal patterns of
CDKN1B and CDKN2A along with significant decline in hTERT signal patterns in
ATO-treated cells as compared with the control group (in time- and dose-dependent
manners). On the other hand, no difference in signal patterns for Erg and p53 was
observed in response to ATO exposure. The results of the present study show the
cytogenetic alteration in hTERT, CDKN1B, and CDKN2A in NB4 cells after treatment 
with ATO might introduce a new mechanism of antitumor activities of ATO in APL
cell line, NB4.

PMID: 21544632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Leuk Res. 2011 Jul;35(7):e106-10. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2011.03.020. Epub 2011
May 6.

A novel PML-ADAMTS17-RARA gene rearrangement in a patient with pregnancy-related 
acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Lim G, Cho EH, Cho SY, Shin SY, Park JC, Yang YJ, Oh SH, Marschalek R, Meyer C,
Park TS.

PMID: 21529941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. JAMA. 2011 Apr 20;305(15):1577-84. doi: 10.1001/jama.2011.497.

Use of whole-genome sequencing to diagnose a cryptic fusion oncogene.

Welch JS(1), Westervelt P, Ding L, Larson DE, Klco JM, Kulkarni S, Wallis J, Chen
K, Payton JE, Fulton RS, Veizer J, Schmidt H, Vickery TL, Heath S, Watson MA,
Tomasson MH, Link DC, Graubert TA, DiPersio JF, Mardis ER, Ley TJ, Wilson RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University, St Louis, Missouri, USA.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2011 Apr 20;305(15):1596-7.
    JAMA. 2011 Aug 10;306(6):610; author reply 610-1.

CONTEXT: Whole-genome sequencing is becoming increasingly available for research 
purposes, but it has not yet been routinely used for clinical diagnosis.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether whole-genome sequencing can identify cryptic,
actionable mutations in a clinically relevant time frame.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PATIENT: We were referred a difficult diagnostic case of
acute promyelocytic leukemia with no pathogenic X-RARA fusion identified by
routine metaphase cytogenetics or interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH). The case patient was enrolled in an institutional review board-approved
protocol, with consent specifically tailored to the implications of whole-genome 
sequencing. The protocol uses a "movable firewall" that maintains patient
anonymity within the entire research team but allows the research team to
communicate medically relevant information to the treating physician.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Clinical relevance of whole-genome sequencing and time to 
communicate validated results to the treating physician.
RESULTS: Massively parallel paired-end sequencing allowed identification of a
cytogenetically cryptic event: a 77-kilobase segment from chromosome 15 was
inserted en bloc into the second intron of the RARA gene on chromosome 17,
resulting in a classic bcr3 PML-RARA fusion gene. Reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction sequencing subsequently validated the expression of the
fusion transcript. Novel FISH probes identified 2 additional cases of
t(15;17)-negative acute promyelocytic leukemia that had cytogenetically invisible
insertions. Whole-genome sequencing and validation were completed in 7 weeks and 
changed the treatment plan for the patient.
CONCLUSION: Whole-genome sequencing can identify cytogenetically invisible
oncogenes in a clinically relevant time frame.

PMCID: PMC3156695
PMID: 21505136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Korean J Lab Med. 2011 Apr;31(2):86-90. doi: 10.3343/kjlm.2011.31.2.86.

A rare case of microgranular acute promyelocytic leukemia associated with
ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) in an old-age patient.

Kim MJ(1), Cho SY, Lim G, Yoon HS, Lee HJ, Suh JT, Lee J, Lee WI, Cho KS, Park
TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University,
Seoul, Korea.

We present a rare case of microgranular variant acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL) associated with ider(17)(q10)t(15;17)(q22;q12) of an old-age patient. The
initial chromosome study showed a
46,XX,del(6)(?q21q25),der(15)t(15;17)(q22;q12),ider(17)(q10)t(15;17)[10]/47,sl,+i
der(17)(q10)t(15;17)[3]/46,XX[16]. FISH signals from a dual color dual fusion
translocation PML-RARA probe were consistent with the results of conventional
cytogenetics. Because of the rarity of ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) in microgranular
APL, further studies on both gene dosage effect of this chromosomal abnormality
and the influence of ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) on clinical features such as
prognosis, survival, and treatment response of APL cases are recommended.

PMCID: PMC3116005
PMID: 21474981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. BMC Genomics. 2011 Mar 31;12:169. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-169.

High-throughput sequencing of Astrammina rara: sampling the giant genome of a
giant foraminiferan protist.

Habura A(1), Hou Y, Reilly AA, Bowser SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Disease, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health, Albany, 12201, USA. habura@wadsworth.org

BACKGROUND: Foraminiferan protists, which are significant players in most marine 
ecosystems, are also genetic innovators, harboring unique modifications to
proteins that make up the basic eukaryotic cell machinery. Despite their
ecological and evolutionary importance, foraminiferan genomes are poorly
understood due to the extreme sequence divergence of many genes and the
difficulty of obtaining pure samples: exogenous DNA from ingested food or
ecto/endo symbionts often vastly exceed the amount of "native" DNA, and
foraminiferans cannot be cultured axenically. Few foraminiferal genes have been
sequenced from genomic material, although partial sequences of coding regions
have been determined by EST studies and mass spectroscopy. The lack of genomic
data has impeded evolutionary and cell-biology studies and has also hindered our 
ability to test ecological hypotheses using genetic tools.
RESULTS: 454 sequence analysis was performed on a library derived from whole
genome amplification of microdissected nuclei of the Antarctic foraminiferan
Astrammina rara. Xenogenomic sequence, which was shown not to be of eukaryotic
origin, represented only 12% of the sample. The first foraminiferal examples of
important classes of genes, such as tRNA genes, are reported, and we present
evidence that sequences of mitochondrial origin have been translocated to the
nucleus. The recovery of a 3' UTR and downstream sequence from an actin gene
suggests that foraminiferal mRNA processing may have some unusual features.
Finally, the presence of a co-purified bacterial genome in the library also
permitted the first calculation of the size of a foraminiferal genome by
molecular methods, and statistical analysis of sequence from different genomic
sources indicates that low-complexity tracts of the genome may be endoreplicated 
in some stages of the foraminiferal life cycle.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide the first window into genomic organization and
genetic control in these organisms, and also complement and expands upon
information about foraminiferal genes based on EST projects. The genomic data
obtained are informative for environmental and cell-biological studies, and will 
also be useful for efforts to understand relationships between foraminiferans and
other protists.

PMCID: PMC3079666
PMID: 21453490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Arch Anim Nutr. 2011 Feb;65(1):34-45.

Effect of restricted feeding and realimentation periods on compensatory growth
performance and physiological characteristics of pigs.

Wiecek J(1), Rekiel A, Skomial J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pig Breeding, Faculty of Animal Sciences, Warsaw University of
Life Sciences, Poland. justyna_wiecek@sggw.pl

An experiment with 94 growing pigs was conducted to determine the effect of a
feed restriction of 25% on performance, carcass quality, organ weight, blood
hormone levels and some biochemical parameters. The experiment consisted of four 
periods of 21 days each. In the different periods animals (initial BW about 31
kg) were fed ad libitum (A) or restrictively (R), resulting at day 84 in Groups
AAAA, AARA, RAAA and RARA. During Period I, the daily gain of restrictively fed
pigs (Group R) was about 22% lower than from Group A (p < 0.01). During
realimentation, compensatory growth was observed in Period II for Group RA, and
in Period IV for Group RARA. No compensatory growth was observed for Group AARA, 
which was fed restrictively in Period III only (day 43 to 63). For the whole
experiment (day 1 to 84), BW gain and feed conversion amounted to 830 g/d and
3.03 kg/kg, 798 g/d and 2.99 kg/kg, 813 g/d and 2.86 kg/kg, and 800 g/d and 2.78 
kg/kg for Groups AAAA, AARA, RAAA and RARA, respectively. The decrease of liver
and kidney weights as a result of restricted feeding was not significant and
after three weeks of realimentation these differences almost disappeared. At day 
3 after realimentation of restrictively fed pigs (Group RA) the growth hormone
level was significantly increased, but at day 14 of realimentation this level
turned out to be lower (p < 0.01) than in pigs fed ad libitum (Group AA). This
was considered as a further indication of compensatory growth.

PMID: 21452612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Blood. 2011 Jun 2;117(22):5795-802. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-02-329367. Epub 2011 
Mar 28.

Revisiting the differentiation paradigm in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Ablain J(1), de The H.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Paris 7/Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR
7212/INSERM U944, Equipe labellisée No. 11, Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer,
Hôpital St Louis, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Blood. 2012 Mar 1;119(9):2177-9.

As the result of intense clinical and basic research, acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL) has progressively evolved from a deadly to a curable disease.
Historically, efforts aimed at understanding the molecular bases for therapy
response have repeatedly illuminated APL pathogenesis. The classic model
attributes this therapeutic success to the transcriptional reactivation elicited 
by retinoic acid and the resulting overcoming of the differentiation block
characteristic of APL blasts. However, in clinical practice, retinoic acid by
itself only rarely yields prolonged remissions, even though it induces massive
differentiation. In contrast, as a single agent, arsenic trioxide neither
directly activates transcription nor triggers terminal differentiation ex vivo,
but cures many patients. Here we review the evidence from recent ex vivo and in
vivo studies that allow a reassessment of the role of differentiation in APL
cure. We discuss alternative models in which PML-RARA degradation and the
subsequent loss of APL cell self-renewal play central roles. Rather than therapy 
aimed at inducing differentiation, targeting cancer cell self-renewal may
represent a more effective goal, achievable by a broader range of therapeutic
agents.

PMID: 21444912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Clin Invest. 2011 Apr;121(4):1445-55. doi: 10.1172/JCI45284. Epub 2011 Mar 23.

Sequencing a mouse acute promyelocytic leukemia genome reveals genetic events
relevant for disease progression.

Wartman LD(1), Larson DE, Xiang Z, Ding L, Chen K, Lin L, Cahan P, Klco JM, Welch
JS, Li C, Payton JE, Uy GL, Varghese N, Ries RE, Hoock M, Koboldt DC, McLellan
MD, Schmidt H, Fulton RS, Abbott RM, Cook L, McGrath SD, Fan X, Dukes AF, Vickery
T, Kalicki J, Lamprecht TL, Graubert TA, Tomasson MH, Mardis ER, Wilson RK, Ley
TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Oncology, Stem Cell Biology
Section, Washington University School of Medicine, Siteman Cancer Center, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2011 Apr;121(4):1255-8.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a subtype of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). 
It is characterized by the t(15;17)(q22;q11.2) chromosomal translocation that
creates the promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid receptor a (PML-RARA) fusion
oncogene. Although this fusion oncogene is known to initiate APL in mice, other
cooperating mutations, as yet ill defined, are important for disease
pathogenesis. To identify these, we used a mouse model of APL, whereby PML-RARA
expressed in myeloid cells leads to a myeloproliferative disease that ultimately 
evolves into APL. Sequencing of a mouse APL genome revealed 3 somatic,
nonsynonymous mutations relevant to APL pathogenesis, of which 1 (Jak1 V657F) was
found to be recurrent in other affected mice. This mutation was identical to the 
JAK1 V658F mutation previously found in human APL and acute lymphoblastic
leukemia samples. Further analysis showed that JAK1 V658F cooperated in vivo with
PML-RARA, causing a rapidly fatal leukemia in mice. We also discovered a somatic 
150-kb deletion involving the lysine (K)-specific demethylase 6A (Kdm6a, also
known as Utx) gene, in the mouse APL genome. Similar deletions were observed in 3
out of 14 additional mouse APL samples and 1 out of 150 human AML samples. In
conclusion, whole genome sequencing of mouse cancer genomes can provide an
unbiased and comprehensive approach for discovering functionally relevant
mutations that are also present in human leukemias.

PMCID: PMC3069786
PMID: 21436584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Clin Invest. 2011 Apr;121(4):1255-8. doi: 10.1172/JCI57200. Epub 2011 Mar 23.

Finding a needle in a haystack: whole genome sequencing and mutation discovery in
murine models.

Rampal RK(1), Levine RL.

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program and Leukemia Service, Department of
Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2011 Apr;121(4):1445-55.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a malignancy of the bone marrow, in which
there is a deficiency of myeloid cells and an excess of immature cells called
promyelocytes. APL is most commonly caused by a translocation (15:17) and
expression of the promyelocytic leukemia and the retinoic receptor a (PML-RARA)
fusion product; however, the events that cooperate with PML-RARA in APL
pathogenesis are not well understood. In this issue of the JCI, Wartman and
colleagues use an innovative approach to find other relevant mutations in APL.
They performed whole genome sequencing and copy number analysis of a
well-characterized APL mouse model to uncover somatic mutations in Jak1 and
lysine (K)-specific demethylase 6A (Kdm6a, also known as Utx) in mice with APL
and validated the ability of Jak1 mutations to cooperate with PML-RARA in APL.
The findings implicate the JAK/STAT pathway in the pathogenesis of APL and
illustrate the power of whole genome sequencing to identify novel disease alleles
in murine models of disease.

PMCID: PMC3069796
PMID: 21436577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Haematologica. 2011 Jun;96(6):829-36. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.035584. Epub
2011 Mar 21.

CDKN1B, encoding the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B (p27), is located in
the minimally deleted region of 12p abnormalities in myeloid malignancies and its
low expression is a favorable prognostic marker in acute myeloid leukemia.

Haferlach C(1), Bacher U, Kohlmann A, Schindela S, Alpermann T, Kern W,
Schnittger S, Haferlach T.

Author information: 
(1)MLL, Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Max-Lebsche-Platz 31, 81377 Munich, Germany. 
claudia.haferlach@mll.com

BACKGROUND: Alterations of the short arm of chromosome 12 (12p) occur in various 
hematologic malignancies and ETV6 and CDKN1B, which are located on 12p, have been
implicated as leukemogenic genes of interest.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We selected seven patients with myeloid malignancies and
small 12p deletions detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization encompassing
only the region centromeric of ETV6 and further evaluated them by single
nucleotide polymorphism microarrays.
RESULTS: The minimally deleted region contained only nine genes. These genes were
subsequently analyzed by microarray expression profiling in an independent cohort
of 781 patients, most, but not all, of whom had different hematologic
malignancies CREBL2, MANSC1, and CDKN1B were expressed in more than 25% of cases,
while the other six genes were expressed in only a minority of cases. As CDKN1B
is a cell cycle regulator and functions as a tumor suppressor gene, this gene was
selected for further expression studies in 286 patients with acute myeloid
leukemia. When comparing patients with low CDKN1B expression (expression
level<1,160; 1st quartile) with those with intermediate or high expression
(2nd-4th quartiles), certain mutations were observed more frequently in the
former: RUNX1-RUNX1T1 (11/83, 13.3% versus 5/203; 2.5%; P=0.001), PML-RARA
rearrangements (11/83, 13.3% versus 4/203, 2.0%; P<0.001), 11q23/MLL
rearrangements (6/83, 7.2% versus 4/203, 2.0%; P=0.038), and FLT3-TKD mutations
(7/63, 11.1% versus 6/167, 3.6%; P=0.047). The median overall survival of
patients with low CDKN1B expression was longer than that of patients with
intermediate/high expression (not reached versus 14.9 months; P=0.005). Likewise,
patients with low CDKN1B expression had a longer event-free survival than those
with intermediate/high expression (31.0 versus 9.7 months; P=0.013).
CONCLUSIONS: CDKN1B is an interesting candidate gene as a potential biomarker for
prognostication in acute myeloid leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3105644
PMID: 21422114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Immunity. 2011 Mar 25;34(3):435-47. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.03.003.

Essential role for retinoic acid in the promotion of CD4(+) T cell effector
responses via retinoic acid receptor alpha.

Hall JA(1), Cannons JL, Grainger JR, Dos Santos LM, Hand TW, Naik S, Wohlfert EA,
Chou DB, Oldenhove G, Robinson M, Grigg ME, Kastenmayer R, Schwartzberg PL,
Belkaid Y.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunology Section, Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2011 Mar 25;34(3):290-2.

Vitamin A and its metabolite, retinoic acid (RA) are implicated in the regulation
of immune homeostasis via the peripheral induction of regulatory T cells. Here we
showed RA was also required to elicit proinflammatory CD4(+) helper T cell
responses to infection and mucosal vaccination. Retinoic acid receptor alpha
(RARa) was the critical mediator of these effects. Antagonism of RAR signaling
and deficiency in RARa (Rara(-/-)) resulted in a cell-autonomous CD4(+) T cell
activation defect, which impaired intermediate signaling events, including
calcium mobilization. Altogether, these findings reveal a fundamental role for
the RA-RARa axis in the development of both regulatory and inflammatory arms of
adaptive immunity and establish nutritional status as a broad regulator of
adaptive T cell responses.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3415227
PMID: 21419664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Blood. 2011 May 5;117(18):4716-25. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-302950. Epub 2011
Mar 8.

AIDA 0493 protocol for newly diagnosed acute promyelocytic leukemia: very
long-term results and role of maintenance.

Avvisati G(1), Lo-Coco F, Paoloni FP, Petti MC, Diverio D, Vignetti M, Latagliata
R, Specchia G, Baccarani M, Di Bona E, Fioritoni G, Marmont F, Rambaldi A, Di
Raimondo F, Kropp MG, Pizzolo G, Pogliani EM, Rossi G, Cantore N, Nobile F,
Gabbas A, Ferrara F, Fazi P, Amadori S, Mandelli F; GIMEMA, AIEOP, and EORTC
Cooperative Groups.

Author information: 
(1)Unità Operativa Complessa di Ematologia e Terapia Cellulare, Università Campus
Bio-Medico, Roma, Italy. g.avvisati@unicampus.it

All-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) has greatly modified the prognosis of acute
promyelocytic leukemia; however, the role of maintenance in patients in molecular
complete remission after consolidation treatment is still debated. From July 1993
to May 2000, 807 genetically proven newly diagnosed acute promyelocytic leukemia 
patients received ATRA plus idarubicin as induction, followed by 3 intensive
consolidation courses. Thereafter, patients reverse-transcribed polymerase chain 
reaction-negative for the PML-RARA fusion gene were randomized into 4 arms: oral 
6-mercaptopurine and intramuscular methotrexate (arm 1); ATRA alone (arm 2); 3
months of arm1 alternating to 15 days of arm 2 (arm 3); and no further therapy
(arm 4). Starting from February 1997, randomization was limited to
ATRA-containing arms only (arms 2 and 3). Complete remission was achieved in 761 
of 807 (94.3%) patients, and 681 completed the consolidation program. Of these,
664 (97.5%) were evaluated for the PML-RARA fusion gene, and 586 of 646 (90.7%)
who tested reverse-transcribed polymerase chain reaction-negative were randomized
to maintenance. The event-free survival estimate at 12 years was 68.9% (95%
confidence interval, 66.4%-71.4%), and no differences in disease-free survival at
12 years were observed among the maintenance arms.

PMID: 21385856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2011 Jan;52(1):37-40.

[Biclonal co-existence of t(15;17) and t(9;22) chromosomal abnormalities in acute
promyelocytic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Takahashi H(1), Sakai R, Hattori Y, Ohshima R, Hagihara M, Kuwabara H,
Ishigatsubo Y, Fujisawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Yokohama City University Medical Center.

A 50-year-old male was admitted to our hospital with pancytopenia. Peripheral
blood examination showed pancytopenia (WBC 450/µl, Hb 7.3 g/dl, Plt 3,000/µl) and
elevated FDP. Bone marrow examination demonstrated 38% blasts, 20% promyelocytes 
and Faggot cells. Cytogenetic analysis demonstrated the following: 46, XY,
t(15;17)(q22;q12)[9]/46, XY, del(6)(q?), t(9;22)(q34;q11.2)[1]/46, XY[10].
PML/RARA and minor BCR/ABL were also detected by quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction of bone marrow cells (52,000 copies/µgRNA
and 650 copies/µgRNA, respectively). The patient was diagnosed with acute
promyelocytic leukemia. He was treated with all-trans retinoic acid monotherapy
and achieved complete hematological remission 51 days after the initial
treatment. Post-induction bone marrow examination demonstrated 46, XY[20] and
PML/RARA 240 copies/µgRNA, whereas minor BCR/ABL was not detected. The patient's 
initial cytogenetic analysis suggested the presence of two distinct clones with
t(15;17) and t(9;22), which to our knowledge have not previously been reported.

PMID: 21378481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Clin Invest. 2011 Apr;121(4):1636-45. doi: 10.1172/JCI42953.

PML-RARA can increase hematopoietic self-renewal without causing a
myeloproliferative disease in mice.

Welch JS(1), Yuan W, Ley TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Stem Cell Biology, Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63119, USA.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by the t(15;17) translocation
that generates the fusion protein promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid receptor a
(PML-RARA) in nearly all cases. Multiple prior mouse models of APL constitutively
express PML-RARA from a variety of non-Pml loci. Typically, all animals develop a
myeloproliferative disease, followed by leukemia in a subset of animals after a
long latent period. In contrast, human APL is not associated with an antecedent
stage of myeloproliferation. To address this discrepancy, we have generated a
system whereby PML-RARA expression is somatically acquired from the mouse Pml
locus in the context of Pml haploinsufficiency. We found that physiologic
PML-RARA expression was sufficient to direct a hematopoietic progenitor
self-renewal program in vitro and in vivo. However, this expansion was not
associated with evidence of myeloproliferation, more accurately reflecting the
clinical presentation of human APL. Thus, at physiologic doses, PML-RARA
primarily acts to increase hematopoietic progenitor self-renewal, expanding a
population of cells that are susceptible to acquiring secondary mutations that
cause progression to leukemia. This mouse model provides a platform for more
accurately dissecting the early events in APL pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3068978
PMID: 21364283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Mol Diagn. 2011 Mar;13(2):213-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2010.10.009.

Common leukemia- and lymphoma-associated genetic aberrations in healthy
individuals.

Song J(1), Mercer D, Hu X, Liu H, Li MM.

Author information: 
(1)Hayward Genetics Center, Tulane University Medical Center, New Orleans,
Louisiana.

Leukemia- and lymphoma-associated (LLA) chromosomal rearrangements are critical
in the process of tumorigenesis. These genetic alterations are also important
biological markers in the diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of hematopoietic
malignant diseases. To detect the presence or absence of these genetic
alterations in healthy individuals, sensitive nested RT-PCR analyses were
performed on a large number of peripheral blood samples for selected markers
including MLL partial tandem duplications (PTDs), BCR-ABL p190, BCR-ABL p210,
MLL-AF4, AML1-ETO, PML-RARA, and CBFB-MYH11. Using nested RT-PCR, the presence of
all of these selected markers was detected in healthy individuals at various
prevalence rates. No correlation was observed between incidence and age except
for BCR-ABL p210 fusion, the incidence of which rises with increasing age. In
addition, nested RT-PCR was performed on a large cohort of umbilical cord blood
samples for MLL PTD, BCR-ABL p190 and BCR-ABL p210. The results demonstrated the 
presence of these aberrations in cord blood from healthy neonates. To our
knowledge, the presence of PML-RARA and CBFB-MYH11 in healthy individuals has not
been previously described. The present study provides further evidence for the
presence of LLA genetic alterations in healthy individuals and suggests that
these mutations are not themselves sufficient for malignant transformation.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the Association
for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3128552
PMID: 21354057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Przegl Lek. 2010;67(6):371-4.

[Genotyping and minimal residual disease study in children with acute myeloid
leukemia: preliminary results].

[Article in Polish]

Balwierz W(1), Pietrzyk JJ, Wator G, Stozek K, Klekawka T, Kwiecinska K,
Dluzniewska A, Matysiak M, Malinowska I, Sikorska-Fic B, Balcerska A,
Maciejka-Kapuscinska L, Sonta-Jakimczyk D, Tomaszewska R, Chybicka A,
Krawczuk-Rybak M, Muszynska-Roslan K, Mlynarski W, Stolarska M, Urasinski T,
Kamienska E, Sobol G, Wieczorek M, Karolczyk G, Wysocki M, Koltan S, Kowalczyk
JR, Wójcik B, Ksiazek T, Szewczyk K.

Author information: 
(1)Klinika Onkologii i Hematologii Dzieciecej, PA Instytut Pediatrii, UJ-CM w
Krakowie. balwierz@mp.pl

The aim of the paper is to present the initial results of molecular examination
which was started in 2006 for children with acute myeloid leukemia. Better
knowledge of biology of this disease, can result in establishing of new risk
factors what allows more precise patient stratification to different therapeutic 
groups. Study was obtained patients until to 18 years of age treated according to
AML-BFM 2004 INTERIM protocol in 14 centers of the Polish Pediatric
Leukemia/Lymphoma Study Group. Mononuclear cells were collected from bone marrow 
on time points established according to the AML-BFM 2004 INTERIM protocol.
Collected cells were isolated on Ficoll gradient, and RNA and DNA were isolated
using TRIZOL reagent. To synthesize cDNA an amount of 1 mg of total RNA was used.
To perform quantitative RT-PCR and RQ-PCR reactions 4 fusion gene transcripts
(AML1-ETO, CBFb-MYH11, PML-RARA /subtype bcrl and bcr3/) were used according to
the protocol established by Europe Against Cancer Program. An expression of WT1
gene was tested additionally. An analysis of ABL control gene was used to
normalize of achieved results. Determination of duplication of FLT3 gene in DNA
sample was performed with starters complementary to JM region. Genotyping was
performed in 75 patients with acute myeloid leukemia so far. AML1-ETO fusion gene
transcript was found in 14 patients (19%). PML-RARA (subtype bcr3) and CBFB-MYH11
gene transcripts were detected in 3 (4%) and 3 (4%) patients, respectively.
Duplication of FLT3 gene was found in 4 (5.3%) cases. Between 67 tested children 
over expression of WT1 was present in 51 patients (76%). Analysis of MRD level in
subsequent time points showed systematic decrease of number of fusion gene
transcript copies and gene WT1 expression. To establish the rate of molecular
marker presence in AML in children and the influence of the presence of MRD on
the treatment results as well, the study has to be conducted on a larger group of
patients with longer follow-up.

PMID: 21344764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. BMC Dev Biol. 2011 Feb 9;11:7. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-11-7.

Coordinated gene expression during gilthead sea bream skeletogenesis and its
disruption by nutritional hypervitaminosis A.

Fernández I(1), Darias M, Andree KB, Mazurais D, Zambonino-Infante JL, Gisbert E.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Cultius Experimentals, IRTA Centre de Sant Carles de la Ràpita
(IRTA-SCR), Crta, del Poble Nou s/n, 43540 - Sant Carles de la Ràpita (Spain)
ignacio.fernandez@irta.es

BACKGROUND: Vitamin A (VA) has a key role in vertebrate morphogenesis,
determining body patterning and growth through the control of cell proliferation 
and differentiation processes. VA regulates primary molecular pathways of those
processes by the binding of its active metabolite (retinoic acid) to two types of
specific nuclear receptors: retinoic acid receptors (RARs) and retinoid X
receptors (RXRs), which promote transcription of downstream target genes. This
process is well known in most of higher vertebrates; however, scarce information 
is available regarding fishes. Therefore, in order to gain further knowledge of
fish larval development and its disruption by nutritional VA imbalance, the
relative expression of some RARs and RXRs, as well as several genes involved in
morpho- and skeletogenesis such as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors
(PPARA, PPARB and PPARG); retinol-binding protein (RBP); insulin-like growth
factors I and II (IGF1 and IGF2, respectively); bone morphogenetic protein 2
(Bmp2); transforming growth factor ß-1 (TGFB1); and genes encoding different
extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins such as matrix Gla protein (mgp), osteocalcin
(bglap), osteopontin (SPP1), secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC)
and type I collagen a1 chain (COL1A1) have been studied in gilthead sea bream.
RESULTS: During gilthead sea bream larval development, specific expression
profiles for each gene were tightly regulated during fish morphogenesis and
correlated with specific morphogenetic events and tissue development. Dietary
hypervitaminosis A during early larval development disrupted the normal gene
expression profile for genes involved in RA signalling (RARA), VA homeostasis
(RBP) and several genes encoding ECM proteins that are linked to skeletogenesis, 
such as bglap and mgp.
CONCLUSIONS: Present data reflects the specific gene expression patterns of
several genes involved in larval fish RA signalling and skeletogenesis; and how
specific gene disruption induced by a nutritional VA imbalance underlie the
skeletal deformities. Our results are of basic interest for fish VA signalling
and point out some of the potential molecular players involved in fish
skeletogenesis. Increased incidences of skeletal deformities in gilthead sea
bream fed with hypervitaminosis A were the likely ultimate consequence of
specific gene expression disruption at critical development stages.

PMCID: PMC3045981
PMID: 21306609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Feb 2;13(1):R15. doi: 10.1186/bcr2824.

Quantification and clinical relevance of gene amplification at chromosome
17q12-q21 in human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-amplified breast cancers.

Lamy PJ(1), Fina F, Bascoul-Mollevi C, Laberenne AC, Martin PM, Ouafik L, Jacot
W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Spécialisée et d'Oncogénétique, Centre Régional de
Lutte contre le Cancer Val d'Aurelle-Paul Lamarque, 208, rue des Apothicaires,
Montpellier F-34298, France. pjlamy@valdorel.fnclcc.fr

INTRODUCTION: Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-amplified breast
cancers represent a tumor subtype with chromosome 17q rearrangements that lead to
frequent gene amplifications. The aim of this study was to quantify the
amplification of genes located on chromosome 17q and to analyze the relations
between the pattern of gene amplifications and the patients' characteristics and 
survival.
METHODS: Patients with HER2-positive breast tumors (HER2 score of 3+ by
immunohistochemistry or positive for HER2 amplification by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH)) (n = 86) and with HER2-negative breast tumors (n = 40)
(negative controls) were included in this study. Using a quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction method and DNA extracted from frozen tumor specimens, 11 genes
(MED1, STARD3, HER2, GRB7, THRA, RARA, TOP2A, IGFBP4, CCR7, KRT20, KRT19 and
GAS), which are localized within Chr17q12-q21 and have a putative role in breast 
cancer development, were quantified. Relapse-free and overall survival rates were
estimated from the date of surgery to the date of the event of interest
(recurrence or death) using the Kaplan-Meier method.
RESULTS: Gene amplification was observed only in HER2-positive tumors, and the
frequency of amplification decreased with the distance of the gene from HER2.
HER2 presented the highest level of amplification. TOP2A was not included in the 
smallest region of amplification involving HER2. Amplification of RARA, KRT20 and
KRT19 was significantly associated with node-positive breast cancer (P = 0.030, P
= 0.002 and P = 0.033, respectively). During a median follow-up period of 55
months (range, 6 to 81 months), the subgroup of patients with hormone
receptor-negative cancer and without TOP2A amplification showed the worst
survival (relapse-free survival: hazard ratio (HR) = 0.29, 95% confidence
interval (95% CI), 0.13 to 0.65, P = 0.001; and overall survival: HR = 0.28, 95% 
CI, 0.10 to 0.76, P = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: HER2 amplification seems to drive genomic instability along
chromosome 17q, leading to different patterns of gene amplification. This study
confirms the clinical importance of identifying, among patients with
HER2-positive breast tumors, the subgroup of patients with hormone
receptor-negative and nonamplified TOP2A cancers as they have the worst
prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3109584
PMID: 21288332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Brief Funct Genomics. 2011 Jan;10(1):18-29. doi: 10.1093/bfgp/elr002. Epub 2011
Jan 21.

Dynamics of epigenetic modifications in leukemia.

Uribesalgo I(1), Di Croce L.

Author information: 
(1)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona 08003,
Spain. luciano.dicroce@crg.es

Chromatin modifications at both histones and DNA are critical for regulating gene
expression. Mis-regulation of such epigenetic marks can lead to pathological
states; indeed, cancer affecting the hematopoietic system is frequently linked to
epigenetic abnormalities. Here, we discuss the different types of modifications
and their general impact on transcription, as well as the polycomb group of
proteins, which effect transcriptional repression and are often mis-regulated.
Further, we discuss how chromosomal translocations leading to fusion proteins can
aberrantly regulate gene transcription through chromatin modifications within the
hematopoietic system. PML-RARa, AML1-ETO and MLL-fusions are examples of fusion
proteins that mis-regulate epigenetic modifications (either directly or
indirectly), which can lead to acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML). An in-depth
understanding of the mechanisms behind the mis-regulation of epigenetic
modifications that lead to the development and progression of AMLs could be
critical for designing effective treatments.

PMCID: PMC3080765
PMID: 21258047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2011 Jan;91(1):39-43. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20744. Epub 2010 Dec 1.

Association of retinoic acid receptor genes with meningomyelocele.

Tran PX(1), Au KS, Morrison AC, Fletcher JM, Ostermaier KK, Tyerman GH, Northrup 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical School at Houston, TX
77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Neural tube defects (NTDs) occur in as many as 0.5-2 per 1000 live
births in the United States. One of the most common and severe neural tube
defects is meningomyelocele (MM) resulting from failed closure of the caudal end 
of the neural tube. MM has been induced by retinoic acid teratogenicity in rodent
models. We hypothesized that genetic variants influencing retinoic acid (RA)
induction via retinoic acid receptors (RARs) may be associated with risk for MM.
METHODS: We analyzed 47 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that span across
the three retinoic acid receptor genes using the SNPlex genotyping platform. Our 
cohort consisted of 610 MM families.
RESULTS: One variant in the RARA gene (rs12051734), three variants in the RARB
gene (rs6799734, rs12630816, rs17016462), and a single variant in the RARG gene
(rs3741434) were found to be statistically significant at p < 0.05.
CONCLUSION: RAR genes were associated with risk for MM. For all associated SNPs, 
the rare allele conferred a protective effect for MM susceptibility.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3044482
PMID: 21254357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Indian J Cancer. 2011 Jan-Mar;48(1):60-7. doi: 10.4103/0019-509X.75831.

Role of RT-PCR and FISH in diagnosis and monitoring of acute promyelocytic
leukemia.

Polampalli S(1), Choughule A, Prabhash K, Amare P, Baisane C, Kabre S, Mahadik S,
Shinde S, Nair R, Banavali S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, India.

BACKGROUND: Patients with a presence of Promyelocytic Leukemia-Retinoic Acid
Receptor Alpha (PML-RARA) genes rearrangement predict a favorable response to
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), and a significant improvement in survival.
Therefore, establishing the presence of PML-RARA rearrangement is important for
optimal patient management.
AIM: The objective of this study is to compare and assess the role of fluorescent
in situ hybridization (FISH) and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR) in the diagnosis and long-term monitoring of Acute Promyelocytic
Leukemia (APL).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We compared 145 samples received at different interval of 
times to analyze the sensitivity of RT-PCR and FISH.
RESULTS: The failure rate for RT-PCR was 4% at baseline, 13% at induction, and 0%
at the end of consolidation. And for FISH it was 8% at baseline, 38% at
induction, and 66% at the end of consolidation. The predictive values of relapse 
in the patients who were positive and negative by RT-PCR, at the end of
induction, were 60% and 3%, respectively, and at end of consolidation it was 67% 
and 4%, respectively. On the other hand the predictive values of relapse in
patients who were positive and negative by FISH at end of induction were 57% and 
6%, respectively; while at end of consolidation it was 14% who were negative by
FISH.
CONCLUSION: Both RT-PCR and FISH are important for the diagnosis of APL cases, as
both techniques complement each other in the absence or failure of any one of
them. However, RT-PCR is more sensitive than FISH for the detection of minimal
residual disease in the long-term monitoring of these patients. The present study
shows that the predictive value of relapse is more associated with minimal
residual disease (MRD) results by RT-PCR than that by FISH.

PMID: 21248444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Clin Med Insights Oncol. 2010 Dec 20;4:163-70. doi: 10.4137/CMO.S6446.

Early Detection of t(8;21) Chromosomal Translocations During Treatment of
PML-RARA Positive Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia: A Case Study.

Neto WK(1), Serpa M, Sanabani SS, Bueno PT, Velloso ED, Dorlhiac-Llacer PE,
Bendit I.

Author information: 
(1)Fundação Pró-Sangue, Hemocentro de São Paulo, Brazil.

Here we describe a female patient who developed acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL) characterized by t(l5;17) translocation at diagnosis. The patient began
treatment with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) + chemotherapy. During follow up,
the patient was found to be negative for the t(15;17) transcript after 3 months
of therapy which remained undetectable, thereafter. However, the emergence of a
small clone with a t(8;21) abnormality was observed in the bone marrow and
peripheral blood (PB) cells between 3 and 18 months following treatment
initiation. The abnormal translocation observed in PB cells obtained at 3 months 
was detected after the second cycle of consolidation therapy and reappeared at 15
months during maintenance treatment, a period without ATRA. Although based on a
single case, we conclude that genetic screening of multiple translocations in AML
patients should be requested to allow early identification of other emerging
clones during therapy that may manifest clinically following treatment.

PMCID: PMC3018899
PMID: 21234297  [PubMed]


333. Haematologica. 2011 Apr;96(4):621-5. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.036657. Epub 2010
Dec 29.

Presenting features and treatment outcome of acute promyelocytic leukemia arising
after multiple sclerosis.

Ammatuna E(1), Montesinos P, Hasan SK, Ramadan SM, Esteve J, Hubmann M, Pagoni M,
Grimwade D, Sanz MA, Lo-Coco F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopathology, University Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2011 Apr;96(4):493-5.

We report the clinical features and treatment outcome of 33 patients with
multiple sclerosis who developed acute promyelocytic leukemia. Thirty patients
were previously exposed to mitoxantrone. The median latency period between
treatment initiation and acute promyelocytic leukemia diagnosis was 32 months.
The PML-RARA bcr1 iso-form was identified in 87% of cases. Twenty-nine (90%)
patients achieved hematologic remission after all-trans retinoic acid and
chemotherapy (n = 31) or arsenic trioxide and all-trans retinoic acid.
Consolidation included modified chemotherapy or arsenic trioxide. At a median
follow up of 26 months, 23 patients are in complete remission, 4 relapsed and one
developed secondary leukemia. The 5-year cumulative incidence of relapse and
overall survival were 23% and 68%, respectively. Although treatment heterogeneity
and suboptimal post-remission therapy must be taken into account, overall results
and development of secondary leukemia in one patient suggest that effective and
less toxic agents like arsenic trioxide warrants further investigation in this
context.

PMCID: PMC3069242
PMID: 21193421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Cancers (Basel). 2011 May 16;3(2):2402-20. doi: 10.3390/cancers3022402.

Differentiation therapy of acute myeloid leukemia.

Gocek E(1), Marcinkowska E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Wroclaw, ul Tamka 2, Wroclaw
50-137, Poland. ema@cs.uni.wroc.pl.

Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) is a predominant acute leukemia among adults,
characterized by accumulation of malignantly transformed immature myeloid
precursors. A very attractive way to treat myeloid leukemia, which is now called 
'differentiation therapy', was proposed as in vitro studies have shown that a
variety of agents stimulate differentiation of the cell lines isolated from
leukemic patients. One of the differentiation-inducing agents, all-trans retinoic
acid (ATRA), which can induce granulocytic differentiation in myeloid leukemic
cell lines, has been introduced into clinics to treat patients with acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) in which a PML-RARA fusion protein is generated by a
t(15;17)(q22;q12) chromosomal translocation. Because differentiation therapy
using ATRA has significantly improved prognosis for patients with APL, many
efforts have been made to find alternative differentiating agents. Since
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D) is capable of inducing in vitro
monocyte/macrophage differentiation of myeloid leukemic cells, clinical trials
have been performed to estimate its potential to treat patients with AML or
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Unfortunately therapeutic concentrations of 1,25D
can induce potentially fatal systemic hypercalcemia, thus limiting clinical
utility of that compound. Attempts to overcome this problem have focused on the
synthesis of 1,25D analogs (VDAs) which retain differentiation inducing
potential, but lack its hypercalcemic effects. This review aims to discuss
current problems and potential solutions in differentiation therapy of AML.

PMCID: PMC3757424
PMID: 24212816  [PubMed]


335. Front Oncol. 2011 Oct 25;1:35. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2011.00035. eCollection 2011.

Development of real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction assays to track
treatment response in retinoid resistant acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Jovanovic JV(1), Rennie K, Culligan D, Peniket A, Lennard A, Harrison J, Vyas P, 
Grimwade D.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Laboratory, Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics,
King's College London School of Medicine London, UK.

Molecular detection of minimal residual disease (MRD) has become established to
assess remission status and guide therapy in patients with ProMyelocytic
Leukemia-RARA+ acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). However, there are few data on
tracking disease response in patients with rarer retinoid resistant subtypes of
APL, characterized by PLZF-RARA and STAT5b-RARA. Despite their rarity (<1% of
APL) we identified 6 cases (PLZF-RARA, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>5; STAT5b-RARA, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1), established
the respective breakpoint junction regions and designed reverse
transcription-quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) assays
to detect leukemic transcripts. The relative level of fusion gene expression in
diagnostic samples was comparable to that observed in t(15;17) - associated APL, 
affording assay sensitivities of ~1 in 10(4)-10(5). Serial samples were available
from two PLZF-RARA APL patients. One showed persistent polymerase chain reaction 
positivity, predicting subsequent relapse, and remains in CR2, ~11<U+2009>years
post-autograft. The other, achieved molecular remission (CRm) with combination
chemotherapy, remaining in CR1 at 6<U+2009>years. The STAT5b-RARA patient failed to
achieve CRm following frontline combination chemotherapy and ultimately proceeded
to allogeneic transplant on the basis of a steadily rising fusion transcript
level. These data highlight the potential of RT-qPCR detection of MRD to
facilitate development of more individualized approaches to the management of
rarer molecularly defined subsets of acute leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3356041
PMID: 22655241  [PubMed]


336. Blood. 2011 Feb 24;117(8):2460-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-300087. Epub 2010
Dec 29.

Rara haploinsufficiency modestly influences the phenotype of acute promyelocytic 
leukemia in mice.

Welch JS(1), Klco JM, Varghese N, Nagarajan R, Ley TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Stem Cell Biology, Division of Oncology, Washington University
School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

RARA (retinoic acid receptor alpha) haploinsufficiency is an invariable
consequence of t(15;17)(q22;q21) translocations in acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL). Retinoids and RARA activity have been implicated in hematopoietic
self-renewal and neutrophil maturation. We and others therefore predicted that
RARA haploinsufficiency would contribute to APL pathogenesis. To test this
hypothesis, we crossed Rara(+/-) mice with mice expressing PML (promyelocytic
leukemia)-RARA from the cathepsin G locus (mCG-PR). We found that Rara
haploinsufficiency cooperated with PML-RARA, but only modestly influenced the
preleukemic and leukemic phenotype. Bone marrow from mCG-PR(+/-) × Rara(+/-) mice
had decreased numbers of mature myeloid cells, increased ex vivo myeloid cell
proliferation, and increased competitive advantage after transplantation. Rara
haploinsufficiency did not alter mCG-PR-dependent leukemic latency or penetrance,
but did influence the distribution of leukemic cells; leukemia in mCG-PR(+/-) ×
Rara(+/-) mice presented more commonly with low to normal white blood cell counts
and with myeloid infiltration of lymph nodes. APL cells from these mice were
responsive to all-trans retinoic acid and had virtually no differences in
expression profiling compared with tumors arising in mCG-PR(+/-) × Rara(+/+)
mice. These data show that Rara haploinsufficiency (like Pml haploinsufficiency
and RARA-PML) can cooperate with PML-RARA to influence the pathogenesis of APL in
mice, but that PML-RARA is the t(15;17) disease-initiating mutation.

PMCID: PMC3317790
PMID: 21190992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. PLoS Genet. 2010 Dec 9;6(12):e1001238. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001238.

The C-terminal domain of the bacterial SSB protein acts as a DNA maintenance hub 
at active chromosome replication forks.

Costes A(1), Lecointe F, McGovern S, Quevillon-Cheruel S, Polard P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie et Génétique Moléculaires, Université de
Toulouse, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, LMGM-UMR5100, Toulouse,
France.

We have investigated in vivo the role of the carboxy-terminal domain of the
Bacillus subtilis Single-Stranded DNA Binding protein (SSB(Cter)) as a
recruitment platform at active chromosomal forks for many proteins of the genome 
maintenance machineries. We probed this SSB(Cter) interactome using GFP fusions
and by Tap-tag and biochemical analysis. It includes at least 12 proteins. The
interactome was previously shown to include PriA, RecG, and RecQ and extended in 
this study by addition of DnaE, SbcC, RarA, RecJ, RecO, XseA, Ung, YpbB, and
YrrC. Targeting of YpbB to active forks appears to depend on RecS, a RecQ
paralogue, with which it forms a stable complex. Most of these SSB partners are
conserved in bacteria, while others, such as the essential DNA polymerase DnaE,
YrrC, and the YpbB/RecS complex, appear to be specific to B. subtilis. SSB(Cter) 
deletion has a moderate impact on B. subtilis cell growth. However, it markedly
affects the efficiency of repair of damaged genomic DNA and arrested replication 
forks. ssb<U+0394>Cter mutant cells appear deficient in RecA loading on ssDNA,
explaining their inefficiency in triggering the SOS response upon exposure to
genotoxic agents. Together, our findings show that the bacterial SSB(Cter) acts
as a DNA maintenance hub at active chromosomal forks that secures their
propagation along the genome.

PMCID: PMC3000357
PMID: 21170359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Dec;203(2):278-83. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.08.026.

FISH-negative cryptic PML-RARA rearrangement detected by long-distance polymerase
chain reaction and sequencing analyses: a case study and review of the
literature.

Kim MJ(1), Cho SY, Kim MH, Lee JJ, Kang SY, Cho EH, Huh J, Yoon HJ, Park TS, Lee 
WI, Marschalek R, Meyer C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, 1
Hoegi-dong, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-702, Korea.

Comment in
    Ann Hematol. 2012 Oct;91(10):1645-8.

Although a normal karyotype according to conventional cytogenetic analysis in
association with cryptic t(15;17) has been infrequently reported in cases of
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), a fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH)-negative cryptic PML-RARA rearrangement is even more rare, with only 12
such APL cases of FISH-negative cryptic PML-RARA rearrangements in the
literature. Reported here is an additional clinical APL case with a FISH-negative
cryptic PML-RARA rearrangement, confirmed by long-distance DNA polymerase chain
reaction method. Discussion includes a relevant literature review of similar
cases. DNA-PCR can be a useful tool for the analysis of complex and cryptic
rearrangements.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21156244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2010 Sep;23(3):333-45. doi:
10.1016/j.beha.2010.09.010. Epub 2010 Nov 3.

Detection of fusion genes at the protein level in leukemia patients via the flow 
cytometric immunobead assay.

Dekking E(1), van der Velden VH, Böttcher S, Brüggemann M, Sonneveld E,
Koning-Goedheer A, Boeckx N, Lucio P, Sedek L, Szczepanski T, Kalina T, Kovac M, 
Evans P, Hoogeveen PG, Flores-Montero J, Orfao A, Comans-Bitter WM, Staal FJ, van
Dongen JJ; EuroFlow Consortium (EU-FP6, LSHB-CT-2006-018708).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Nowadays, the presence of specific genetic aberrations is progressively used for 
classification and treatment stratification, because acute leukemias with the
same oncogenetic aberration generally form a clinically and diagnostically
homogenous disease entity with comparable prognosis. Many oncogenetic aberrations
in acute leukemias result in a fusion gene, which is transcribed into fusion
transcripts and translated into fusion proteins, which are assumed to play a
critical role in the oncogenetic process. Fusion gene aberrations are detected by
karyotyping, FISH, or RT-PCR analysis. However, these molecular genetic
techniques are laborious and time consuming, which is in contrast to flow
cytometric techniques. Therefore we developed a flow cytometric immunobead assay 
for detection of fusion proteins in lysates of leukemia cell samples by use of a 
bead-bound catching antibody against one side of the fusion protein and
fluorochrome-conjugated detection antibody. So far, we have been able to design
such fusion protein immunobead assays for BCR-ABL, PML-RARA, TEL-AML1, E2A-PBX1, 
MLL-AF4, AML1-ETO and CBFB-MYH11. The immunobead assay for detection of fusion
proteins can be performed within 3 to 4 hours in a routine diagnostic setting,
without the need of special equipment other than a flow cytometer. The novel
immunobead assay will enable fast and easy classification of acute leukemia
patients that express fusion proteins. Such patients can be included at an early 
stage in the right treatment protocols, much faster than by use of current
molecular techniques. The immunobead assay can be run in parallel to routine
immunophenotyping and is particularly attractive for clinical settings without
direct access to molecular diagnostics.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 21123134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Korean J Hematol. 2010 Sep;45(3):208-10. doi: 10.5045/kjh.2010.45.3.208. Epub
2010 Sep 30.

Long-term survival in a patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia with isolated
meningeal relapse.

Kim SH(1), Yun J, Kim HJ, Kim CK, Park SK, Hong DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Soonchunhyang University College of
Medicine, Bucheon, Korea.

The meningeal involvement is rare in acute promyelocytic leukemia. We experienced
a 39-year-old woman who achieved complete remission with all-trans retinoic acid,
idarubicin and cytarabine therapy. Several months later, she complained of
non-specific headache. Her complete blood cell count was normal, but magnetic
resonance image of brain revealed focal meningeal enhancement and cerebrospinal
fluid showed leukemic promyelocytes and PML/RARA rearrangement. Bone marrow study
showed hematologic, cytogenetic and molecular remission. She was treated with
intrathecal and systemic chemotherapy and whole brain radiotherapy. The patient
has survived for 68 months since the last systemic chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC2983040
PMID: 21120212  [PubMed]


341. Korean J Hematol. 2010 Sep;45(3):171-6. doi: 10.5045/kjh.2010.45.3.171. Epub 2010
Sep 30.

Clinical utility of FISH analysis in addition to G-banded karyotype in
hematologic malignancies and proposal of a practical approach.

Kwon WK(1), Lee JY, Mun YC, Seong CM, Chung WS, Huh J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis can provide
important information in the management of patients with hematologic
malignancies. However, FISH performed in addition to G-banded karyotype can be
labor-intensive and expensive. The aim of this study was to evaluate whether FISH
gives additional information in the setting of adequate conventional cytogenetics
in cases of hematologic malignancies.
METHODS: Bone marrow aspirates were obtained from 135 patients at diagnosis (56
AML, 32 MDS, 20 ALL, and 27 MM) between 2005 and 2010. Interphase FISH was
performed using the following probes: BCR/ABL1, AML1/ETO, PML/RARA, CBFB, MLL,
EGR1, CEP8, and D7S486 for AML; CEP8, D20S108, EGR1, and D7S486 for MDS;
BCR/ABL1, MLL, CDKN2A (p16), ETV6, and 6q21/c-myc for ALL; IgH, TP53, D13S25,
IgH/CCND1, IgH/MAF, IgH/FGFR3, and 1q21/8p21 for MM. We compared the results of
FISH with the corresponding aberrations identified by G-banded karyotype.
RESULTS: Additional genetic aberrations detected by FISH (which were not
identified by G-banded karyotype) were 4%, 9%, 50%, and 67% in AML, MDS, ALL, and
MM, respectively. In ALL, CDKN2A and ETV6 FISH revealed additional genetic
aberrations in 33% and 28% of cases, respectively. In MM, FISH was of benefit in 
detecting IgH, D13S25, TP53, and 1q21 rearrangements, not detected by G-banded
karyotype (31%, 36%, 20%, and 40%, respectively).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that performing FISH in addition to G-banded
karyotype may contribute little additional genetic information in AML and MDS,
whereas routine FISH analysis appears to be an efficient screening method in ALL 
and MM.

PMCID: PMC2983032
PMID: 21120205  [PubMed]


342. Korean J Hematol. 2010 Jun;45(2):133-5. doi: 10.5045/kjh.2010.45.2.133. Epub 2010
Jun 30.

A variant acute promyelocytic leukemia with t(11;17) (q23;q12); ZBTB16-RARA
showing typical morphology of classical acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Han SB(1), Lim J, Kim Y, Kim HJ, Han K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

A subgroup of acute leukemia with morphology resembling acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL) shows variant translocations involving RARA and has a different
morphology from that of classical APL. The variant APL with t(11;17)(q23;q12);
ZBTB16-RARA subgroup has been reported to have leukemic cells with regular
nuclei, many granules, absence of Auer rods, an increased number of Pelgeroid
neutrophils, strong myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity, and all-trans-retinoic-acid
(ATRA) resistance. Here, we report a case of variant APL with t(11;17)(q23;q12); 
ZBTB16-RARA showing typical morphological features of classical APL, including
numerous Auer rods and faggot cells. The leukemic cells expressed CD13, CD33,
CD117, human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR, and cytoplasmic-MPO on the
immunophenotyping study. The diagnosis was confirmed by cytogenetic and molecular
studies. To distinguish variant APL cases from classical APL cases, regardless of
whether morphologically the findings are consistent with those of classical APL, 
combining morphologic, immunophenotypic, cytogenetic, and molecular studies
before chemotherapy is very important.

PMCID: PMC2983015
PMID: 21120193  [PubMed]


343. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2010 Oct;10 Suppl 3:S139-43. doi:
10.3816/CLML.2010.s.027.

Utilization of molecular phenotypes to detect relapse and optimize the management
of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Hasan SK(1), Lo-Coco F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopathology, University Tor Vergata, Via Montpellier 1, Rome,
Italy.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by a unique genetic
aberration, the t(15;17) chromosome translocation. Translocation breakpoints are 
located within the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) locus on chromosome 15 and the
retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) locus on chromosome 17. In the past 2
decades, critical advances have been made in understanding the molecular
pathogenesis of APL. APL represents a paradigm for molecularly targeted therapy
in cancer and an extraordinary model for translational research in medicine. In
fact, the release of differentiation block upon treatment of APL with
all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) has represented the first example of targeted
therapy in human cancer. More recently, the advent of arsenic trioxide (ATO) has 
allowed further progress in the management of this disease through improved
outcomes in patients receiving this agent in combination with ATRA. Finally,
optimization of therapy and minimization of toxicity is feasible in this disease 
through careful monitoring of residual disease using polymerase chain
reaction-based approaches targeting the PML-RARA fusion gene.

PMID: 21115433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011 Mar;127(3):603-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2010.09.010.
Epub 2010 Nov 18.

Peanut allergy: Clinical and immunologic differences among patients from 3
different geographic regions.

Vereda A(1), van Hage M, Ahlstedt S, Ibañez MD, Cuesta-Herranz J, van Odijk J,
Wickman M, Sampson HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Allergy, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Peanut allergy affects persons from various geographic regions where 
populations are exposed to different dietary habits and environmental pollens.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to describe the clinical and immunologic characteristics of 
patients with peanut allergy from 3 countries (Spain, the United States, and
Sweden) using a molecular component diagnostic approach.
METHODS: Patients with peanut allergy from Madrid (Spain, n = 50), New York
(United States, n = 30), Gothenburg, and Stockholm (both Sweden, n = 35) were
enrolled. Clinical data were obtained either from a specific questionnaire or
gathered from chart reviews. IgE antibodies to peanut extract and the peanut
allergens rAra h 1, 2, 3, 8 and 9, as well as to cross-reactive birch (rBet v 1) 
and grass (rPhl p 1, 5, 7, and 12) pollen allergens, were analyzed.
RESULTS: American patients frequently had IgE antibodies to rAra h 1 to 3 (56.7% 
to 90.0%) and often presented with severe symptoms. Spanish patients recognized
these 3 recombinant peanut allergens less frequently (16.0% to 42.0%), were more 
often sensitized to the lipid transfer protein rAra h 9 (60.0%), and typically
had peanut allergy after becoming allergic to other plant-derived foods. Swedish 
patients detected rAra h 1 to 3 more frequently than Spanish patients (37.1% to
74.3%) and had the highest sensitization rate to the Bet v 1 homologue rAra h 8
(65.7%), as well as to rBet v 1 (82.9%). Spanish and Swedish patients became
allergic to peanut at 2 years or later, whereas the American children became
allergic around 1 year of age.
CONCLUSIONS: Peanut allergy has different clinical and immunologic patterns in
different areas of the world. Allergen component diagnostics might help us to
better understand this complex entity.

Copyright © 2010 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21093026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Blood Rev. 2011 Jan;25(1):39-51. doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2010.10.002. Epub 2010 Nov
27.

Independent prognostic variables in acute myeloid leukaemia.

Smith ML(1), Hills RK, Grimwade D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, St. Bartholomew's Hospital, London, UK.

Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is one of the most common haematological
malignancies and is increasing in frequency due to an ageing population. Whilst
remission will be achieved in up to 80% of those receiving intensive
chemotherapy, the main variables precluding cure are the treatment-related
mortality and relapse rates. Decisions on intensification, de-escalation and
allografting rely on the ability to divide an apparently homogeneous group
according to risk. A wide range of clinical, cytogenetic and molecular variables 
may be used to inform this task. Cytogenetic and molecular characterisation has
already identified subgroups, such as acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) with
t(15;17)/PML-RARA and AML with FLT3 mutation for which targeted therapies are
available, and further molecularly defined groups who may be potential candidates
for this approach are likely to be identified in the future. This review examines
the range of established clinical and diagnostic parameters that should be used
in assessing prognosis for a patient with AML and looks ahead to an expanding
repertoire of potential variables that are currently under evaluation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21078537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Meat Sci. 2011 Mar;87(3):244-9. doi: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2010.10.019. Epub 2010 Oct
26.

Effect of restricted feeding and realimentation periods on pork quality and fatty
acid profile of M. longissimus thoracis.

Wiecek J(1), Rekiel A, Batorska M, Skomial J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pig Breeding, Faculty of Animal Sciences, Warsaw University of
Life Sciences, Poland. justyna_wiecek@sggw.pl

An experiment with 94 fattening pigs (48 gilts and 46 barrows) was conducted to
determine the effect of feeding 25% restricted diets at different body weights on
meat quality and fatty acid profile of M. longissimus thoracis (LT). During the
84 days of the experiment (4 periods, 21 days each), animals with an initial
weight of about 31 kg were fed in different periods of observation ad libitum (A)
or restricted diets (R) in groups AAAA, AARA, RAAA and RARA. After 21 days of the
experiment, the restricted-fed pigs, compared to those fed ad libitum, had a
lower total fat content of M. longissimus thoracis (P<0.05), higher shear force
(P=0.068), and lower proportions of SFA (C14:0, C18:0 P<0.05) and MUFA and higher
proportions of PUFA (C20:4, C22:4 P<0.05) in the fatty acid profile. Three weeks 
after the restricted feed supply was lifted, the total fat content in LT muscle
was higher than in animals fed ad libitum throughout (2.34 vs. 2.02), very close 
after the next 3 weeks of realimentation (3.16 vs. 3.15) and lower after another 
3 weeks (3.19 vs. 3.49). Regardless of the time at which restricted feeding was
started and the number of restricted feeding periods, the total fat content in
the LT muscle at the end of the experiment was similar or lower in groups RAAA,
AARA and RARA, compared to group AAAA. The coefficient of correlation between the
total fat content in LT and the shear force was -0.36 (P<0.01). Colour, pH and
drip loss did not depend on the level of nutrition. After 84 days of observation,
animals from groups RARA and AARA, compared to pigs from groups AAAA and RAAA,
were characterized by a slightly higher shear force of LT, lower SFA and MUFA
(P<0.001), and higher n-6 PUFA (P<0.01) and n-3 PUFA (P<0.01) proportions in the 
fatty acid profile. The fatty acid profiles of AAAA pigs and pigs undergoing a
63-day realimentation period (RAAA) were similar. Regardless of the feeding
scheme, the n-6:n-3 ratio exceeded 10 in all the groups.

Copyright © 2010 The American Meat Science Association. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21075545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. PLoS Genet. 2010 Oct 28;6(10):e1001178. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001178.

Allele-specific down-regulation of RPTOR expression induced by retinoids
contributes to climate adaptations.

Sun C(1), Southard C, Witonsky DB, Kittler R, Di Rienzo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America.

The mechanistic target of rapamycin (MTOR) pathway regulates cell growth, energy 
homeostasis, apoptosis, and immune response. The regulatory associated protein of
MTOR encoded by the RPTOR gene is a key component of this pathway. A previous
survey of candidate genes found that RPTOR contains multiple SNPs with strong
correlations between allele frequencies and climate variables, consistent with
the action of selective pressures that vary across environments. Using data from 
a recent genome scan for selection signals, we honed in on a SNP (rs11868112) 26 
kb upstream to the transcription start site of RPTOR that exhibits the strongest 
association with temperature variables. Transcription factor motif scanning and
mining of recently mapped transcription factor binding sites identified a binding
site for POU class 2 homeobox 1 (POU2F1) spanning the SNP and an adjacent
retinoid acid receptor (RAR) binding site. Using expression quantification,
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), and reporter gene assays, we demonstrate
that POU2F1 and RARA do bind upstream of the RPTOR gene to regulate its
expression in response to retinoids; this regulation is affected by the allele
status at rs11868112 with the derived allele resulting in lower expression
levels. We propose a model in which the derived allele influences thermogenesis
or immune response by altering MTOR pathway activity and thereby increasing
fitness in colder climates. Our results show that signatures of genetic
adaptations can identify variants with functional effects, consistent with the
idea that selection signals may be used for SNP annotation.

PMCID: PMC2965758
PMID: 21060808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Exp Med. 2010 Nov 22;207(12):2581-94. doi: 10.1084/jem.20091071. Epub 2010 Nov 
8.

Gain of MYC underlies recurrent trisomy of the MYC chromosome in acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Jones L(1), Wei G, Sevcikova S, Phan V, Jain S, Shieh A, Wong JC, Li M, Dubansky 
J, Maunakea ML, Ochoa R, Zhu G, Tennant TR, Shannon KM, Lowe SW, Le Beau MM,
Kogan SC.

Author information: 
(1)Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Laboratory
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Gain of chromosome 8 is the most common chromosomal gain in human acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). It has been hypothesized that gain of the MYC protooncogene is of
central importance in trisomy 8, but the experimental data to support this are
limited and controversial. In a mouse model of promyelocytic leukemia in which
the MRP8 promoter drives expression of the PML-RARA fusion gene in myeloid cells,
a Myc allele is gained in approximately two-thirds of cases as a result of
trisomy for mouse chromosome 15. We used this model to test the idea that MYC
underlies acquisition of trisomy in AML. We used a retroviral vector to drive
expression of wild-type, hypermorphic, or hypomorphic MYC in bone marrow that
expressed the PML-RARA transgene. MYC retroviruses cooperated in myeloid
leukemogenesis and suppressed gain of chromosome 15. When the PML-RARA transgene 
was expressed in a Myc haploinsufficient background, we observed selection for
increased copies of the wild-type Myc allele concomitant with leukemic
transformation. In addition, we found that human myeloid leukemias with trisomy 8
have increased MYC. These data show that gain of MYC can contribute to the
pathogenic effect of the most common trisomy of human AML.

PMCID: PMC2989761
PMID: 21059853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2010 Oct-Dec;53(4):817-9. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.72097.

Cryptic PML-RARa positive acute promyelocytic leukemia with unusual morphology
and cytogenetics.

Goyal M(1), Dattatreya PS, Goud I, Murthy SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Indo-American Cancer Institute and Research
Centre, Hyderabad, India. dr_manu31@yahoo.com

Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia (APL) is different from other forms of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), to the reason being the potential devastating coagulopathy and
the sensitivity to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic trioxide (As 2 O 3 
). We hereby present a case of APL, morphologically distinct from the
hypergranular APL; however, the flow cytometry revealed a characteristic
phenotype showing dim CD45, bright CD13, bright CD33 and dim CD117 positivity.
These were negative for CD34, HLA-DR, B-lymphoid and T-lymphoid lineage markers. 
Conventional cytogenetics revealed a distinct karyotype of a male with
translocation t(4;15)(q34.2:q26.3). However, interphase fluorescence-in-situ
hybridization (FISH) revealed PML/RARA fusion signal on chromosome 15 in 90%
cells. The cryptic translocations may be missed on conventional cytogenetics,
however, need to be picked by other techniques as FISH.

PMID: 21045428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 Nov;10(11):775-83. doi: 10.1038/nrc2943. Epub 2010 Oct 22.

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia: novel insights into the mechanisms of cure.

de Thé H(1), Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de Santé et de Recherche Médicale, Centre National de
Recherche Scientifique, Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Université
Paris-Diderot UMR 944/7212, Equipe labellisée par Ligue contre Cancer, Service de
Biochimie, Hôpital St. Louis, 2 avenue C. Vellefaux, 75475 Paris, CEDEX 10,
France. dethe@univ-parisdiderot.fr

The fusion oncogene, promyelocytic leukaemia (PML)-retinoic acid receptor-a
(RARA), initiates acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) through both a block to
differentiation and increased self-renewal of leukaemic progenitor cells. The
current standard of care is retinoic acid (RA) and chemotherapy, but arsenic
trioxide also cures many patients with APL, and an RA plus arsenic trioxide
combination cures most patients. This Review discusses the recent evidence that
reveals surprising new insights into how RA and arsenic trioxide cure this
leukaemia, by targeting PML-RARa for degradation. Drug-triggered oncoprotein
degradation may be a strategy that is applicable to many cancers.

PMID: 20966922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Ann Acad Med Singapore. 2010 Sep;39(9):705-9.

Urotensin 2 and retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene expression in IgA
nephropathy.

Woo KT(1), Lau YK, Zhao Y, Puong KY, Tan HB, Fook-Chong S, Wong KS, Chan CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Renal Medicine, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.
woo.keng.thye@sgh.com.sg

INTRODUCTION: IgA nephropathy is a disease where the pathogenesis is still poorly
understood. Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) microarray technique allows tens of
thousands of gene expressions to be examined at the same time. Commercial
availability of microarray genechips has made this powerful tool accessible for
wider utilisation in the study of diseases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seven patients with IgA nephropathy, 6 with minimal change
nephrotic syndrome (MCNS) as patient controls and 7 normal healthy subjects were 
screened for the differential expression of genes, genome-wide. The Human Genome 
U133 Plus 2.0 Arrays (Affymetrix, USA) were used to quantitate the differential
expression of 38,500 well-characterised human genes.
RESULTS: A total of 7761 gene expressions were identified that have an
IgAN/Normal gene expression ratio of 0.06-fold to 5.58-fold. About 35% of the
altered gene expressions have no gene title or just a hypothetical protein label 
such as FLJ30679. Most of the remaining 65% are identified proteins where their
importance to IgAN is not immediately apparent at this time. Among the 30 most
upregulated and 30 most downregulated genes are Urotensin 2 (upregulated
3.09-fold, P <0.05) and Fatty-acid binding protein 6 (downregulated to 0.12-fold,
P <0.05). Retinoic acid receptor alpha (vitamin A receptor) was also found
downregulated to 0.41-fold (P <0.005). Taqman realtime polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) for urotensin 2 and retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) were performed on
20 patients with IgA nephropathy and 11 with Minimal Change Disease and the data 
correlated with various clinical indices.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that there may be a therapeutic role for
retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) in IgA nephropathy and a clinical monitoring 
role for Urotensin 2 in Minimal Change Disease.

PMID: 20957306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Blood. 2010 Dec 23;116(26):6018-22. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-06-289389. Epub 2010 
Sep 22.

Clinical and genetic features of therapy-related myeloid neoplasms after
chemotherapy for acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Imagawa J(1), Harada Y, Shimomura T, Tanaka H, Okikawa Y, Hyodo H, Kimura A,
Harada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Research Institute for Radiation
Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a highly curable disease with excellent
complete remission and long-term survival rates. However, the development of
therapy-related myeloid neoplasms (t-MN) is being reported with increasing
frequency in patients successfully treated for APL. We attempted to clarify the
different clinical features and hematologic findings between t-MN and relapse
cases, and to identify gene alterations involved in t-MN. We compared 10 relapse 
and 11 t-MN cases that developed in 108 patients during their first complete
remission from APL. At APL diagnosis, t-MN patients had lower white blood cell
counts than did relapse patients (P = .048). Overall survival starting from
chemotherapy was significantly worse in t-MN patients than in relapse patients (P
= .022). The t-MN cases were characterized as CD34(+)/HLA-DR(+) and PML-RARA(-), 
and 4 RUNX1/AML1 mutations were detected. T-MN is easily distinguished from APL
relapse by evaluating these hematologic features, and it may originate from
primitive myeloid cells by chemotherapy-induced RUNX1 mutations.

PMID: 20861459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Cancer. 2011 Jan 15;117(2):435; author reply 435-6. doi: 10.1002/cncr.25316. Epub
2010 Sep 15.

Evaluation of PML immunofluorescence, flow cytometric immunophenotypic analysis, 
and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction for PML/RARa for rapid
diagnosis of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Varma N, Agarwal C, Varma S.

Comment on
    Cancer. 2010 Jan 15;116(2):369-76.

PMID: 20845483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Blood. 2010 Nov 18;116(20):4274-83. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-01-264432. Epub 2010 
Aug 31.

BCOR as a novel fusion partner of retinoic acid receptor alpha in a
t(X;17)(p11;q12) variant of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Yamamoto Y(1), Tsuzuki S, Tsuzuki M, Handa K, Inaguma Y, Emi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, School of Medicine, Fujita Health University,
Toyoake, Aichi, Japan. yyukiya@fujita-hu.ac.jp

The majority of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cases are characterized by the
presence of a promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid receptor alpha(RARA) fusion
gene. In a small subset, RARA is fused to a different partner, usually involved
in regulating cell growth and differentiation. Here, we identified a novel RARA
fusion transcript, BCOR-RARA, in a t(X;17)(p11;q12) variant of APL with unique
morphologic features, including rectangular and round cytoplasmic inclusion
bodies. Although the patient was clinically responsive to all-trans retinoic
acid, several relapses occurred with standard chemotherapy and all-trans retinoic
acid. BCOR is a transcriptional corepressor through the proto-oncoprotein, BCL6, 
recruiting histone deacetylases and polycomb repressive complex 1 components.
BCOR-RARA was found to possess common features with other RARA fusion proteins.
These included: (1) the same break point in RARA cDNA; (2) self-association; (3) 
retinoid X receptor alpha is necessary for BCOR-RARA to associate with the RARA
responsive element; (4) action in a dominant-negative manner on RARA
transcriptional activation; and (5) aberrant subcellular relocalization. It
should be noted that there was no intact BCOR found in the 45,-Y,t(X;17)(p11;q12)
APL cells because they featured only a rearranged X chromosome. These results
highlight essential features of pathogenesis in APL in more detail. BCOR appears 
to be involved not only in human congenital diseases, but also in a human cancer.

PMID: 20807888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 27;5(8):e12464. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012464.

In vitro transformation of primary human CD34+ cells by AML fusion oncogenes:
early gene expression profiling reveals possible drug target in AML.

Abdul-Nabi AM(1), Yassin ER, Varghese N, Deshmukh H, Yaseen NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

Different fusion oncogenes in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) have distinct clinical
and laboratory features suggesting different modes of malignant transformation.
Here we compare the in vitro effects of representatives of 4 major groups of AML 
fusion oncogenes on primary human CD34+ cells. As expected from their clinical
similarities, MLL-AF9 and NUP98-HOXA9 had very similar effects in vitro. They
both caused erythroid hyperplasia and a clear block in erythroid and myeloid
maturation. On the other hand, AML1-ETO and PML-RARA had only modest effects on
myeloid and erythroid differentiation. All oncogenes except PML-RARA caused a
dramatic increase in long-term proliferation and self-renewal. Gene expression
profiling revealed two distinct temporal patterns of gene deregulation. Gene
deregulation by MLL-AF9 and NUP98-HOXA9 peaked 3 days after transduction. In
contrast, the vast majority of gene deregulation by AML1-ETO and PML-RARA
occurred within 6 hours, followed by a dramatic drop in the numbers of
deregulated genes. Interestingly, the p53 inhibitor MDM2 was upregulated by
AML1-ETO at 6 hours. Nutlin-3, an inhibitor of the interaction between MDM2 and
p53, specifically inhibited the proliferation and self-renewal of primary human
CD34+ cells transduced with AML1-ETO, suggesting that MDM2 upregulation plays a
role in cell transformation by AML1-ETO. These data show that differences among
AML fusion oncogenes can be recapitulated in vitro using primary human CD34+
cells and that early gene expression profiling in these cells can reveal
potential drug targets in AML.

PMCID: PMC2929205
PMID: 20805992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Curr Opin Oncol. 2010 Nov;22(6):656-63. doi: 10.1097/CCO.0b013e32833ed831.

Assessment of minimal residual disease in acute myeloid leukemia.

Grimwade D(1), Vyas P, Freeman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical & Molecular Genetics, King's College London School of
Medicine, Guy's & St. Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
david.grimwade@genetics.kcl.ac.uk

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The last 15 years have witnessed significant improvements in
technologies to detect minimal residual disease (MRD) in acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). We review recent studies highlighting the potential for novel and
standardized assays to provide independent prognostic information and develop
more personalized treatment approaches.
RECENT FINDINGS: Progress includes establishment of optimized real-time
quantitative PCR (RQ-PCR) assays for WT1 (commonly overexpressed and a putative
therapeutic target) and mutant NPM1 genes. Moreover, sequential MRD monitoring
using an internationally standardized PML-RARA RQ-PCR assay has been successfully
used to guide molecularly targeted therapy in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL).
There have also been significant advances in multiparameter flow cytometry (MFC) 
to detect MRD, with introduction of 6-10 color technology and improved
understanding of the immunophenotype of leukemic stem cells.
SUMMARY: Sensitive MRD detection using MFC and/or RQ-PCR has become feasible in
virtually all AML patients. MRD monitoring is now considered a standard of care
in APL. Recent studies provide a strong rationale for prospective trials
investigating the merits of extending MRD detection to alter therapy and
potentially improve outcome in other AML subtypes.

PMID: 20805746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Oct 1;202(1):33-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.06.003.

Amplification of the RARA gene in acute myeloid leukemia: significant finding or 
coincidental observation?

Asleson AD(1), Morgan V, Smith S, Velagaleti GV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55906, USA.

Oncogene amplification resulting in aberrant expression, although common in solid
tumors, is rare in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and is mostly associated with
amplification of MYC, RUNX1, and MLL genes. Retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA)
and other target sequences at 17p11.2 often represent the amplicons expressed in 
breast cancer, not in AML. We present a unique case of a 59-year-old female with 
a history of breast cancer, now presenting with pancytopenia and bilateral
infiltration with effusion in nodules of the right upper lobe of the lung. She
was diagnosed with AML-M5. Chromosome analysis demonstrated a hypodiploid clone
with complex numerical/structural abnormalities including 5q deletion, monosomy
7, as well as structurally rearranged chromosome 11 and several marker
chromosomes. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis showed
amplification of RARA, loss of 7q, monosomy 7, loss of DEK (6p23), and additional
copies of NUP214 (9q34) and MLL (11q23). Additional FISH studies showed both
ERBB2 and TOP2A genes, which were co-amplified on one of the marker chromosomes. 
The follow-up bone marrow did not yield any metaphases, but FISH was normal for
all probes, including RARA. After a short remission, the patient relapsed and
showed clonal evolution. Additional case reports are necessary to assess whether 
RARA amplification in hematologic malignancies serves as an independent
prognostic factor.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20804918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Autophagy. 2010 Oct;6(7):964-5. doi: 10.4161/auto.6.7.13066. Epub 2010 Oct 19.

Autophagic degradation of an oncoprotein.

Bøe SO(1), Simonsen A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Biology and Neuroscience (CMBN) and Institute of Medical 
Microbiology, Rikshospitalet University Hospital, and Institute of Clinical
Biochemistry, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. stig.ove.boe@rr-research.no

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by a chromosomal t(15;17)
translocation that fuses the gene encoding the promyelocytic leukemia protein
(PML) to that encoding retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA). The product of this
genetic aberration, the PML/RARA fusion protein, is highly oncogenic and supports
malignant transformation and growth of hematopoietic precursor cells at the
promyelocytic stage of differentiation. Successful treatment of APL by all-trans 
retinoic acid (ATRA) or arsenic trioxide (ATO) depends on the ability of these
drugs to induce proteolytic degradation of this chimeric protein. In a recently
published study we demonstrate that PML/RARA is amenable for degradation by
autophagy and that ATRA- and ATO-induced PML/RARA degradation is
autophagy-dependent. Consequently, autophagic degradation regulates basal
turnover as well as therapy-induced elimination of this oncoprotein. In addition,
our study reveals an important role of autophagy in promoting granulocytic
differentiation of APL cells.

PMID: 20724820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Hematology. 2010 Aug;15(4):204-9. doi: 10.1179/102453309X12583347114176.

Treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia with PETHEMA LPA 99 protocol: a
Tunisian single center experience.

Jeddi R(1), Ghédira H, Menif S, Ben Neji H, Ben Amor R, Kacem K, Aissaoui L,
Bouteraâ W, Abdennebi Y, Raihane BL, Gouider E, Raouf H, Hèla BA, Saad A, Zaher
B, Meddeb B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Aziza Othmana University Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
ramzi.jed@voila.fr

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) has now become the most curable of all
subtypes of acute myeloid leukemia. A cure rate of 75-80% can be anticipated with
a combination of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and anthracyclines. In Tunisia,
the ATRA era began in 1998 with the use, consecutively, of two regimens of a
combination of ATRA with anthracycline and cytarabine (APL93), and without
cytarabine (LPA99). From 2004, 39 patients with confirmed APL either by t(15;17) 
or PML/RARA were treated by the PETHEMA LPA 99 trial. The rationale of this
protocol by avoiding cytarabine is to reduce death in complete remission (CR)
without increasing the incidence of relapse. Thirty-three patients achieved CR
(84.6%). The remaining six patients were considered as failure due to early
death: three caused by differentiation syndrome (DS) and three died from central 
nervous system hemorrhage. Baseline blood cell count (WBC) >10 x 10(9)/l (P=0.26)
and creatinine >1.4 mg/dl (P=0.42) were not predictive of mortality. DS was
observed in 11 patients (30.5%) with a median onset time of 12 days (range: 3-23 
days) and median WBC of 29 x 10(9)/L (range: 1.2 x 10(9)-82.7 x 10(9)/l). DS was 
severe in seven cases, moderate in four, and fatal in three cases. Body mass
index > or =30 (P=0.044) and baseline WBC > or =20 x 10(9)/l (P=0.025) are
independent predictors of DS. The median follow-up of this study is 36 months.
Thirty patients are alive in continuous complete remission; two patients died in 
CR from septic shock and secondary myelodysplastic syndrome respectively; one
patient died 47 months after achieving two relapses. Event free survival from
diagnosis was 80% and overall survival was 82%. Our results are quite acceptable 
and can be improved by reducing mortality rate.

PMID: 20670478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Aug;201(1):28-31. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.05.001.

Cryptic insertion of PML-RARA into the 3p25 locus in an acute promyelocytic
leukemia with t(3;17)(p25;q21).

Chattopadhyay A(1), Redner RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of
Pittsburgh and UP Cancer Institute, 5117 Centre Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

We studied a case of a 72-year-old man with acute promyelocytic leukemia and a
t(3;17)(p25;q21). Fluorescence in situ hybridization failed to show rearrangement
of the PML (promyelocytic leukemia protein) locus but did demonstrate
relocalization of the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) to chromosome 3. We
performed a modified panhandle polymerase chain reaction analysis to investigate 
the unknown 5' partner. Our analysis indicates that the fusion partner is PML.
This karyotype therefore results in a cryptic PML-RARA fusion inserted into the
3p25 locus. Our case highlights the need for molecular analysis of seemingly
novel karyotypic abnormalities.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2925300
PMID: 20633765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Cancer Cell. 2010 Jul 13;18(1):88-98. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.06.003.

PML/RARA oxidation and arsenic binding initiate the antileukemia response of
As2O3.

Jeanne M(1), Lallemand-Breitenbach V, Ferhi O, Koken M, Le Bras M, Duffort S,
Peres L, Berthier C, Soilihi H, Raught B, de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm/Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS)/Université Paris
Diderot/Institut Universitaire Hématologie U944/UMR7212, Laboratoire associé de
la Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, Hôpital St Louis, 1, Av. C. Vellefaux, 75475
Paris, Cedex 10, France.

As(2)O(3) cures acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) by initiating PML/RARA
oncoprotein degradation, through sumoylation of its PML moiety. However, how
As(2)O(3) initiates PML sumoylation has remained largely unexplained. As(2)O(3)
binds vicinal cysteines and increases reactive oxygen species (ROS) production.
We demonstrate that upon As(2)O(3) exposure, PML undergoes ROS-initiated
intermolecular disulfide formation and binds arsenic directly. Disulfide-linked
PML or PML/RARA multimers form nuclear matrix-associated nuclear bodies (NBs),
become sumoylated and are degraded. Hematopoietic progenitors transformed by an
As(2)O(3)-binding PML/RARA mutant exhibit defective As(2)O(3) response.
Conversely, nonarsenical oxidants elicit PML/RARA multimerization,
NB-association, degradation, and leukemia response in vivo, but do not affect
PLZF/RARA-driven APLs. Thus, PML oxidation regulates NB-biogenesis, while
oxidation-enforced PML/RARA multimerization and direct arsenic-binding cooperate 
to enforce APL's exquisite As(2)O(3) sensitivity.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20609355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Blood. 2010 Sep 30;116(13):2324-31. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-01-261040. Epub 2010 
Jun 23.

Autophagy contributes to therapy-induced degradation of the PML/RARA oncoprotein.

Isakson P(1), Bjørås M, Bøe SO, Simonsen A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of
Oslo, Blindern, Oslo, Norway.

Comment in
    Blood. 2010 Sep 30;116(13):2200-1.

Treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) with all-trans retinoic acid
and/or arsenic trioxide represents a paradigm in targeted cancer therapy because 
these drugs cause clinical remission by affecting the stability of the fusion
oncoprotein promyelocytic leukemia (PML)/retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA). The
authors of previous studies have implicated the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway as
the main mechanism involved in therapy-induced PML/RARA degradation. Here we have
investigated a role of autophagy, a protein degradation pathway that involves
proteolysis of intracellular material within lysosomes. We found that both
all-trans retinoic acid and arsenic trioxide induce autophagy via the mammalian
target of rapamycin pathway in APL cells and that autophagic degradation
contributes significantly both to the basal turnover as well as the
therapy-induced proteolysis of PML/RARA. In addition, we observed a correlation
between autophagy and therapy-induced differentiation of APL cells. Given the
central role of the PML/RARA oncoprotein in APL pathogenesis, this study
highlights an important role of autophagy in the development and treatment of
this disease.

PMID: 20574048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 Aug;49(8):726-32. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20783.

Analysis of t(15;17) chromosomal breakpoint sequences in therapy-related versus
de novo acute promyelocytic leukemia: association of DNA breaks with specific DNA
motifs at PML and RARA loci.

Hasan SK(1), Ottone T, Schlenk RF, Xiao Y, Wiemels JL, Mitra ME, Bernasconi P, Di
Raimondo F, Stanghellini MT, Marco P, Mays AN, Döhner H, Sanz MA, Amadori S,
Grimwade D, Lo-Coco F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopathology, University of 'Rome Tor Vergata', Rome, Italy.
syedk.hasan@uniroma2.it

We compared genomic breakpoints at the PML and RARA loci in 23 patients with
therapy-related acute promyelocytic leukemia (t-APL) and 25 de novo APL
cases.Eighteen of 23 t-APL cases received the topoisomerase II poison
mitoxantrone for their primary disorder. DNA breaks were clustered in a
previously reported 8 bp "hot spot" region of PML corresponding to a preferred
site of mitoxantrone-induced DNA topoisomerase II-mediated cleavage in 39% of
t-APL occurring in patients exposed to this agent and in none of the cases
arising de novo (P = 0.007). As to RARA breakpoints, clustering in a 3' region of
intron 2 (region B) was found in 65% of t-APL and 28% of de novo APL patients,
respectively. Scan statistics revealed significant clustering of RARA breakpoints
in region B in t-APL cases (P = 0.001) as compared to de novo APL (P = 1).
Furthermore, approximately 300 bp downstream of RARA region B contained a
sequence highly homologous to a topoisomerase II consensus sequence. Biased
distribution of DNA breakpoints at both PML and RARA loci suggest the existence
of different pathogenetic mechanisms in t-APL as compared with de novo APL.

PMID: 20544846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Curr Stem Cell Res Ther. 2010 Dec;5(4):372-8.

The impact of molecularly targeted therapies upon the understanding of
leukemogenesis and the role of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Nagai S(1), Takahashi T, Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokio 1138655, Japan.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a distinct subset of acute myeloid
leukemia. An abnormal fusion gene, PML/RARA is detected in approximately 98% of
patients with APL. PML/RARA confers long-term self-renewal properties to
promyelocytes. All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic trioxide (ATO), which
are the major molecularly targeted therapies in APL, affect the PML/RARA fusion
protein and cause differentiation and apoptosis of APL cells. Although the
leukemia-initiating cells of APL may be present in a myeloid progenitor committed
compartment, the precise population of those remains to be elucidated. However,
recent studies have demonstrated the effect of ATRA and ATO on APL
leukemia-initiating cells. Through these studies, we can understand more deeply
how current clinical therapies lead to long-lasting remission of APL. ATRA and
ATO have improved the prognosis of APL patients and have changed the role of
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). At present, HSCT is not indicated
for patients with APL in first complete remission, and considered for patients
with relapsed APL. In this review, we discuss the three main topics as follows:
the leukemia-initiating cells in APL, the current state-of-the-art treatment for 
newly diagnosed and relapsed APL, and the role of HSCT in APL patients.

PMID: 20528759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Jul 1;200(1):47-53. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.03.016.

Unusual presentation of myeloid sarcoma in a case of acute promyelocytic leukemia
with a cryptic PML-RARA rearrangement involving multiple sites including the
atrium.

Tirado CA(1), Chen W, Valdez F, Karandikar N, Arbini A, Acevedo I, Garcia R,
Davila O, Smart RL, Matthews E, Kirk A, Collins RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
75390-9073, USA. carlos1.tirado@utsouthwestern.edu
<carlos1.tirado@utsouthwestern.edu>

Myeloid sarcoma is an extramedullary tumor mass composed of immature myeloid
cells. Myeloid sarcoma may develop de novo, concurrently with acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), or at relapse. Although myeloid sarcoma can occur at any site,
myeloid sarcoma involving the heart is extremely rare. Reported here is the case 
of a 30-year-old man, initially diagnosed with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
in bone marrow, who presented later with myeloid sarcoma at multiple anatomical
sites (left scapula, thoracic vertebra, right atrium, and supraclavicular mass)
in multiple relapses. Conventional cytogenetic studies performed on the atrial
sample revealed a karyotype with additional material on the short arm of
chromosome 7, at 7p22. Fluorescence in situ hybridization studies confirmed a
cryptic PML-RARA fusion on the short arm of chromosome 7, as well as a second
fusion on one copy of chromosome 15. With the fourth and latest relapse,
molecular cytogenetic studies performed on interphase nuclei of the myeloid
sarcoma specimen (a supraclavicular mass) showed evidence of six related abnormal
clones with a PML-RARA fusion, suggesting clonal evolution. This represents a
rare case of APL with a cryptic PML-RARA rearrangement presenting as myeloid
sarcoma at multiple relapses and involving multiple anatomical sites, including
cardiac atrium.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20513534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Leukemia. 2010 Jul;24(7):1265-75. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.95. Epub 2010 May 27.

A conceptual framework for the identification of candidate drugs and drug targets
in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Marstrand TT(1), Borup R, Willer A, Borregaard N, Sandelin A, Porse BT,
Theilgaard-Mönch K.

Author information: 
(1)Biotech Research and Innovation Center, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.

Chromosomal translocations of transcription factors generating fusion proteins
with aberrant transcriptional activity are common in acute leukemia. In acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL), the promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic-acid receptor
alpha (PML-RARA) fusion protein, which emerges as a consequence of the t(15;17)
translocation, acts as a transcriptional repressor that blocks neutrophil
differentiation at the promyelocyte (PM) stage. In this study, we used publicly
available microarray data sets and identified signatures of genes dysregulated in
APL by comparison of gene expression profiles of APL cells and normal PMs
representing the same stage of differentiation. We next subjected our identified 
APL signatures of dysregulated genes to a series of computational analyses
leading to (i) the finding that APL cells show stem cell properties with respect 
to gene expression and transcriptional regulation, and (ii) the identification of
candidate drugs and drug targets for therapeutic interventions. Significantly,
our study provides a conceptual framework that can be applied to any subtype of
AML and cancer in general to uncover novel information from published microarray 
data sets at low cost. In a broader perspective, our study provides strong
evidence that genomic strategies might be used in a clinical setting to
prospectively identify candidate drugs that subsequently are validated in vitro
to define the most effective drug combination for individual cancer patients on a
rational basis.

PMID: 20508621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Br J Haematol. 2010 Jul;150(2):158-69. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08209.x.
Epub 2010 May 9.

All trans retinoic acid nanodisks enhance retinoic acid receptor mediated
apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in mantle cell lymphoma.

Singh AT(1), Evens AM, Anderson RJ, Beckstead JA, Sankar N, Sassano A, Bhalla S, 
Yang S, Platanias LC, Forte TM, Ryan RO, Gordon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Haematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
a-singh@northwestern.edu

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is characterized by translocation t(11;14)(q13;q32),
aggressive clinical behaviour, and poor patient outcomes following conventional
chemotherapy. New treatment approaches are needed that target novel biological
pathways. All trans retinoic acid (ATRA) is a key retinoid that acts through
nuclear receptors that function as ligand-inducible transcription factors. The
present study evaluated cell killing effects of ATRA-enriched nanoscale delivery 
particles, termed nanodisks (ND), on MCL cell lines. Results show that ATRA-ND
induced cell death more effectively than naked ATRA (dimethyl sulphoxide) or
empty ND. ATRA-ND induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation to a greater
extent than naked ATRA. The antioxidant, N-acetylcysteine, inhibited ATRA-ND
induced apoptosis. Compared to naked ATRA, ATRA-ND enhanced G1 growth arrest,
up-regulated p21and p27, and down regulated cyclin D1. At ATRA concentrations
that induced apoptosis, expression levels of retinoic acid receptor-alpha
(RARalpha) and retinoid X receptor-gamma (RXRgamma) were increased. Compared to
naked ATRA, ATRA-ND significantly stimulated transcriptional activity of RARA in 
a model carcinoma cell line. Furthermore, the RAR antagonist, Ro 41-5253,
inhibited ATRA-ND induced ROS generation and prevented ATRA-ND induced cell
growth arrest and apoptosis. In summary, incorporation of ATRA into ND enhanced
the biological activity of this retinoid in cell culture models of MCL.

PMCID: PMC2907750
PMID: 20507312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Int J Hematol. 2010 Jun;91(5):820-5. doi: 10.1007/s12185-010-0575-z. Epub 2010
May 13.

Retrospective study of arsenic trioxide for childhood acute promyelocytic
leukemia in China: a single-center experience.

Wang H(1), Hao L, Wang X, Li J, Wu Q, Bian S.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Department, Hematology Center, ShengJing
Hospital of China Medical University, Sanhao Street #36, Heping District,
Shenyang, 110004, Liaoning, China. wang_hong354@hotmail.com

There are very limited reports about childhood acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL), especially about arsenic trioxide (ATO) treatment in both induction and
post-remission regimens. 35 newly diagnosed APL patients received ATO treatment
in our center and the clinical course as well as the outcome of them was
investigated. The dose of intravenous ATO was 0.15-0.17 mg/kg per day, only one
patient got 0.33 mg/kg per day, maximum dose was 10 mg per day in induction
therapy with minimal chemotherapy treatment (CT) for hyperleukocytosis.
Anthracycline or anthracycline-based CT was used for consolidation therapy and
followed by 0.10-0.15 mg/kg per day ATO treatment in maintenance therapy. The
continuous detection for morphology of bone marrow and PML-RARa were necessary
for administrating CT or not. 3 patients died during induction therapy for
intracranial hemorrhage, leukocytosis and septic shock. Total of 30 patients
achieved complete remission (CR) and were followed-up for 10-108 months. The
overall survival (OS) for all patients was 82.7%, whereas the OS for patients
obtained CR was 95.8%. The event-free survival for 5 years was 80.3%.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation could be under control to reduce induction
mortality with adequate supportive care, especially in the first 2 weeks. The
side effects of ATO were mild and transient. This regimen of ATO treatment both
in induction and post-remission therapy was effective and safe for childhood APL 
to get long-term survival.

PMID: 20461563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Int J Hematol. 2010 Jun;91(5):742-7. doi: 10.1007/s12185-010-0582-0. Epub 2010
May 11.

Eradication of acute promyelocytic leukemia-initiating cells by
PML/RARA-targeting.

Nasr R(1), de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, American University of Beirut, Beirut,
Lebanon.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by a t(15;17) translocation
that yields a PML/RARA fusion protein. Expression of PML/RARA, a potent
transcriptional repressor, induces APL in mice. Both retinoic acid (RA) and
arsenic trioxide directly target PML/RARA-mediated transcriptional repression and
protein stability, inducing rapid differentiation of the promyelocytes and
clinical remission in most APL patients. RA also triggers growth arrest and
progressive clearance of leukemia initiating cells (LIC), both ex vivo and in
vivo. Suboptimal RA concentrations or expression of the PLZF/RARA variant allows 
complete RA-induced differentiation, but neither LIC clearance nor disease
remission. Thus, RA-induced differentiation and LIC clearance may be uncoupled.
The RA/arsenic trioxide association, which dramatically synergizes for PML/RARA
degradation but not for differentiation, rapidly clears LIC in a
proteasome-dependent manner, resulting in APL eradication in murine models and
patients. Collectively, these results demonstrate that LIC clearance, which
mirrors PML/RARA degradation, is the primary basis for APL cure by the RA/arsenic
trioxide association, rather than differentiation. Oncogene degradation could be 
a generally applicable therapeutic strategy to clear LICs in several types of
tumors.

PMID: 20455087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Genomics. 2010 Sep;96(3):134-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2010.04.005. Epub 2010 May 
6.

Genomic phenotype of non-cultured pulmonary fibroblasts in idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis.

Emblom-Callahan MC(1), Chhina MK, Shlobin OA, Ahmad S, Reese ES, Iyer EP, Cox DN,
Brenner R, Burton NA, Grant GM, Nathan SD.

Author information: 
(1)George Mason University, Department of Molecular and Microbiology, Manassas,
VA 20110, USA.

Activated fibroblasts are the central effector cells of the progressive fibrotic 
process in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Characterizing the genomic
phenotype of isolated fibroblasts is essential to understanding IPF pathogenesis.
Comparing the genomic phenotype of non-cultured pulmonary fibroblasts from
advanced IPF patients' and normal lungs revealed novel genes, biological
processes and concomitant pathways previously unreported in IPF fibroblasts. We
demonstrate altered expression in proteasomal constituents,
ubiquitination-mediators, Wnt, apoptosis and vitamin metabolic pathways and cell 
cycle regulators, suggestive of loss of cellular homeostasis. Specifically,
FBXO32, CXCL14, BDKRB1 and NMNAT1 were up-regulated, while RARA and CDKN2D were
down-regulated. Paradoxically, pro-apoptotic inducers TNFSF10, BAX and CASP6 were
also found to be increased. This comprehensive description of altered gene
expression in isolated IPF fibroblasts underscores the complex biological
processes characteristic of IPF and may provide a foundation for future research 
into this devastating disease.

PMID: 20451601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Int J Hematol. 2010 May;91(4):636-45. doi: 10.1007/s12185-010-0550-8. Epub 2010
Apr 8.

Molecular monitoring of BAALC expression in patients with CD34-positive acute
leukemia.

Najima Y(1), Ohashi K, Kawamura M, Onozuka Y, Yamaguchi T, Akiyama H, Sakamaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious Diseases Center,
Komagome Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

Recent studies have shown that high BAALC expression predicts an adverse
prognosis and may define an important risk factor in acute myeloid leukemia
patients with normal karyotype. We performed, using real-time quantitative
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RQ-PCR), the molecular analysis 
of BAALC gene as a possible minimal residual disease (MRD) marker in 45 patients 
with newly diagnosed acute leukemia. BAALC transcript levels in 32 patients with 
CD34 expressed in leukemic blasts were 2-3 logs higher than background levels,
and the copy number was reduced in patients achieving hematological remission.
Comparative monitoring of MRD by RQ-PCR for the Wilms' tumor gene 1(WT1) or
specific translocation markers demonstrated that BAALC had similar kinetics as
WT1, AML1/ETO and minor BCR/ABL, but not PML/RARA. Quantitation of BAALC gene
expression made it possible to assess MRD in patients with CD34-positive acute
leukemia. To our knowledge, this is the first report concerning the use of BAALC 
mRNA expression for MRD monitoring.

PMID: 20376583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Apr 15;198(2):135-43. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.01.005.

Cytogenetic studies in acute leukemia patients relapsing after allogeneic stem
cell transplantation.

Schmidt-Hieber M(1), Blau IW, Richter G, Türkmen S, Bommer C, Thiel G, Neitzel H,
Stroux A, Uharek L, Thiel E, Blau O.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Department III (Hematology, Oncology and Transfusion Medicine),
Charité Campus Benjamin Franklin, 12200 Berlin, Germany.
martin.schmidt-hieber@charite.de

Erratum in
    Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Jul 1;200(1):73.

We analyzed karyotype stability in 22 patients with acute leukemia at relapse or 
disease progression after allogeneic stem cell transplantation (allo-SCT).
Karyotypes before and at relapse after allo-SCT were different in 15 patients
(68%), the most frequent type being clonal evolution either alone or combined
with clonal devolution (13 patients). Patients with and without a karyotype
change did not differ significantly in overall survival (OS) (median, 399 vs. 452
days; P = 0.889) and survival after relapse (median, 120 vs. 370 days; P =
0.923). However, acquisition of additional structural chromosome 1 abnormalities 
at relapse after allo-SCT occurred more frequently than expected and was
associated with reduced OS (median, 125 vs. 478 days; P = 0.008) and shorter
survival after relapse (median, 37 vs. 370 days; P = 0.002). We identified a
previously undescribed clonal evolution involving t(15;17) without PML-RARA
rearrangement in an AML patient. We conclude that a karyotype change is common at
relapse after allo-SCT in acute leukemia patients. Moreover, our data suggest
that additional structural chromosome 1 abnormalities are overrepresented at
relapse after allo-SCT in these patients and, in contrast to a karyotype change
per se, are associated with reduced OS and shorter survival after relapse.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20362228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Diagn Ther. 2010 Apr 1;14(2):113-7. doi: 10.2165/11317400-000000000-00000.

A case of a novel PML/RARA short fusion transcript with truncated transcription
variant 2 of the RARA gene.

Jezísková I(1), Rázga F, Gazdová J, Doubek M, Jurcek T, Korístek Z, Mayer J,
Dvoráková D.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, Department of Internal
Medicine-Hemato-oncology, University Hospital Brno and Masaryk University, Brno, 
Czech Republic. ivana.jeziskova@fnbrno.cz

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) with atypical breakpoints in the promyelocytic
leukemia (PML) and retinoic acid receptor-alpha (RARA) genes represents a rare
leukemic event, which occurs preferentially in patients with variant types of the
PML/RARA fusion gene. Here we report on a patient with APL with a unique PML/RARA
fusion transcript that harbors a short type of this fusion gene, exhibiting
unexpected results of standard PCR diagnostics. The detected transcript
originates from fusion of PML exon 4 and a truncated form of transcription
variant 2 of the RARA gene, with an additional 9 bp insertion. According to our
knowledge, this differs from all previously described fusion transcripts.

PMID: 20359255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Acta Haematol. 2010;123(3):162-70. doi: 10.1159/000294959. Epub 2010 Mar 11.

Isochromosome der(17)(q10)t(15;17) in acute promyelocytic leukemia resulting in
an additional copy of the RARA-PML fusion gene: report of 4 cases and review of
the literature.

Manola KN(1), Karakosta M, Sambani C, Terzoudi G, Pagoni M, Gatsa E, Papaioannou 
M.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Scientific Research Demokritos, Athens, Greece.
pmanola@ipta.demokritos.gr

Isochromosome of the long arm of the derivative chromosome 17, originating from
the translocation t(15;17) [ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) or ider(17q)] in acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL), is a rare chromosome aberration which has been
associated with a poor prognosis. In the present study, we report on 4 male APL
patients with ider(17q) and review the clinical, cytogenetic and molecular
characteristics of all previously reported APL patients with ider(17q) in order
to clarify the clinical features and outcome of these patients. The data
presented in this study demonstrated that ider(17q), which resulted in an extra
RARA-PML fusion gene, was more frequent in males than females (male/female ratio 
of 2.12/1), was associated with a rather low initial white blood cell count and
did not confer an adverse prognosis in APL patients treated with
all-trans-retinoic acid and chemotherapy. The most frequent additional chromosome
change to ider(17q) was trisomy 8. Ider(17q) was observed in all subtypes of the 
PML-RARA fusion gene, but the frequency of the bcr1 subtype was increased. Cases 
of overrepresentation of the RARA-PML fusion gene and ider(17q) cases may help in
elucidating the role of RARA-PML in leukemogenesis.

PMID: 20224268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Future Oncol. 2010 Mar;6(3):445-55. doi: 10.2217/fon.09.175.

Molecular mechanisms involved in the progression of myelodysplastic syndrome.

Nolte F(1), Hofmann WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology & Oncology, University Hospital Mannheim, Germany.
florian.nolte@medma.uni-heidelberg.de

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a heterogeneous group of diseases
characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis presenting with peripheral cytopenias 
in combination with a hyperplastic bone marrow. MDS patients have an increased
risk of disease evolution to acute leukemia. Strong efforts have been made to
gain further insights into the pathobiology of MDS. Development and progression
of MDS to acute myeloid leukemia is suggested to be a multistep alteration to
hematopoietic stem cells consisting of class I and class II alterations: the
former targeting genes that are involved in signal transduction (e.g., FLT3, RAS 
and KIT), whereas the latter affect transcription factors (e.g., RUNX, RARA, EVI1
and WT1). These alterations consist of not only genomic mutations but also
epigenetic aberrations, which can lead to reversible gene silencing. However,
whether numerical and structural alterations of chromosomes and/or single genes
or epigenetic changes represent the initiating event or, more likely, secondary
events remains part of the discussion. Accumulation of such defects may finally
cause the leukemic transformation of MDS.

PMID: 20222800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Endocrinology. 2010 May;151(5):2361-72. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-1338. Epub 2010 Mar 
9.

Activity of retinoic acid receptor-alpha is directly regulated at its protein
kinase A sites in response to follicle-stimulating hormone signaling.

Santos NC(1), Kim KH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington 99164-4234, USA.

Retinoic acid receptor-alpha (RARA) is crucial for germ cell development in the
testis, as shown by the degenerated testis in Rara gene knockout mice, which are 
sterile. Similarly, FSH is known to regulate Sertoli cell proliferation and
differentiation, indirectly controlling the quantity of the spermatogenic output.
Interestingly, FSH inhibited, via activation of FSH receptor, cAMP, and protein
kinase A (PKA), the nuclear localization and transcriptional activity of RARA.
Given that retinoic acid, the ligand for RARA, is known to regulate cell
proliferation and differentiation, we investigated whether FSH regulates RARA by 
a direct posttranslational phosphorylation mechanism. Mutagenesis of serine 219
(S219) and S369 at the PKA sites on RARA to either double alanines or double
glutamic acids showed that both PKA sites are important for RARA activity. The
negative charges at the PKA sites, whether they are from glutamic acids or
phosphorylation of serines, decreased the nuclear localization of RARA,
heterodimerization with retinoid X receptor-alpha, and the transcriptional
activity of the receptor. On the other hand, the double-alanine mutant that
cannot be phosphorylated at the 219 and 369 amino acid positions did not respond 
to cAMP and PKA activation. Wild-type and double-mutant RARA interacted with PKA,
but only in the presence of cAMP or FSH. These results together suggest that FSH 
may regulate cell proliferation and differentiation of Sertoli cells, at least
partially, by directly affecting the PKA sites of RARA and controlling the
transcriptional function of the receptor.

PMCID: PMC2869257
PMID: 20215566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. BMC Med Genomics. 2010 Mar 8;3:6. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-3-6.

Gene expression signatures in childhood acute leukemias are largely unique and
distinct from those of normal tissues and other malignancies.

Andersson A(1), Edén P, Olofsson T, Fioretos T.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund
University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. anna.andersson@med.lu.se

BACKGROUND: Childhood leukemia is characterized by the presence of balanced
chromosomal translocations or by other structural or numerical chromosomal
changes. It is well know that leukemias with specific molecular abnormalities
display profoundly different global gene expression profiles. However, it is
largely unknown whether such subtype-specific leukemic signatures are unique or
if they are active also in non-hematopoietic normal tissues or in other human
cancer types.
METHODS: Using gene set enrichment analysis, we systematically explored whether
the transcriptional programs in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and 
myeloid leukemia (AML) were significantly similar to those in different
flow-sorted subpopulations of normal hematopoietic cells (n = 8), normal
non-hematopoietic tissues (n = 22) or human cancer tissues (n = 13).
RESULTS: This study revealed that e.g., the t(12;21) [ETV6-RUNX1] subtype of ALL 
and the t(15;17) [PML-RARA] subtype of AML had transcriptional programs similar
to those in normal Pro-B cells and promyelocytes, respectively. Moreover, the
11q23/MLL subtype of ALL showed similarities with non-hematopoietic tissues.
Strikingly however, most of the transcriptional programs in the other leukemic
subtypes lacked significant similarity to approximately 100 gene sets derived
from normal and malignant tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates, for the first time, that the expression
profiles of childhood leukemia are largely unique, with limited similarities to
transcriptional programs active in normal hematopoietic cells, non-hematopoietic 
normal tissues or the most common forms of human cancer. In addition to providing
important pathogenetic insights, these findings should facilitate the
identification of candidate genes or transcriptional programs that can be used as
unique targets in leukemia.

PMCID: PMC2845086
PMID: 20211010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 25;5(2):e9417. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009417.

Involvement of transcription factor NR2F2 in human trophoblast differentiation.

Hubert MA(1), Sherritt SL, Bachurski CJ, Handwerger S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, United
States of America.

BACKGROUND: During the in vitro differentiation of human villous cytotrophoblast 
(CTB) cells to a syncytiotrophoblast (STB) phenotype, mRNA levels for the nuclear
hormone receptor NR2F2 (ARP-1, COUP-TFII) increase rapidly, reaching a peak at
day 1 of differentiation that is 8.8-fold greater than that in undifferentiated
CTB cells. To examine whether NR2F2 is involved in the regulation of villous CTB 
cell differentiation, studies were performed to determine whether NR2F2 regulates
the expression of TFAP2A (AP-2alpha), a transcription factor that is critical for
the terminal differentiation of these cells to a STB phenotype.
METHODOLOGY/PRIMARY FINDINGS: Overexpression of NR2F2 in primary cultures of
human CTB cells and JEG-3 human choriocarcinoma cells induced dose-dependent
increases in TFAP2A promoter activity. Conversely, siRNA mediated silencing of
the NR2F2 gene in villous CTB undergoing spontaneous differentiation blocked the 
induction of the mRNAs for TFAP2A and several STB cell specific marker genes,
including human placental lactogen (hPL), pregnancy specific glycoprotein 1
(PSG1) and corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) by 51-59%. The induction of
TFAP2A promoter activity by NR2F2 was potentiated by the nuclear hormone
receptors retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) and retinoid X receptor alpha
(RXRA).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Taken together, these results strongly suggest that
NR2F2 is involved in villous CTB cell differentiation and that NR2F2 acts, at
least in part, by directly activating TFAP2A gene expression and by potentiating 
the transactivation of TFAP2A by RARA and RXRA.

PMCID: PMC2828470
PMID: 20195529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Leuk Res. 2010 Aug;34(8):e190-3. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.02.003. Epub 2010
Mar 1.

ATRA is effective to an acute promyelocytic leukemia patient without RARA gene
rearrangement.

Song X, Gong S, Chen J, Gao L, Yang J, Wang J.

PMID: 20189646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 May;49(5):471-9. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20757.

Atypical mRNA fusions in PML-RARA positive, RARA-PML negative acute promyelocytic
leukemia.

Walz C(1), Grimwade D, Saussele S, Lengfelder E, Haferlach C, Schnittger S,
Lafage-Pochitaloff M, Hochhaus A, Cross NC, Reiter A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathologisches Institut, Universitätsmedizin Mannheim, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer
1-3, Mannheim, Germany.

Reciprocal RARA-PML transcripts are not detected in approximately 25% of patients
with PML-RARA positive acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), but the reasons for
this are poorly understood. We studied 21 PML-RARA positive/RARA-PML negative
cases by bubble PCR and multiplex long template PCR to identify the genomic
breakpoints. Additional RT-PCR analysis was performed based on the DNA findings. 
Three cases were found to have complex rearrangements involving a third locus:
the first had a PML-CDC6-RARA forward DNA fusion and expressed a chimeric
PML-CDC6-RARA mRNA in addition to a PML-RARA. The other two had HERC1-PML and
NT_009714.17-PML genomic fusion sequences at their respective reciprocal
breakpoints. Six patients were falsely classified as RARA-PML negative due to
deletions on chromosome 15 and/or 17, or alternative splicing leading to atypical
RARA-PML fusion transcripts, which were not identified by conventional RT-PCR
assays. This study demonstrates that the frequency of RARA-PML expression has
been underestimated and highlights remarkable complexity at chromosomal
breakpoint regions in APL even in cases with an apparently simple balanced
t(15;17)(q24;q12).

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20155840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Reproduction. 2010 Apr;139(4):717-31. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0527. Epub 2010 Feb 3.

Disulfide isomerase glucose-regulated protein 58 is required for the nuclear
localization and degradation of retinoic acid receptor alpha.

Zhu L(1), Santos NC, Kim KH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Center for Reproductive Biology, Washington
State University, Pullman, Washington 99164-4234, USA.

Retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) is critical for spermatogenesis, as shown by 
a sterility phenotype observed in Rara knockout mice. RARA is important in both
Sertoli and germ cells of the testis. Here, we demonstrate that a disulfide
isomerase glucose-regulated protein 58 (GRp58) participates in the nuclear import
and degradation of RARA in Sertoli cells. GRp58 interacted with RARA in the
presence of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) ligand and, as a complex, it was
translocated from the cytoplasm to the nucleus and, then with time, GRp58
dissociated from RARA and was found in the cytoplasm. The GRp58 RNAi treatment
disrupted ATRA-dependent RARA nuclear localization, indicating the requirement of
GRp58 for RARA nuclear localization. Moreover, treatment with
sulfhydryl-modifying agents that oxidize SH-groups of cysteine residues to
disulfide bonds abolished ATRA-mediated RARA nuclear localization, suggesting
that the thiol oxidoreductase activity of GRp58 may be required for RARA nuclear 
import. Additionally, the proteasome inhibitor treatment resulted in the
co-localization of GRp58 and RARA at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), suggesting
that GRp58 may bring RARA to the ER for the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) of
RARA before it is de-coupled from RARA for recycling. In this regard, proteasome 
inhibitor treatment also increased the interaction of RARA with UBE2J2, an
ERAD-associated ubiquitin E2 enzyme. Collectively, the results indicate that
GRp58 may act as a molecular chaperone that alters the protein conformation of
RARA for its delivery to the nucleus and, then with time, accompanies RARA to the
ER for RARA ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated ERAD.

PMID: 20130111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Feb;197(1):75-80. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.11.001.

Concomitant and successive amplifications of MYC in APL-like leukemia.

Bruyère H(1), Sutherland H, Chipperfield K, Hudoba M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Vancouver General Hospital
and University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. helene.bruyere@vch.ca

A 61-year-old male patient presented with very high blood white cell count, left 
shift of granulocytes to blasts, as well as low hemoglobin and platelets. The
bone marrow aspirate and biopsy were consistent with an acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). Blasts presented with large azurophilic inclusions and prominent Auer rods
resembling acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Cytogenetic analysis revealed a
deletion 9p and double-minute chromosomes. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
showed amplification of the MYC probe and the absence of a RARA rearrangement.
The patient achieved complete morphologic and cytogenetic remission 1 month after
allogenic transplant, but relapsed 1 month later. Cytogenetics showed MYC
amplification as a homogeneously staining region inserted into the long arm of
one chromosome 9 and as a ring structure. At least five other acute promyelocytic
leukemia-like cases without translocation 15;17, but with double minutes, have
been reported in the literature. Only one of these had no RARA rearrangement.
This report presents a second patient with APL-like bone marrow morphology,
absence of RARA rearrangement, and MYC amplification. In this case, the
amplification happened in various concomitant or successive forms.

Crown Copyright (c) 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20113841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Jun;51(6):3281-90. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-3769.
Epub 2010 Jan 27.

Retinoic acid receptor (RAR)-alpha is not critically required for mediating
retinoic acid effects in the developing mouse retina.

Cammas L(1), Trensz F, Jellali A, Ghyselinck NB, Roux MJ, Dollé P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, BP 10142
Illkirch, France.

PURPOSE: To determine the functional contribution of retinoic acid receptor
(RAR)-alpha in the developing murine neural retina, through a phenotypic analysis
of the corresponding null mutants.
METHODS: RARalpha mutant (Rara(-/-)) mice were compared with wild-type
littermates at several stages of pre- and postnatal development. An RA-response
element (RARE)-containing reporter transgene was used to assess the contribution 
of RARalpha to retinoid signaling in the retina. In situ hybridization was
performed on serial eye sections to investigate the expression of main
developmental regulators. Immunofluorescence was used to detect differentiated
cell types in the adult retina. Mutants were also subjected to clinical
observation and visual function evaluation with the optomotor test and
electroretinography.
RESULTS: Both isoform transcripts of RARalpha were expressed throughout the
neural retina at various stages of pre- and postnatal development. In the
Rara(-/-) mice the RARE-reporter transgene consistently failed to activate in the
developing neural retina. However, they did not exhibit any alteration of the
expression patterns of molecular determinants and had a normal organization of
retinal cell types at postnatal stages. Their performance in visual tests was
indistinguishable from that of control littermates.
CONCLUSIONS: Although RARalpha mediates RARE reporter transgene activity in the
neural retina, its function is not necessary for the retina to develop and
function normally. These data suggest that retinoic acid regulates neural retinal
development through other, possibly RAR-independent, pathways.

PMID: 20107170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Cancer Treat Rev. 2010 May;36(3):224-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2009.12.007. Epub
2010 Jan 25.

17q12-21 - the pursuit of targeted therapy in breast cancer.

Glynn RW(1), Miller N, Kerin MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Clinical Science Institute, National University of
Ireland, Costello Road, Galway, Ireland. ronanglynn@doctors.org.uk

PURPOSE: Identification of HER2/neu, and the subsequent development of targeted
therapy for patients who over-express it, has revolutionized their management.
Research has since focused on the area of chromosome 17 in which HER2/neu is
located in order to identify other genes in the vicinity. The aims of this review
are, firstly, to discuss current thinking in relation to the role of these genes 
in the pathogenesis of breast cancer and, secondly, to examine how this evidence 
may be assimilated such that new forms of targeted therapy can be developed.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: This review discusses the evidence in relation to 4 genes
located at the HER2/neu amplicon, namely TOP2A, GRB7, STARD3 and RARA.
RESULTS: TOP2A has aroused particular interest as over-expression of its protein 
has been shown to correlate, both with amplification of HER2/neu, and with
response to anthracycline-based chemotherapeutic agents in breast cancer. GRB7 is
included on Oncotype DXtm, and has recently been implicated in gastric and
oesophageal cancer. STARD3 and RARA also hold clinical relevance, the former
having been shown to function in steroidogenesis and therefore implicated in
hormone-receptor-positive breast cancer. Finally, RARA may be the key to
unlocking the problem of resistance to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) in breast
cancer sufferers; this treatment has previously been demonstrated to induce
remission in over 80% of patients with acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APML).
CONCLUSION: These genes hold potential as therapeutic targets, and warrant
further investigation as we move towards our goal of individually tailored
therapeutic strategies in breast cancer.

Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 20100636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Clin Transl Oncol. 2010 Jan;12(1):8-14. doi: 10.1007/s12094-010-0460-5.

Molecular biology of therapy-related leukaemias.

Joannides M(1), Grimwade D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical & Molecular Genetics, King's College London School of
Medicine, Guy's Hospital, London, UK.

Therapy-related leukaemias are becoming an increasing healthcare problem as more 
patients survive their primary cancers. The nature of the causative agent has an 
important bearing upon the characteristics, biology, time to onset and prognosis 
of the resultant leukaemia. Agents targeting topoisomerase II induce acute
leukaemias with balanced translocations that generally arise within 3 years,
often involving the MLL, RUNX1 and RARA loci at 11q23, 21q22 and 17q21
respectively. Chromosomal breakpoints have been found to be preferential sites of
topoisomerase II cleavage, which are believed to be repaired by the nonhomologous
end-joining DNA repair pathway to generate chimaeric oncoproteins that underlie
the resultant leukaemias. Therapy-related acute myeloid leukaemias occurring
after exposure to antimetabolites and/or alkylating agents are biologically
distinct with a longer latency period, being characterised by more complex
karyotypes and loss of p53. Although treatment of therapy-related leukaemias
represents a considerable challenge due to prior therapy and comorbidities,
curative therapy is possible, particularly in those with favourable karyotypic
features.

PMID: 20080465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Androl. 2010 Jul-Aug;31(4):406-18. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.109.008763. Epub 2010
Jan 14.

Retinoic acid modulates the subcellular localization of small ubiquitin-related
modifier-2/3 (SUMO-2/3) in the testis.

Zhu L(1), Doyle TJ, Kim KH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Center of Reproductive Biology, Washington
State University, Pullman, WA 99164-4234, USA.

Covalent attachment of small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) to target proteins
is an important posttranslational mechanism controlling diverse cellular
functions. Recently, hypo- or hyper-sumoylation by SUMO-2/3 was shown to play a
crucial role in male reproduction. However, the regulation of SUMO-2/3 in the
testis remains unknown. Here, we report that the subcellular localization of
SUMO-2/3 changes during testicular development. SUMO-2/3 was mainly found
localized in the nucleus of Sertoli cells and gonocytes early in testicular
development, but the localization shifted to the cytoplasm in Sertoli and germ
cells after meiotic initiation. This change in the subcellular localization was
mimicked both in testes of postnatal day 10 (P10) rats injected with all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA) and in organ cultures of testes from P10 rats treated with
ATRA. These results suggest that retinoic acid might have a role in controlling
the subcellular localization of SUMO-2/3. Moreover, treatment of Sertoli cells
with a retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA)-specific agonist changed the
subcellular localization of SUMO-2/3 from the nucleus to the cytoplasm.
Furthermore, disruption of the retinoic acid receptor alpha (Rara) gene in the
testis resulted in alteration of SUMO-2/3 subcellular localization, indicating
that its protein RARA might have a role in the nuclear trafficking of SUMO-2/3.
Because many SUMO target proteins are usually modified en masse after a
biological stimulus, our results suggest that dysregulation of SUMO-2/3
subcellular localization could easily be a pleiotropic contributing factor that
can cause a male sterility phenotype in Rara-null mice.

PMID: 20075418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Cancer Cell. 2010 Jan 19;17(1):13-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.11.020. Epub 2010
Jan 7.

DNA methylation signatures identify biologically distinct subtypes in acute
myeloid leukemia.

Figueroa ME(1), Lugthart S, Li Y, Erpelinck-Verschueren C, Deng X, Christos PJ,
Schifano E, Booth J, van Putten W, Skrabanek L, Campagne F, Mazumdar M, Greally
JM, Valk PJ, Löwenberg B, Delwel R, Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hematology Oncology Division, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2010 Jan 19;17(1):1-3.

We hypothesized that DNA methylation distributes into specific patterns in cancer
cells, which reflect critical biological differences. We therefore examined the
methylation profiles of 344 patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Clustering of these patients by methylation data segregated patients into 16
groups. Five of these groups defined new AML subtypes that shared no other known 
feature. In addition, DNA methylation profiles segregated patients with CEBPA
aberrations from other subtypes of leukemia, defined four epigenetically distinct
forms of AML with NPM1 mutations, and showed that established AML1-ETO,
CBFb-MYH11, and PML-RARA leukemia entities are associated with specific
methylation profiles. We report a 15 gene methylation classifier predictive of
overall survival in an independent patient cohort (p < 0.001, adjusted for known 
covariates).

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3008568
PMID: 20060365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Mol Diagn. 2010 Jan;12(1):3-16. doi: 10.2353/jmoldx.2010.090054. Epub 2009 Dec 
3.

Genetic tests to evaluate prognosis and predict therapeutic response in acute
myeloid leukemia.

Gulley ML(1), Shea TC, Fedoriw Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 913 Brinkhous-Bullitt
Building, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7525, USA.
Margaret_gulley@med.unc.edu

Management of patients with acute myeloid leukemia relies on genetic tests that
inform diagnosis and prognosis, predict response to therapy, and measure minimal 
residual disease. The value of genetics is reinforced in the revised 2008 World
Health Organization acute myeloid leukemia classification scheme. The various
analytic procedures-karyotype, fluorescence in situ hybridization, reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction, DNA sequencing, and microarray
technology-each have advantages in certain clinical settings, and understanding
their relative merits assists in specimen allocation and in effective utilization
of health care resources. Karyotype and array technology represent genome-wide
screens, whereas the other methods target specific prognostic features such as
t(15;17) PML-RARA, t(8;21) RUNX1-RUNX1T1, inv(16) CBFB-MYH11, 11q23 MLL
rearrangement, FLT3 internal tandem duplication, or NPM1 mutation. New biomarkers
and pharmacogenetic tests are emerging. The pathologist's expertise is critical
in 1) consulting with clinicians about test selection as well as specimen
collection and handling; 2) allocating tissue for immediate testing and
preserving the remaining specimen for any downstream testing that is indicated
once morphology and other pertinent test results are known; 3) performing tests
that maximize outcome based on the strengths and limitations of each assay in
each available specimen type; and 4) interpreting and conveying results to the
rest of the health care team in a format that facilitates clinical management.
Acute myeloid leukemia leads the way for modern molecular medicine.

PMCID: PMC2797712
PMID: 19959801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Genetika. 2009 Oct;45(10):1393-400.

[Formation and chromosome evolution of the palearctic species of chironomids of
the genus Sergentia Kieffer (diptera, chironomidae). divergence of the karyotypes
of S. baueri Wülker et al., 1999, S. prima Proviz et al., 1997, S. electa Proviz 
et al., 1999 and their relationship with the endemic species from Baikal Lake].

[Article in Russian]

Proviz VI.

The banding structures of chromosomes of three Palearctic species of chironomids 
of the genus Sergentia Kieffer, 1922 from the Irkutsk reservoir were
comparatively analyzed: S. baueri Wülker et al., 1999 (2n = 8), S. prima Proviz
et al., 1997 (2n = 8), and S. electa Proviz et al., 1999 (2n = 6). The S. baueri 
karyotype was taken as a standard in chromosome mapping. It was established that 
in contrast to S. baueri and S. prima the S. electa karyotype was formed due to a
complex translocation: transfer of chromosome IV in the median part of chromosome
III. The sequences of chromosome I bands were found to be completely homologous
in all Palearctic species and in S. rara Proviz et al., 1999 (2n = 8) taken as
the original species in the group of Baikalian endemics. In both groups, seven
homozygous inversions were detected, of which the common one is the inversion in 
chromosome III. It was assumed on the basis of the results of the karyological
analysis that among the Palearctic species S. baueri is most similar to the
Baikalian endemics and S. electa is phylogenetically closer to S. prima. Specific
features of the chromosome and morphological evolutions of the Sergentia genus
species are considered.

PMID: 19947551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2010 Feb;88(2):84-93. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20639.

Testing reported associations of genetic risk factors for oral clefts in a large 
Irish study population.

Carter TC(1), Molloy AM, Pangilinan F, Troendle JF, Kirke PN, Conley MR, Orr DJ, 
Earley M, McKiernan E, Lynn EC, Doyle A, Scott JM, Brody LC, Mills JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Statistics, and Prevention Research, Eunice Kennedy 
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA. carterto@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Suggestive, but not conclusive, studies implicate many genetic
variants in oral cleft etiology. We used a large, ethnically homogenous study
population to test whether reported associations between nonsyndromic oral clefts
and 12 genes (CLPTM1, CRISPLD2, FGFR2, GABRB3, GLI2, IRF6, PTCH1, RARA, RYK,
SATB2, SUMO1, TGFA) could be confirmed.
METHODS: Thirty-one single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in exons, splice
sites, and conserved non-coding regions were studied in 509 patients with cleft
lip with or without cleft palate (CLP), 383 with cleft palate only (CP), 838
mothers and 719 fathers of patients with oral clefts, and 902 controls from
Ireland. Case-control and family-based statistical tests were performed using
isolated oral clefts for the main analyses.
RESULTS: In case-control comparisons, the minor allele of PTCH1 A562A (rs2066836)
was associated with reduced odds of CLP (odds ratios [OR], 0.29; 95% confidence
interval [CI], 0.13-0.64 for homozygotes), whereas the minor allele of PTCH1
L1315P (rs357564) was associated with increased odds of CLP (OR, 1.36; 95% CI,
1.07-1.74 for heterozygotes; and OR, 1.56; 95% CI, 1.09-2.24 for homozygotes).
The minor allele of one SUMO1 SNP, rs3769817 located in intron 2, was associated 
with increased odds of CP (OR, 1.45; 95% CI, 1.06-1.99 for heterozygotes).
Transmission disequilibrium was observed for the minor allele of TGFA V159V
(rs2166975) which was over-transmitted to CP cases (p = 0.041).
CONCLUSIONS: For 10 of the 12 genes, this is the largest candidate gene study of 
nonsyndromic oral clefts to date. The findings provide further evidence that
PTCH1, SUMO1, and TGFA contribute to nonsyndromic oral clefts.

PMCID: PMC3503531
PMID: 19937600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Hum Genet. 2010 Feb;127(2):207-21. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0763-1. Epub 2009 Nov 
10.

Rubella vaccine-induced cellular immunity: evidence of associations with
polymorphisms in the Toll-like, vitamin A and D receptors, and innate immune
response genes.

Ovsyannikova IG(1), Dhiman N, Haralambieva IH, Vierkant RA, O'Byrne MM, Jacobson 
RM, Poland GA.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Vaccine Research Group, Mayo Clinic, Guggenheim 611C, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

Toll-like, vitamin A and D receptors and other innate proteins participate in
various immune functions. We determined whether innate gene-sequence variations
are associated with rubella vaccine-induced cytokine immune responses. We
genotyped 714 healthy children (11-19 years of age) after two doses of
rubella-containing vaccine for 148 candidate SNP markers. Rubella virus-induced
cytokines were measured by ELISA. Twenty-two significant associations (range of P
values 0.002-0.048) were found between SNPs in the vitamin A receptor family
(RARA, RARB, TOP2B and RARG), vitamin D receptor and downstream mediator of
vitamin D signaling (RXRA) genes and rubella virus-specific (IFN-gamma, IL-2,
IL-10, TNF-alpha, and GM-CSF) cytokine immune responses. A TLR3 gene promoter
region SNP (rs5743305, -8441A > T) was associated with rubella-specific GM-CSF
secretion. Importantly, SNPs in the TRIM5 gene coding regions, rs3740996
(His43Tyr) and rs10838525 (Gln136Arg), were associated with an allele
dose-related secretion of rubella virus-specific TNF-alpha and IL-2/GM-CSF,
respectively, and have been previously shown to have functional consequences
regarding the antiviral activity and susceptibility to HIV-1 infection. We
identified associations between individual SNPs and haplotypes in, or involving, 
the RIG-I (DDX58) gene and rubella-specific TNF-alpha secretion. This is the
first paper to present evidence that polymorphisms in the TLR, vitamin A, vitamin
D receptor, and innate immunity genes can influence adaptive cytokine responses
to rubella vaccination.

PMCID: PMC2809817
PMID: 19902255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Wildl Dis. 2009 Oct;45(4):1221-6.

Endoparasites of the coyote (Canis latrans), a recent migrant to insular
newfoundland.

Bridger KE(1), Baggs EM, Finney-Crawley J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Natural Resources, Animal Health Division, PO Box 7400, St.
John's, Newfoundland A1E 3Y5, Canada. kimbridger@gov.nl.ca

This study provides the first data on the helminth fauna of the coyote (Canis
latrans) in insular Newfoundland. Sixty-nine coyotes were collected between 2001 
and 2003 and examined for helminths. A total of 10 helminth species were
recorded: the cestodes Taenia ovis krabbei (9%), Taenia hydatigena (4%), Taenia
pisiformis (1%), and Mesocestoides spp. (5%); and the nematodes Toxocara canis
(19%), Toxascaris leonina (1%), Crenosoma vulpis (19%), Physaloptera rara (6%),
Uncinaria stenocephala (3%), and Angiostrongylus vasorum (1%). No significant
differences (P< or =0.05) were detected between sexes. Mesocestoides spp., T.
canis, and C. vulpis were more prevalent in juveniles than adults.
Angiostrongylus vasorum is reported in coyotes for the second time in
Newfoundland, Canada.

PMID: 19901402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Blood. 2010 Jan 14;115(2):198-205. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-04-212530. Epub 2009
Nov 9.

Strikingly different molecular relapse kinetics in NPM1c, PML-RARA,
RUNX1-RUNX1T1, and CBFB-MYH11 acute myeloid leukemias.

Ommen HB(1), Schnittger S, Jovanovic JV, Ommen IB, Hasle H, Østergaard M,
Grimwade D, Hokland P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunohematology, Department of Hematology, Aarhus University
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

Early relapse detection in acute myeloid leukemia is possible using standardized 
real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RQ-PCR) protocols. However,
optimal sampling intervals have not been defined and are likely to vary according
to the underlying molecular lesion. In 74 patients experiencing hematologic
relapse and harboring aberrations amenable to RQ-PCR (mutated NPM1 [designated
NPM1c], PML-RARA, RUNX1-RUNX1T1, and CBFB-MYH11), we observed strikingly
different relapse kinetics. The median doubling time of the CBFB-MYH11 leukemic
clone was significantly longer (36 days) than that of clones harboring other
markers (RUNX1-RUNX1T1, 14 days; PML-RARA, 12 days; and NPM1c, 11 days; P <
.001). Furthermore, we used a mathematical model to determine frequency of
relapse detection and median time from detection of minimal residual disease to
hematologic relapse as a function of sampling interval length. For example, to
obtain a relapse detection fraction of 90% and a median time of 60 days, blood
sampling every sixth month should be performed for CBFB-MYH11 leukemias. By
contrast, in NPM1c(+)/FLT3-ITD(-), NPM1c(+)/FLT3-ITD(+), RUNX1-RUNX1T1, and
PML-RARA leukemias, bone marrow sampling is necessary every sixth, fourth, and
fourth and second month, respectively. These data carry important implications
for the development of optimal RQ-PCR monitoring schedules suitable for
evaluation of minimal residual disease-directed therapies in future clinical
trials.

PMID: 19901261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Korean J Lab Med. 2009 Oct;29(5):379-83. doi: 10.3343/kjlm.2009.29.5.379.

[Detection of PML/RARA rearrangement by reverse transcriptase-PCR and sequencing 
in a case of microgranular acute promyelocytic leukemia lacking t(15;17) on
karyotype and FISH].

[Article in Korean]

Kim KE(1), Woo KS, Kim SH, Han JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Dong-A University College of Medicine,
Busan, Korea.

We report a case of morphologically microgranular acute promyelocytic leukemia
with PML/RARA fusion transcripts demonstrated by reverse transcriptase-PCR and
cDNA sequencing, and no PML/RARA fusion detected by karyotype and FISH analyses. 
Karyotype was 47,XX,+8[19]/46,XX[1]. Although the newer FISH probes provide more 
accurate detections of t(15;17), it would be necessary to perform other molecular
tests to further identify the masked PML/RARA fusions.

PMID: 19893344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Syst Biol Reprod Med. 2009 Aug;55(4):145-63. doi: 10.3109/19396360902896844.

Temporal profiling of rat transcriptomes in retinol-replenished vitamin
A-deficient testis.

Doyle TJ(1), Oudes AJ, Kim KH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Center for Reproductive Biology, Washington
State University, Pullman, Washington 99164-4234, USA.

At least in mammals, retinoic acid is a pivotal factor in maintaining the
functionality of the testis, in particular, for the progression of germ cells
from mitosis to meiosis. Removal of dietary vitamin A or a targeted deletion of
retinoic acid receptor alpha gene (Rara), the receptor for retinoic acid, in
mice, led to testicular degeneration by a dramatic loss of germ cells and a loss 
of control of the spermatogenic cycle. The germ cells that remained in the
vitamin A deficient (VAD) rat testis were spermatogonia and a few preleptotene
spermatocytes. Spermatogenesis can be reinitiated by injection of VAD rats with
retinol, the metabolic precursor of retinoic acid, but to date, the functions of 
retinoic acid in the testis remain elusive. We have applied DNA microarray
technology to investigate the time-dependent transcriptome changes that occur 4
to 24 h after retinol replenishment in the VAD rat testis. The retinol-regulated 
gene expression occurred both in germ cells and Sertoli cells. Bioinformatic
analyses revealed time-dependent clusters of genes and canonical pathways that
may have critical functions for proper progression through spermatogenesis. In
particular, gene clusters that emerged dealt with: (1) cholesterol and oxysterol 
homeostasis, * (2) the regulation of steroidogenesis, (3) glycerophospholipid
metabolism, (4) the regulation of acute inflammation, (5) the regulation of the
cell cycle including ubiquitin-mediated degradation of cell cycle proteins and
control of centrosome and genome integrity, and (6) the control of membrane
scaffolding proteins that can integrate multiple small GTPase signals within a
cell. These results provide insights into the potential role of retinoic acid in 
the testis.

PMCID: PMC2772137
PMID: 19886770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Blood. 2010 Jan 14;115(2):326-30. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-235051. Epub 2009
Nov 2.

Evidence for direct involvement of epirubicin in the formation of chromosomal
translocations in t(15;17) therapy-related acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Mays AN(1), Osheroff N, Xiao Y, Wiemels JL, Felix CA, Byl JA, Saravanamuttu K,
Peniket A, Corser R, Chang C, Hoyle C, Parker AN, Hasan SK, Lo-Coco F, Solomon E,
Grimwade D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical & Molecular Genetics, King's College London School of
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

Therapy-related acute promyelocytic leukemia (t-APL) with t(15;17)(q22;q21)
involving the PML and RARA genes is associated with exposure to agents targeting 
topoisomerase II (topoII), particularly mitoxantrone and epirubicin. We
previously have shown that mitoxantrone preferentially induces topoII-mediated
DNA damage in a "hotspot region" within PML intron 6. To investigate mechanisms
underlying epirubicin-associated t-APL, t(15;17) genomic breakpoints were
characterized in 6 cases with prior breast cancer. Significant breakpoint
clustering was observed in PML and RARA loci (P = .009 and P = .017,
respectively), with PML breakpoints lying outside the mitoxantrone-associated
hotspot region. Recurrent breakpoints identified in the PML and RARA loci in
epirubicin-related t-APL were shown to be preferential sites of topoII-induced
DNA damage, enhanced by epirubicin. Although site preferences for DNA damage
differed between mitoxantrone and epirubicin, the observation that particular
regions of the PML and RARA loci are susceptible to these agents may underlie
their respective propensities to induce t-APL.

PMCID: PMC2808156
PMID: 19884644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Nihon Rinsho. 2009 Oct;67(10):1889-93.

[Molecular mechanisms in the development of acute myeloid leukemia].

[Article in Japanese]

Ichikawa M(1), Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University of Tokyo Hospital.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a malignant hematopoietic neoplasm characterized 
by clonal proliferation of tumor cells that arise from the hematopoietic
stem/progenitor population within the bone marrow. Cytogenetic abnormalities or
point mutations of the hematopoiesis-specific genes are frequently found in
patients with AML, and these genetic aberrations are closely associated with the 
pathophysiology of the disease. Molecular pathogenesis of AML has been disclosed 
through analyses of such gene aberrations, including AML1 and MLL abnormalities, 
PML-RARA chimeric gene, activating mutations of FLT3, and EVI-1 abnormalities.
Through prediction of prognosis and targeted therapy, this knowledge on
pathogenesis of AML has been applied to the clinical practice, and further
investigation should improve the outcome of therapy for AML in the future.

PMID: 19860185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Endocrinology. 2009 Dec;150(12):5586-95. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0868. Epub 2009 Oct
22.

Small ubiquitin-like modifier-2 modification of retinoic acid receptor-alpha
regulates its subcellular localization and transcriptional activity.

Zhu L(1), Santos NC, Kim KH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Center for Reproductive Biology, Washington
State University, Pullman, Washington 99164, USA.

The retinoic acid receptor-alpha (Rara) gene is critical for germ cell
development in the testis, as demonstrated by infertile Rara knockout male mice. 
The encoded protein for Rara (RARA) is expressed in both Sertoli cells and germ
cells, but it is not always in the nucleus. Previously, all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA) was shown to increase the nuclear localization and transcriptional
activity of RARA in Sertoli cells. Here, we identified a small ubiquitin-like
modifier-2 (SUMO-2) modification as a novel posttranslational regulatory
mechanism controlling the ATRA-dependent RARA subcellular localization and
transcription. ATRA increased the SUMO-2 modification of RARA. In the presence of
ATRA, lysine 166 (K166) and K171 of RARA were modified at a physiological
concentration of SUMO-2, whereas in the absence of ATRA, K399 was the only site
that was modified, but at a higher SUMO-2 concentration. However, K399 was
critical for ATRA-controlled nuclear trafficking of RARA. In the presence of
ATRA, a K399 mutation to arginine resulted in the cytoplasmic localization of
K399R mutant, indicating that K166 and K171 sumoylations were inhibitory to
nuclear localization. This may be due to SUMO/sentrin-specific peptidase 6
(SENP6) not being able to bind K399R mutant to desumoylate K166 and K171 in
Sertoli cells, whereas it can bind RARA with intact K399. On the other hand,
functional K166 and K171 sites for sumoylation were required for a full
transcriptional activity, when K399 was intact. These results together suggest
that both K166 and K171 sumoylation and desumoylation are critical for optimal
RARA function.

PMCID: PMC2795702
PMID: 19850744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Curr Oncol Rep. 2009 Nov;11(6):439-45.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia in childhood.

Gregory J(1), Feusner J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology,Goryeb Children's Hospital, 100
Madison Avenue, Morristown, NJ 07962, USA. john.gregoryjr@atlantichealth.org

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a relatively rare form of acute myelogenous
leukemia (AML). In the United States, APL in children constitutes only 5% to 10% 
of AML. Molecularly, the disease is characterized by a fusion protein,
promyelocytic leukemia (PML)-retinoic acid receptor (RAR)-alpha that results from
a balanced reciprocal translocation between the PML gene on chromosome 15 and the
RAR-alpha (RARA) gene on chromosome 17. A major advance in the field of APL
treatment has been the use of all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA). Advances in the
treatment of APL have taken this form of AML from a disease with significant
morbidity and mortality to one with an excellent outcome. This has resulted
largely from the incorporation of ATRA into frontline regimens with chemotherapy.
Anthracyclines remain a cornerstone of treatment at this point. Recent trials
have shown a role for arsenic trioxide in both newly diagnosed and relapsed APL.

PMID: 19840521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Oct 15;15(20):6321-6. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-0209.
Epub 2009 Oct 6.

Therapy-induced PML/RARA proteolysis and acute promyelocytic leukemia cure.

Nasr R(1), Lallemand-Breitenbach V, Zhu J, Guillemin MC, de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, American University of Beirut, Beirut,
Lebanon.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by a specific t(15;17)
chromosomal translocation that yields the PML/RARA fusion gene. Clinically,
besides chemotherapy, two drugs induce clinical remissions: retinoic acid (RA)
and arsenic trioxide (As). Both agents directly target PML/RARA-mediated
transcriptional repression and protein stability, inducing to various extent
promyelocyte differentiation and clinical remission of APL patients. RA targets
the RARA moiety of the fusion, whereas arsenic targets its PML part. PML/RARA
expression in the mouse is sufficient to initiate APL. The RA-As association,
which synergizes for PML/RARA degradation but not for differentiation, rapidly
clears leukemia initiating cells (LIC), resulting in APL eradication in murine
APL models, but also in several APL clinical trials. Cyclic AMP triggered
PML/RARA phosphorylation also enhances RA-induced APL regression, PML/RARA
degradation, and LIC clearance, raising new options for therapy-resistant
patients. Although differentiation has a major role in debulking of the tumor,
PML/RARA degradation seems to be the primary basis for APL eradication by the
RA-As association. Oncoprotein degradation could be a general therapeutic
strategy that may be extended beyond APL.

PMID: 19808868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. BMC Biol. 2009 Oct 5;7:66. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-7-66.

Recombination and insertion events involving the botulinum neurotoxin complex
genes in Clostridium botulinum types A, B, E and F and Clostridium butyricum type
E strains.

Hill KK(1), Xie G, Foley BT, Smith TJ, Munk AC, Bruce D, Smith LA, Brettin TS,
Detter JC.

Author information: 
(1)Bioscience Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545,
USA. khill@lanl.gov

BACKGROUND: Clostridium botulinum is a taxonomic designation for at least four
diverse species that are defined by the expression of one (monovalent) or two
(bivalent) of seven different C. botulinum neurotoxins (BoNTs, A-G). The four
species have been classified as C. botulinum Groups I-IV. The presence of bont
genes in strains representing the different Groups is probably the result of
horizontal transfer of the toxin operons between the species.
RESULTS: Chromosome and plasmid sequences of several C. botulinum strains
representing A, B, E and F serotypes and a C. butyricum type E strain were
compared to examine their genomic organization, or synteny, and the location of
the botulinum toxin complex genes. These comparisons identified synteny among
proteolytic (Group I) strains or nonproteolytic (Group II) strains but not
between the two Groups. The bont complex genes within the strains examined were
not randomly located but found within three regions of the chromosome or in two
specific sites within plasmids. A comparison of sequences from a Bf strain
revealed homology to the plasmid pCLJ with similar locations for the bont/bv b
genes but with the bont/a4 gene replaced by the bont/f gene. An analysis of the
toxin cluster genes showed that many recombination events have occurred,
including several events within the ntnh gene. One such recombination event
resulted in the integration of the bont/a1 gene into the serotype toxin B ha
cluster, resulting in a successful lineage commonly associated with food borne
botulism outbreaks. In C. botulinum type E and C. butyricum type E strains the
location of the bont/e gene cluster appears to be the result of insertion events 
that split a rarA, recombination-associated gene, independently at the same
location in both species.
CONCLUSION: The analysis of the genomic sequences representing different strains 
reveals the presence of insertion sequence (IS) elements and other
transposon-associated proteins such as recombinases that could facilitate the
horizontal transfer of the bonts; these events, in addition to recombination
among the toxin complex genes, have led to the lineages observed today within the
neurotoxin-producing clostridia.

PMCID: PMC2764570
PMID: 19804621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Dev Dyn. 2009 Oct;238(10):2701-11. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22087.

Retinoic acid receptors exhibit cell-autonomous functions in cranial neural crest
cells.

Dupé V(1), Pellerin I.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté de Médecine, Institut de Génétique et Développement, Université de
Rennes 1, Rennes Cedex, France. valerie.dupe@univ-rennes1.fr

Previous work has emphasized the crucial role of retinoic acid (RA) in the
ontogenesis of the vast majority of mesenchymal structures derived from the
neural crest cells (NCC), which migrate through, or populate, the frontonasal
process and branchial arches. Using somatic mutagenesis in the mouse, we have
selectively ablated two or three retinoic acid receptors (i.e., RARalpha/RARbeta,
RARalpha/RARgamma and RARalpha/RARbeta/RARgamma) in NCC. By rigorously analyzing 
these mutant mice, we found that survival and migration of NCC is normal until
gestational day 10.5, suggesting that RAR-dependent signaling is not
intrinsically required for the early steps of NCC development. However, ablation 
of Rara and Rarg genes in NCC yields an agenesis of the median portion of the
face, demonstrating that RARalpha and RARgamma act cell-autonomously in
postmigratory NCC to control the development of structures derived from the
frontonasal process. In contrast, ablation of the three Rar genes in NCC leads to
less severe defects of the branchial arches derived structures compared with Rar 
compound null mutants. Therefore, RARs exert a function in the NCC as well as in 
a separated cell population. This work demonstrates that RARs use distinct
mechanisms to pattern cranial NCC.

PMID: 19777591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Leuk Res. 2010 May;34(5):615-21. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.08.018. Epub 2009
Sep 12.

Expression pattern of the septin gene family in acute myeloid leukemias with and 
without MLL-SEPT fusion genes.

Santos J(1), Cerveira N, Bizarro S, Ribeiro FR, Correia C, Torres L, Lisboa S,
Vieira J, Mariz JM, Norton L, Snijder S, Mellink CH, Buijs A, Shih LY, Strehl S, 
Micci F, Heim S, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.

Septins are proteins associated with crucial steps in cell division and cellular 
integrity. In humans, 14 septin genes have been identified, of which five (SEPT2,
SEPT5, SEPT6, SEPT9, and SEPT11) are known to participate in reciprocal
translocations with the MLL gene in myeloid neoplasias. We have recently shown a 
significant down-regulation of both SEPT2 and MLL in myeloid neoplasias with the 
MLL-SEPT2 fusion gene. In this study, we examined the expression pattern of the
other 13 known septin genes in altogether 67 cases of myeloid neoplasia,
including three patients with the MLL-SEPT2 fusion gene, four with MLL-SEPT6
fusion, and three patients with the MLL-SEPT9 fusion gene. When compared with
normal controls, a statistically significant down-regulation was observed for the
expression of both MLL (6.4-fold; p=0.008) and SEPT6 (1.7-fold; p=0.002) in
MLL-SEPT6 leukemia. Significant down-regulation of MLL was also found in
MLL-MLLT3 leukemias. In addition, there was a trend for SEPT9 down-regulation in 
MLL-SEPT9 leukemias (4.6-fold; p=0.077). Using hierarchical clustering analysis
to compare acute myeloid leukemia genetic subgroups based on their similarity of 
septin expression changes, we found that MLL-SEPT2 and MLL-SEPT6 neoplasias
cluster together apart from the remaining subgroups and that PML-RARA leukemia
presents under-expression of most septin family genes.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19748670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2009 Aug 18;41(4):477-9.

Cytogenetic and molecular characterization of complex three-way translocations in
acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Freeman CE(1), Mercer DD, Ye Y, Van Brunt J 3rd, Li MM.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Program, Hayward Genetics Center, New Orleans, LA, USA.

The most frequent chromosomal rearrangement reported in acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL) is t(15; 17) (q22; q21). The t(15; 17) generates the PML/RARA
fusion gene that blocks the transcription of genes involved in myeloid cell
differentiation. A small number of simple and complex variants of the classical
t(15; 17) have been reported. We report two complex three-way translocation
variants, t(3; 17; 15) (q27; q21; q22) and t(8; 17; 15) (q24.3; q12; q22) in
which the PML/RARA fusion gene has been created on the derivative 15 chromosomes.
Many of these variant translocations are suspected by conventional cytogenetics
but need to be confirmed with additional molecular testing. We discuss the
importance of supplementing conventional cytogenetic testing with FISH and RT-PCR
to accurately diagnose APL variant patients.

PMID: 19727242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. BMC Genomics. 2009 Aug 27;10:403. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-403.

Transcriptional profiling reveals developmental relationship and distinct
biological functions of CD16+ and CD16- monocyte subsets.

Ancuta P(1), Liu KY, Misra V, Wacleche VS, Gosselin A, Zhou X, Gabuzda D.

Author information: 
(1)CRCHUM, Université de Montréal, INSERM Unit 743, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
petronela.ancuta@umontreal.ca

BACKGROUND: Human peripheral blood monocytes (Mo) consist of subsets
distinguished by expression of CD16 (FCgammaRIII) and chemokine receptors.
Classical CD16- Mo express CCR2 and migrate in response to CCL2, while a minor
CD16+ Mo subset expresses CD16 and CX3CR1 and migrates into tissues expressing
CX3CL1. CD16+ Mo produce pro-inflammatory cytokines and are expanded in certain
inflammatory conditions including sepsis and HIV infection.
RESULTS: To gain insight into the developmental relationship and functions of
CD16+ and CD16- Mo, we examined transcriptional profiles of these Mo subsets in
peripheral blood from healthy individuals. Of 16,328 expressed genes, 2,759 genes
were differentially expressed and 228 and 250 were >2-fold upregulated and
downregulated, respectively, in CD16+ compared to CD16- Mo. CD16+ Mo were
distinguished by upregulation of transcripts for dendritic cell (DC) (SIGLEC10,
CD43, RARA) and macrophage (MPhi) (CSF1R/CD115, MafB, CD97, C3aR) markers
together with transcripts relevant for DC-T cell interaction (CXCL16, ICAM-2,
LFA-1), cell activation (LTB, TNFRSF8, LST1, IFITM1-3, HMOX1, SOD-1, WARS, MGLL),
and negative regulation of the cell cycle (CDKN1C, MTSS1), whereas CD16- Mo were 
distinguished by upregulation of transcripts for myeloid (CD14, MNDA, TREM1,
CD1d, C1qR/CD93) and granulocyte markers (FPR1, GCSFR/CD114, S100A8-9/12).
Differential expression of CSF1R, CSF3R, C1QR1, C3AR1, CD1d, CD43, CXCL16, and
CX3CR1 was confirmed by flow cytometry. Furthermore, increased expression of RARA
and KLF2 transcripts in CD16+ Mo coincided with absence of cell surface cutaneous
lymphocyte associated antigen (CLA) expression, indicating potential imprinting
for non-skin homing.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that CD16+ and CD16- Mo originate from a common
myeloid precursor, with CD16+ Mo having a more MPhi - and DC-like transcription
program suggesting a more advanced stage of differentiation. Distinct
transcriptional programs, together with their recruitment into tissues via
different mechanisms, also suggest that CD16+ and CD16- Mo give rise to
functionally distinct DC and MPhi in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2741492
PMID: 19712453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2010 Mar;21(2 Pt 2):e429-38. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-3038.2009.00930.x. Epub 2009 Aug 21.

Serological and clinical characteristics of children with peanut sensitization in
an Asian community.

Chiang WC(1), Pons L, Kidon MI, Liew WK, Goh A, Wesley Burks A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Medicine, Kandang Kerbau Children's Hospital,
Singapore. Chiang.Wen.Chin@kkh.com.sg

In the past two decades, peanut allergy prevalence has increased in the West but 
has been perceived as having remained low in Asia. To review the clinical
presentation of Asian children with peanut hypersensitivity and measure their IgE
responses to major peanut allergens. We enrolled 31 children presenting with
various allergies and a positive skin prick test to peanut from the Children's
hospital outpatient allergy clinic in Singapore. A detailed questionnaire was
completed by parents. The children's serum IgE specific to native Ara h 1, native
Ara h 2, and recombinant Ara h 3 were detected using ELISA. Of the 31 patients,
19 had previously documented reactions to peanuts, while 12 had no previous
clinical reaction. Most, 89.5% (17/19) of first reactions featured skin changes
(urticaria, erythema, angioedema), but only 36.8% (7/19) involved skin symptoms
alone. Respiratory symptoms and GI symptoms occurred in 42.1% and 26.3% of
patients respectively and did not occur as the sole manifestation of reaction.
The most common GI manifestation was emesis, present in 26.3% (5/19) of subjects.
Two children experienced impaired consciousness with systemic, anaphylactic
events. Although most sought treatment for their first peanut reaction only one
patient received epinephrine. Half of our patients reported a subsequent
accidental ingestion after the diagnosis of peanut allergy, with a median time
from diagnosis to first accidental ingestion of 4 months and a reported increased
severity of reaction in approximately half of the repeat exposures. Eighty-seven 
percent of children had specific IgE directed against at least one of the major
peanut allergens. Among all patients, 87.1% had IgE specific to both Ara h 1 and 
Ara h 2 and 54.8% to rAra h 3. Asian children with peanut sensitization have
clinically similar presentations and respond to the same major allergenic
proteins as their Western counterparts. The perceived differences between the
populations in this context do not stem from divergent clinical or immunological 
responses.

Copyright (c) 2009 John Wiley & Sons A/S

PMID: 19702675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2009 Nov;8(5):387-92.

Beneficial and adverse effects of molecularly targeted therapies for acute
promyelocytic leukemia in central nervous system.

Nagai S(1), Takahashi T, Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-Ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a distinct subset of acute myeloid leukemia
characterized by an abnormal fusion protein, PML/RARA. All-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA) and arsenic trioxide, which are the major molecularly targeted therapies
in APL, affect or degrade the PML/RARA fusion protein and cause differentiation
and apoptosis of APL cells. These therapies have improved the prognosis of APL
patients and are now the main therapeutic options in APL. In addition, gemtuzumab
ozogamicin is another targeted therapy in APL. On the other hand, the prognosis
of patients with central nervous system (CNS) relapses of APL remains poor.
Therefore, CNS relapses have become major concerns, and effective therapeutic
approaches for CNS relapses are needed. In fact, possible active roles of
molecularly targeted therapies in CNS relapses of APL have been suggested, and
several new approaches with molecularly targeted therapies for CNS relapses have 
been examined in APL. In this review, we discuss three main topics; the
relationship between the incidence of CNS relapses and the introduction of
molecularly targeted therapies for APL, new approaches with targeted therapies
for CNS relapses of APL, and other complications of targeted therapies in CNS
such as pseudotumor cerebri induced by ATRA and subarachnoid hemorrhage. These
comprehensive understanding would be helpful for better management of patients
with APL.

PMID: 19702568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Aug;17(4):969-73.

[Detection and quantification of aberrant leukemia fusion gene by real-time
RT-PCR].

[Article in Chinese]

Li XJ(1), Yu MJ, Liang Y, He D, Li B, Hu J, Chen Q, Li HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The Second People Hospital of Yunnan Province,
Kunming 650021, Yunnan Province, China.

This study was purposed to set up real-time quantitative RT-PCR technique and to 
measure leukemia fusion gene transcripts in patients with chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML), acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL). All plasmids containing the target gene sequences were
constructed to establish the standard curves. A TaqMan based real-time
quantitative RT-PCR was performed to measure aberrant fusion gene transcripts in 
130 samples of peripheral blood (PB) or bone marrow (BM) from 49 patients with
leukemia. The results showd that the BCR-ABL(P210) transcripts were detected in
28 (82.4%) out of 34 CML patients (the ratios of BCR-ABL(P210)/ABL varied from
0.01 to 3.19) and also in 2 (33.3%) out of 6 ALL patients. The BCR-ABL(P190)
transcripts were detected in 2 (33.3%) out of 6 ALL patients. The BCR-ABL(P210)
and BCR-ABL(P190) transcripts were both detected in 1 (2.9%) CML patients. The
PML/RARalpha transcripts were detected in 7 (77.8%) out of 9 APL patients (the
ratio of PML-RARa/ABL varied from 0.0014 to 3.199). The relative frequency of
both bcr1 and bcr3 was 42.9%, while that of bcr2 was 14.3%. The transcript level 
of aberrant fusion gene varied from the clinical situation of patient. It is
concluded that real-time quantitative PCR is a reliable, innovative and promising
technology with high sensitivity and specialty. It has potential clinical value
for defining diagnosis, typing tumor, selecting treatment, measuring the tumor
load, monitoring fusion gene expression level and evaluating therapeutic
strategies, which is worthy to be popularized.

PMID: 19698240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Int J Cancer. 2009 Nov 15;125(10):2349-59. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24620.

Chromosomal abnormalities and novel disease-related regions in progression from
Barrett's esophagus to esophageal adenocarcinoma.

Akagi T(1), Ito T, Kato M, Jin Z, Cheng Y, Kan T, Yamamoto G, Olaru A, Kawamata
N, Boult J, Soukiasian HJ, Miller CW, Ogawa S, Meltzer SJ, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School 
of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA. tadayuki@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Barrett's esophagus (BE) is a metaplastic condition caused by chronic
gastroesophageal reflux which represents an early step in the development of
esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). Single-nucleotide polymorphism microarray
(SNP-chip) analysis is a novel, precise, high-throughput approach to examine
genomic alterations in neoplasia. Using 250K SNP-chips, we examined the
neoplastic progression of BE to EAC, studying 11 matched sample sets: 6 sets of
normal esophagus (NE), BE and EAC, 4 of NE and BE and 1 of NE and EAC. Six (60%) 
of 10 total BE samples and 4 (57%) of 7 total EAC samples exhibited 1 or more
genomic abnormalities comprising deletions, duplications, amplifications and
copy-number-neutral loss of heterozygosity (CNN-LOH). Several shared
abnormalities were identified, including chromosome 9p CNN-LOH [2 BE samples
(20%)], deletion of CDKN2A [4 BE samples (40%)] and amplification of 17q12-21.2
involving the ERBB2, RARA and TOP2A genes [3.1 Mb, 2 EAC (29%)]. Interestingly, 1
BE sample contained a homozygous deletion spanning 9p22.3-p22.2 (1.2 Mb): this
region harbors only 1 known gene, basonuclin 2 (BNC2). Real-time PCR analysis
confirmed the deletion of this gene and decreased the expression of BNC2 mRNA in 
the BE sample. Furthermore, transfection and stable expression of BNC2 caused
growth arrest of OE33 EAC cells, suggesting that BNC2 functions as a tumor
suppressor gene in the esophagus and that deletion of this gene occurs during the
development of EAC. Thus, this SNP-chip analysis has identified several early
cytogenetic events and novel candidate cancer-related genes that are potentially 
involved in the evolution of BE to EAC.

PMCID: PMC2766567
PMID: 19670330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Pathol. 2009 Sep;219(1):16-24. doi: 10.1002/path.2574.

Does chromosome 17 centromere copy number predict polysomy in breast cancer? A
fluorescence in situ hybridization and microarray-based CGH analysis.

Marchiò C(1), Lambros MB, Gugliotta P, Di Cantogno LV, Botta C, Pasini B, Tan DS,
Mackay A, Fenwick K, Tamber N, Bussolati G, Ashworth A, Reis-Filho JS, Sapino A.

Author information: 
(1)The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre-Institute of Cancer Research,
London, UK.

Comment in
    J Pathol. 2009 Sep;219(1):1-2.

Approximately 8% of breast cancers show increased copy numbers of chromosome 17
centromere (CEP17) by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) (ie average CEP17
>3.0 per nucleus). Currently, this pattern is believed to represent polysomy of
chromosome 17. HER2-amplified cancers have been shown to harbour complex patterns
of genetic aberrations of chromosome 17, in particular involving its long arm. We
hypothesized that aberrant copy numbers of CEP17 in FISH assays may not
necessarily represent true chromosome 17 polysomy. Eighteen randomly selected
CEP17 polysomic cases and a control group of ten CEP17 disomic cases, as defined 
by dual-colour FISH, were studied by microarray-based comparative genomic
hybridization (aCGH), which was performed on microdissected samples using a 32K
tiling-path bacterial artificial chromosome microarray platform. Additional FISH 
probes were employed for SMS (17p11.2) and RARA (17q21.2) genes, as references
for chromosome 17 copy number. Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization
revealed that 11 out of the 18 polysomic cases harboured gains of 17q with
involvement of the centromere, one displayed 17q gain sparing the centromeric
region, and only one could be defined as polysomic. The remaining five cases
displayed amplification of the centromeric region. Among these, one case, showing
score 2+ by immunohistochemistry and 8.5 HER2 mean copy number, was classified as
not amplified by HER2/CEP17 ratio and as amplified by HER2/SMS ratio. Our results
suggest that true chromosome 17 polysomy is likely to be a rare event in breast
cancer and that CEP17 copy number greater than 3.0 in FISH analysis is frequently
related to gain or amplification of the centromeric region. Larger studies
investigating the genetic profiles of CEP17 polysomic cases are warranted.

PMID: 19670217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Mol Vis. 2009 Jul 17;15:1390-7.

The retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene is not associated with myopia,
hypermetropia, and ocular biometric measures.

Veerappan S(1), Schäche M, Pertile KK, Islam FM, Chen CY, Mitchell P, Dirani M,
Baird PN.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Eye Research Australia, University of Melbourne, Royal Victorian
Eye and Ear Hospital, 32 Gisborne Street, East Melbourne 3002, Australia.

PURPOSE: The Retinoic Acid Receptor Alpha (RARA) gene is a potential candidate
gene for myopia due to its differential expression in animal models during
experimentally induced myopia. To test for whether RARA is associated with myopia
we have undertaken a case-control study assessing for associations between RARA
and myopia, hypermetropia, and ocular biometric measures.
METHODS: A total of 802 Anglo-Celtic individuals were genotyped. Five tag single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (tSNPs) in RARA with an r(2) of 0.8 and a minor allele
frequency greater than 5% were selected for genotyping. Genotype frequencies of
these 5 tSNPs were compared between individuals with emmetropia and those with
myopia or hypermetropia. A quantitative analysis was also performed to assess
associations with ocular biometric measures including axial length, corneal
curvature and anterior chamber depth.
RESULTS: We did not identify any significant association between tSNPs in RARA
with either myopia or hypermetropia as qualitative traits. Neither did we
identify any significant associations of these tSNPs with the quantitative traits
of axial length, corneal curvature and anterior chamber depth.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to assess for associations between RARA and 
myopia, hypermetropia, and ocular biometric measures. Our findings suggest that
variations in the nucleotide sequence of RARA are not associated with myopia,
hypermetropia, or ocular biometric measures in our population.

PMCID: PMC2713734
PMID: 19626135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Eur J Haematol. 2009 Nov;83(5):499-501. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2009.01324.x.
Epub 2009 Jul 18.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia harboring a STAT5B-RARA fusion gene and a G596V
missense mutation in the STAT5B SH2 domain of the STAT5B-RARA.

Iwanaga E, Nakamura M, Nanri T, Kawakita T, Horikawa K, Mitsuya H, Asou N.

Comment on
    Eur J Haematol. 2008 May;80(5):444-7.

PMID: 19624718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Clin Exp Allergy. 2009 Sep;39(9):1427-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2009.03312.x. 
Epub 2009 Jul 16.

The non-specific lipid transfer protein, Ara h 9, is an important allergen in
peanut.

Lauer I(1), Dueringer N, Pokoj S, Rehm S, Zoccatelli G, Reese G, Miguel-Moncin
MS, Cistero-Bahima A, Enrique E, Lidholm J, Vieths S, Scheurer S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergology, Paul-Ehrlich-Institut, Langen, Germany. lauir@pei.de

BACKGROUND: Plant food allergy in the Mediterranean area is mainly caused by
non-specific lipid transfer proteins (nsLTP). The aim of this study was to
characterize peanut nsLTP in comparison with peach nsLTP, Pru p 3, and assess its
importance in peanut allergy.
METHODS: Peanut-allergic patients from Spain (n=32) were included on the basis of
a positive case history and either a positive skin prick test or specific IgE to 
peanut. For comparison, sera of 41 peanut-allergic subjects from outside the
Mediterranean area were used. Natural Ara h 9 and two isoforms of recombinant Ara
h 9, expressed in Pichia pastoris, were purified using a two-step chromatographic
procedure. Allergen characterization was carried out by N-terminal sequencing,
circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy, immunoblotting, IgE inhibition tests and
basophil histamine release assays.
RESULTS: Compared with natural peanut nsLTP, the recombinant proteins could be
purified in high amounts from yeast supernatant (> or =45 mg/L). The identity of 
the proteins was verified by N-terminal amino acid sequencing and with rabbit
nsLTP-specific antibodies. CD spectroscopy revealed similar secondary structures 
for all preparations and Pru p 3. The Ara h 9 isoforms showed 62-68% amino acid
sequence identity with Pru p 3. IgE antibody reactivity to rAra h 9 was present
in 29/32 Spanish and 6/41 non-Mediterranean subjects. Recombinant Ara h 9 showed 
strong cross-reactivity to nPru p 3 and similar IgE-binding capacity as nAra h 9.
The two Ara h 9 isoforms displayed similar IgE reactivity. In peanut-allergic
patients with concomitant peach allergy, Ara h 9 showed a weaker allergenic
potency than Pru p 3 in histamine release assays.
CONCLUSIONS: Ara h 9 is a major allergen in peanut-allergic patients from the
Mediterranean area. Ara h 9 is capable of inducing histamine release from
basophils, but to a lesser extent than Pru p 3.

PMID: 19624524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Aug;124(2):328-36, 336.e1-6. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.05.031. Epub 2009 Jul 12.

Relevance of IgE binding to short peptides for the allergenic activity of food
allergens.

Albrecht M(1), Kühne Y, Ballmer-Weber BK, Becker WM, Holzhauser T, Lauer I,
Reuter A, Randow S, Falk S, Wangorsch A, Lidholm J, Reese G, Vieths S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergology, Paul-Ehrlich-Institut, Langen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Analysis of IgE antibody binding to epitopes provides information for
food allergy diagnosis and management and construction of hypoallergenic
candidate vaccines, but the contribution of sequential epitopes to functionally
relevant IgE binding is not fully understood.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to study the impact of IgE-binding peptides described as
major sequence epitopes in the literature on IgE-binding capacity of 2 selected
food allergens.
METHODS: IgE-binding peptides of the food allergens Ara h 2 (peanut) and Pen a 1 
(shrimp) were identified. Synthetic soluble peptides representing the identified 
sequences were assessed for their capacity to inhibit IgE binding to the parent
allergens by means of ELISA and in mediator release assay. The IgE-binding
capacity of unfolded recombinant (r) Ara h 2 was analyzed. A hybrid tropomyosin
carrying the IgE-binding regions of Pen a 1 grafted into the structural context
of the nonallergenic mouse tropomyosin was applied in ELISA inhibition
experiments and ImmunoCAP analysis.
RESULTS: Although IgE-binding peptides representing sections of the allergen
sequences were detected, no relevant capacity to inhibit the IgE binding to the
parent allergen in ELISA or basophil activation test was observed. Unfolded rAra 
h 2 showed reduced IgE-binding capacity compared with folded rAra h 2 and failed 
to elicit mediator release. Hybrid tropomyosin bound less IgE than rPen a 1 in
ImmunoCAP analysis and revealed marginal inhibitory capacity.
CONCLUSION: Peptides identified as major sequence epitopes on Pen a 1 and Ara h 2
show little contribution to the IgE binding of the allergens studied.

PMID: 19596143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Exp Oncol. 2009 Jun;31(2):92-6.

Expression profile of nuclear receptors upon Epstein -- Barr virus induced B cell
transformation.

Yenamandra SP(1), Lundin A, Arulampalam V, Yurchenko M, Pettersson S, Klein G,
Kashuba E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska
Institute, Stockholm S17177, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Infection of human B cells with Epstein - Barr virus (EBV) induces
metabolic activation, morphological transformation, cell proliferation and
eventual immortalization.
AIM: To identify the nuclear receptors, which are the cellular interaction
partners of EBNAs, that will help to elucidate the mechanism of B cell
transformation.
METHODS: We have compared the nuclear receptor profile in the naïve and
EBV-transformed B-lymphocytes, using TaqMan LDA microfluidic card technology.
RESULTS: Out of 48 nuclear receptor, 17 showed differential expression at the
mRNA level. The expression of 5 genes was elevated in EBV-transformed cells,
whereas 12 genes were downregulated in lymphoblastoid cells (LCLs). 7 genes were 
studied at the protein level; 2 genes were up regulated (Nr2F2 and RARA) and 4
genes were down regulated (ERB, NUR77, PPARG, and VDR) in LCLs.
CONCLUSION: The nuclear receptor profiling on EBV infected B cells showed
alterations of nuclear receptors expression at both mRNA and protein levels
compared with non infected peripheral blood cells. Further analysis on a possible
role of each nuclear receptor in EBV induced cell transformation should be
performed.

PMID: 19550398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Aug 1;27(22):3650-8. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.20.1533. Epub 2009 
Jun 8.

Prospective minimal residual disease monitoring to predict relapse of acute
promyelocytic leukemia and to direct pre-emptive arsenic trioxide therapy.

Grimwade D(1), Jovanovic JV, Hills RK, Nugent EA, Patel Y, Flora R, Diverio D,
Jones K, Aslett H, Batson E, Rennie K, Angell R, Clark RE, Solomon E, Lo-Coco F, 
Wheatley K, Burnett AK.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London School of
Medicine, 8th Floor, Tower Wing, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, United Kingdom. 
david.grimwade@genetics.kcl.ac.uk

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2010 Feb 1;28(4):e62; author reply e63-4.

PURPOSE: Molecular diagnostics and early assessment of treatment response that
use methodologies capable of detecting submicroscopic disease can distinguish
subgroups of patients with leukemia at differing relapse risk. Such information
is being incorporated into risk-stratified protocols; however, there are few data
concerning prospective use of sequential minimal residual disease (MRD)
monitoring to identify more precisely those patients destined to experience
relapse, which would allow more tailored therapies.
METHODS: Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RQ-PCR) assays to
detect leukemia-specific transcripts (ie, PML-RARA, RARA-PML) were used to
prospectively analyze 6,727 serial blood and marrow samples from 406 patients
with newly diagnosed acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) who were receiving
all-trans-retinoic acid and anthracycline-based chemotherapy.
RESULTS: MRD monitoring according to the recommended schedule successfully
identified the majority of patients subject to relapse and provided the most
powerful predictor of relapse-free survival (RFS) in multivariable analysis
(hazard ratio, 17.87; 95% CI, 6.88 to 46.41; P < .0001); MRD monitoring was far
superior to presenting WBC (hazard ratio, 1.02; 95% CI, 1.00 to 1.03; P = .02),
which is currently widely used to guide therapy. In patients who were predicted
to experience relapse on the basis of MRD monitoring, early treatment
intervention with arsenic trioxide prevented progression to overt relapse in the 
majority, and the RFS rate at 1 year from molecular relapse was 73%. By using
this strategy, 3-year cumulative incidence of clinical relapse was only 5% in the
Medical Research Council AML15 trial.
CONCLUSION: Rigorous sequential RQ-PCR monitoring provides the strongest
predictor of RFS in APL and, when coupled with pre-emptive therapy, provides a
valid strategy to reduce rates of clinical relapse. This provides a model for
development of a more individualized approach to management of other molecularly 
defined subtypes of acute leukemia.

PMID: 19506161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Nucl Recept Signal. 2009 May 12;7:e006. doi: 10.1621/nrs.07006.

Developmental expression of retinoic acid receptors (RARs).

Dollé P(1).

Author information: 
(1)IGBMC (Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire),
France. dolle@igbmc.fr

Here, I review the developmental expression features of genes encoding the
retinoic acid receptors (RARs) and the 'retinoid X' or rexinoid receptors (RXRs).
The first detailed expression studies were performed in the mouse over two
decades ago, following the cloning of the murine Rar genes. These studies
revealed complex expression features at all stages of post-implantation
development, one receptor gene (Rara) showing widespread expression, the two
others (Rarb and Rarg) with highly regionalized and/or cell type-specific
expression in both neural and non-neural tissues. Rxr genes also have either
widespread (Rxra, Rxrb), or highly-restricted (Rxrg) expression patterns. Studies
performed in zebrafish and Xenopus demonstrated expression of Rar and Rxr genes
(both maternal and zygotic), at early pre-gastrulation stages. The eventual
characterization of specific enzymes involved in the synthesis of retinoic acid
(retinol/retinaldehyde dehydrogenases), or the triggering of its catabolism
(CYP26 cytochrome P450s), all of them showing differential expression patterns,
led to a clearer understanding of the phenomenons regulated by retinoic acid
signaling during development. Functional studies involving targeted gene
disruptions in the mouse, and additional approaches such as dominant negative
receptor expression in other models, have pinpointed the specific, versus partly 
redundant, roles of the RARs and RXRs in many developing organ systems. These
pleiotropic roles are summarized hereafter in relationship to the receptors'
expression patterns.

PMCID: PMC2686085
PMID: 19471585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Clin Invest. 2009 Jun;119(6):1714-26. doi: 10.1172/JCI38248. Epub 2009 May 18.

High throughput digital quantification of mRNA abundance in primary human acute
myeloid leukemia samples.

Payton JE(1), Grieselhuber NR, Chang LW, Murakami M, Geiss GK, Link DC, Nagarajan
R, Watson MA, Ley TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Division of Laboratory and Genomic
Medicine, Washington University Medical School, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by the t(15;17) chromosomal
translocation, which results in fusion of the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA)
gene to another gene, most commonly promyelocytic leukemia (PML). The resulting
fusion protein, PML-RARA, initiates APL, which is a subtype (M3) of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). In this report, we identify a gene expression signature that is
specific to M3 samples; it was not found in other AML subtypes and did not simply
represent the normal gene expression pattern of primary promyelocytes. To
validate this signature for a large number of genes, we tested a recently
developed high throughput digital technology (NanoString nCounter). Nearly all of
the genes tested demonstrated highly significant concordance with our microarray 
data (P < 0.05). The validated gene signature reliably identified M3 samples in 2
other AML datasets, and the validated genes were substantially enriched in our
mouse model of APL, but not in a cell line that inducibly expressed PML-RARA.
These results demonstrate that nCounter is a highly reproducible, customizable
system for mRNA quantification using limited amounts of clinical material, which 
provides a valuable tool for biomarker measurement in low-abundance patient
samples.

PMCID: PMC2689138
PMID: 19451695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Genes Dev. 2009 May 15;23(10):1195-206. doi: 10.1101/gad.512009.

The PRC1 Polycomb group complex interacts with PLZF/RARA to mediate leukemic
transformation.

Boukarabila H(1), Saurin AJ, Batsché E, Mossadegh N, van Lohuizen M, Otte AP,
Pradel J, Muchardt C, Sieweke M, Duprez E.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy (CIML), Université de la
Méditerranée, Campus de Luminy, 13288 Marseille Cedex 09, France.

Ectopic repression of retinoic acid (RA) receptor target genes by PML/RARA and
PLZF/RARA fusion proteins through aberrant recruitment of nuclear corepressor
complexes drives cellular transformation and acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
development. In the case of PML/RARA, this repression can be reversed through
treatment with all-trans RA (ATRA), leading to leukemic remission. However,
PLZF/RARA ectopic repression is insensitive to ATRA, resulting in persistence of 
the leukemic diseased state after treatment, a phenomenon that is still poorly
understood. Here we show that, like PML/RARA, PLZF/RARA expression leads to
recruitment of the Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2) Polycomb group (PcG)
complex to RA response elements. However, unlike PML/RARA, PLZF/RARA directly
interacts with the PcG protein Bmi-1 and forms a stable component of the PRC1 PcG
complex, resulting in PLZF/RARA-dependent ectopic recruitment of PRC1 to RA
response elements. Upon treatment with ATRA, ectopic recruitment of PRC2 by
either PML/RARA or PLZF/RARA is lost, whereas PRC1 recruited by PLZF/RARA
remains, resulting in persistent RA-insensitive gene repression. We further show 
that Bmi-1 is essential for the PLZF/RARA cellular transformation property and
implicates a central role for PRC1 in PLZF/RARA-mediated myeloid leukemic
development.

PMCID: PMC2685534
PMID: 19451220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. BMC Cancer. 2009 May 15;9:147. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-147.

Both SEPT2 and MLL are down-regulated in MLL-SEPT2 therapy-related myeloid
neoplasia.

Cerveira N(1), Santos J, Bizarro S, Costa V, Ribeiro FR, Lisboa S, Correia C,
Torres L, Vieira J, Snijder S, Mariz JM, Norton L, Mellink CH, Buijs A, Teixeira 
MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.
nscerveira@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: A relevant role of septins in leukemogenesis has been uncovered by
their involvement as fusion partners in MLL-related leukemia. Recently, we have
established the MLL-SEPT2 gene fusion as the molecular abnormality subjacent to
the translocation t(2;11)(q37;q23) in therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia. In 
this work we quantified MLL and SEPT2 gene expression in 58 acute myeloid
leukemia patients selected to represent the major AML genetic subgroups, as well 
as in all three cases of MLL-SEPT2-associated myeloid neoplasms so far described 
in the literature.
METHODS: Cytogenetics, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and molecular
studies (RT-PCR, qRT-PCR and qMSP) were used to characterize 58 acute myeloid
leukemia patients (AML) at diagnosis selected to represent the major AML genetic 
subgroups: CBFB-MYH11 (n = 13), PML-RARA (n = 12); RUNX1-RUNX1T1 (n = 12), normal
karyotype (n = 11), and MLL gene fusions other than MLL-SEPT2 (n = 10). We also
studied all three MLL-SEPT2 myeloid neoplasia cases reported in the literature,
namely two AML patients and a t-MDS patient.
RESULTS: When compared with normal controls, we found a 12.8-fold reduction of
wild-type SEPT2 and MLL-SEPT2 combined expression in cases with the MLL-SEPT2
gene fusion (p = 0.007), which is accompanied by a 12.4-fold down-regulation of
wild-type MLL and MLL-SEPT2 combined expression (p = 0.028). The down-regulation 
of SEPT2 in MLL-SEPT2 myeloid neoplasias was statistically significant when
compared with all other leukemia genetic subgroups (including those with other
MLL gene fusions). In addition, MLL expression was also down-regulated in the
group of MLL fusions other than MLL-SEPT2, when compared with the normal control 
group (p = 0.023)
CONCLUSION: We found a significant down-regulation of both SEPT2 and MLL in
MLL-SEPT2 myeloid neoplasias. In addition, we also found that MLL is
under-expressed in AML patients with MLL fusions other than MLL-SEPT2.

PMCID: PMC2689242
PMID: 19445675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg. 2010 Jan;130(1):83-92. doi: 10.1007/s00402-009-0884-y.

History of the treatment of scapula fractures.

Bartonícek J(1), Cronier P.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Department of 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University,
Krobárova 50, 100 34 Prague 10, Czech Republic. bartonicek.jan@seznam.cz

The history of treatment of scapula fractures is closely connected with the
history of the French surgery. Paré (Les uvres d´Ambroise Paré, conseiller, et
premier chirurgien du Roy, Gabriel Buon, Paris, p VCV, 1579), Petit (Traité des
maladies des os. Tome second, Charles-Etienne Hochereau, Paris, pp 122138,
1723), Du Verney (Traité des maladies des os. Tome I, de Burre, Paris, pp
220231, 1751) and Desault (uvres chirurgicales, ou tableau de la doctrine et de
la pratique dans le traitement des maladies externes par Xav. Bichat, Desault,
Méquignon, Devilliers, Deroi, Paris, pp 98106, 1798) were the first to point out
the existence of these fractures. The first drawing of a scapula fracture was
presented by Vogt (Dissertatio de ambarum scapularum dextroeque simul claviculae 
fractura rara, Dissertatione Universitae Vitembergensi, Wittenberg, 1799). This
author was also the first to describe the scapula fracture associated with
ipsilateral fracture of the clavicle. The first radiograph of scapula fracture
(glenoid fossa fracture) was published by Struthers (Edinburgh Med J
4(3):147149, 1910). The first internal fixation of scapula fracture using plate 
was done by Lambotte (1910) who was followed by Lane (The operative treatment of 
fractures, Medical Publishing Co, London, pp 99101, 1914) and later by Lenormant
(Sur l´ostéosynthèse dans certains fractures de l´omoplate Bulletins et mémoires 
de la Société de chirgie de Paris, pp 15011502, 1923), Dujarier (Fracture du col
chirgical de l´omoplate. Ostéosynthèse par plaque en T. Bonne réduction. Bulletin
et mémoires de la Société de chirurgie de Paris, pp 14921493, 1923) and Basset
(Ostéosynthèse d´une fracture de l´omoplate. Bulletin et mémoires de la Société
nationale de chirurgie. p 193, 1924). Dupont and Evrard (J Chir (Paris)
39:528534, 1932) presented the first detailed description of the surgical
approach along the lateral border of the scapula including two drawings. They
were also the first to use the term pillar of scapula. Judet (Acta Orthop Belg 
30:673678, 1964) advocated operative treatment of displaced scapula fractures
and described extensile posterior approach. Based on the French school, AO/ASIF
improved methods of internal fixation of these fractures.

PMID: 19440728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Neuroscience. 2009 Aug 18;162(2):396-403. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.04.055. Epub 2009 May 3.

Neuroglobin-overexpression alters hypoxic response gene expression in primary
neuron culture following oxygen glucose deprivation.

Yu Z(1), Liu J, Guo S, Xing C, Fan X, Ning M, Yuan JC, Lo EH, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroprotection Research Laboratory, Department of Neurology and Radiology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Program in Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, 
149 13th Street, Room 2411A, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Neuroglobin (Ngb) is a tissue globin specifically expressed in neurons. Our
laboratory and others have shown that Ngb overexpression protects neurons against
hypoxia/ischemia, but the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Recent 
studies demonstrate that hypoxia/ischemia induces a multitude of spatially and
temporally regulated responses in gene expression, and initial evidence suggested
that Ngb might function in altering biological processes of gene expression. In
this study, we asked how Ngb may help regulate genes responsive to hypoxia.
Expression of hypoxic response genes following oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD)
was examined using mRNA arrays in neuroglobin-overexpressing transgenic (Ngb-Tg) 
and wild type (WT) mouse neurons. From a total of 113 genes on the microarray,
mRNA expression of 65 genes was detected. Under rest condition, 14 genes were
downregulated in Ngb-Tg neurons compared to WT. In WT neurons, after 4-h OGD
followed by 4-h reoxygenation (O4/R4), 20 genes were significantly downregulated,
and only Fos mRNA was significantly increased. However, out of the 20
downregulated genes in WT neurons, 12 of them were no longer significantly
changed in Ngb-Tg neurons: Add1, Arnt2, Camk2g, Cstb, Dr1, Epas1, Gna11, Hif1a,
Il6st, Khsrp, Mars and Rara. Among these 12 genes, 8 (Add1, Camk2g, Cstb, Dr1,
Epas1, Gna11, Hif1a, Khsrp) were already reduced in Ngb-Tg neurons compared to WT
under rest conditions. Additionally, three genes that initially showed no changes
in WT neurons (Ctgf, Egfr and Pea15) were downregulated after OGD in the Ngb-Tg
neurons. These findings suggest that Ngb overexpression modulates mRNA expression
of multiple hypoxic response genes in the early phase after OGD/reoxygenation.
Further studies on these gene networks and interactions may lead to better
understanding of Ngb in signaling pathways that contribute to neuroprotection.

PMCID: PMC2787411
PMID: 19401220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Nature. 2009 May 21;459(7245):455-9. doi: 10.1038/nature07954. Epub 2009 Apr 19.

GlcNAcylation of a histone methyltransferase in retinoic-acid-induced
granulopoiesis.

Fujiki R(1), Chikanishi T, Hashiba W, Ito H, Takada I, Roeder RG, Kitagawa H,
Kato S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo, 1-1-1
Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

Retraction in
    Nature. 2014 Jan 23;505(7484):574.

The post-translational modifications of histone tails generate a 'histone code'
that defines local and global chromatin states. The resultant regulation of gene 
function is thought to govern cell fate, proliferation and differentiation.
Reversible histone modifications such as methylation are under mutual controls to
organize chromosomal events. Among the histone modifications, methylation of
specific lysine and arginine residues seems to be critical for chromatin
configuration and control of gene expression. Methylation of histone H3 lysine 4 
(H3K4) changes chromatin into a transcriptionally active state. Reversible
modification of proteins by beta-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) in response to
serum glucose levels regulates diverse cellular processes. However, the
epigenetic impact of protein GlcNAcylation is unknown. Here we report that
nuclear GlcNAcylation of a histone lysine methyltransferase (HKMT), MLL5, by
O-GlcNAc transferase facilitates retinoic-acid-induced granulopoiesis in human
HL60 promyelocytes through methylation of H3K4. MLL5 is biochemically identified 
in a GlcNAcylation-dependent multi-subunit complex associating with nuclear
retinoic acid receptor RARalpha (also known as RARA), serving as a mono- and
di-methyl transferase to H3K4. GlcNAcylation at Thr 440 in the MLL5 SET domain
evokes its H3K4 HKMT activity and co-activates RARalpha in target gene promoters.
Increased nuclear GlcNAcylation by means of O-GlcNAc transferase potentiates
retinoic-acid-induced HL60 granulopoiesis and restores the retinoic acid response
in the retinoic-acid-resistant HL60-R2 cell line. Thus, nuclear MLL5
GlcNAcylation triggers cell lineage determination of HL60 through activation of
its HKMT activity.

PMID: 19377461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Leuk Res. 2009 Oct;33(10):1427-9. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.03.021. Epub 2009
Apr 17.

The race and dose of chemotherapy should be considered for optimizing maintenance
therapy for acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Nagai S(1), Nannya Y, Hangaishi A, Takahashi T, Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 1138655, Japan.

Although European conventional maintenance therapy for acute promyelocytic
leukemia consisting of all-trans retinoic acid, 6-mercaptopurine, and
methotrexate has been adopted in some trials, the adverse events of this therapy 
have not been described well. We describe adverse events of this therapy in
detail and we find that the tolerance of maintenance therapy may depend on the
race. Our results indicate that the race and dose intensity should be considered 
in addition to the number of consolidation courses and PML/RARA mRNA status in
configuring the optimal regimen of maintenance therapy, because tolerability may 
depend much on the races and dose intensity.

PMID: 19375796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Langmuir. 2009 Apr 21;25(8):4621-7. doi: 10.1021/la803858q.

Ultrastructural insights in the interface between generated renal tubules and a
polyester interstitium.

Minuth WW(1), Denk L, Meese C, Rachel R, Roessger A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Anatomy, University of Regensburg,
University Street 31, D-93053 Regensburg, Germany.
will.minuth@vkl.uni-regensburg.de

In regenerative medicine, stem/progenitor cells are emerging as potential
candidates for the treatment of renal failure. However, the mechanism of
regeneration of renal tubules from stem/progenitor cells is not well-elucidated. 
In this study, a new method was developed for the generation of tubules replacing
coating by extracellular matrix proteins. Renal stem/progenitor cells are mounted
between layers of polyester fleece. This artificial interstitium supports spatial
development of tubules within 13 days of perfusion culture in chemically defined 
Iscove's modified Dulbecco's medium (IMDM) containing aldosterone as the
tubulogenic factor. Whole mount label by soybean agglutinin (SBA) showed that
generated tubules exhibited a lumen and a continuously developed basal lamina.
Immuno-labeling for cytokeratin Endo-A demonstrated the presence of isoprismatic 
epithelial cells, and laminin gamma1, occludin, and Na/K-ATPase alpha5 labeling
revealed typical features of a polarized epithelium. To get first insight in the 
interface between tubules and polyester interstitium, transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) was performed. The results showed that the generated tubules
exhibited polar differentiation with a continuously developed basal lamina
consisting of a lamina rara interna, lamina densa, and lamina rara externa.
Collagen type III was found to be the linking molecule between the basal lamina
and the surrounding polyester fibers by immuno labeling studies. Thus, the
findings demonstrate that the spatial development involves the interface between 
the tubular basal lamina and the polyester interstitium of tubules and is not
restricted to the epithelial portion.

PMID: 19366226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Talanta. 2009 Jun 15;78(4-5):1227-34. doi: 10.1016/j.talanta.2008.12.053. Epub
2009 Jan 15.

An electrochemical biosensor for detection of PML/RARA fusion gene using capture 
probe covalently immobilized onto poly-calcon carboxylic acid modified glassy
carbon electrode.

Wei N(1), Chen J, Zhang J, Wang K, Xu X, Lin J, Li G, Lin X, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Analysis, Fujian Medical University, 88 Jiaotong 
Road, Fuzhou 350004, China.

In this article, the poly-calcon carboxylic acid (poly-CCA) film modified
electrode was prepared by cyclic voltammetry (CV). Then, an electrochemical DNA
biosensor was developed for detection of PML/RARA fusion gene in acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) by using 18-mer single-stranded deoxyribonucleic
acid as the capture probe. The capture probe was covalently attached through free
amines on the DNA bases using 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide
(EDC) and N-hydrosulfosuccinimide (NHS) cross-linking reaction on a
carboxylate-terminated poly-CCA monolayer modified glassy carbon electrode (GCE).
The covalent immobilized capture probe could selectively hybridize with its
target DNA to form double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) on GCE surface. The aim of this
work is to provide a well-defined recognition interface for the detection of DNA.
Differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) was used to monitor the hybridization
reaction on the capture probe electrode. The decrease of the peak current of
methylene blue (MB), an electroactive indicator, was observed upon hybridization 
of the probe with the target DNA. The results indicated that in pH 7.0 phosphate 
buffer solution (PBS), the oxidation peak current was linear with the
concentration of complementary strand in the range of 1.0 x 10(-12) to 1.0 x
10(-11)M with a detection limit of 6.7 x 10(-13)M. This new method demonstrates
its excellent specificity for single-base mismatch and complementary sequence
(dsDNA) after hybridization, and it would be proposed to use in real sample.

PMID: 19362180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Int J Hematol. 2009 May;89(4):489-96. doi: 10.1007/s12185-009-0291-8. Epub 2009
Apr 2.

Incidence of extramedullary disease in patients with acute promyelocytic
leukemia: a single-institution experience.

Vega-Ruiz A(1), Faderl S, Estrov Z, Pierce S, Cortes J, Kantarjian H, Ravandi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, Unit 428, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Using current treatment regimens, over 90% of patients with acute promyelocytic
leukemia will achieve complete remission (CR). However, approximately 30% of
these patients will relapse, including a small proportion who will develop
extramedullary disease (EMD). In this study, we investigated the incidence of EMD
in 263 patients with APL who were treated at our institution from January 1990 to
May 2008. With a median follow-up of 31 months (range 2 days-203 months), 8 (3%) 
patients developed EMD. The most commonly affected site was the central nervous
system (n = 7). Before developing EMD, one patient had achieved CR with a
chemotherapy-only regimen, six patients had achieved CR with all-trans-retinoic
acid (ATRA)-based regimens, and one patient had achieved CR with an ATRA plus
arsenic trioxide (ATO)-based regimen. The EMD conferred a poor prognosis; five
patients died within 4 months of developing EMD. The molecular status did not
predict EMD; four patients had a negative PCR for the PML-RARA transcripts prior 
to relapse with EMD. In conclusion, the incidence of EMD is low. We were unable
to identify any specific factors that could predict the development of EMD.

PMCID: PMC4199302
PMID: 19340529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2009 Apr 1;34(7):670-9. doi: 10.1097/BRS.0b013e31819c40f5.

In vivo analysis of atlantoaxial motion in individuals immobilized with the halo 
thoracic vest or Philadelphia collar.

Koller H(1), Zenner J, Hitzl W, Ferraris L, Resch H, Tauber M, Auffarth A,
Lederer S, Mayer M.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Traumatology and Sports Medicine, Paracelsus Medical
University, Müllner Hauptstrasse 48, Salzburg, Austria. heiko.koller@t-online.de

STUDY DESIGN: In vivo biomechanical comparison of the halo thoracic vest (HTV)
and the Philadelphia collar (PC).
OBJECTIVE: To delineate the capacity of both orthoses for immobilization of the
atlantoaxial complex (AAC), e.g., for their use in odontoid fracture care.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Stable odontoid fractures can be treated with
external immobilization using, e.g., a PC or a HTV. Although the HTV confers
higher morbidity, particularly in elderly patients, with a similar union-rate in 
odontoid fracture care compared with the PC, many surgeons are still prone to use
the HTV instead of the PC because the former is thought to accomplish increased
rigidity at the AAC. Because application of the HTV using pins is an invasive
procedure, there is a lack of biomechanical in vivo data on the "real" rigidity
conferred by a HTV in comparison with a PC.
METHODS: Twenty volunteers were subjected to flexion/extension radiographs
immobilized in a modified HTV or a PC. The radiographs were performed in extreme 
position of flexion in sitting position and extension in standing position. The
PC was fitted as usual. The 4 cortical pins of a normal clinically used HTV were 
replaced by 12 modified distance pins. The halo-ring was fixed to the head by
tightening of the 12 pins in an alternating fashion, thus yielding a hexapod-like
strong fixation between the head and the HTV. The procedure was uncomfortable but
there were no adverse events from the HTV placement. Radiographs were analyzed
for the segmental rotation angle of C1-C2 in sagittal plane (SRA C1-C2) and the
absolute rotation angle of C2-C7 (ARA C2-C7) using the Harrison tangent method.
Separation angles (rSRA C1-C2 and rARA C2-C7) were calculated from
flexion/extension views. Two observers measured all angles. The means of the
measurements were used for statistical analysis. The interobserver reliability
was expressed by calculating intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs).
RESULTS.: Mean age of 20 volunteers was 30.9 +/- 4.2 years. Calculation of the
ICCs showed good to excellent interobserver reliability for all angular
measurements (ICC = 0.95-0.98). Concerning restriction of subaxial sagittal plane
motion, the HTV was more effective than the PC. The difference for the rARA C2-C7
between the PC (mean 20.7 degrees) and HTV (mean 9.2 degrees) yielded
significance (P = 0.01). But, concerning restriction of flexion/extension at the 
AAC, there was no statistical significant difference for the rSRA C1-C2 between
the PC and HTV (P = 0.3). The PC (mean 1.3 degrees) was even superior to the HTV 
(mean, 3.3 degrees) in restricting sagittal motion at C1-C2. In comparison to
normal atlantoaxial motion was restricted by 88.5% with the PC and 70.8% with the
HTV. In light of the results and a selected review of literature, a treatment
algorithm for the elderly patient with odontoid fracture is presented.
CONCLUSION: Under the extremes of flexion and extension bendings, the current
study demonstrated that there was no significant difference in restriction of
sagittal motion at C1-C2 when using the PC instead of the HTV in a group of 20
young normal adults. In light of the current biomechanical data and a selected
review of literature, it is concluded that the use of a PC is sufficient for the 
treatment of stable odontoid fractures.

PMID: 19333098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2009 Jan 1;14:1684-707.

PML nuclear bodies in the pathogenesis of acute promyelocytic leukemia: active
players or innocent bystanders?

Brown NJ(1), Ramalho M, Pedersen EW, Moravcsik E, Solomon E, Grimwade D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London School of 
Medicine, London, UK.

The promyelocytic leukemia gene (PML) encodes a protein which localizes to
PML-nuclear bodies (NBs), sub-nuclear multi-protein structures, which have been
implicated in diverse biological functions such as apoptosis, cell proliferation 
and senescence. However, the exact biochemical and molecular basis of PML
function up until now has not been defined. Strikingly, over a decade ago,
PML-NBs were found to be disrupted in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) in which
PML is fused to the gene encoding retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) due to the 
t(15;17) chromosomal translocation, generating the PML-RARA chimeric protein. The
treatment of APL patients with all-transretinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic trioxide
which target the PML-RARA oncoprotein results in clinical remission, associated
with blast cell differentiation and reformation of the PML NBs, thus linking NB
integrity with disease status. This review focuses on the current theories for
molecular and biochemical functions of the PML-NBs, which would imply a role in
the pathogenesis of APL, whilst also discussing the intriguing possibility that
their disruption may not be in itself a significant oncogenic event.

PMID: 19273155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Transplant Proc. 2009 Jan-Feb;41(1):441-5. doi:
10.1016/j.transproceed.2008.09.058.

Late conversion to everolimus complicated with necrotizing glomerulonephritis in 
a renal allograft recipient: case report.

Nowacka-Cieciura E(1), Perkowska-Ptasinska A, Sulikowska-Rowinska A, Cieciura T, 
Wazna E, Durlik M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transplantation Medicine and Nephrology, Transplantation
Institute, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland. ewnowacka@wp.eu

Conversion from calcineurin inhibitors (CNI) to proliferation signal inhibitors
(PSI), such as sirolimus or everolimus (EV), may improve the course of chronic
allograft nephropathy. Herein we have presented a case of a kidney recipient with
chronic cyclosporine (CsA) nephrotoxicity who was converted from CsA to EV at 5.5
years posttransplantation. There were no significant changes in
immunofluorescence (IFL) or in electron microscopy (EM) in the preconversion
biopsy. Two months after conversion, proteinuria and creatinine increased. The
biopsy showed focal, segmental necrosis of the glomerular tuft with the formation
of segmental cellular crescents and increased endocapillary cellularity. IFL
showed granular deposits of IgG, IgM, and C3 mostly along the capillary walls; it
was negative for C4d. EM revealed electron-dense deposits within the glomerular
basement membrane (GBM) and in the subendothelial region with significant
reduction in the capillary lumina due to GBM reduplication and widening of lamina
rara interna with the formation of fibrillary structures therein: focal,
segmental glomerulosclerosis. EV was withdrawn and we administered tacrolimus and
steroid pulses with improvement. Five months after the withdrawal of EV, a third 
graft biopsy showed remission of the necrotizing glomerulonephritis. However, the
patient demanded dialysis at 17 months after conversion to EV. We concluded that 
necrotizing glomerulonephritis with immune complex deposition in a renal
allograft was possibly induced by late conversion from CNI to EV. Reconversion to
CNI may be recommended in cases of PSI-associated posttransplantation
glomerulonephritis but the long-term prognosis is uncertain.

PMID: 19249576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. BMC Genomics. 2009 Feb 24;10:90. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-90.

Expression profiling and Ingenuity biological function analyses of interleukin-6-
versus nerve growth factor-stimulated PC12 cells.

Kunz D(1), Walker G, Bedoucha M, Certa U, März-Weiss P, Dimitriades-Schmutz B,
Otten U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Institute of Physiology, University of Basel,
Basel, Switzerland. dieter.kunz@unibas.ch

BACKGROUND: The major goal of the study was to compare the genetic programs
utilized by the neuropoietic cytokine Interleukin-6 (IL-6) and the neurotrophin
(NT) Nerve Growth Factor (NGF) for neuronal differentiation.
RESULTS: The designer cytokine Hyper-IL-6 in which IL-6 is covalently linked to
its soluble receptor s-IL-6R as well as NGF were used to stimulate PC12 cells for
24 hours. Changes in gene expression levels were monitored using Affymetrix
GeneChip technology. We found different expression for 130 genes in IL-6- and 102
genes in NGF-treated PC12 cells as compared to unstimulated controls. The gene
set shared by both stimuli comprises only 16 genes.A key step is upregulation of 
growth factors and functionally related external molecules known to play
important roles in neuronal differentiation. In particular, IL-6 enhances gene
expression of regenerating islet-derived 3 alpha (REG3A; 1084-fold), regenerating
islet-derived 3 beta (REG3B/PAPI; 672-fold), growth differentiation factor 15
(GDF15; 80-fold), platelet-derived growth factor alpha (PDGFA; 69-fold), growth
hormone releasing hormone (GHRH; 30-fold), adenylate cyclase activating
polypeptide (PACAP; 20-fold) and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF; 5-fold). NGF
recruits GDF15 (131-fold), transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGFB1; 101-fold)
and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF; 89-fold). Both stimuli activate
growth-associated protein 43 (GAP-43) indicating that PC12 cells undergo
substantial neuronal differentiation.Moreover, IL-6 activates the transcription
factors retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA; 20-fold) and early growth response 1 
(Egr1/Zif268; 3-fold) known to play key roles in neuronal
differentiation.Ingenuity biological function analysis revealed that completely
different repertoires of molecules are recruited to exert the same biological
functions in neuronal differentiation. Major sub-categories include cellular
growth and differentiation, cell migration, chemotaxis, cell adhesion, small
molecule biochemistry aiming at changing intracellular concentrations of second
messengers such as Ca2+ and cAMP as well as expression of enzymes involved in
posttranslational modification of proteins.
CONCLUSION: The current data provide novel candidate genes involved in neuronal
differentiation, notably for the neuropoietic cytokine IL-6. Our findings may
also have impact on the clinical treatment of peripheral nerve injury. Local
application of a designer cytokine such as H-IL-6 with drastically enhanced
bioactivity in combination with NTs may generate a potent reparative
microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC2657914
PMID: 19239705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Leuk Res. 2009 Nov;33(11):1574-7. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.01.016. Epub 2009
Feb 12.

Aleukemic bcr-abl positive granulocytic sarcoma.

Kuan JW(1), Pathmanathan R, Chang KM, Tan SM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Department, Ampang Hospital, Jalan Mewah Utara, Pandan Mewah, 68000
Ampang, Selangor, Malaysia. kuanjewwin@hotmail.com

Granulocytic sarcoma (GS) can occur de novo or in association with intramedullary
myeloid disorders. With the advent of sophisticated molecular detection
techniques to detect diagnostic genes such as bcr-abl, PML-RARA and CBFB/MYH11 in
bone marrow or peripheral blood, many cases of the so called 'primary' GS are
questionable. We report a case of primary GS where the tumor mass bcr-abl
translocation was demonstrated by fluorescent in situ hybridization in which
there was no evidence of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). This is an important
finding as it highlights the possibility that CML may present as a sole
extramedullary form, and illustrates potential treatment by tyrosine kinase
inhibitor.

PMID: 19215983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Wildl Dis. 2009 Jan;45(1):1-13.

Gastrointestinal helminths in raccoons in Texas.

Kresta AE(1), Henke SE, Pence DB.

Author information: 
(1)Caesar Kleberg Wildlife Research Institute, 700 University Blvd., Texas A&M
University-Kingsville, Kingsville, Texas 78363, USA. kfseh00@tamuk.edu

Raccoons (n=590) were collected from October 1999 to August 2003 from 35 counties
across Texas, and gastrointestinal tracts were examined for helminth parasites.
Prevalence was calculated and differences in mean abundance were examined among
habitat ecoregions, age classes, and between sexes. Twenty different species of
helminths (13 nematodes, two cestodes, two acanthocephalans, and three
trematodes) were positively identified in the gastrointestinal tracts of 590
raccoons in Texas. Five of the 20 helminth species collected (Physaloptera rara, 
Placoconus lotoris, Molineus barbatus, Atriotaenia procyonis, and
Macracanthorhynchus ingens) had a prevalence >20%. The total number of
individuals of these five species (n=22,777) accounted for over 86% of the total 
number of individuals of all helminth species (n=26,426) collected. Subsequent
analyses were based on these five helminths. Mean abundance differed among
habitat ecoregions, age classes, and between sexes for all five parasites
evaluated. This study is the most comprehensive statewide survey ever done of
gastrointestinal helminths of raccoons across Texas. The five most prevalent
helminths identified have all been reported in at least one previous survey,
indicating that these parasites are not new to Texas and that raccoons are not
naïve to the effects these parasites have on them. It may be helpful to wildlife 
rehabilitators, trappers, wildlife biologists, and other professionals to be
aware of parasite abundance in raccoons from different areas of the state, as
frequent human-raccoon interactions occur, and some of these parasites could be
harmful to humans and domestic animals.

PMID: 19204330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Int J Hematol. 2009 Mar;89(2):204-8. doi: 10.1007/s12185-008-0253-6. Epub 2009
Feb 4.

A new three-way variant t(15;22;17)(q22;q11.2;q21) in acute promyelocytic
leukemia.

Kato T(1), Hangaishi A, Ichikawa M, Motokura T, Takahashi T, Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by the t(15;17)(q22;q21),
which results in the fusion of the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene at 15q22
with the retinoic acid alpha-receptor (RARA) at 17q21. We report the case of a
44-year-old man with APL carrying a new complex variant translocation (15;22;17).
Karyotypic analysis with G-banding of bone marrow cells revealed t(15;22;17)
(q22;q11.2;q21). Fluorescence in situ hybridization with a PML/RARA dual-color
DNA probe showed the fusion signals. RT-PCR analysis showed long-form PML/RARA
fusion transcripts. A complete remission was attained with a course of
conventional chemotherapy with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). This is the first 
report of a new three-way translocation of 22q11 involvement with APL.

PMID: 19190979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Anticancer Res. 2008 Nov-Dec;28(6A):3573-8.

Identification of parental chromosomes involved in translocations BCR-ABL,
t(9;22) and PML-RARA, t(15;17).

Chaudhuri JP(1), Karamanov S, Paulraj P, McGill JR, Walther J.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Cytogenetik Unit, Kinderklinik, LMU, 80336 Miinchen, Germany.
Jyoti7777@aol.com

Cells of blood and bone marrow often exhibit a genome- or ploidywise organization
of the two haploid sets, representing apparently maternal and paternal
chromosomes in interphase nuclei and in metaphase spreads. This provides the
opportunity to perform "genomic karyotyping." Such application of karyotyping may
indicate whether two chromosomes involved in a translocation are both maternal,
both paternal, or intermingled, i.e., one maternal and the other paternal (we
refer to this as mixed). The parental origin for these translocations likely has 
profound differences and implications in disease expression and response to
treatments, making such information very important to personalized medicine. In
this mini-review, we present our observations from specimens with translocations 
BCR-ABL, t(9;22) and PML-RARA, t(15;17). About 20% metaphases of these specimens 
indicated ploidywise organization and were amenable to genomic karyotyping
analysis. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) probes for BCR-ABL
translocation suggest a close approximation of the HSA 9 and 22, as control
values for false-positive signals run from approximately 5-10%. Given a
ploidywise distribution of the maternal and paternal sets of chromosomes, it
would be expected that the chromosomes involved in the translocation t(9;22)
would more often belong to one of the two genomes, either maternal or paternal.
Contrastingly, HSA 15 and 17 are not considered as spatially close to each other 
and therefore an intragenomic involvement would be rarer for translocation
t(15;17). In 14 out of the 21 (66.6%) specimens with informative metaphases, the 
chromosomes involved in the translocation BCR-ABL were restricted to one of the
two genomes--either maternal or paternal. In cases of translocation PML-RARA only
4 out of 21 (19.1%) specimens indicated an intragenomic involvement. These simple
yet informative analyses of cancer-related translocations show profound
underlying genomic origins and lend support to genomic karyotyping.

PMID: 19189637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Leuk Res. 2009 Jul;33(7):e55-8. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2008.12.002. Epub 2009 Jan
21.

Derivative (7)t(7;8): The sole karyotype abnormality in acute promyelocytic
leukemia with PML/RARA rearrangement identified by RT-PCR and sequence analysis.

Wang Y, Fang M, Jing Y, Li J, Jiang F, Wang Y.

PMID: 19162322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Eur J Endocrinol. 2009 Apr;160(4):631-8. doi: 10.1530/EJE-08-0812. Epub 2009 Jan 
20.

Retinoic acid receptor and retinoid X receptor subtype expression for the
differential diagnosis of thyroid neoplasms.

Hoftijzer HC(1), Liu YY, Morreau H, van Wezel T, Pereira AM, Corssmit EP, Romijn 
JA, Smit JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Leiden University Medical 
Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Although differential expression of retinoic acid receptor (RAR)
subtypes between benign and malignant thyroid tissues has been described, their
diagnostic value has not been reported.
AIM: To investigate the diagnostic accuracy of RAR and retinoid X receptor (RXR) 
subtype protein expression for the differential diagnosis of thyroid neoplasms.
METHODS: We used a tissue array containing 93 benign thyroid tissues (normal
thyroid, multinodular goiter, and follicular adenoma (FA)) and 77 thyroid
carcinomas (papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), follicular thyroid carcinoma, and 
follicular variant of PTC (FVPTC)). Immunostaining was done for RAR and RXR
subtypes. Staining was analyzed semiquantitatively based on receiver operating
curve analyses and using hierarchical cluster analysis.
RESULTS: We found increased expression of cytoplasmic (c) RARA, cRARG, cRXRB and 
decreased expression of nuclear (n) RARB, nRARG, and nRXRA in thyroid carcinomas 
compared with benign tissues. We found three proteins differently expressed
between FA and FTC and five proteins differentially expressed between FA and
FVPTC, with high diagnostic accuracies. Using cluster analysis, the combination
of negative staining of membranous RXRB and positive staining for cRXRB had a
high positive predictive value (98%) for malignant thyroid disease, whereas the
combination of positive nRXRA and negative cRXRB staining had a high predictive
value (91%) for benign thyroid lesions.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that differences in RAR and RXR subtype protein
expression may be valuable for the differential diagnosis of thyroid neoplasms.
The results of this study and especially the value of cluster analysis have to be
confirmed in subsequent studies.

PMID: 19155317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2009 May;52(5):671-4. doi: 10.1002/pbc.21915.

Simultaneous occurrence of MLL and RARA rearrangements in a pediatric acute
lymphoblastic leukemia patient.

Zámecníkova A(1), Al Bahar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Kuwait Cancer Control Center, Shuwaikh, Kuwait.
annaadria@yahoo.com

We report a case of concurrent translocations of MLL gene, associated with a
highly distinct leukemia subtype and RARA gene, which is pathogenomic in acute
promyelocytic leukemia. Conventional cytogenetic revealed a novel complex
rearrangement between chromosomes 5, 11, and 17 resulting in a three-way
chromosome translocation t(5;11;17)(q31;q23;q21). Fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis demonstrated that the 11q23 breakpoint involved the MLL,
and the 17q21 breakpoint involved the RARA gene. Concurrent translocations of two
specific oncogenes MLL and RARA with a new partner breakpoint on 5q31 have not
been previously described.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19142993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Cancer Treat Res. 2010;145:219-35. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-69259-3_13.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia: a paradigm for differentiation therapy.

Grimwade D(1), Mistry AR, Solomon E, Guidez F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London School of 
Medicine, London, UK. david.grimwade@genetics.kcl.ac.uk

Acute promyelocytic leukemia(APL) is characterized by the t(15;17) chromosomal
translocation leading to the formation of the PML-RARalpha oncoprotein. This
leukemia has attracted considerable interest in recent years, being the first in 
which therapies that specifically target the underlying molecular lesion, i.e.,
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic trioxide (ATO), leading to induction
of differentiation and apoptosis have been successfully used in clinical
practice. The advent of ATRA therapy has transformed APL from being a disease
with a poor outlook to one of the most prognostically favorable subsets of acute 
myeloid leukemia. Further improvements in outcome may be achieved with the use of
ATO, which achieves high rates of remission in the relatively small proportion of
patients now relapsing following standard first-line therapy with ATRA and
anthracycline-based chemotherapy. Moreover, recent studies have suggested that
ATO and ATRA, or even ATO alone, used as front-line treatment of PML-RARA-
associated APL can induce long-term remissions. This raises the possibility that 
some patients can be cured using differentiation therapies alone, without the
need for chemotherapy, thereby potentially reducing treatment-related toxicity.
It is clear that the success of such an approach is critically dependent upon
molecular diagnostics and monitoring for minimal residual disease (MRD) to
distinguish those patients who can potentially be cured with differentiation
therapy from those requiring additional myelosuppressive agents. This represents 
an exciting new phase in the treatment of acute leukemia, highlighting the
potential of molecularly targeted and MRD-directed therapies to achieve an
individualized approach to patient management.

PMID: 20306254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Blood. 2009 Feb 19;113(8):1741-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-12-130260. Epub 2008
Dec 23.

Hidden abnormalities and novel classification of t(15;17) acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL) based on genomic alterations.

Akagi T(1), Shih LY, Kato M, Kawamata N, Yamamoto G, Sanada M, Okamoto R, Miller 
CW, Liang DC, Ogawa S, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, University
of California at Los Angeles School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
tadayuki@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a hematopoietic malignant disease
characterized by the chromosomal translocation t(15;17), resulting in the
formation of the PML-RARA gene. Here, 47 t(15;17) APL samples were analyzed with 
high-density single-nucleotide polymorphism microarray (50-K and 250-K SNP-chips)
using the new algorithm AsCNAR (allele-specific copy-number analysis using
anonymous references). Copy-number-neutral loss of heterozygosity (CNN-LOH) was
identified at chromosomes 10q (3 cases), 11p (3 cases), and 19q (1 case).
Twenty-eight samples (60%) did not have an obvious alteration (normal-copy-number
[NC] group). Nineteen samples (40%) showed either one or more genomic
abnormalities: 8 samples (17%) had trisomy 8 either with or without an additional
duplication, deletion, or CNN-LOH (+8 group); and 11 samples (23%) had genomic
abnormalities without trisomy 8 (other abnormalities group). These chromosomal
abnormalities were acquired somatic mutations. Interestingly, FLT3-ITD mutations 
(11/47 cases) occurred only in the group with no genomic alteration (NC group).
Taken together, these results suggest that the pathway of development of APL
differs in each group: FLT3-ITD, trisomy 8, and other genomic changes. Here, we
showed for the first time hidden abnormalities and novel disease-related genomic 
changes in t(15;17) APL.

PMCID: PMC2647673
PMID: 19109227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Jan 15;188(2):103-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.09.002.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia with insertion of PML exon 7a and partial deletion
of exon 3 of RARA: a novel variant transcript related to aggressive course and
not detected with real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis.

Park TS(1), Kim JS, Song J, Lee KA, Yoon S, Suh B, Lee JH, Lee HJ, Kim JK, Choi
JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 250 
Seongsanno, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

We report the case of a 38-year-old man with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
showing a distinct breakpoint cluster region 2 (bcr2) variant transcript.
Findings from bone marrow, cytogenetic, fluorescence in situ hybridization, and
qualitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analyses
were consistent with the diagnosis of APL. Although PCR products of size 841 bp
and 984 bp were amplified from bone marrow specimen, the quantitative PCR
(RQ-PCR) findings were negative. Given the discrepancy in PCR results, sequencing
of PCR products was performed to determine the detailed composition of these
fusion transcripts. By cloning and sequencing, we discovered that these two bands
were isoforms, in which one exon (exon 5, 144 bp) of the PML gene was spliced out
of the smaller products (minor PCR products); one sequence (G) insertion and one 
base substitution (T-->C) of PML exon 4 generate a stop codon in the smaller
fusion transcript. In addition, a search of the Ensembl database revealed that
these variant PML/RARA fusion transcripts were composed of exon 7a insertion of
the PML gene and partial deletion (46 bp) of exon 3 of the RARA gene, in addition
to inserted sequences of intron 7 of PML and genomic sequence ATCT of unknown
origin at the fusion junction site. Although the biological significance of most 
atypical transcripts remains unclear, sequence analysis of these atypical
products should be performed, to reveal the composition of such a fusion
transcript and elucidate the molecular mechanism.

PMID: 19100514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Dec;16(6):1275-8.

[Effects of PML-RARalpha on cAMP-induced AML cell differentiation].

[Article in Chinese]

Jia PM(1), Dou AX, Zhang CL, Lou YJ, Pan XR, Tong JH.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University Medical College, Shanghai 200025,
China.

To explore the molecular mechanisms of acute promyelocytic leukemia cell
differentiation induced by cAMP combined with low-dose As2O3, the PR9 cell line, 
which was stably transfected by PML-RARa fusion gene, was used as in vitro model.
The effects of PML-RARa on cAMP-induced AML cell differentiation were evaluated
according to cell growth, cell morphology, cell surface antigen as well as
luciferase reporter gene assay, in the cells before and after the treatment with 
cAMP and/or As2O3. The results showed that cAMP alone could slightly increase the
expression of CD11b in the PR9 cells expressing the PML-RARa fusion protein, but 
could not induce these cells to differentiate. The cells presented the terminal
differentiation morphology and significantly increased CD11b expression only
under the treatment of cAMP combined with As2O3. In addition, PML-RARa had strong
inhibitory activity on the transcription of the reporter gene containing cAMP
response elements. In conclusions, the PML-RARa fusion protein could dramatically
block the signaling pathway of cAMP during the AML cell differentiation.

PMID: 19099626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Feb 1;27(4):504-10. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.18.6130. Epub 2008
Dec 15.

Effective treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia with all-trans-retinoic acid,
arsenic trioxide, and gemtuzumab ozogamicin.

Ravandi F(1), Estey E, Jones D, Faderl S, O'Brien S, Fiorentino J, Pierce S,
Blamble D, Estrov Z, Wierda W, Ferrajoli A, Verstovsek S, Garcia-Manero G, Cortes
J, Kantarjian H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Unit 428, 1515 Holcombe Blvd, Houston, TX 77030, USA. fravandi@mdanderson.org

PURPOSE: We examined the outcome of patients with newly diagnosed acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) treated with all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) and
arsenic trioxide (ATO) with or without gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) but without
traditional cytotoxic chemotherapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: From February 2002 to March 2008, 82 patients with APL were
treated with a combination of ATRA plus ATO. The first cohort of 65 patients
received ATRA and ATO (beginning on day 10 of ATRA). High-risk patients (WBCs
>or= 10 x 10(9)/L) received GO on the first day. From July 2007, the second
cohort of 17 patients received ATRA and ATO concomitantly on day 1. They also
received GO on day 1, if high risk, and if their WBC increased to more than 30 x 
10(9)/L during induction. Monitoring for PML-RARA fusion gene was conducted after
induction and throughout consolidation and follow-up.
RESULTS: Overall, 74 patients achieved complete remission (CR) and one achieved
CR without full platelet recovery after the induction, for a response rate of
92%. Seven patients died at a median of 4 days (range, 1 to 24 days) after
inclusion in the study from disease-related complications. The median follow-up
is 99 weeks (range, 2 to 282 weeks). Among the responding patients, three
experienced relapse at 39, 52, and 53 weeks. Three patients died after being in
CR for 14, 21, and 71 weeks, all from a second malignancy. The estimated 3-year
survival rate is 85%.
CONCLUSION: The combination of ATRA and ATO (with or without GO) as initial
therapy for APL was effective and safe and can substitute chemotherapy-containing
regimens.

PMID: 19075265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Dec;25(6):712-4.

[Simultaneous presence of ins (15;17),t(2;17;20) and trisomy 8 in a patient with 
acute promyelocytic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Bai S(1), Xue Y, Wu Y, Pan J, Zhang J, Shen J, Wang Y, Qiu H.

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital, Soochow University, Jiangsu Institute of
Hematology, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215006, P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To report a rare complex karyotypic abnormalities including ins
(15;17),t(2;17;20) and trisomy 8 in a patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL).
METHODS: Chromosomes were prepared after 24 h culture of bone marrow cells.
R-banding technique was used to analyze the karyotype. Multiplex fluorescence in 
situ hybridization (M-FISH), chromosome painting using whole chromosome parint
(WCP) 2, 15, 17 and 20 and interphase-FISH (I-FISH) using PML-RARa dual-colour
dual-fusion translocation probe were performed to ascertain the essence and
origin of the abnormal chromosomes detected by conventional karyotypic analysis.
RESULTS: Karyotypic analysis revealed a karyotype of 47, XY, 2q-, + 8, 17q+ ,
20p+ . M-FISH analysis showed a karyotype of 47, XY, t(2;17;20) (q24;q21;p13), + 
8, which was confirmed by chromosome painting. PML-RARa fusion gene which lied in
the derivative chromosome 15 was detected by I-FISH suggesting a cryptic
insertion (15;17)(q22;q21.1q21.3).
CONCLUSION: FISH is a reliable method for characterization of cryptic ins (15;17)
and other complex translocations. It should be used in all suspected APL patients
lacking t(15;17) by conventional karyotypic analysis.

PMID: 19065540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Jan 1;188(1):48-51. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.08.012.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia in early pregnancy with translocation t(15;17) and
variant PML/RARA fusion transcripts.

Park TS(1), Lee ST, Kim JS, Song J, Lee KA, Kim SJ, Seok YM, Lee HJ, Han JH, Kim 
JK, Lee EY, Choi JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

A 32-year-old pregnant woman in the 13th gestational week was brought to
Severance Hospital with gum bleeding and easy bruising. Initial laboratory
results revealed anemia and thrombocytopenia. In a peripheral blood smear, 81% of
leukocytes were large, abnormal promyelocytes. Bone marrow aspiration showed a
hypercellular marrow with packed leukemic promyelocytes, and chromosome study
revealed a karyotype of 46,XX,t(15;17)(q22;q21)[10]/46,XX[10]. In addition,
variant fusion transcripts of PML/RARA were detected in the marrow specimen. The 
patient was diagnosed with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) and was treated
with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and idarubicin. One month from the patient's 
initial diagnosis a follow-up bone marrow examination was performed, revealing
complete remission (CR). We know of no previous reports of APL during pregnancy
associated with variant PML/RARA fusion transcripts. Here, we describe a novel
case of APL in a pregnant woman with a t(15;17) translocation and variant fusion 
transcripts.

PMID: 19061780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Int J Hematol. 2009 Jan;89(1):86-90. doi: 10.1007/s12185-008-0216-y. Epub 2008
Dec 4.

Spontaneous regression of aleukemic leukemia cutis harboring a NPM/RARA fusion
gene in an infant with cutaneous mastocytosis.

Kanegane H(1), Nomura K, Abe A, Makino T, Ishizawa S, Shimizu T, Naoe T, Miyawaki
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Toyama,
2630 Sugitani, Toyama, 930-0194, Japan. kanegane@med.u-toyama.ac.jp

Aleukemic leukemia cutis has been rarely reported in infant leukemia. This report
describes a 6-month-old boy with aleukemic leukemia cutis, which regressed
without any treatments within 6 months. Interestingly, a cytogenetic analysis
disclosed a leukemia clone with the karyotype of 46, XY, t(5;17)(q35;q12), which 
generated nucleophosmin (NPM)-retinoic acid receptor alpha fusion (RARA) fusion
transcripts. The patient simultaneously had cutaneous mastocytosis, which also
disappeared with the leukemia cutis. He shows no physical or laboratory
abnormalities without any treatments after 12 months, although the NPM/RARA
transcripts remain faintly in the bone marrow. The present case is partially
compatible with systemic mastocytosis with an associated clonal hematologic
non-mast cell lineage disorder, proposed by the WHO classification, and it is
also suggestive of the initiation or early stage of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

PMID: 19052694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Br J Haematol. 2009 Apr;145(1):2. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07437.x. Epub
2009 Nov 20.

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia with cryptic PML-RARA fusion.

Wong KF(1), Chow E, Siu LL, Wong WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, China.
kfwong@ha.org.hk

PMID: 19036120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Int Urol Nephrol. 2009 Dec;41(4):1047-53. doi: 10.1007/s11255-008-9500-2. Epub
2008 Nov 25.

Nutcracker syndrome in a child with familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) disease:
renal ultrastructural features.

Ozcan A(1), Gonul II, Sakallioglu O, Oztas E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Gulhane Military Medical Academy, Etlik, Ankara,
06018, Turkey. aozcan06018@yahoo.com

Renal nutcracker syndrome is an uncommon clinical condition caused by compression
of the left renal vein. It is usually accompanied by hematuria and/or orthostatic
proteinuria. To date, the pathogenic mechanism of proteinuria and its
ultrastructural features have not been clearly identified. Here, we present the
glomerular ultrastructural features of nutcracker syndrome and our attempt to
analyze the relationship between proteinuria and ultrastructural features. Two
months prior to admission, a 11-year-old girl with familial Mediterranean fever
who was treated with colchicine was found to have proteinuria. Accompanying
hematuria was not identified, and laboratory findings were otherwise normal.
Doppler ultrasonography and computerized tomography angiography revealed an
entrapment of the left renal vein. A kidney biopsy was performed due to the
persistent proteinuria. Light microscopy revealed segmental, minimal increases in
the mesangial cells and matrix. No amyloid deposition was present. Neither
immunofluorescence nor electron microscopy showed immunoglobulin deposition.
Increased thickness of the glomerular basement membrane due to the unequivocal
radiolucent widening of the lamina rara interna was the most striking
ultrastructural finding. At high magnification, there were no amyloidal fibrils. 
It has been proposed that hemodynamic alterations and structural changes in
glomerular basement membrane glycosaminoglycans may play a role in the
pathogenesis of proteinuria. Radiolucent expansion of the lamina rara interna of 
the glomerular basement membrane in the presenting case would seem to support
these data.

PMID: 19031109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Nat Med. 2008 Dec;14(12):1333-42. doi: 10.1038/nm.1891. Epub 2008 Nov 23.

Eradication of acute promyelocytic leukemia-initiating cells through PML-RARA
degradation.

Nasr R(1), Guillemin MC, Ferhi O, Soilihi H, Peres L, Berthier C, Rousselot P,
Robledo-Sarmiento M, Lallemand-Breitenbach V, Gourmel B, Vitoux D, Pandolfi PP,
Rochette-Egly C, Zhu J, de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Paris 7/CNRS UMR 7151, Equipe labellisée N degrees 11 Ligue
Nationale Contre le Cancer, Service de Biochimie, Hôpital St Louis, Paris Cedex
10, France.

Erratum in
    Nat Med. 2009 Jan;15(1):117.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2009 Jan 6;15(1):7-8.

Retinoic acid and arsenic trioxide target the protein stability and
transcriptional repression activity of the fusion oncoprotein PML-RARA, resulting
in regression of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Phenotypically, retinoic
acid induces differentiation of APL cells. Here we show that retinoic acid also
triggers growth arrest of leukemia-initiating cells (LICs) ex vivo and their
clearance in PML-RARA mouse APL in vivo. Retinoic acid treatment of mouse APLs
expressing the fusion protein PLZF-RARA triggers full differentiation, but not
LIC loss or disease remission, establishing that differentiation and LIC loss can
be uncoupled. Although retinoic acid and arsenic synergize to clear LICs through 
cooperative PML-RARA degradation, this combination does not enhance
differentiation. A cyclic AMP (cAMP)-dependent phosphorylation site in PML-RARA
is crucial for retinoic acid-induced PML-RARA degradation and LIC clearance.
Moreover, activation of cAMP signaling enhances LIC loss by retinoic acid,
identifying cAMP as another potential APL therapy. Thus, whereas transcriptional 
activation of PML-RARA is likely to control differentiation, its catabolism
triggers LIC eradication and long-term remission of mouse APL. Therapy-triggered 
degradation of oncoproteins could be a general strategy to eradicate cancer stem 
cells.

PMID: 19029980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Cell Cycle. 2008 Dec;7(23):3647-52. Epub 2008 Dec 5.

Trim24 (Tif1 alpha): an essential 'brake' for retinoic acid-induced transcription
to prevent liver cancer.

Khetchoumian K(1), Teletin M, Tisserand J, Herquel B, Ouararhni K, Losson R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC),
Department of Functional Genomics, CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, France.

Retinoic acid (RA), the active derivative of vitamin A, is an important signaling
molecule that controls various developmental processes and influence the
proliferation and differentiation of a variety of cell types. RA exerts its
biological functions primarily through binding to and activating nuclear RA
receptors (RARs, which include the RAR alpha, beta and gamma isotypes RARA, RARB 
and RARC). Aberrant expression or impaired function of these nuclear receptors
has been linked to diverse types of cancer. RARs are RA-dependent transcription
factors that regulate gene expression through the recruitment of different
co-regulators (co-activators and co-repressors). TRIM24 (formerly known as TIF1
alpha) was among the first co-regulators identified as interacting with RARs in a
ligand-dependent fashion, and it was recently shown to function in mice as a
potent liver-specific tumor suppressor by attenuating Rara-mediated
transcription. The fact that Trim24(-/-), but not Trim24(-/-)Rara(+/-), mutant
mice are highly predisposed to the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 
has significant implications in cancer research. This result, along with the
observation that in response to pharmacological inhibition of the RA signaling,
hepatocytes lacking Trim24 loose their ability to proliferate, strongly
implicates Rara as a proto-oncogene in hepatocytes and demonstrates that
overactivated RA signaling is deleterious to liver homeostasis.

PMID: 19029830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Dec;187(2):61-73. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.06.015.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia relapsing as secondary acute myelogenous leukemia
with translocation t(3;21)(q26;q22) and RUNX1-MDS1-EVI1 fusion transcript.

Park TS(1), Choi JR, Yoon SH, Song J, Kim J, Kim SJ, Kwon O, Min YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 250 
Seongsanno, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a subtype of acute myelogenous leukemia
(AML) that is characterized by peculiar clinical and biologic features, including
severe hemorrhagic diathesis, specific recurrent chromosomal aberration, and
distinct morphologic features with predominant pathologic promyelocytes. A
reciprocal translocation involving chromosomes 15 and 17, t(15;17)(q22;q21), is a
characteristic feature of APL that represents approximately 5-8% of AML. The
rearranged gene created by this translocation encodes a chimeric protein PML-RARA
that is a transcriptional repressor. In contrast to other AML subtypes, APL is
particularly sensitive to treatment with all trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) combined 
with chemotherapy, converting this once fatal leukemia to a highly curable
disease. Nonetheless, therapy-related myelodysplastic syndrome-acute myelogenous 
leukemia (t-MDS/AML) has been reported as a rare complication of chemotherapy in 
APL. Of 30 APL cases described as t-MDS/AML in the literature, only 1 case
relapsed as acute leukemia with t(3;21)(q26;q22). Here we describe a rare case of
APL relapsing as secondary AML with t(3;21)(q26;q22) and clinically characterize 
this patient using the RUNX1 (previously AML1)-MDS1-EVI1 fusion transcript (with 
follow-up for 55 months), and review the relevant literature.

PMID: 19027486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Blood. 2009 Jan 15;113(3):635-45. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-02-140996. Epub 2008
Oct 30.

Gene expression profiling of pulmonary mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma
identifies new biologic insights with potential diagnostic and therapeutic
applications.

Chng WJ(1), Remstein ED, Fonseca R, Bergsagel PL, Vrana JA, Kurtin PJ, Dogan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Mayo Clinic,
Scottsdale, AZ, USA.

We conducted comprehensive gene expression profiling (GEP) of primary pulmonary
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma (n = 33) and compared the
results to GEP of other B- and T-cell lymphomas and normal lymphocytes to
identify novel markers and deregulated pathways. MALT has a prominent T-cell
signature and a marginal zone/memory B-cell profile. Four novel transcripts were 
specifically overexpressed in MALT, and 2 of these, MMP7 and SIGLEC6, were
validated at the protein level. GEP also revealed distinct molecular subsets in
MALT. One subset, characterized by MALT1 translocations, showed overexpression of
nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-KB) pathway genes but also was enriched for chemokine
signaling pathways. Another subset showed increased plasma cells and a prominent 
plasma cell gene signature. By analyzing several genes with very high ("spiked") 
expression in individual cases, we identified clusters with different biologic
characteristics, such as samples with MALT1 translocations having high expression
of MALT1 and RARA, samples with plasmacytic differentiation having high FKBP11
expression, and samples with high RGS13 expression tending to have trisomy 3 and 
reactive follicles. In conclusion, MALT subgroups with distinct pathologic
features defined by distinct groups of deregulated genes were identified. These
genes could represent novel diagnostic and therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC2628370
PMID: 18974375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Blood. 2009 Jan 8;113(2):412-21. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-05-158139. Epub 2008 Oct
21.

Transcriptional repression of microRNA genes by PML-RARA increases expression of 
key cancer proteins in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Saumet A(1), Vetter G, Bouttier M, Portales-Casamar E, Wasserman WW, Maurin T,
Mari B, Barbry P, Vallar L, Friederich E, Arar K, Cassinat B, Chomienne C,
Lecellier CH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Humaine, CNRS UPR1142, Montpellier, France.

Micro(mi)RNAs are small noncoding RNAs that orchestrate many key aspects of cell 
physiology and their deregulation is often linked to distinct diseases including 
cancer. Here, we studied the contribution of miRNAs in a well-characterized human
myeloid leukemia, acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), targeted by retinoic acid
and trioxide arsenic therapy. We identified several miRNAs transcriptionally
repressed by the APL-associated PML-RAR oncogene which are released after
treatment with all-trans retinoic acid. These coregulated miRNAs were found to
control, in a coordinated manner, crucial pathways linked to leukemogenesis, such
as HOX proteins and cell adhesion molecules whose expressions are thereby
repressed by the chemotherapy. Thus, APL appears linked to transcriptional
perturbation of miRNA genes, and clinical protocols able to successfully
eradicate cancer cells may do so by restoring miRNA expression. The
identification of abnormal miRNA biogenesis in cancer may therefore provide novel
biomarkers and therapeutic targets in myeloid leukemias.

PMID: 18941112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Genomics. 2009 Jan;93(1):62-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2008.09.002. Epub 2008 Oct
25.

Retinoic acid regulates the human methionine sulfoxide reductase A (MSRA) gene
via two distinct promoters.

Pascual I(1), Larrayoz IM, Rodriguez IR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Retinal Cell and Molecular Biology, Mechanisms of Retinal
Diseases Section, National Eye Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.

MSRAs (methionine sulfoxide reductases A) are enzymes that reverse the effects of
oxidative damage by reducing methionine sulfoxide back to methionine and
recovering protein function. In this study we demonstrate that the
transcriptional regulation of the human MSRA gene is complex and driven by two
distinct promoters. Both promoters demonstrate high expression in human brain and
kidney tissues. The upstream (promoter 1) regulates the msrA1 transcript that
codes for the mitochondrial form of MSRA and is highly active in a broad range of
cell lines. The downstream promoter (promoter 2) regulates the msrA2/3
transcripts that code for the cytosolic/nuclear forms of MSRA and is generally
less active. Promoter 2 contains a 65 bp putative enhancer region that is very
active in the retinal pigment epithelium-derived D407 cell line. Both promoters
are partially regulated by all-trans retinoic acid via RARA and other RARs.

PMCID: PMC2645438
PMID: 18845237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2008 May;29(5):304-7.

[Comparisons of conventional and normalized calculation of quantitative real-time
RT-PCR detecting PML-RAR alpha fusion gene in patients with acute promyelocytic
leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Hu J(1), Gao XD, Liu YF, Zhu YM, Li JM, Shen ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, RuiJin Hospital, Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.

OBJECTIVE: To optimize the calculation of quantitative real time RT-PCR
(Q-RT-PCR) of PML-RARalpha in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
for molecular monitoring of minimal residual disease (MRD).
METHODS: By using both regular reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and Q-RT-PCR, the expression levels of PML-RARalpha transcripts were
measured before and after treatment. The conventional Q-RT-PCR calculation was
directly compared the post-treatment transcript level with the respective
pre-treatment one (DoseN) in the individual patient while the standardized
calculation was based on the calculation of standardized pre-treatment DoseN of
all patients.
RESULTS: In 181 samples from 31 patients, the results of log-reduction of
PML-RARa after induction, at the end of consolidation and during maintenance by
conventional method were (1.9 +/- 1.9), (4.8 +/- 1.3) and (5.7 +/- 0.4),
respectively, while by standardized method were (2.0 +/- 1.9), (4.9 +/- 1.4) and 
(5.7 +/- 0.1), respectively. Of notice, the result was with significant less
variation of the latter methods during maintenance therapy. Moreover, with
defined criteria of molecular response (3.0-4.9 log-reduction as minor and > or =
5.0 log-reduction as major molecular response), the standardized method was
validated in clinical settings.
CONCLUSION: The standardized method is superior to the conventional method for
calculation of Q-RT-PCR results. The new method can reduce the individual
variation in monitoring the MRD and is feasible even for patients with
unavailable pre-treatment samples.

PMID: 18844066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Oct 7;105(40):15535-40. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0808266105. Epub 2008 Oct 1.

Distinct microRNA expression profiles in acute myeloid leukemia with common
translocations.

Li Z(1), Lu J, Sun M, Mi S, Zhang H, Luo RT, Chen P, Wang Y, Yan M, Qian Z,
Neilly MB, Jin J, Zhang Y, Bohlander SK, Zhang DE, Larson RA, Le Beau MM, Thirman
MJ, Golub TR, Rowley JD, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are postulated to be important regulators in cancers. Here, we
report a genome-wide miRNA expression analysis in 52 acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
samples with common translocations, including t(8;21)/AML1(RUNX1)-ETO(RUNX1T1),
inv(16)/CBFB-MYH11, t(15;17)/PML-RARA, and MLL rearrangements. Distinct miRNA
expression patterns were observed for t(15;17), MLL rearrangements, and
core-binding factor (CBF) AMLs including both t(8;21) and inv(16) samples.
Expression signatures of a minimum of two (i.e., miR-126/126*), three (i.e.,
miR-224, miR-368, and miR-382), and seven (miR-17-5p and miR-20a, plus the
aforementioned five) miRNAs could accurately discriminate CBF, t(15;17), and
MLL-rearrangement AMLs, respectively, from each other. We further showed that the
elevated expression of miR-126/126* in CBF AMLs was associated with promoter
demethylation but not with amplification or mutation of the genomic locus. Our
gain- and loss-of-function experiments showed that miR-126/126* inhibited
apoptosis and increased the viability of AML cells and enhanced the
colony-forming ability of mouse normal bone marrow progenitor cells alone and
particularly, in cooperation with AML1-ETO, likely through targeting Polo-like
kinase 2 (PLK2), a tumor suppressor. Our results demonstrate that specific
alterations in miRNA expression distinguish AMLs with common translocations and
imply that the deregulation of specific miRNAs may play a role in the development
of leukemia with these associated genetic rearrangements.

PMCID: PMC2563085
PMID: 18832181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2008 Jul;41(7):571-8.

Low expression of APAF-1XL in acute myeloid leukemia may be associated with the
failure of remission induction therapy.

Benites BD(1), Fattori A, Hackel C, Lorand-Metze I, De Souza CA, Schulz E, Costa 
FF, Saad ST.

Author information: 
(1)Hemocentro and Departamento de Medicina Interna, Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brasil.

Apoptotic protease activating factor 1 (APAF-1) has a critical role in the
regulation of apoptosis. In the present study, the mRNA expression analysis of
different APAF-1 transcripts (APAF-1S, APAF-1LC, APAF-1LN, and APAF-1XL) was
analyzed in bone marrow samples from 37 patients with acute myeloid leukemia
(newly diagnosed, with no previous treatment). APAF-1XL and APAF-1LN transcripts 
(with and without an extra WD-40 repeat region, respectively) were detected in
all samples, although the major form expressed was APAF-1XL in 65% of the samples
(group 1), while 35% of the samples expressed primarily APAF-1LN (group 2). Only 
46% of the patients presented complete remission in response to remission
induction therapy (represented by less than 5% marrow blasts and hematological
recovery), all but 2 cases being from group 1, 21.6% did not attain complete
remission (only 1 case from group 1), and 32.4% of the patients died early. Lower
expression of APAF-1XL (APAF-1XL/APAF-1LN ratio <1.2) was associated with a poor 
response to therapy (P = 0.0005, Fisher exact test). Both groups showed similar
characteristics regarding white blood cell counts, cytogenetic data or presence
of gene rearrangements associated with good prognosis as AML1-ETO, CBFB-MYH11 and
PML/RARA. Since it has been shown that only the isoforms with the extra WD-40
repeat region activate procaspase-9, we suggest that low procaspase-9 activation 
may also be involved in the deregulation of apoptosis and chemotherapy resistance
in acute myeloid leukemia.

PMID: 18719738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Reproduction. 2008 Nov;136(5):619-26. doi: 10.1530/REP-08-0235. Epub 2008 Aug 19.

Retinoid X receptor beta (RXRB) expression in Sertoli cells controls cholesterol 
homeostasis and spermiation.

Vernet N(1), Dennefeld C, Klopfenstein M, Ruiz A, Bok D, Ghyselinck NB, Mark M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), Inserm
U596, CNRS UMR7104, Illkirch F-67400, France.

Somatic, targeted inactivation of the retinoid X receptor beta gene (Rxrb) in
Sertoli cells (SC; yielding Rxrb(Ser-/-) mutants) leads to failure of spermatid
release, accumulation of cholesterol esters and, subsequently, testis
degeneration. These abnormalities are identical, in their nature and kinetics, to
those observed upon inactivating Rxrb in the whole organism, thereby
demonstrating that all reproductive functions of RXRB are carried out in SC. The 
Rxrb(Ser-/-) testis degeneration is a consequence of a cholesterol ester cell
overload occurring in SC in response to reduced ABCA1- and SCARB1-mediated
cholesterol efflux. The failure of spermiation was also reported in mice lacking 
the retinoic acid (RA) receptor-alpha (RARA) in SC (Rara(Ser-/-) mutants) and
represents, in addition, a feature of vitamin A deficiency that can be readily
induced in mice lacking the lecithin:retinol acyltransferase (Lrat(-/-) mutants).
Altogether, these findings support the conclusion that RXRB heterodimerized with 
a RA-liganded RARA transduces signals required in SC for spermatid release.

PMID: 18713813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Hematology. 2008 Jun;13(3):142-6. doi: 10.1179/102453308X316112.

Predictive factors of all-trans-retinoic acid related complications during
induction therapy for acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Jeddi R(1), Kacem K, Ben Neji H, Mnif S, Gouider E, Aissaoui L, Ben Amor R, Ben
Lakhal R, Ben Abid H, Belhadjali Z, Meddeb B.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Department, Aziza Othmana University Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
ramzi.jed@voila.fr

BACKGROUND: The combination of all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) and chemotherapy
has made acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) a highly curable leukemia. However,
several complications are reported with this treatment the most serious and life 
threatening being Retinoic Acid Syndrome (RAS). We aimed at identifying factors
that could predict complications caused by ATRA during induction treatment of
APL.
PATIENTS: Forty-two patients with confirmed APL (by t(15;17) and/or PML/RARA)
treated at our institution (University hospital of Tunis) between January 1998
and June 2006 using two consecutive protocols: European APL93 trial (24 patients)
until February 2004 and Spanish PETHEMA LPA99 trial (18 patients) more recently. 
Induction regimen consisted of ATRA 45 mg/m(2)/d until CR combined to DNR 60
mg/m(2)/d x 3+Cytarabine 200 mg/m(2)/d x 7 (APL93) and Idarubicin 12 mg/m(2) d2, 
4, 6, 8 (LPA99). Prednisone (0.5 mg/kg d1-d15) was added if WBC >10 x 10(9)/L to 
prevent RAS in LPA 99.
RESULTS: Median age was 36 yr (7-64 yr), M/F=16/26 (0.61), median WBC was 2.4 x
10(9)/L (range 0.6-100 x 10(9)/L). WBC >10 x 10(9)/L was noted in 14 patients
(33%). Additional cytogenetic abnormalities were seen in 12/42 (28%). Median body
mass index (BMI=weight/height(2):N 20-25) was 24 kg/m(2) (range 16-40 kg/m(2)),
BMI >30 was noted in nine patients (8F and 1M). Thirty-three patients achieved CR
(78.57%):18/24 (75%) in APL93 versus 15/18 (83%) in LPA99. Nine patients (21.42%)
had early death. Causes of early death were: RAS (6) and CNS hemorrhage (3).
Complications due to ATRA were: RAS (10), Scrotal ulcerations (3), Sweet syndrome
(2), Perineal ulcerations (1), and Pseudotumor cerebri (1). Prognostic factors
for complications of ATRA (Fisher exact test) were: BMI >35 (p=0.055), induction 
treatment without cytarabine (LPA99 trial) (p=0.047), whereas age (p=0.74),
gender (p=0.51), initial WBC (p=0.47), and additional cytogenetic abnormalities
(p=0.83) were not predictive. Retinoic Acid Syndrome was more reported in
patients with initial WBC >10 x 10(9)/L (p=0.08).
CONCLUSION: We found high BMI (>35) in female and treatment without Cytarabine to
increase the risk of developing complications with ATRA.

PMID: 18702871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2008 Aug 18;40(4):392-4.

[Kidney injury in transplantation-associated thrombotic microangiopathy].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu M(1), Zou WZ, Zhang Y, Wang SL, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Beijing, China. lumin@bjmu.edu.cn

OBJECTIVE: To study clinicopathological features and mechanism of renal injury in
transplantation-associated thrombotic microangiopathy (TA-TMA).
METHODS: The renal biopsies obtained from patients after hematopoietic cell
transplantation or kidney transplantation were observed by immunofluorescence,
light microscopy and electron microscopy (EM).
RESULTS: The patients presented hypertension, massive proteinuria, intravascular 
haemolysis and renal insufficiency some time after transplantation. Various
immunoglobulins and complements were negative in immunofluorescent staining.
Light microscopy showed endothelial cell proliferation and swelling of glomerular
capillary and small arteries, irregular thickened glomerular basement membrane
and microthrombosis. EM revealed endothelial cell proliferation and swelling with
thickened lamina rara interna of glomerular basement membrane.
CONCLUSION: TA-TMA is a rare complication after organ or tissue transplantation. 
Kidney is often involved in TA-TMA with massive proteinuria, anemia and renal
failure. Differential diagnosis should be made between TA-TMA and rejection or
other renal diseases. Renal biopsy is a major method for accurate diagnosis.
TA-TMA correlates to endothelial cell injury caused by viral infection and/or
immunosuppressive drugs for anti-rejection.

PMID: 18677386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Int J Lab Hematol. 2008 Aug;30(4):286-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-553X.2007.00954.x.

Simple multiplex RT-PCR for identifying common fusion transcripts in childhood
acute leukemia.

Pakakasama S(1), Kajanachumpol S, Kanjanapongkul S, Sirachainan N,
Meekaewkunchorn A, Ningsanond V, Hongeng S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, Ramathibodi
Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand. rasam@mahidol.ac.th

Nonrandom gene rearrangements have been demonstrated in leukemic cells at
diagnosis. These genetic abnormalities are associated with specific types,
clinical characteristics, and prognosis of acute leukemia. Common fusion
transcripts in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) are TEL-AML1,
E2A-PBX, MLL-AF4, and BCR-ABL (p190) and in acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia
(ANLL) are AML-ETO, PML-RARA, and CBFB-MYH11. Reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) for detection of each individual fusion transcript is
impractical and time consuming. The purpose of this study was to develop simple
RT-PCR methods to identify common fusion transcripts of newly diagnosed acute
leukemia in children. Total RNA was extracted from bone marrow samples of
children diagnosed with acute leukemia. Multiplex RT-PCR panel A (ALL) included
primers for TEL-AML1, E2A-PBX, MLL-AF4, and BCR-ABL (p190) whereas panel B (ANLL)
composed of primers for AML-ETO, PML-RARA, and CBFB-MYH11. Known leukemic cell
lines were used to serve as positive controls. Eighty three children diagnosed
with ALL (n = 63) and ANLL (n = 20) were included in this study. Fusion
transcripts could be identified using multiplex RT-PCR panel A for ALL and panel 
B for ANLL in 26/83 (31.3%) cases. In ALL samples, we found TEL-AML1 = 16/63
(25.4%), E2A-PBX = 3/63 (4.8%), MLL-AF4 = 1/63 (1.6%), and BCR-ABL = 1/63 (1.6%).
Four cases of AML1-ETO (20%) and one PML-RARA (5%) were found in ANLL samples. In
conclusion, our simple multiplex RT-PCR for detection of fusion transcripts in
childhood acute leukemia was found to be a rapid, accurate, and effective method.

PMID: 18665825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Blood. 2008 Oct 15;112(8):3383-90. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-10-115600. Epub 2008
Jul 23.

Molecular analysis of t(15;17) genomic breakpoints in secondary acute
promyelocytic leukemia arising after treatment of multiple sclerosis.

Hasan SK(1), Mays AN, Ottone T, Ledda A, La Nasa G, Cattaneo C, Borlenghi E,
Melillo L, Montefusco E, Cervera J, Stephen C, Satchi G, Lennard A, Libura M, Byl
JA, Osheroff N, Amadori S, Felix CA, Voso MT, Sperr WR, Esteve J, Sanz MA,
Grimwade D, Lo-Coco F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopathology, University of Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

Therapy-related acute promyelocytic leukemia (t-APL) with t(15;17) translocation 
is a well-recognized complication of cancer treatment with agents targeting
topoisomerase II. However, cases are emerging after mitoxantrone therapy for
multiple sclerosis (MS). Analysis of 12 cases of mitoxantrone-related t-APL in MS
patients revealed an altered distribution of chromosome 15 breakpoints versus de 
novo APL, biased toward disruption within PML intron 6 (11 of 12, 92% vs 622 of
1022, 61%: P = .035). Despite this intron spanning approximately 1 kb,
breakpoints in 5 mitoxantrone-treated patients fell within an 8-bp region
(1482-9) corresponding to the "hotspot" previously reported in t-APL,
complicating mitoxantrone-containing breast cancer therapy. Another shared
breakpoint was identified within the approximately 17-kb RARA intron 2 involving 
2 t-APL cases arising after mitoxantrone treatment for MS and breast cancer,
respectively. Analysis of PML and RARA genomic breakpoints in functional assays
in 4 cases, including the shared RARA intron 2 breakpoint at 14 446-49, confirmed
each to be preferential sites of topoisomerase IIalpha-mediated DNA cleavage in
the presence of mitoxantrone. This study further supports the presence of
preferential sites of DNA damage induced by mitoxantrone in PML and RARA genes
that may underlie the propensity to develop this subtype of leukemia after
exposure to this agent.

PMCID: PMC2954750
PMID: 18650449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2008;(39):52-7. doi: 10.1093/jncimonographs/lgn003.

Clinical significance of the most common chromosome translocations in adult acute
myeloid leukemia.

Mrózek K(1), Bloomfield CD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Arthur
G. James Cancer Hospital, Richard J. Solove Research Institute, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210-1228, USA. krzysztof.mrozek@osumc.edu

Acquired genetic alterations such as balanced and unbalanced chromosome
aberrations and submicroscopic gene mutations and changes in gene expression
strongly affect pretreatment features and prognosis of adults with acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML). The most frequent chromosome/molecular rearrangements, that is,
t(8;21)(q22;q22)/RUNX1-RUNX1T1 and inv(16)(p13q22)/t(16;16)(p13;q22)/CBFB-MYH11
characteristic of core-binding factor (CBF) AML and t(15;17)(q22;q12-21)/PML-RARA
characteristic of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), confer favorable clinical
outcome when patients receive optimal treatment, that is, regimens that include
high-dose cytarabine for CBF AML and all-trans-retinoic acid and/or arsenic
trioxide for APL. Recently, mutations in such genes as KIT in CBF AML and FLT3 in
APL have been correlated with clinical features and/or outcome of patients with
these AML subtypes, and microarray gene expression profiling has been
successfully used for diagnostic purposes and to provide biologic insights. These
data underscore the value of genetic testing for common translocations for
diagnosis, prognostication, and, increasingly, selecting therapy in acute
leukemia.

PMID: 18648004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2008 Jun;49(6):408-12.

[Hypercalcemia associated with all-trans retinoic acid therapy for microgranular 
type acute promyelocytic leukemia].

[Article in Japanese]

Hisatake J(1), Shimozuma J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Omori Red Cross Hospital.

A 24-year-old man was admitted to the hospital for pancytopenia. Peripheral blood
test and bone marrow aspiration demonstrated an increase in hypogranular
promyelocytes. Karyotype analysis and RT-PCR showed 47, XY, t(15;17)(q22;q12),
+12, and PML-RARA, respectively. The patient was diagnosed as having acute
promyelocytic leukemia microgranular type (M3v) and was therefore administered
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). Idarubicin and Ara-C were later added to the
treatment regimen because of an increased number of leukemic cells. Nausea,
vomiting and general fatigue associated with hypercalcemia developed on day 30.
There were no findings indicating infection. The administration of ATRA was thus 
suspected to have induced hypercalcemia. ATRA was therefore discontinued and
prednisolone and elcatonin were administered instead. Five days after this
change, the serum calcium level normalized. Complete remission was thereafter
confirmed on day 45. Hypercalcemia associated with ATRA therapy for APL is rare, 
and to date, there have been no case reports describing hypercalcemia associated 
with M3v in the literature. Interaction of fosfluconazole was suspected of
causing hypercalcemia when used concomitantly with ATRA.

PMID: 18646608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Oct;28(19):5912-23. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00467-08. Epub 2008 Jul 
21.

MBD3, a component of the NuRD complex, facilitates chromatin alteration and
deposition of epigenetic marks.

Morey L(1), Brenner C, Fazi F, Villa R, Gutierrez A, Buschbeck M, Nervi C,
Minucci S, Fuks F, Di Croce L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Regulacio Genomica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

In plants, as in mammals, mutations in SNF2-like DNA helicases/ATPases were shown
to affect not only chromatin structure but also global methylation patterns,
suggesting a potential functional link between chromatin structure and epigenetic
marks. The SNF2-like ATPase containing nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase
corepressor complex (NuRD) is involved in gene transcriptional repression and
chromatin remodeling. We have previously shown that the leukemogenic protein
PML-RARa represses target genes through recruitment of DNA methytransferases and 
Polycomb complex. Here, we demonstrate a direct role of the NuRD complex in
aberrant gene repression and transmission of epigenetic repressive marks in acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL). We show that PML-RARa binds and recruits NuRD to
target genes, including to the tumor-suppressor gene RARbeta2. In turn, the NuRD 
complex facilitates Polycomb binding and histone methylation at lysine 27.
Retinoic acid treatment, which is often used for patients at the early phase of
the disease, reduced the promoter occupancy of the NuRD complex. Knockdown of the
NuRD complex in leukemic cells not only prevented histone deacetylation and
chromatin compaction but also impaired DNA and histone methylation, as well as
stable silencing, thus favoring cellular differentiation. These results unveil an
important role for NuRD in the establishment of altered epigenetic marks in APL, 
demonstrating an essential link between chromatin structure and epigenetics in
leukemogenesis that could be exploited for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC2546998
PMID: 18644863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Haematologica. 2008 Sep;93(9):1414-6. doi: 10.3324/haematol.12854. Epub 2008 Jul 
4.

The seventh pathogenic fusion gene FIP1L1-RARA was isolated from a
t(4;17)-positive acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Kondo T, Mori A, Darmanin S, Hashino S, Tanaka J, Asaka M.

PMID: 18603554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Bacteriol. 2008 Sep;190(17):5995-6001. doi: 10.1128/JB.00620-08. Epub 2008 Jun 
20.

UvrD and UvrD252 counteract RecQ, RecJ, and RecFOR in a rep mutant of Escherichia
coli.

Lestini R(1), Michel B.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, Centre de Génétique Moléculaire, UPR 2167, Gif-sur-Yvette F-91198,
Université Paris-Sud, Orsay F-91405, France.

Rep and UvrD are two related Escherichia coli helicases, and inactivating both is
lethal. Based on the observation that the synthetic lethality of rep and uvrD
inactivation is suppressed in the absence of the recombination presynaptic
proteins RecF, RecO, or RecR, it was proposed that UvrD is essential in the rep
mutant to counteract a deleterious RecFOR-dependent RecA binding. We show here
that the synthetic lethality of rep and uvrD mutations is also suppressed by recQ
and recJ inactivation but not by rarA inactivation. Furthermore, it is
independent of the action of UvrD in nucleotide excision repair and mismatch
repair. These observations support the idea that UvrD counteracts a deleterious
RecA binding to forks blocked in the rep mutant. An ATPase-deficient mutant of
UvrD [uvrD(R284A)] is dominant negative in a rep mutant, but only in the presence
of all RecQJFOR proteins, suggesting that the UvrD(R284A) mutant protein is
deleterious when it counteracts one of these proteins. In contrast, the uvrD252
mutant (G30D), which exhibits a strongly decreased ATPase activity, is viable in 
a rep mutant, where it allows replication fork reversal. We conclude that the
residual ATPase activity of UvrD252 prevents a negative effect on the viability
of the rep mutant and allows UvrD to counteract the action of RecQ, RecJ, and
RecFOR at forks blocked in the rep mutant. Models for the action of UvrD at
blocked forks are proposed.

PMCID: PMC2519539
PMID: 18567657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Ann Oncol. 2008 Nov;19(11):1927-34. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdn394. Epub 2008 Jun 20.

Telomerase activity and telomere length in patients with acute promyelocytic
leukemia: indicative of proliferative activity, disease progression, and overall 
survival.

Ghaffari SH(1), Shayan-Asl N, Jamialahmadi AH, Alimoghaddam K, Ghavamzadeh A.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology, Oncology and BMT Research Center, Tehran University Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. shghaffari2000@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: The progressive shortening of telomeres and the activation of
telomerase have been considered to be one of the key mechanisms in cellular
immortalization and tumor progression.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: About 300 sequential samples were collected from 40
patients during the course of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) disease.
Telomerase activity (TA) and terminal restriction fragment (TRF) length were
assessed by TRAP and Southern blot analyses, respectively. PML-retinoic acid
receptor alpha (RARa)/glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase transcripts were
quantified by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: About 90% of the patients had a significant reduction in telomere length
(TL) relative to the control (median 3.5 versus 11.37 kbp; P < 0.001). A
significant positive correlation between TL and PML-RARa expression was found (P 
= 0.001). Telomerase was activated in all patients; however, TA level was
significantly higher in the group of relapsed patients than patient with newly
diagnosed. The group of patients with shortened TRF and elevated TA had a
significantly poorer overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: The shortened TL and elevated TA in APL patients are mainly
indicative of extensive proliferative activity and they correlate with disease
progression and relapse; thus, they may serve as prognostic factors for a subset 
of APL patients with more aggressive disease and poor outcome, those who may not 
respond favorably to arsenic therapy.

PMID: 18567608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Jul;184(1):44-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.03.006.

A new complex translocation t(5;17;15)(q11;q21;q22) in acute promyelocytic
leukemia.

Abe S(1), Ishikawa I, Harigae H, Sugawara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Hematology, Tohoku University School of
Medicine, 1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aobaku, Sendai, Japan. uhouho@snh.go.jp

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is associated with the t(15;17)(q22;q21)
translocation which causes the fusion of the retinoic acid alpha gene (RARA) on
17q21 to the promyelocytic leukemia gene (PML) on 15q22. The two chimeric genes, 
PML/RARA and RARA/PML, are thought to play a role in leukemogenesis. A small
proportion of patients with APL have complex or simple variants of this
translocation. We report the case of a 22-year-old woman with APL carrying a
complex variant translocation t(5;17;15)(q11;q12;q22) confirmed by G-banding,
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), fluorescence in situ
hybridization(FISH), and spectral karyotyping analysis (SKY). The patient
achieved complete remission with all-trans retinoic acid treatment and
chemotherapy. These results illustrate the usefulness of combined analysis
consisting of G-banding, RT-PCR, FISH, and SKY methods to identify the PML/RARA
fusion gene in cases with variant t(15;17).

PMID: 18558288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Blood. 2008 Aug 15;112(4):1434-42. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-01-132084. Epub 2008
Jun 13.

Quantitative trait loci associated with susceptibility to therapy-related acute
murine promyelocytic leukemia in hCG-PML/RARA transgenic mice.

Funk RK(1), Maxwell TJ, Izumi M, Edwin D, Kreisel F, Ley TJ, Cheverud JM,
Graubert TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Oncology, Stem Cell Biology
Section, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Therapy-related acute myelogenous leukemia (t-AML) is an important late adverse
effect of alkylator chemotherapy. Susceptibility to t-AML has a genetic
component, yet specific genetic variants that influence susceptibility are poorly
understood. We analyzed an F(2) intercross (n = 282 mice) between mouse strains
resistant or susceptible to t-AML induced by the alkylator ethyl-N-nitrosourea
(ENU) to identify genes that regulate t-AML susceptibility. Each mouse carried
the hCG-PML/RARA transgene, a well-characterized initiator of myeloid leukemia.
In the absence of ENU treatment, transgenic F(2) mice developed leukemia with
higher incidence (79.4% vs 12.5%) and at earlier time points (108 days vs 234
days) than mice in the resistant background. ENU treatment of F(2) mice further
increased incidence (90.4%) and shortened median survival (171 vs 254 days). We
genotyped F(2) mice at 384 informative single nucleotide polymorphisms across the
genome and performed quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis. Thirteen QTLs
significantly associated with leukemia-free survival, spleen weight, or white
blood cell count were identified on 8 chromosomes. These results suggest that
susceptibility to ENU-induced leukemia in mice is a complex trait governed by
genes at multiple loci. Improved understanding of genetic risk factors should
lead to tailored treatment regimens that reduce risk for patients predisposed to 
t-AML.

PMCID: PMC2515115
PMID: 18552208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008 Oct;51(4):521-4. doi: 10.1002/pbc.21614.

Mobilization of PML-RARA negative blood stem cells and salvage with autologous
peripheral blood stem cell transplantation in children with relapsed acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Termuhlen AM(1), Klopfenstein K, Olshefski R, Rosselet R, Yeager ND, Soni S,
Gross TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University College of Medicine,
Columbus, Ohio, USA. amanda.termuhlen@nationwidechildrens.org

BACKGROUND: Relapsed acute promyleocytic leukemia (APL) is treated with
re-induction chemotherapy, commonly arsenic trioxide, and stem cell
transplantation (SCT). The effect of arsenic trioxide on autologous peripheral
blood stem cell collection is unknown.
PROCEDURE: Five pediatric patients with relapsed APL had PML-RARA negative
peripheral blood stem cells mobilized (four after arsenic trioxide) and underwent
autologous SCT after cyclophosphamide (60 mg/kg x 2) and total body irradiation
(TBI-fractionated 1,200 cGy) conditioning.
RESULTS: All five patients remain in molecular remission a median of 20 months
post-transplant.
CONCLUSION: Autologous SCT performed during molecular remission is a treatment
option for pediatric patients with relapsed APL and may provide durable
leukemia-free survival without the complications of allogeneic transplantation.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18493994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Br J Haematol. 2008 Jul;142(1):74-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07160.x. Epub 
2008 Apr 17.

The expression of DeltaNTP73, TATP73 and TP53 genes in acute myeloid leukaemia is
associated with recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities and in vitro susceptibility
to cytarabine cytotoxicity.

Lucena-Araujo AR(1), Panepucci RA, dos Santos GA, Jácomo RH, Santana-Lemos BA,
Lima AS, Garcia AB, Araújo AG, Falcão RP, Rego EM.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Division of the Department of Internal Medicine, Centre for Cell
Based Therapy, Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo,
Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.

TP73 encodes for two proteins: full-length TAp73 and DeltaNp73, which have little
transcriptional activity and exert dominant-negative function towards TP53 and
TAp73. We compared TATP73 and DeltaNTP73 expression in acute myeloid leukaemia
(AML) samples and normal CD34(+) progenitors. Both forms were more highly
expressed in leukaemic cells. Amongst AML blasts, TATP73 was more expressed in
AML harbouring the recurrent genetic abnormalities (RGA): PML-RARA, RUNX1-RUNX1T1
and CBFB-MYH11, whereas higher DeltaNTP73 expression was detected in non-RGA
cases. TP53 expression did not vary according to DeltaNTP73/TATP73 expression
ratio. Leukaemic cells with higher DeltaNTP73/TATP73 ratios were significantly
more resistant to cytarabine-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 18422993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Nat Cell Biol. 2008 May;10(5):547-55. doi: 10.1038/ncb1717. Epub 2008 Apr 13.

Arsenic degrades PML or PML-RARalpha through a SUMO-triggered
RNF4/ubiquitin-mediated pathway.

Lallemand-Breitenbach V(1), Jeanne M, Benhenda S, Nasr R, Lei M, Peres L, Zhou J,
Zhu J, Raught B, de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Paris 7/CNRS UMR 7151, Equipe Labellisée N11 Ligue Nationale
Contre le Cancer, Hôpital St. Louis, 1, Av. C. Vellefaux 75475 Paris CEDEX 10
France.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2008 May;10(5):507-9.

In acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL), arsenic trioxide induces degradation of
the fusion protein encoded by the PML-RARA oncogene, differentiation of leukaemic
cells and produces clinical remissions. SUMOylation of its PML moiety was
previously implicated, but the nature of the degradation pathway involved and the
role of PML-RARalpha catabolism in the response to therapy have both remained
elusive. Here, we demonstrate that arsenic-induced PML SUMOylation triggers its
Lys 48-linked polyubiquitination and proteasome-dependent degradation. When
exposed to arsenic, SUMOylated PML recruits RNF4, the human orthologue of the
yeast SUMO-dependent E3 ubiquitin-ligase, as well as ubiquitin and proteasomes
onto PML nuclear bodies. Arsenic-induced differentiation is impaired in cells
transformed by a non-degradable PML-RARalpha SUMOylation mutant or in APL cells
transduced with a dominant-negative RNF4, directly implicating PML-RARalpha
catabolism in the therapeutic response. We thus identify PML as the first protein
degraded by SUMO-dependent polyubiquitination. As PML SUMOylation recruits not
only RNF4, ubiquitin and proteasomes, but also many SUMOylated proteins onto PML 
nuclear bodies, these domains could physically integrate the SUMOylation,
ubiquitination and degradation pathways.

PMID: 18408733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Br J Nutr. 2008 Oct;100(4):722-30. doi: 10.1017/S0007114508967568. Epub 2008 Apr 
3.

Synergic effect of vitamin A and high-fat diet in adipose tissue development and 
nuclear receptor expression in young rats.

Redonnet A(1), Ferrand C, Bairras C, Higueret P, Noël-Suberville C, Cassand P,
Atgié C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Nutrition et Neurosciences (ISTAB), Université Bordeaux 1, Avenue des
Facultés, Talence 33405, France.

In order to study the effects of dietary lipids and vitamin A on the development 
of adipose tissues, young rats were submitted for 8 d to a control or to two
cafeteria diets with normal (Caf) or higher (Caf + ) vitamin A levels. Retinoid
(retinoic acid receptor (RAR) a, RARg, retinoid X receptor(RXR) alpha) and fatty 
acid (PPARgamma) receptor mRNA was measured in the subcutaneous white adipose
tissue (Swat) and in isolated mature adipocytes by RT-PCR. The stroma vascular
fraction was cultured in vitro to test the capacities of the adipocyte precursors
to proliferate and differentiate.The Caf diet enriched in vitamin A resulted in
an increased adiposity, due to increased adipocyte hypertrophy. This was
concomitant with a lower expression of RARa and RARg mRNA (234.6 and 238.6 %) and
a higher expression of PPARgamma (+59 %) in the Swat and, to a less extent,in
isolated adipocytes. Positive correlations were obtained between PPARgamma mRNA
and Swat weights and between PPARgamma and RXRalpha mRNA. By contrast, RARgamma
mRNA and Swat masses were negatively correlated. The adipocyte precursors from
Caf + Swat proliferated more,in vitro, at the beginning of the culture. This
difference progressively disappeared and was totally absent after 8 d of culture,
but with a higher percentage of differentiated preadipocytes (+80.3 %) in the Caf
+ group. In conclusion, lipids and vitamin A act synergistically on the normal
growth of the adipose tissue in young rats, concomitant with an imbalance in the 
pattern of the nuclear receptors. These changes influence the early normal
development of the endogenous adipocyte precursors.

PMID: 18384703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Immunol Methods. 2008 Jun 1;335(1-2):116-20. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2008.02.012.
Epub 2008 Mar 11.

The biological activity of a recombinantly expressed (His)(6)-tagged peanut
allergen (rAra h 1) is unaffected by endotoxin removal.

Jensen LB(1), Torp AM, Andersen SB, Skov PS, Poulsen LK, Knol EF, van Hoffen E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Denmark. lbjj@life.ku.dk

The application of recombinant (His)(6)-tagged proteins in cell culture assays is
associated with problems due to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) contamination. LPS
stimulates cells of the immune system, thereby masking antigen-specific
activation of T cells. Due to the affinity of LPS for histidine it is associated 
with difficulties to remove LPS from recombinant (His)(6)-tagged proteins. Here
we describe that the Triton X-114 phase separation method can be used to remove
LPS from (His)(6)-tagged proteins and that the recombinant proteins retain their 
biological activity.

PMID: 18377922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Lab Invest. 2008 May;88(5):491-503. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2008.19. Epub 2008 Mar
10.

Genomic analysis of the HER2/TOP2A amplicon in breast cancer and breast cancer
cell lines.

Arriola E(1), Marchio C, Tan DS, Drury SC, Lambros MB, Natrajan R,
Rodriguez-Pinilla SM, Mackay A, Tamber N, Fenwick K, Jones C, Dowsett M, Ashworth
A, Reis-Filho JS.

Author information: 
(1)The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Research, 
London, UK.

HER2 and TOP2A are targets for the therapeutic agents trastuzumab and
anthracyclines and are frequently amplified in breast cancers. The aims of this
study were to provide a detailed molecular genetic analysis of the 17q12-q21
amplicon in breast cancers harbouring HER2/TOP2A co-amplification and to
investigate additional recurrent co-amplifications in HER2/TOP2A-co-amplified
cancers. In total, 15 breast cancers with HER2 amplification, 10 of which also
harboured TOP2A amplification, as defined by chromogenic in situ hybridisation,
and 6 breast cancer cell lines known to be amplified for HER2 were subjected to
high-resolution microarray-based comparative genomic hybridisation analysis. This
revealed that the genomes of 12 cases were characterised by at least one
localised region of clustered, relatively narrow peaks of amplification, with
each cluster confined to a single chromosome arm (ie 'firestorm' pattern) and 3
cases displayed many narrow segments of duplication and deletion affecting the
vast majority of chromosomes (ie 'sawtooth' pattern). The smallest region of
amplification (SRA) on 17q12 in the whole series extended from 34.73 to 35.48 Mb,
and encompassed HER2 but not TOP2A. In HER2/TOP2A-co-amplified samples, the SRA
extended from 34.73 to 36.54 Mb, spanning a region of approximately 1.8 Mb. Apart
from HER2 and TOP2A, this region encompassed four additional genes whose
expression levels as defined by quantitative real-time PCR are significantly
higher in HER2/TOP2A-co-amplified vs HER2-amplified breast cancers: CASC3, CDC6, 
RARA and SMARCE1. Of the cell lines studied, SKBR3 and UACC812 showed HER2/TOP2A 
co-amplification. In conclusion, this is the first detailed genome-wide
characterisation of HER2/TOP2A-amplified breast cancers; cell lines were
identified that can be used to model these cancers in vitro. The 17q12 amplicon
is complex and harbours multiple genes that may be associated with breast cancer 
development and progression, and potentially exploitable as therapeutic targets.

PMID: 18332872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Apr 1;182(1):50-5. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2007.12.011.

5'RARA submicroscopic deletion from new variant translocation involving
chromosomes 15, 17, and 18, in a case of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Stavropoulou C(1), Georgakakos VN, Manola KN, Pagoni M, Garofalaki M, Pantelias
GE, Sambani C.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Scientific Research Demokritos, Athens, Greece.

Submicroscopic deletions of the PML-RARA fusion genes constitute rare
rearrangements in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). We describe a rare case of 
APL carrying a novel complex translocation involving chromosomes 15, 17, and 18
associated with a submicroscopic deletion of the 5' part of the RARA gene, as
evidenced by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). A PML/RARA dual-fusion
probe did not reveal the RARA-PML fusion signal on the der(17q), usually detected
in the typical t(15;17). The RARA break-apart probe showed a deletion
hybridization pattern with loss of the signal corresponding to the 5' portion of 
the RARA gene. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction confirmed the
absence of the fusion RARA-PML transcript. The patient achieved complete
remission, but died during consolidation therapy, 2 months after diagnosis. To
our knowledge, this is the first reported case of APL with a complex variant
t(15;17) involving chromosome 18 at band q12 and one of the very rare described
cases displaying a submicroscopic deletion of the RARA 5' region. Further cases
are needed to delineate the incidence of submicroscopic deletions in APL and
elucidate their prognostic impact.

PMID: 18328952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Br J Haematol. 2008 Apr;141(1):52-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07023.x.

Therapy-associated genetic aberrations in patients treated for non-Hodgkin
lymphoma.

Basecke J(1), Podleschny M, Becker A, Seiffert E, Schwiers I, Schwiers R, Haase
D, Glass B, Schmitz N, Trumper L, Griesinger F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology and Oncology, University of Goettingen, Goettingen, 
Germany. jbaesec@gwdg.de

Therapy-associated myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myeloid leukaemia
(t-AML/MDS) following high dose chemotherapy are significant problems, with a
cumulative incidence of 20% or more in myeloablative treatment regimen.
Retrospective findings indicated that t-AML/MDS associated genetic aberrations
can be observed directly after exposure to chemotherapy and can precede t-AML by 
several months. To determine the incidence of post-therapeutic aberrations and
their predictive value, we prospectively investigated 316 samples of 95 patients 
with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) who were treated with intermediate and high dose 
chemotherapy (Arm A and B of the megaCHOEP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
etoposide, vincristine, prednisolone) trial of the German High Grade NHL study
group). Molecular aberrations (RUNX1/RUNX1T1, PML-RARA, CBFB-MYH11, MLL-MLLT1,
BCR-ABL1) were observed in 33.3% (Arm A) and 55.4% (Arm B) of patients and in
14.9% and 28.7% of respective samples. Cytogenetic analysis of 53 NHL patients
after high dose therapy showed frequent chromosomal breakage. Clonal aberrations 
were found in three patients. None of these patients developed a t-AML/MDS during
a 3-year clinical follow up period. We concluded that the high incidence of
genetic aberrations reflected a dose-dependent, transient therapy-induced genetic
damage which is not predictive of a t-AML/MDS.

PMID: 18324966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2008 Jun;23(6):569-80. doi: 10.1007/s00384-008-0451-y. Epub
2008 Feb 28.

Gene profiling of colonic serrated adenomas by using oligonucleotide microarray.

Kim K(1), Park U, Wang J, Lee J, Park S, Kim S, Choi D, Kim C, Park J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, School of Medicine, Konkuk University, Chungju,
Chungbuk-Do, Korea. kkongr@kku.ac.kr

PURPOSE: The serrated pathway has been proposed as an important concept
explaining the colorectal carcinogenesis. However, the key molecules of the
serrated pathway which contribute to the formation of serrated polyp are still
poorly understood. To elucidate the molecular genetic basis of the serrated
pathway, we performed an initial oligonucleotide microarray to analyze the gene
expression pattern of patients with colonic serrated adenomas.
METHODS: Oligonucleotide microarrays containing 3,096 genes were used to compare 
individual gene profiles of serrated adenoma samples (n = 5) and normal mucosal
samples obtained from colon in patients by colonoscopy. Three genes were further 
investigated by means of quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) for validation. The Significance Analysis of Microarray (SAM)
package method was used to identify differentially expressed genes.
RESULTS: Compared with normal colonic mucosa tissue, 73 genes were upregulated at
least twofold, and 51 genes were downregulated by at least 50% in serrated polyp 
samples (approximately 3.6% of genes evaluated) with a p-value of less than 0.05.
Moreover, some of the gene expression patterns observed were similar to those of 
previously reported in colorectal cancer, suggesting reinforcement of tendency to
malignancy. Three genes (TNFRSF10A, BENE, RARA) with strongly significant
expression intensities in the oligonucleotide microarray results were validated
by quantitative RT-PCR. TNFRSF10A had upregulated expression patterns while BENE,
RARA had downregulated expression pattern.
CONCLUSION: Although our report presents only preliminary results, we think they 
provide important data regarding serrated adenomas not only to better define the 
precise mechanism of genetic changes involved as the main member in serrated
pathway of colorectal carcinogenesis but also to yield practical information for 
identifying optimized diagnostic modalities.

PMID: 18305945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Int J Lab Hematol. 2009 Jun;31(3):372-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-553X.2008.01040.x.
Epub 2008 Feb 19.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia with i(17)(q10) on G-banding and PML/RARA
rearrangement by RT-PCR without evidence of PML/RARA rearrangement on FISH.

Huh J, Moon H, Chi H, Chung W.

PMID: 18294238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Ann Transplant. 2007;12(3):33-8.

Predictive value of RT-PCR PML-RARA transcript monitoring for extramedullary
relapse of acute promyelocytic leukemia in the pleura, heart and pericardium
after allogeneic SCT.

Nasilowska-Adamska B(1), Majewski M, Seferynska I, Szczepinski A, Tomaszewska A, 
Prochorec-Sobieszek M, Guz K, Torbicki A, Warzocha K, Marianska B.

Author information: 
(1)Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, Institute of Hematology and Blood
Transfusion, Warsaw, Poland. barbaramail@poczta.onet.pl

BACKGROUND: We report a patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) relapse
in extremely rare sites--the pleura, heart and pericardium without evidence of
bone marrow infiltration and with molecular evidence of disease after allogeneic 
stem cell transplantation (alloSCT).
CASE DESCRIPTION: Presented patient underwent alloSCT in second complete
hematological and cytogenetic remission with presence of promyelocytic
leukemia-retinoic acid receptor A (PML-RARA) detected in reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) with sensitivity of 10(-2).
After transplant, this patient remained in complete hematological and cytogenetic
remission but nested RT-PCR assays with detection thresholds of 10(-3)/10(-4)
were positive for PML-RARA rearranged gene even chimerism tests showed 100% of
donor profile. He was in a very good clinical condition and presented symptoms of
transient limited chronic graft vs. host disease. Twenty one months after
transplant, the leukemic relapse in the pleura, heart and pericardium was
diagnosed. At that time, PML-RARA transcript detected in RT-PCR assay (10(-2))
was positive for the first time after transplant. During salvage chemotherapy he 
died because of cardiogenic shock.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that detection of PML-RARA after alloSCT should be
indication insightful diagnosis of medullary or extramedullary (EM) relapse. The 
imaging techniques of all possible sites of APL EM relapse have to be included.

PMID: 18290568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Mod Pathol. 2008 Jun;21(6):670-5. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.32. Epub 2008 Feb
8.

Epigenetic instability is rare in fibrolamellar carcinomas but common in
viral-associated hepatocellular carcinomas.

Vivekanandan P(1), Torbenson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Fibrolamellar carcinomas have a unique predilection for younger individuals and
arise in livers without recognizable liver disease. In contrast to typical
hepatocellular carcinomas, fibrolamellar carcinomas show few chromosomal changes 
and lack mutation in key genes such as TP53 and CTNNB1. Epigenetic instability,
manifesting as methylation of important tumor suppressor gene promoters, has not 
been investigated in fibrolamellar carcinomas. Thus, the methylation status of 11
tumor suppressor gene promoters was investigated using methylation-specific PCR: 
RASSF1, CDH1, CDKN2B, HPP1, CDKN2A, GSTP1, P16, RARA, FLJ13081, SOCS1, and TP53. 
Nine fibrolamellar carcinomas were studied including primary tumors (N=5) and
metastatic deposits (N=4) along with control groups of typical hepatocellular
carcinoma arising in livers with (N=21) and without cirrhosis (N=10). In
fibrolamellar carcinomas, RASSF1A and CDH1 (e-cadherin) were the most commonly
methylated genes with 80-100% of tumors methylated. However, overall
fibrolamellar carcinomas showed low levels of methylation with no differences
between fibrolamellar carcinomas and their paired normal livers. However,
fibrolamellar carcinomas showed significantly less methylation than
hepatocellular carcinomas that arose in the background of viral cirrhosis.
Overall, methylation was most strongly linked to viral cirrhosis. In conclusion, 
fibrolamellar carcinoma shows low levels of methylation. In contrast, higher
levels of promoter methylation are associated with hepatocellular carcinomas that
arise in the setting of viral induced cirrhosis.

PMID: 18264082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Int J Hematol. 2008 Jan;87(1):39-47. doi: 10.1007/s12185-007-0013-z. Epub 2007
Dec 6.

Gene profiling of growth factor independence 1B gene (Gfi-1B) in leukemic cells.

Koldehoff M(1), Zakrzewski JL, Klein-Hitpass L, Beelen DW, Elmaagacli AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bone Marrow Transplantation, University Hospital of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. michael.koldehoff@uni-duisburg-essen.de

To investigate the molecular effects of growth factor independence 1B (Gfi-1B), a
transcription factor essential for the development of hematopoietic cells and
differentiation of erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages, the naturally Gfi-1B
overexpressing cell line K562 was cultured in the presence of Gfi-1B
target-specific small interfering RNA (siRNA). SiRNA treatment significantly
knocked down Gfi-1B expression with an efficiency of nearly 90%. Analysis of the 
siRNA silencing protocol by colony-forming units ensured that it was not
cytotoxic. Samples from Gfi-1B overexpressing cells and cells with knocked-down
Gfi-1B were analyzed by oligonucleotide microarray technology and based upon
rigorous statistical analysis of the data; relevant genes were chosen for
confirmation by reserve transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, including
MYC/MYCBP and CDKN1A. Interestingly, transcripts within components of the
signalling cascade of immune cells (PLD1, LAMP1, HSP90, IL6ST), of the tyrosine
kinase pathway (TPR, RAC3) and of the transcription factors (RAC3, CEP290, JEM-1,
ATR, MYC, SMC3, RARA, RBBP6) were found to be differentially expressed in Gfi-1B 
overexpressing cells compared to controls. Individual genes such as ZDHHC17,
DMXL1, ZNF292 were found to be upregulated in Gfi-1B overexpressing cells. In
addition, down-regulated transcripts showed cell signaling transcripts for
several chemokine gene members including GNAL, CXCL5, GNL3L, GPR65, TMEM30,
BCL11B and transcription factors (GTF2H3, ATXN3). In conclusion, several
essential cell signalling factors, as well as transcriptional and
post-translational regulation genes were differentially expressed in cells that
overexpressed Gfi-1B compared to control cells with knocked-down Gfi-1B. Our data
indicate that Gfi-1B signalling is important for commitment and maturation of
hematopoietic cell populations.

PMID: 18224412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Eur J Haematol. 2008 May;80(5):444-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2008.01042.x. Epub
2008 Jan 23.

Detection of the STAT5B-RARA fusion transcript in acute promyelocytic leukemia
with the normal chromosome 17 on G-banding.

Kusakabe M(1), Suzukawa K, Nanmoku T, Obara N, Okoshi Y, Mukai HY, Hasegawa Y,
Kojima H, Kawakami Y, Ninomiya H, Nagasawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences,
University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Comment in
    Eur J Haematol. 2009 Nov;83(5):499-501.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by chromosomal rearrangements
of 17q21, leading to fusion of the gene-encoding retinoic acid receptor alpha
(RARA) with a number of alternative partner genes. Signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5 beta (STAT5B) is one of the alternative partners. We
report a rare case of APL with STAT5B-RARA fusion transcript and the normal
chromosome 17 on G-banding. Administration of all trans-retinoic acid improved
disseminated intravascular coagulation without decrease of the leukemia cells in 
his peripheral blood and bone marrow. The molecular mechanism of fusion between
STAT5B and RARA by chromosomal rearrangement is discussed based on the data from 
genome database. Clinical characteristics of APL with STAT5B-RARA are also
discussed.

PMID: 18221386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Korean J Lab Med. 2006 Oct;26(5):329-33.

[Acute Monocytic Leukemia with t(11;17)(q23;q21) Involving a Rearrangement of
Mixed Lineage Leukemia Gene.].

[Article in Korean]

Kim KE(1), Kim SH, Han JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Dong-A University College of Medicine,
Busan, Korea.

A case of acute monocytic leukemia (AMoL) by French-American-British (FAB)
classification in a 63-year-old male showed the abnormal karyotype
46,XY,t(11;17)(q23;q21), previously reported as a variant translocation in acute 
promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis 
identified a mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene rearrangement, but not visible
disruptions of promyelocytic leukemia (PML) or retinoic acid receptor alpha
(RARA) genes. We suggest that a certain gene proximal to RARA was rearranged in
this case onto a gene close to MLL on chromosome 11q. Now, a few cases of AMoL
with a similar translocation have been reported in the literature, and these
cases emphasize the importance of cytogenetic and FISH studies in addition to
morphology, cytochemistry, and immunophenotype in classifying acute myeloid
leukemia (AML).

PMID: 18156746  [PubMed]


486. Korean J Lab Med. 2007 Oct;27(5):305-12.

[Clinical significance of quantitation of WT1 gene expression for minimal
residual disease monitoring of acute myelogenous leukemia].

[Article in Korean]

Kim HR(1), Shin JH, Lee JN, Lee EY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Busan Paik Hospital, College of Medicine,
Inje University, Busan, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Following induction chemotherapy for AML, a sensitive determination
of minimal residual disease (MRD) in patients achieving complete remission (CR)
should enable the detection of early relapse. This study was designed to verify
if quantitative assessment of the Wilms' tumor (WT1) gene by real time polymerase
chain reaction (RQ-PCR) can be used as a marker for MRD detection during the
monitoring of AML.
METHODS: WT1 gene expression was quantified by RQ-PCR in 31 patients with AML at 
diagnosis (27 patients) and during follow-up (29 patients) relative to ABL
control gene. In four patients, the WT1 gene expression was analyzed in
comparison to a second PCR marker, PML-RARA fusion transcript. Prognostic
significance of WT1 gene expression was analyzed at diagnosis and at the primary 
CR evaluation. Longitudinal WT1 gene analysis was performed in 17 AML patients.
RESULTS: At diagnosis, WT1 gene expression exceeded the control level in all of
the patients. Higher levels of WT1 gene expression were not associated with
shorter event free survival or overall survival at diagnosis. Higher levels of
WT1 gene expression were associated with shorter event free survival after
induction chemotherapy. Relapse was observed in eight of 17 patients analysed
longitudinally, and an increase of WT1 gene expression preceded morphologic
relapse in four patients with the fusion transcript negative. Concomitant
monitoring of PML-RARA fusion transcript reveals the lack of a significant
correlation withWT1 gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Quantitation of WT1 gene expression could be used for MRD monitoring
of AML and for the early detection of relapse, especially in patients lacking
specific molecular markers.

PMID: 18094593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Nat Genet. 2007 Dec;39(12):1500-6. Epub 2007 Nov 18.

Loss of Trim24 (Tif1alpha) gene function confers oncogenic activity to retinoic
acid receptor alpha.

Khetchoumian K(1), Teletin M, Tisserand J, Mark M, Herquel B, Ignat M,
Zucman-Rossi J, Cammas F, Lerouge T, Thibault C, Metzger D, Chambon P, Losson R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Department of 
Functional Genomics, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR7104,
Université Louis Pasteur, Collége de France, Illkirch, France.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a major cause of death worldwide. Here, we
provide evidence that the ligand-dependent nuclear receptor co-regulator Trim24
(also known as Tif1alpha) functions in mice as a liver-specific tumor suppressor.
In Trim24-null mice, hepatocytes fail to execute proper cell cycle withdrawal
during the neonatal-to-adult transition and continue to cycle in adult livers,
becoming prone to a continuum of cellular alterations that progress toward
metastatic HCC. Using pharmacological approaches, we show that inhibition of
retinoic acid signaling markedly reduces hepatocyte proliferation in Trim24-/-
mice. We further show that deletion of a single retinoic acid receptor alpha
(Rara) allele in a Trim24-null background suppresses HCC development and restores
wild-type expression of retinoic acid-responsive genes in the liver, thus
demonstrating that in this genetic background Rara expresses an oncogenic
activity correlating with a dysregulation of the retinoic acid signaling pathway.
Our results not only provide genetic evidence that Trim24 and Rara co-regulate
hepatocarcinogenesis in an antagonistic manner but also suggest that aberrant
activation of Rara is deleterious to liver homeostasis.

PMID: 18026104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Cancer. 2008 Jan 1;112(1):4-16.

Monitoring of minimal residual disease in acute myeloid leukemia.

Kern W(1), Haferlach C, Haferlach T, Schnittger S.

Author information: 
(1)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany. wolfgang.kern@mll-online.com

Two highly sensitive methods, multiparameter flow cytometry (MFC) and real-time
quantitative PCR (RQ-PCR), are increasingly used to monitor minimal residual
disease (MRD) and to guide risk-adapted management in acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). An independent prognostic impact has been demonstrated for MRD levels
obtained by both methods. MFC has been found particularly useful for assessment
of early clearance of malignant cells and after consolidation therapy. At the
latter checkpoint, MRD levels quantified by RQ-PCR in AML with fusion genes also 
have the strongest prognostic power. In addition, highly predictive initial
expression levels have been identified by RQ-PCR. Both methods are capable of
early detection of relapse. Through the use of all available markers including
NPM1 mutations and FLT3 mutations in addition to fusion genes, RQ-PCR-based MRD
assessment is possible in more than half of patients, whereas MFC is applicable
to most AML cases. With a sensitivity of 10(-4) (PML-RARA) to 10(-7)
(patient-specific primers, FLT3 and NPM1 mutations), RQ-PCR is more sensitive in 
most cases. Large clinical trials will determine the exact role and place of
immunologic and RQ-PCR-based monitoring of MRD in the therapy of patients with
AML.

2007 American Cancer Society

PMID: 18000811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Blood. 2008 Feb 15;111(4):2374-7. Epub 2007 Nov 9.

DNA methylation-independent loss of RARA gene expression in acute myeloid
leukemia.

Glasow A(1), Barrett A, Petrie K, Gupta R, Boix-Chornet M, Zhou DC, Grimwade D,
Gallagher R, von Lindern M, Waxman S, Enver T, Hildebrandt G, Zelent A.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Haemato-Oncology, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United
Kingdom.

The retinoic acid receptor (RAR) alpha gene (RARA) encodes 2 major isoforms and
mediates positive effects of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) on myelomonocytic
differentiation. Expression of the ATRA-inducible (RARalpha2) isoform increases
with myelomonocytic differentiation and appears to be down-regulated in many
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell lines. Here, we demonstrate that relative to
normal myeloid stem/progenitor cells, RARalpha2 expression is dramatically
reduced in primary AML blasts. Expression of the RARalpha1 isoform is also
significantly reduced in primary AML cells, but not in AML cell lines. Although
the promoters directing expression of RARalpha1 and RARalpha2 are respectively
unmethylated and methylated in AML cell lines, these regulatory regions are
unmethylated in all the AML patient cell samples analyzed. Moreover, in primary
AML cells, histones associated with the RARalpha2 promoter possessed diminished
levels of H3 acetylation and lysine 4 methylation. These results underscore the
complexities of the mechanisms responsible for deregulation of gene expression in
AML and support the notion that diminished RARA expression contributes to
leukemogenesis.

PMID: 17993618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Blood. 2008 Mar 1;111(5):2527-37. Epub 2007 Oct 26.

Prognostic relevance of FLT3-TKD mutations in AML: the combination matters--an
analysis of 3082 patients.

Bacher U(1), Haferlach C, Kern W, Haferlach T, Schnittger S.

Author information: 
(1)Bone Marrow Transplant Unit, University Hospital of Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany.

We characterized the mutational status of the FLT3 tyrosine kinase domain
(FLT3-TLD) in 3082 patients with newly diagnosed AML. FLT3-TKD mutations were
detected in 147 of 3082 (4.8%) patients. Similar to the FLT3 juxtamembrane domain
mutations (FLT3-LM), there was a high correlation of FLT3-TKD mutations with
normal karyotype (88 of 1472; 6.0%). FLT3-TKD mutations were most frequent in the
AML FAB subtypes M5b (15 of 114; 13.2%), M3v (6 of 51; 11.8%), and M4 (39 of 484;
8.1%). Similar to FLT3-LM, the FLT3-TKD mutations show elevated peripheral
leukocytes compared with FLT3wt AML. FLT3-TKD had a high incidence in cases with 
NPM1 mutations (23 of 262; 8.8%), CEBPA mutations (6 of 76; 7.9%), and NRAS
mutations (6 of 78; 7.7%). FLT3-TKD in combination with FLT3-LM (17 of 594
patients; 2.9%) and KITD816 (1 of 44; 2.3%) was rare. Unlike the FLT3-LM, which
are associated with inferior survival, prognosis was not influenced by FLT3-TKD
in the total cohort of 1720 cases, where follow-up data were available (97
FLT3-TKD; 1623 FLT3-WT). In t(15;17)/PML-RARA with FLT3-TKD mutations, in
FLT3-LM/TKD double-mutated, and in MLL-PTD/TKD double-mutated cases prognosis was
unfavorably influenced by FLT3-TKD mutations. In contrast, we found an additional
favorable impact of FLT3-TKD on EFS in prognostically favorable AML with NPM1- or
CEBPA mutations.

PMID: 17965322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Leukemia. 2008 Jan;22(1):200-3. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

The presence of a single PML-RARA isoform lacking exon 5 in FISH-negative APL
samples.

Ashur-Fabian O, Trakhtenbrot L, Dominissini D, Koren-Michowitz M, Nagler A,
Rechavi G, Amariglio N.

PMID: 17960172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Acta Haematol. 2007;118(3):183-7. Epub 2007 Oct 11.

Identification of atypical PML-RARA breakpoint in a patient with acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Ismail S(1), Ababneh N, Awidi A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Jordan, Amman, Jordan. sismail@ju.edu.jo

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) of the M3 subtype is characterized by
translocation t(15;17) that generates the PML-RARA fusion gene. Depending on the 
breakpoint position in the PML gene, 3 main fusion transcripts usually result.
These breakpoints are bcr1 and bcr3 in introns 6 and 3, respectively, and bcr2 in
exon 6. This report describes a rare atypical bcr2 breakpoint in a patient with
morphological, cytogenetic and molecular features of APL. The presence of
t(15;17) was first revealed by fluorescent in situ hybridization. Molecular
analysis by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction using primers for
different PML-RARA junctions showed bands with different sizes compared with
those generated from the three classical breakpoints, namely bcr1, bcr2 and bcr3.
However, sequence analysis confirmed the presence of a bcr2 transcript with an
atypical breakpoint within exon 6. The patient responded well to treatment and is
now in complete remission. However, suggesting a favorable prognosis associated
with such a rare transcript is difficult as more similar cases are needed to
confirm such a conclusion. This article also stresses the importance of
sequencing unusual polymerase chain reaction products to confirm their nature.

2007 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 17934255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Am J Transplant. 2007 Dec;7(12):2757-68. Epub 2007 Oct 6.

Transplant glomerulopathy: ultrastructural abnormalities occur early in
longitudinal analysis of protocol biopsies.

Wavamunno MD(1), O'Connell PJ, Vitalone M, Fung CL, Allen RD, Chapman JR,
Nankivell BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Renal Medicine, University of Sydney, Westmead Hospital, Sydney,
Australia.

Transplant glomerulopathy (TXG) presents a distinctive pattern of glomerular
abnormalities. The aim of this study was to describe its sequential
ultrastructural pathology. A paired cohort study of 228 protocol biopsies, from
our longitudinal database (n = 1345), compared TXG (7 patients, 95 biopsies) and 
controls (8 patients, 133 biopsies). Ultrastructural morphometry and C4d
immunoperoxidase were evaluated from implantation to 5 years after
transplantation against sequential histology and functional changes. TXG was
predated by early glomerular endothelial cell activation; typified by
vacuolation, hypertrophy, serration and expansion of lamina rara interna from 39 
+/- 23 days after transplantation. Endothelial cells were transformed into an
activated phenotype, containing numerous mitochondria, Golgi and ribosomes.
Transition from fenestrated to continuous endothelium, mesangial matrix expansion
and podocyte fusion occurred late. Endothelial cell activation also occurred in
peritubular capillaries (PTC) followed by basement membrane multi-lamination (p <
0.05-0.001). Light microscopy changes of TXG occurred at 2.3 years. PTC C4d
deposition was intermittently expressed over time, correlating with endothelial
abnormalities, glomerular C4d and donor-specific antibodies (DSA) (p <
0.05-0.001). In summary, endothelial and subendothelial ultrastructural
abnormalities in glomerular and peritubular capillaries are sensitive, early
markers of TXG, likely due to stimulation of endothelial cells into an activated 
phenotype by antibody-mediated sub-lytic complement deposition.

PMID: 17924997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Dec;1120:114-30. Epub 2007 Sep 28.

Potential functions of retinoic acid receptor A in Sertoli cells and germ cells
during spermatogenesis.

Doyle TJ(1), Braun KW, McLean DJ, Wright RW, Griswold MD, Kim KH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA
99164-4234, USA.

Elucidation of the retinoid signaling circuitry in the testis is critical to
understanding how male germ cells develop to spermatozoa. Retinoic acid receptor 
A protein (RARA) is an essential mediator of retinoid signaling in the testis, as
shown by a sterility phenotype observed for retinoic acid receptor A gene (Rara) 
knockout male mice. The seminiferous tubules of Rara knockout mice showed varying
degrees of germ-cell degeneration. A dramatic increase in apoptosis of early
meiotic prophase spermatocytes was observed in these tubules compared to the
wild-type tubules. Germ-cell loss was dependent on the stages of the
spermatogenic cycle: germ-cell loss was negligible in stages I-V, but severe
after stages VIII and IX of the spermatogenic cycle. Using spermatogonial
transplantation, the individual function of RARA in Sertoli cells or germ cells
was determined. The wild-type donor germ cells, transplanted into Rara knockout
testes, colonized and proliferated in the RARA-deficient microenvironment. The
donor-derived cells were mostly early meiotic prophase spermatocytes, with few
more advanced germ cells detected. Conversely, when Rara-deficient germ cells
were injected into the microenvironment that express RARA, establishment of
donor-derived germ-cell colonies was rare, but remarkably, once colonized,
Rara-deficient germ cells progressed normally through spermatogenesis. These
results together suggest that RARA may function in Sertoli cells to promote the
survival and development of early meiotic prophase spermatocytes, whereas RARA in
germ cells functions to increase the proliferation and differentiation of
spermatogonia, prior to meiotic prophase.

PMID: 17905941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Blood. 2007 Dec 1;110(12):4073-6. Epub 2007 Aug 21.

The PRKAR1A gene is fused to RARA in a new variant acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Catalano A(1), Dawson MA, Somana K, Opat S, Schwarer A, Campbell LJ, Iland H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Haematology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
alberto.catalano@email.cs.nsw.gov.au

We report the molecular and cytogenetic characterization of a novel variant of
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). The bone marrow showed 88% hypergranular
promyelocytes, and the karyotype was 47,XY,+22 [5]/46,XY[30]. Fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH) indicated disruption and deletion of the 5'-end of the 
RARA gene. Treatment with all-trans retinoic acid, idarubicin, and arsenic
trioxide induced cytogenetic complete remission without morphologic evidence of
residual leukemia. The diagnostic marrow was negative for PML-RARA transcripts by
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), but an atypical product
was observed. Sequencing showed partial homology to the PRKAR1A gene, encoding
the regulatory subunit type I-alpha of cyclic adenosine monophosphate-dependent
protein kinase. RT-PCR using specific primers for PRKAR1A and RARA amplified 2
transcript splice variants of a PRKAR1A-RARA fusion gene, and PRKAR1A and RARA
FISH probes confirmed the fusion. This novel PRKAR1A-RARA gene rearrangement is
the fifth variant APL in which the RARA partner gene has been identified and the 
second known rearrangement of PRKAR1A in a malignant disease. This trial was
registered at www.actr.org.au with the Australian Clinical Trials Registry as
number 12605000070639.

PMID: 17712046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Aug;15(4):714-9.

[Detection of PML/RARa transcripts in acute promyelocytic leukemia by real-time
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction].

[Article in Chinese]

Lang L(1), Li HM, Liu H, Wang YM, Zhang XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The second People Hospital of Yunnan Province,
Kunming 650021, China.

This study was purposed to establish a real-time quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for detection of PML/RARa fusion
gene in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) and to explore the
relationship between the expression level of PML/RARa fusion gene transcript and 
the clinical status or efficacy of the therapy in APL. The conventional RT-PCR
was used to amplify PML/RARa gene from cultured NB4 cells. Standard curves were
constructed by modified real-time PCR on standard template after 10-fold serial
dilutions of cDNA of 1 microg NB4 cells. The sensitivity, stability and
repeatability of this method was determined. The PML/RARa gene transcripts of
bone marrows in 4 APL patients before and after treatment and in 1 APL patient
relapsed after complete remission were dynamically detected by modified real-time
quantitative RT-PCR. The results indicated that the sensitivity of real-time
quantitative RT-PCR for detecting PML/RARa fusion gene was about 10(-5) microg
cDNA from NB4 cells, the repeatability and reproducibility of this method were
satisfactory, intra-and inter-assay coefficients of variation were 2.1% and 3.8%.
The copy numbers of PML/RARa transcripte reflecting PML/RARa fusion gene
expression level in 4 newly diagnosed patients with APL were 1884, 5533, 1803,
4677 and the median was 3 475. After ATRA + chemotherapy copy numbers of PML/RARa
transcript decreased to 40, 135, 79, 29, and mean was 121. Another patient's
PML/RARa gene copy number was 8600 at diagnosis, the gene copy number was 730
after therapy for 4 months, although he was in complete remission, but copy
number increased to 11 000 when APL relapsed 3 months later. The copy number
efficiently reduced to 1200 after ATRA + chemotherapy. It is concluded that the
established real-time quantitative RT-PCR method is sensitive, reliable, accurate
and repeatable. The efficiency of method was finally tested for patient samples, 
showing a PML/RARa transcript copy number in APL patients significantly decrease 
after therapy, and increase at the time of relapse which indicate that changes of
fusion gene expression levels coincide with clinical progress of disease. This
method can be used to detect the minimal residual disease, assess response to
treatment and evaluate prognosis of disease.

PMID: 17708789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. EMBO J. 2007 Aug 22;26(16):3804-14. Epub 2007 Jul 19.

UvrD controls the access of recombination proteins to blocked replication forks.

Lestini R(1), Michel B.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, Centre de Génétique Moléculaire, UPR 2167, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Blocked replication forks often need to be processed by recombination proteins
prior to replication restart. In Escherichia coli, the UvrD repair helicase was
recently shown to act at inactivated replication forks, where it counteracts a
deleterious action of RecA. Using two mutants affected for different subunits of 
the polymerase III holoenzyme (Pol IIIh), we show here that the anti-RecA action 
of UvrD at blocked forks reflects two different activities of this enzyme. A
defective UvrD mutant is able to antagonize RecA in cells affected for the Pol
IIIh catalytic subunit DnaE. In this mutant, RecA action at blocked forks
specifically requires the protein RarA (MgsA). We propose that UvrD prevents RecA
binding, possibly by counteracting RarA. In contrast, at forks affected for the
Pol IIIh clamp (DnaN), RarA is not required for RecA binding and the ATPase
function of UvrD is essential to counteract RecA, supporting the idea that UvrD
removes RecA from DNA. UvrD action on RecA is conserved in evolution as it can be
performed in E. coli by the UvrD homologue from Bacillus subtilis, PcrA.

PMCID: PMC1952219
PMID: 17641684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Cancer Cell. 2007 Jul;12(1):23-35.

RXR is an essential component of the oncogenic PML/RARA complex in vivo.

Zhu J(1), Nasr R, Pérès L, Riaucoux-Lormière F, Honoré N, Berthier C, Kamashev D,
Zhou J, Vitoux D, Lavau C, de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS/University Paris VII UMR 7151, laboratoire associé N11 de la Ligue contre
le Cancer, Hôpital St. Louis, 1, avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex 10,
France.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2007 Jul;12(1):1-3.

Although PML-enforced RARA homodimerization allows PML/RARA to bind DNA
independently of its coreceptor RXR, the latter was identified within the
PML/RARA complex. We demonstrate that a PML/RARA mutant defective for RXR binding
fails to trigger APL development in transgenic mice, although it still transforms
primary hematopoietic progenitors ex vivo. RXR enhances PML/RARA binding to DNA
and is required for rexinoid-induced APL differentiation. In RA-treated
PML/RARA-transformed cells, the absence of RXR binding results in monocytic,
rather than granulocytic, differentiation. PML/RARA enhances posttranslational
modifications of RXRA, including its sumoylation, suggesting that PML-bound
sumoylation enzymes target RXRA and possibly other PML/RARA-bound chromatin
proteins, further contributing to deregulated transcription. Thus, unexpectedly, 
RXR contributes to several critical aspects of in vivo transformation.

PMID: 17613434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2007 Jun;40(6):749-60.

Acute leukemia in early childhood.

Emerenciano M(1), Koifman S, Pombo-de-Oliveira MS.

Author information: 
(1)Divisão de Medicina Experimental, Centro de Pesquisa, Instituto Nacional de
Câncer, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil.

Acute leukemia in early childhood is biologically and clinically distinct. The
particular characteristics of this malignancy diagnosed during the first months
of life have provided remarkable insights into the etiology of the disease. The
pro-B, CD10 negative immunophenotype is typically found in infant acute leukemia,
and the most common genetic alterations are the rearrangements of the MLL gene.
In addition, the TEL/AML1 fusion gene is most frequently found in children older 
than 24 months. A molecular study on a Brazilian cohort (age range 0-23 months)
has detected TEL/AML1+ve (N = 9), E2A/PBX1+ve (N = 4), PML/RARA+ve (N = 4), and
AML1/ETO+ve (N = 2) cases. Undoubtedly, the great majority of genetic events
occurring in these patients arise prenatally. The environmental exposure to
damaging agents that give rise to genetic changes prenatally may be accurately
determined in infants since the window of exposure is limited and known. Several 
studies have shown maternal exposures that may give rise to leukemogenic changes.
The Brazilian Collaborative Study Group of Infant Acute Leukemia has found that
mothers exposed to dipyrone, pesticides and hormones had an increased chance to
give birth to babies with infant acute leukemia [OR = 1.48 (95%CI = 1.05-2.07),
OR = 2.27 (95%CI = 1.56-3.31) and OR = 9.08 (95%CI = 2.95-27.96)], respectively. 
This review aims to summarize recent clues that have facilitated the elucidation 
of the biology of early childhood leukemias, with emphasis on infant acute
leukemia in the Brazilian population.

PMID: 17581672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Soc Reprod Fertil Suppl. 2007;63:11-23.

Retinoid signaling during spermatogenesis as revealed by genetic and metabolic
manipulations of retinoic acid receptor alpha.

Wolgemuth DJ(1), Chung SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA. djw3@columbia.edu

The importance of dietary retinol (vitamin A) and retinoid signaling for normal
development and differentiation has been recognised for many years. Vitamin A
deficiency results in a variety of abnormalities, most of which can be corrected 
by supplementing the diet with all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA), with the exception
of blindness and male sterility. ATRA, an active metabolite of vitamin A,
functions primarily by binding to nuclear receptors of the steroid hormone
superfamily, the retinoic acid receptors (RARs). Gene targeting studies revealed 
the importance of ATRA signaling through the RARs for spermatogenesis. Mice that 
are homozygous for a null mutation in the gene encoding RARalpha, Rara-/-,
exhibit defects in spermatogenesis and male sterility. The abnormalities in these
RARalpha-deficient testes have been examined in detail in a series of recent
studies from our laboratory and will be summarised in this paper. We also review 
how dietary, pharmacologic and genetic strategies, alone or in combination, can
be used to gain further insight into retinoid function in mammalian
spermatogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3796155
PMID: 17566257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Jun;175(2):166-8.

Incidence of submicroscopic deletions vary according to disease entities and
chromosomal translocations in hematologic malignancies: investigation by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Moon HW(1), Chang YH, Kim TY, Oh BR, Min HC, Kim BK, Ahn HS, Cho HI, Lee DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ewha Womans University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.

Submicroscopic deletions of genes in recurrent chromosomal rearrangements occur
frequently in hematologic malignancies, but their incidences have not been
reported clearly. We investigated the incidence of submicroscopic deletions and
their association with specific genetic rearrangements in various hematologic
malignancies. A fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) study was conducted in 
336 patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, 223 patients with acute myeloid
leukemia, and 79 patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia. The incidence of
submicroscopic deletions in patients with chromosomal rearrangements was the
highest in the TEL/AML1 rearrangement (65.0%), followed by BCR/ABL (10.9%), MLL
(5.6%), AML/ETO (4.0%), and PML/RARA (0.0%). Submicroscopic deletion was quite
common, and incidences were variable according to disease entities and
chromosomal translocations. To detect submicroscopic deletions, careful FISH
study should be included for the cytogenetic study of hematologic malignancies,
and their association with clinical prognosis needs to be further studied.

PMID: 17556074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biol Reprod. 2007 Sep;77(3):517-25. Epub 2007 May 30.

Regulation of 17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 in human placental
endothelial cells.

Su EJ(1), Cheng YH, Chatterton RT, Lin ZH, Yin P, Reierstad S, Innes J, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (HSD17B2) oxidizes estradiol to
estrone, testosterone to androstenedione, and 20 alpha-dihydroprogesterone to
progesterone. HSD17B2 is highly expressed in human placental tissue where it is
localized to placental endothelial cells lining the fetal compartment. The aim of
this study was to investigate the effects of potential regulatory factors
including progesterone, estradiol, and retinoic acid (RA) onHSD17B2 expression in
primary human placental endothelial cells in culture.HSD17B2 mRNA expression was 
not regulated by progesterone, the progesterone agonist R5020, or estradiol
treatment. RA significantly induced HSD17B2 mRNA levels and enzyme activity in a 
dose- and time-dependent manner. Maximal stimulation occurred at Hour 48 at an RA
concentration of 10(-6) M. Both retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) and retinoid 
X receptor alpha (RXRA) were readily detected by immunoblotting in isolated
placental endothelial cells. RNA interference directed against RARA or RXRA led
to reduced basal levels of HSD17B2 mRNA levels and significantly abolished
RA-stimulated HSD17B2 expression. Together, these data indicate that regulation
of HSD17B2 mRNA levels and enzymatic activity by RA in the placenta is mediated
by RARA and RXRA.

PMID: 17538076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2007;39(6):1063-70. Epub 2007 Mar 21.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia: new issues on pathogenesis and treatment response.

Vitoux D(1), Nasr R, de The H.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 7151, Université Paris 7, Equipe labellisée par la Ligue Nationale
contre le Cancer, Hôpital Saint-Louis (APHP), 1 av Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris 
Cedex 10, France. dominique.vitoux@sls.aphp.fr

Pathogenesis of acute promyelocytic leukemia appears to be one of the best
understood among human malignancies. The ability of retinoic acid (RA) and
arsenic trioxide to directly target the oncogenic promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic
receptor A (PML-RARA) fusion protein also made this disease the first model for
oncogene-targeted therapies. A set of recent data has significantly increased the
complexity of our view of acute promyelocytic leukemia pathogenesis, as well as
of therapeutic response. This review summarizes and discusses these findings,
which yield novels questions and models.

PMID: 17468032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Feb 6;87(6):396-8.

[Association between retinoic acid receptor alpha gene polymorphisms and
nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate susceptibility].

[Article in Chinese]

Fan GZ(1), Li YL, Wu PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of
Central South University, Changsha 410011, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between D17S579 microsatellite marker 
allelic polymorphisms in retinoic acid receptor-alpha (RARA) gene and the genetic
susceptibility to nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (NSCL/P) in
Hunan Hans.
METHODS: PCR and denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) were used
to detect the polymorphism of RARA gene marked by D17S579 among 140 patients with
NSCL/P, 82 males and 58 females, aged 3 months-14 years, and 132 healthy persons,
68 males and 64 females, aged 6 months-14 years, who underwent physical
examination.
RESULTS: The A6 allele frequency of the NSCL/P patients was 8.93%, significantly 
higher than that of the healthy persons (4.17%, P = 0.026). The A9 allele
frequency the NSCL/P patients was 13.21%, significantly higher than that of the
healthy persons (5.68%, P = 0.003). There were not significant differences in the
frequencies of different alleles between the patients with family history and the
patients without family history (chi2 = 2.710, P = 0.978).
CONCLUSION: The A6 and A9 alleles in D17S579 microsatellite marker of RARA gene
may be correlated with the development of NSCL/P in Hunan Hans. There is no
association between the family history and RARA polymorphism in the NSCL/P
patients.

PMID: 17456381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J BUON. 2004 Apr-Jun;9(2):197-200.

Clonal heterogeneity in a patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Staneva M(1), Zhechev Y, Stoimenov A, Balatzenko G, Guenova M.

Author information: 
(1)National Center of Hematology and Transfusiology, Sofia, Bulgaria.

A 18-year-old man was diagnosed with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). The
conventional cytogenetic analysis revealed normal karyotype 46, XY, t(15; 17).
Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RTPCR) identified PML-RARa
chimeric transcripts. Complete remission (CR) was attained with 3 induction
courses of Ara-C, daunorubicin and all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). Three years
later the patient relapsed. The blasts in bone marrow aspirate at relapse had
AML-M3 morphology, and RT-PCR was positive for PML-RARa transcripts. The patient 
was treated with ATRA and daunorubicin without success. Two months later the
blasts in bone marrow aspirate showed AML-M2 morphology, the karyotype was 47,
XY, +8 and RT-PCR revealed the presence of AML1-ETO transcripts and absence of
PML-RARa transcripts. The patient attained second CR with 3 induction courses -a 
course with Ara-C and daunorubicin and 2 courses with idarubicin, Ara-C and
etoposide.

PMID: 17415815  [PubMed]


6. J Neurosurg. 2006 Dec;105(6):912-5.

Granulocytic sarcoma: an unusual complication of acute promyelocytic leukemia
causing cerebellar hemorrhage. Case report.

Fukushima S(1), Terasaki M, Tajima Y, Shigemori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kurume University School of Medicine, Fukuoka,
Japan.

Granulocytic sarcomas are rare tumors that occur primarily in patients with acute
myelogenous leukemia or other myeloproliferative disorders, are seldom seen in
patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), and have never been reported to
occur in the cerebellum. The authors describe the case of a patient with APL who 
harbored a hemorrhagic granulocytic sarcoma in the cerebellum. This 39-year-old
woman presented with cerebellar ataxia. Magnetic resonance images revealed an
intraaxial tumor in the cerebellum. Bone marrow samples showing infiltration by
leukemic blast cells and data from hematological tests led to a diagnosis of APL.
The patient was treated with chemotherapy and surgery. She had no response to
chemotherapy and died of progressive intratumoral hemorrhage. Results of
histopathological studies and immunohistochemical staining of the cerebellar
tumor confirmed a granulocytic sarcoma. Flow cytometry showed that the blast
cells were positive for leukocyte common antigen, CD13, and CD33 markers. Bone
marrow cytogenetics revealed that the patient had a 46,XX karyotype. Although no 
cytogenetic abnormality was present, fluorescence in situ hybridization detected 
a chimeric fusion of PML and RARA. This is the first report to document a
granulocytic sarcoma in the cerebellum as the primary presentation in a patient
with APL and abnormal coagulation. As predicted by the unusual clinical
manifestations and radiological findings, the patient's survival was short.
Although central nervous system complications in patients with APL are rare, the 
data in this case highlight the need for individualized treatment when such
conditions occur.

PMID: 17405265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Ann Hematol. 2007 May;86(5):311-27. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

Diagnostic pathways in acute leukemias: a proposal for a multimodal approach.

Haferlach T(1), Bacher U, Kern W, Schnittger S, Haferlach C.

Author information: 
(1)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany.
torsten.haferlach@mll-online.com

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) each
represent a heterogeneous complex of disorders, which result from diverse
mechanisms of leukemogenesis. Modern therapeutic concepts are based on individual
risk stratification at diagnosis and during follow-up. For some leukemia subtypes
such as AML M3/M3v with t(15;17)/PML-RARA or Philadelphia-positive ALL targeted
therapy options are available. Thus, optimal therapeutic conditions are based on 
exact classification of the acute leukemia subtype at diagnosis and are guided by
exact and sensitive quantification of minimal residual disease during complete
hematologic remission. Today, a multimodal diagnostic approach combining
cytomorphology, multiparameter flow cytometry, chromosome banding analysis,
accompanied by diverse fluorescence in situ hybridization techniques, and
molecular analyses is needed to meet these requirements. As the diagnostic
process becomes more demanding with respect to experience of personnel, time, and
costs due to the expansion of methods, algorithms, which guide the diagnostic
procedure from basic to more specific methods and which lead finally to a
synopsis of the respective results, are essential for modern diagnostics and
therapeutic concepts.

PMID: 17375301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Apr 1;174(1):48-53.

Novel chromosomal aberrations in a recurrent malignant meningioma.

Pelz AF(1), Klawunde P, Skalej M, Wieacker P, Kirches E, Schneider T, Mawrin C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Otto-von-Guericke University, Leipziger Strasse 
44, D-39120 Magdeburg, Germany.

The molecular basis of tumorigenesis and tumor progression in meningiomas is not 
fully understood. Here we present results of conventional cytogenetic,
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and comparative genetic hybridization 
(CGH) analyses in a patient with recurrent anaplastic meningioma. We found
complex aberrant karyotype alterations previously described in anaplastic
meningiomas, such as 1p, 14q aberration, and a possibly tetraploid karyotype.
Loss of chromosome 22q was detected by conventional cytogenetic analysis.
Additional chromosomal aberrations not previously reported included a
near-triploid karyotype and alterations such as 4p+, 5p-, 7p+, 8q+, and gain of
chromosome 19. FISH with LSI 9p21, CEP9, LSI PML/RARA, and CGH confirmed the
karyotype complexity in this case. Our findings of several previously unreported 
cytogenetic alterations suggest that complex karyotype alterations are a
characteristic feature in anaplastic meningiomas. High chromosomal complexity
might be associated with a highly aggressive meningioma phenotype.

PMID: 17350466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Feb;9(1):28-33.

[Long-term follow-up of treatment outcome and prognosis on 46 children with acute
promyelocytic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu XJ(1), Shi SW, Tang YM, Song H, Yang SL, Wei J, Xu WQ, Pan BH, Chen YH, Zhao
FY, Shen HQ, Qian BQ, Zhang LY, Ning BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310003, China.

OBJECTIVE: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a specific type of hematopoietic
malignancy, accounting for 10% of the de novo acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The
data on long-term outcome of APL in children are limited. The aim of this study
was to investigate the clinical biological features, diagnosis, prognosis and
long-term survival of childhood APL.
METHODS: A total of 46 children with newly diagnosed APL from April 1998 to
October 2005 were enrolled into this study. Induction treatment containing
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) plus daunorubicin (DNR) or pirarubicin (THP) was
performed on these patients, followed by 6 courses of chemotherapy consolidation:
DNR, homoharringtonine or etoposide plus Ara-C. A maintenance therapy was then
administered once 3-6 months. The total period of treatment was 2.5 years.
RESULTS: Of the 39 patients who had completed the regular treatment, 36 (92.3%)
achieved a complete remission. The 5-year cumulative incidence of relapse (CIR)
was 28.6%. The estimated overall survival (OS) rates at 1, 3 and 5 years were
(86.1 +/- 5.8)%, (76.1 +/- 7.5)% and (70.2 +/- 8.9)% respectively, while the
event free survival (EFS) rates were (78.4 +/- 6.8)%, (63.6 +/- 8.7)% and (53.1
+/- 10.0)% respectively. The 5-year OS rate of patients with WBC less than or
equal to 10.0 X 10(9)/L was (81.4 +/- 10.3)%, which was significantly higher than
that with WBC greater than 10.0 X 10(9)/L[(51.6 +/- 14.7)%, P < 0.05]. Five
patients with RT-PCR positive for PML/RARalpha S (short) subtype died eventually 
although all of them achieved CR, but none of the 13 patients with PML/RARalpha L
(long) subtype died.
CONCLUSIONS: Remission induction therapy with ATRA + DNR or THP is effective and 
safe for newly diagnosed childhood APL. The remission induction therapy combined 
with chemotherapy containing high/intermediate dose Ara-C can improve the
long-term survival rates of APL patients. High WBC count and S subtype of
PML-RARa are two poor prognostic factors for children with APL.

PMID: 17306073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Leukemia. 2007 May;21(5):1104-8. Epub 2007 Feb 15.

Fusion of FIP1L1 and RARA as a result of a novel t(4;17)(q12;q21) in a case of
juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia.

Buijs A, Bruin M.

PMID: 17301809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Tunis Med. 2006 Nov;84(11):717-20.

[Therapeutic results with apl 93 protocol in acute promyelocytic leukemia (34
cases)].

[Article in French]

Jeddi R(1), Hdiji S, Kacem K, Ben Lakhal R, Aissaoui L, Ben Abid H, Belhadj Ali
Z, Meddeb B.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'hématologie de I'hôpital Aziza Othmunana Tunis.

BACKGROUND: Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) account for approximately 10% to 
15% of all AML in most reports. Clinical features includes the presence in 80% to
90% of patients of a severe hemorrhagic syndrome, a specific balanced
translocation between chromosomes 15 and 17 with a fusion of a large pert of the 
retinoic acid receptor a gene (RARa) on chromosome 17 to a part of the
promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) gene on chromosome 15. More than 75% of patients
(under 65 years of age) can be cured, with the application of a combination of
anthracyclines and all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), followed by maintenance
therapy.
AIM: of the study was to assess of the therapeutic management of APL 93 protocol 
in acute promyelocytic leukemia.
METHODS: We present here the results of a retrospective study concerning 34
patients with APL included between 1998 and 2004 in the APL 93 protocol : 20 in
group B and 14 in group C. CR was 82 %.
RESULTS: Failure is only due to toxic death (18%) Event free survival at 4 years 
is 63,47% with relapse rate at 14.25%. Overall survival at 4 years is 69,72%. Our
results are acceptable and can be improved with reduction of failure due to toxic
death, probably with omission of cytarabine from induction and consolidation
adapted by the Spanish PETHEMA Group.

PMID: 17294898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Syst Parasitol. 2007 May;67(1):65-72. Epub 2007 Feb 9.

Trichodinid ectoparasites (Ciliophora: Peritricha) from Misgurnus
anguillicaudatus (Cantor) and Anodonta woodiana (Lea) in China, with descriptions
of two new species of Trichodina Ehrenberg, 1838.

Zhao Y(1), Tang F.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Animal Biology of Chongqing, College of Life Science,
Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing, China. mokess@cta.cq.cn

During parasitological surveys in Chongqing, China, three trichodinids infecting 
a freshwater fish, Misgurnus anguillicaudatus (Cantor), and a mollusc, Anodonta
woodiana (Lea), were investigated. Two of these species were found to be new.
Trichodina lechriodentata n. sp., from the fish, was identified by its
small-sized body and irregularly rectangular blade, while T. rara n. sp., from
the mollusc, is characterised by its overall dimensions, denticle morphology and 
the presence of a white speckle in some specimens. T. modesta Lom, 1979 is also
described from the fish. Photomicrographs and morphometric data are presented for
all of the species.

PMID: 17294258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Nov 14;86(42):2978-81.

[Primary application of spectral karyotyping in leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo B(1), DA WM, Han XP, Sun JF, Huang WR, Wang K.

Author information: 
(1)General Hospital of People's Liberation Army, Beijing 100853, China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish a spectral karyotyping (SKY) technique and explore the
value of SKY in leukemia research.
METHODS: SKY technique was conducted on 2 samples of peripheral blood from 2
healthy volunteers, then on the samples from 8 patients with leukemia, including 
chronic myelocytic leukemia (CML) and acute myelocytic leukemia (AML) confirmed
by R-banding. In addition, four patients underwent dual fusion-fluorescence in
situ hybridization (DF-FISH) to detect the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL),
PML/RARa, and BCR/ABL fusion genes. By comparing the results of SKY, R-band
karyotyping, and DF-FISH, the stability and reliability of SKY was judged.
RESULTS: All 10 samples were successfully hybridized and karyotyped. The 2 cases 
of healthy volunteers showed normal karyotypes, thus, a specific SKY technique
was successfully established. In the 8 cases of leukemia patients, SKY identified
aberrations including 9q-, t (9; 22), t (15; 17) and the complex karyotype 47,
XY, +9?ins (1;5) (q23;q23), t (6;7) (q23?; p13), in addition, the SKY technique
detected some number abnormalities. The results of SKY confirmed the results of
R-band karyotyping and DF-FISH; moreover, the SKY technique provided more
accurate karyotypes.
CONCLUSION: With high stability, accuracy, and sensitivity, the SKY technique
established by this study can be applied in leukemia research.

PMID: 17288810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Diagn Ther. 2007;11(1):21-8.

Identification of leukemia-specific fusion gene transcripts with a novel
oligonucleotide array.

Chun SM(1), Kim YL, Choi HB, Oh YT, Kim YJ, Lee S, Kim TG, Yang EG, Park YK, Kim 
DW, Han BD.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Division, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul,
Korea.

BACKGROUND: Identification of specific chromosomal translocations is essential
for the diagnosis and prognosis of leukemia. In this study, we employ DNA
microarray technology to detect chromosomal aberrations in patients with chronic 
myeloid leukemia (CML) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML), as well as in leukemic
cell lines.
METHODS: Reverse transcription using a random 9-mer primer was performed with
total RNA from patients and leukemic cells lines. Multiplex PCR reactions using
four groups of primer sets were then performed for amplification of cDNA from
reverse-transcribed total RNA samples. Normal and fusion sequences were
distinguished by hybridization of the amplified cDNA to a selective
oligonucleotide array (SOA) containing 20-30mer synthetic probes. A total of 23
sets of oligomers were fabricated on glass slides for the detection of normal and
fusion genes, as follows: BCR/ABL, AML/EAP, AML/ETO, AML/MDS, PML/RARA,
NUMA1/RARA, PLZF/RARA, and CBFB/MYH.
RESULTS: Gene translocation in leukemia was effectively identified with the SOA
containing various leukemia-specific fusion and normal control sequences.
Leukemic fusion sequences from patients and cell lines hybridized specifically to
their complementary probes. The probe sets differing by approximately 50% at
their 5' or 3' ends could distinguish between normal and fusion sequences. The
entire process of detection was completed within 8 hours using the SOA method.
CONCLUSIONS: Probe sets on SOA can effectively discriminate between
leukemia-specific fusion and normal sequences with a chip hybridization
procedure. The oligonucleotide array presents several advantages in identifying
leukemic gene translocations, such as multiplex screening, relatively low cost,
and speed.

PMID: 17286448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Feb;173(1):71-4.

A new cytogenetic abnormality, t(2;7)(q33;q36), in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Owatari S(1), Uozumi K, Haraguchi K, Ohno N, Tokunaga M, Tokunaga M, Suzuki S,
Hanada S, Arima N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology & Immunology, Kagoshima University, Sakuragaoka
8-35-1, Kagoshima 890-8520, Japan. owatari@kagomc2.hosp.go.jp

We report the case of a patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) carrying 
a novel chromosomal abnormality, t(2;7)(q33;q36). The 54-year-old woman was
morphologically diagnosed with APL through bone marrow aspiration. The proportion
of blast cells in bone marrow was 78%, including cells displaying Auer rods and
faggot cells. Chromosomal analysis revealed the karyotype
46,XX,t(2;7)(q33;q36)[17]/46,XX[3]. The t(15;17) was not detected with
conventional cytogenetic analysis. However, reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction revealed the presence of a PML/RARA fusion gene. Cells displaying 
t(2;7)(q33;q36) disappeared after complete remission was achieved, using
induction chemotherapy. Although several additional chromosomal abnormalities
have been reported, this t(2;7)(q33;q36) without the classic t(15;17) represents 
a novel chromosomal abnormality associated with APL.

PMID: 17284374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Appl Genet. 2007;48(1):89-91.

Few associations of candidate genes with nonsyndromic orofacial clefts in the
population of Lithuania.

Morkuniené A(1), Steponaviciut D, Utkus A, Kucinskas V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius
University, Vilnius, Lithuania.

Nonsyndromic orofacial clefting (NS-OFC) is a common complex multifactorial trait
with a considerable genetic component and a number of candidate genes suggested
by various approaches. Twenty biallelic and microsatellite DNA markers in the
strong candidate loci TGFA, TGFB3, GABRB3, RARA, and BCL3 were analysed for
allelic association with the NS-OFC phenotype in 112 nuclear families (proband + 
both parents) from Lithuania by using the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT).
Associations were found between the TGFA gene marker rs2166975 and nonsyndromic
cleft palate only (CPO) phenotype (p = 0.045, df 1) as well as between the D2S292
marker and the cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL/CP) phenotype in
allele-wise TDT (P = 0.005, df 9) and genotype-wise TDT (P = 0.021, df 24). A
weak association (P = 0.085, df 3) of the BCL3 marker (BCL3 gene) with the risk
of CPO was also found. Thus our initial results support the contribution of
allelic variation in the TGFA locus to the aetiology of CL/CP in the population
of Lithuania but they do not point to TGFA as a major causal gene. Different
roles of the TGFA and BCL3 genes in the susceptibility to NS-OFC phenotypes are
suggested.

PMID: 17272867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Folia Parasitol (Praha). 2006 Dec;53(4):297-301.

Taxonomic status of Ascocotyle (Phagicola) rara Arruda, Muniz-Pereira et Pinto,
2002 (Digenea: Heterophyidae).

Scholz T(1), Muniz-Pereira LC, Santos CP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Academy of Sciences of the Czech
Republic, Branisovská 31, 370 05 Ceské Budejovice, Czech Republic.
tscholz@paru.cas.cz

Holotype and paratype of Ascocotyle (Phagicola) rara Arruda, Muniz-Pereira et
Pinto, 2002, a heterophyid trematode recently described on the basis of two worms
collected by Lauro Travassos in 1921 in the intestine of Ixobrychus exilis
(Gmelin) from Brazil, were studied. The morphology of the worms revealed their
conspecificity with Ascocotyle (Phagicola) angeloi Travassos, 1928 found in the
same host. Both the taxa have a similar length (between 600 and 900 microm) and
shape of the body (long pyriform), the long intestinal caeca reaching to the
ovarian level, a long posterior muscular prolongation of the oral sucker and the 
prepharynx, transverse uterine loops situated between the ventral sucker and
testes, and the gonotyl with more than 20 digitiform pockets. Consequently, A.
(P.) rara is proposed as a junior synonym of Ascocotyle (Phagicola) angeloi.

PMID: 17252924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(4):e23. Epub 2007 Jan 23.

Dry-reagent disposable dipstick test for visual screening of seven
leukemia-related chromosomal translocations.

Kalogianni DP(1), Bravou V, Christopoulos TK, Ioannou PC, Zoumbos NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, Patras 26500, Greece.

We report the first dry-reagent, disposable, dipstick test for molecular
screening of seven chromosomal translocations associated with acute and chronic
leukemia. The dipstick assay offers about 10 times higher detectability than
agarose gel electrophoresis and, contrary to electrophoresis, allows confirmation
of the sequence of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) product by hybridization
within a few minutes without the need of instrumentation. Biotinylated amplified 
DNA is hybridized with a dA-tailed probe and applied to the strip, which contains
oligo(dT)-conjugated gold nanoparticles in dry form. Upon immersion of the strip 
in the appropriate buffer, the solution migrates and the hybrids are captured by 
immobilized streptavidin at the test zone generating a characteristic red line.
The excess nanoparticles are captured by oligo(dA) strands immobilized at the
control zone of the strip producing a second red line. We studied the:
t(9;22)(q34;q11), t(15;17)(q22;q21), t(11;17)(q23;q21), t(5;17)(q32;q21),
t(11;17)(q13;q21), t(8,21)(q22;q22) and inv(16)(p13;q22) that generate the
BCR-ABL, PML-RARa, PLZF-RARa, NPM-RARa, NuMA-RARa, AML1-ETO and CBFbeta-MYH11
fusion genes, respectively. A single K562 cell was detectable amidst 10(6) normal
leukocytes. A dipstick test was developed for actin, as a reference gene. The
dipstick assay with appropriate probes can be used for identification of the
fusion transcripts involved in the translocation.

PMCID: PMC1851627
PMID: 17251199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mol Med. 2006 Sep-Oct;12(9-10):237-45.

Retinoic acid, GABA-ergic, and TGF-beta signaling systems are involved in human
cleft palate fibroblast phenotype.

Baroni T(1), Bellucci C, Lilli C, Pezzetti F, Carinci F, Becchetti E, Carinci P, 
Stabellini G, Calvitti M, Lumare E, Bodo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical Sciences, University of
Perugia, Italy. tbaroni@unipg.it

During embryogenesis, a complex interplay between extracellular matrix (ECM)
molecules, regulatory molecules, and growth factors mediates morphogenetic
processes involved in palatogenesis. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), 
retinoic acid (RA), and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic signaling systems are
also potentially involved. Using [3H]glucosamine and [35S]methionine
incorporation, anion exchange chromatography, semiquantitative radioactive
RT-PCR, and a TGF-beta binding assay, we aimed to verify the presence of
phenotypic differences between primary cultures of secondary palate (SP)
fibroblasts from 2-year-old subjects with familial nonsyndromic cleft lip and/or 
palate (CLP-SP fibroblasts) and age-matched normal SP (N-SP) fibroblasts. The
effects of RA--which, at pharmacologic doses, induces cleft palate in newborns of
many species--were also studied. We found an altered ECM production in CLP-SP
fibroblasts that synthesized and secreted more glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) and
fibronectin (FN) compared with N-SP cells. In CLP-SP cells, TGF-beta3 mRNA
expression and TGF-beta receptor number were higher and RA receptor-alpha (RARA) 
gene expression was increased. Moreover, we demonstrated for the first time that 
GABA receptor (GABRB3) mRNA expression was upregulated in human CLP-SP
fibroblasts. In N-SP and CLP-SP fibroblasts, RA decreased GAG and FN secretion
and increased TGF-beta3 mRNA expression but reduced the number of TGF-beta
receptors. TGF-beta receptor type I mRNA expression was decreased, TGF-beta
receptor type II was increased, and TGF-beta receptor type III was not affected. 
RA treatment increased RARA gene expression in both cell populations but
upregulated GABRB3 mRNA expression only in N-SP cells. These results show that
CLP-SP fibroblasts compared with N-SP fibroblasts exhibit an abnormal phenotype
in vitro and respond differently to RA treatment, and suggest that altered
crosstalk between RA, GABAergic, and TGF-beta signaling systems could be involved
in human cleft palate fibroblast phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1770008
PMID: 17225872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2007;313:85-100.

The theory of APL revisited.

Scaglioni PP(1), Pandolfi PP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Avenue, NY, New York 10021, USA.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is associated with reciprocal and balanced
chromosomal translocations always involving the retinoic acid receptor alpha
(RARa) gene on chromosome 17 and variable partner genes (X genes) on distinct
chromosomes. RARalpha fuses to the PML gene in the majority of APL cases, and in 
a few cases to the PLZF, NPM, NuMA and STAT5b genes. As a consequence, X-RARalpha
and RARalpha-X fusion genes are generated encoding aberrant chimeric proteins
that exert critical oncogenic functions. Here we will integrate some of the most 
recent findings in APL research in a unified model and discuss some of the
outstanding questions that remain to be addressed.

PMID: 17217040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Am J Hematol. 2007 Jul;82(7):676-8.

Acute Myelogeneous Leukemia (M0/M1) with novel chromosomal abnormality of
t(14;17) (q32; q11.2).

Ahmad F(1), Dalvi R, Mandava S, Das BR.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Cytogenetic Division, SRL Ranbaxy Limited, MIDC, Mumbai, India.

Acute Myelogeneous Leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease with respect to
morphology, immunophenotype, and genetic rearrangements. Multiple recurrent
chromosomal aberrations have been identified by conventional cytogenetic
analysis. In this study, we report a case whose clinical features were suggestive
of AML-M1 subtype with t(14;17) (q32; q11.2) karyotype involving rearrangement of
chromosomal segments 17q11.2 and 14q32. This is the first report of novel
chromosomal translocation in this subset of AML and has not yet been reported
elsewhere. This rearrangement may include certain cancer associated oncogene(s)
or genes involved in the differentiation like retionic acid receptor alpha
(RARA), which may confer differentiation blockage and/or proliferation advantage.

PMID: 17177193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Jan 1;172(1):74-6.

Translocation (10;17)(p15;q21) is a recurrent anomaly in acute myeloblastic
leukemia.

Tempescul A(1), Guillerm G, Douet-Guilbert N, Morel F, Le Bris MJ, De Braekeleer 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Hematology, Institute of Cancerology and Hematology,
CHU Morvan, Avenue Foch, 29609 Brest, France.

We report here two cases of patients with acute myeloblastic leukemia, type M1
(FAB classification), associated with a t(10;17)(p15;q21). Fluorescence in situ
hybridization with the LSI PML/RARA dual-color probe showed the breakpoint to be 
distal to the RARA locus. Four other patients with this translocation have been
reported, three of them having acute undifferentiated or poorly differentiated
leukemia.

PMID: 17175384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Clin Transl Oncol. 2006 Nov;8(11):780-7.

Gene expression regulation and cancer.

Delgado MD(1), León J.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Biología Molecular del Cáncer. Departamento de Biología Molecular.
Unidad de Biomedicina-CSIC. Universidad de Cantabria. Santander. Spain.

Gene expression is mostly controlled at the level of the transcription
initiation. The transcription control regions of protein-encoding genes include: 
the core promoter, where RNA polymerase II binds, the proximal and distal
promoter, responsible for gene expression regulation, and the enhancers and
silencers. Chromatin represents an additional level of regulation of gene
expression. The switching between inactive and active chromatin is closely
related to the activity of histone-modifying enzymes and chromatin-remodelling
complexes. Transcriptional activation of a gene requires the binding of specific 
transcription factors to regulatory DNA elements, the opening of the chromatin,
the binding of Mediator, and the assembly of the preinitiation complex with RNA
polymerase and RNA synthesis initiation. Transcription factors ultimately
transduce the proliferation signals elicited by growth factors. Moreover, many
human oncogenes encode for transcription factors, and some of them are prevalent 
in particular neoplasias (e.g., MYC, MLL, PML-RARa). Also, some of the most
prominent tumor suppressors (e.g. p53) are transcription factors.

PMID: 17134965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. EMBO J. 2006 Dec 13;25(24):5816-25. Epub 2006 Nov 23.

Prepubertal testis development relies on retinoic acid but not rexinoid receptors
in Sertoli cells.

Vernet N(1), Dennefeld C, Guillou F, Chambon P, Ghyselinck NB, Mark M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, INSERM U596, 1
rue Laurent Fries, Illkirch F-67404, France.

Sertoli cells (SC) are instrumental to stem spermatogonia differentiation, a
process that critically depends on retinoic acid (RA). We show here that
selective ablation of RA receptor alpha (RARalpha) gene in mouse SC, singly
(Rara(Ser-/-) mutation) or in combination with RARbeta and RARgamma genes
(Rara/b/g(Ser-/-) mutation), abolishes cyclical gene expression in these cells.
It additionally induces testis degeneration and delays spermatogonial expression 
of Stra8, two hallmarks of RA deficiency. As identical defects are generated upon
inactivation of RARalpha in the whole organism, our data demonstrate that all the
functions exerted by RARalpha in male reproduction are Sertoli cell-autonomous.
They further indicate that RARalpha is a master regulator of the cyclical
activity of SC and controls paracrine pathways required for spermatogonia
differentiation and germ cell survival. Most importantly, we show that the
ablation of all RXR (alpha, beta and gamma isotypes) in SC does not recapitulate 
the phenotype generated upon ablation of all three RARs, thereby providing the
first evidence that RARs exert functions in vivo independently of RXRs.

PMCID: PMC1698894
PMID: 17124491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Zh Obshch Biol. 2006 Sep-Oct;67(5):376-84.

[Spring macrobenthos communities of the Moscow province].

[Article in Russian]

Chertoprud MV.

Macrozoobenthos communities are described based on material from 70 springs and
spring brooks of the Moscow province. The communities include 587 taxa of various
origin: 27 rheophiles, 11 crenobionts, 10 ubiquists of small water bodies, and 3 
limnophiles. Rheophile species predominate in diversity (52%) and total abundance
(41.5%). Crenobionts include Beraea pullata, B. maura, Crunoecia irrorata,
Apatania zonella, Parachiona picicornis, Potamophylax nigrocornis, Oxycera
pseudoamoena, O. rara, O. pardalina, Pedicia rivosa, Thaumalea testacea; six of
these are recorded in the region for the first time. Four types of spring
communities are recognised in the region according to the Braun-Blanquet method: 
with predominant Rhyacophilafasciata and Baetis rhodani (macrorheocrenes),
Potamophylax nigroicornis (microrheocrenes), Nemurella pictetii (limnocrenes),
and Parachiona picicornis (helocrenes). Three of them are confined to water
bodies of different size and flow velocity; one (N. pictetii) is linked to weakly
flowing silted wated bodies. Change of spring communities is often observed also 
downstream due to the distance from the opening of the spring. The structure of
rheocrene communities is most similar to that of brooks, that are significantly
larger than the rheocrenes. Limnocrene and helocrene communities have no
counterparts among communities of other types of water bodies. Some of the
specific traits of spring communities fit the island theory and can be explained 
by it. Comparison of the studied communities with those of springs of Sweden and 
England reveals wide variance of the general faunistic composition of the
communities with a rather stable assortmeont of troglobiot species.

PMID: 17100099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Mol Histol. 2006 Nov;37(8-9):353-9. Epub 2006 Nov 3.

Specific expression of annexin A8 in adult murine stratified epithelia.

Runkel F(1), Michels M, Franken S, Franz T.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomisches Institut, Rheinische-Friedrich-Wilhelms Universität Bonn,
Nussallee 10, 53115 Bonn, Germany.

Annexin A8 is a member of the annexin family of calcium-regulated
membrane-binding proteins. In this report, we investigated the expression of
annexin A8 in adult mouse organs. Northern blot analysis of adult mouse organs
showed that a single annexin A8 transcript of 1.9 kb is expressed most strongly
in skin, eye and tongue. In situ hybridisations using annexin A8-specific probes 
revealed that in the stratified epithelia of the tongue and the early postnatal
epidermis, annexin A8 transcription could be detected in basal and suprabasal
layers of these stratified epithelia. Western blot analyses using a murine
ANXA8-specific antiserum showed, that the 36 kD ANXA8 protein was most abundant
in the skin and tongue. The abundance of ANXA8 protein in the skin increased
during postnatal days 1-18 and was immunohistochemically localised in suprabasal 
layers of the epidermis. In the tongue epithelium as well, ANXA8 protein was
found in suprabasal layers. ANXA8 immunoreactivity was also found in suprabasal
layers of the stratified epithelia of the oesophagus and the forestomach, while
it was detected in all layers of the cornea epithelium and in the cornea
endothelium of the eye. We also investigated the expression of retinoic acid
receptor alpha protein (RARA) and ANXA8 in the epidermis immunohistochemically.
While RARA immunoreactivity was exclusively detected in the basal layer, ANXA8
immunoreactivity was restricted to suprabasal layers of the epidermis. Thus,
ANXA8 protein is most abundant in stratified epithelia of the postnatal mouse.
Its location in the suprabasal layers suggests that ANXA8 may be associated with 
the terminal differentiation of epithelial cells in these tissues.

PMID: 17082908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Aug 29;86(32):2256-60.

[Rearrangements of the mixed lineage leukemia gene in acute myeloid leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang LJ(1), Lu XL, He J, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang 110001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the frequency of mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene
rearrangements in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and to determine the
significance thereof.
METHODS: Conventional cytogenetics (CC) and karyotype analysis were conducted on 
the bone marrow cells from 58 patients with acute myelocytic leukemia (AML), 47
adults (aged 15 approximately 67) and 11 children (aged 1 approximately 14).
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using the whole chromosome painting
(WCP) probes of the chromosomes 1, 5, 11, 16, 17, and 21 was performed. A total
of 58 patients were included in this study. Forty-seven of these patients with
AML were adults and the remaining were children. Both conventional cytogenetics
(CC) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) were carried out. FISH
analysis was performed utilizing commercially available DNA probes, including
whole chromosome painting probes, locus specific probes, and specific and dual
color/multiple color translocation fusion probes.
RESULTS: Six out of the 58 patients (10.3%) were found to have MLL gene
rearrangements, either an extra signal of MLL gene or a disruption of MLL gene
due to a translocation or deletion or duplication. Of these six patients with MLL
gene rearrangements, four were adults and two were children. In addition to MLL
gene rearrangements, complex chromosomal changes were also detected in five of
these patients: 47 - 49, XX, der (1) t (1; 17) (p36.1; q23), +4, +10, der (11) t 
(11; 17) (q23; q23), -17, -18, +20, +21?. ish +21 (wcp21+), der (1) t (1; 17)
(wcp17+), der (11) t (11; 17) (wcp11+; wcp17+); 46, XX, del (5) (q13q33), r (11) 
(p15q25), +r (11) (p15q25). ishr (11) (wcp11+, MLL+), +r (11) (wcp11+, MLL+); 46,
XY, del (11) (q23) [2]/46, idem, add (16) (p13.1) [8]/46, XY [10]. ishadd (16)
(wcp16+), rea (11) (wcp11+); 55, XY, + markers, ish 11q23 (MLL x 3), +21
(wcp21+); and 46, XY, add (11) (q23) [6]/46, idem, t (15; 17) (q22; q21) [12]/46,
XY [2]. ish dup (11) (MLL++), t (15; 17) (PML+, RARa+; RARa-) [24].
CONCLUSION: MLL gene rearrangement is relatively common in AML patients. Because 
MLL gene arrangements due to translocation or other structural changes are
associated with poor response to chemotherapy and poor prognosis, routine testing
for this gene rearrangement should be provided to all newly diagnosed patients
with AML.

PMID: 17064570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Am J Clin Pathol. 2006 Nov;126(5):709-16.

Evaluation of Her-2/neu status in carcinomas with amplified chromosome 17
centromere locus.

Troxell ML(1), Bangs CD, Lawce HJ, Galperin IB, Baiyee D, West RB, Olson SB,
Cherry AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR
97239, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Clin Pathol. 2006 Nov;126(5):673-4.

Accurate assessment of Her-2/neu (erb-b2) status in breast carcinoma is essential
for therapy planning. Clinical assays are targeted at protein overexpression
(immunohistochemical analysis) or gene amplification (fluorescence in situ
hybridization [FISH]). Cases with aberrant FISH signal patterns are problematic
and may lead to underreporting of Her-2/neu amplification. We performed FISH with
additional chromosome 17 probes, SMS (Smith-Magenis syndrome critical region) and
RARA (retinoic acid receptor), on 7 cases with unusual Her-2/CEP17 (chromosome 17
centromere control probe) results to assess whether different measurements of
chromosome 17 copy number might clarify the Her-2/neu amplicon status. Although
the Her-2/CEP17 ratio scores were within normal range (<2.0), the Her-2/SMS or
Her-2/RARA ratio revealed amplification of Her-2/neu in 5 of 7 cases.
Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated Her-2/neu protein overexpression in the
same 5 cases only. We describe novel application of SMS/RARA FISH probes for
assessing cases with complex Her-2/CEP17 FISH patterns. Such additional data,
correlated with immunohistochemical analysis, may help guide therapy in patients 
with breast carcinoma.

PMID: 17050068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Leukemia. 2006 Dec;20(12):2193-5. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

Do RARA/PML fusion gene deletions confer resistance to ATRA-based therapy in
patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia?

Subramaniyam S, Nandula SV, Nichols G, Weiner M, Satwani P, Alobeid B, Bhagat G, 
Murty VV.

PMID: 17008891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cancer Sci. 2006 Oct;97(10):963-9.

Nucleophosmin: a versatile molecule associated with hematological malignancies.

Naoe T(1), Suzuki T, Kiyoi H, Urano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. tnaoe@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Nucleophosmin (NPM) is a nucleolar phosphoprotein that plays multiple roles in
ribosome assembly and transport, cytoplasmic-nuclear trafficking, centrosome
duplication and regulation of p53. In hematological malignancies, the NPM1 gene
is frequently involved in chromosomal translocation, mutation and deletion. The
NPM1 gene on 5q35 is translocated with the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene 
in anaplastic large cell lymphoma with t(2;5). The MLF1 and RARA genes are fused 
with NPM1 in myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with
t(3;5) and acute promyelocytic leukemia with t(5;17), respectively. In each fused
protein, the N-terminal NPM portion is associated with oligomerization of a
partner protein leading to altered signal transduction or transcription.
Recently, mutations of exon 12 have been found in a significant proportion of de 
novo AML, especially in those with a normal karyotype. Mutant NPM is localized
aberrantly in the cytoplasm, but the molecular mechanisms for leukemia remain to 
be studied. Studies of knock-out mice have revealed new aspects regarding NPM1 as
a tumor-suppressor gene. This review focuses on the clinical significance of the 
NPM1 gene in hematological malignancies and newly discovered roles of NPM
associated with oncogenesis.

PMID: 16984370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Ter Arkh. 2006;78(7):25-31.

[Monitoring of minimal residual disease in patients with acute promyelocytic
leukemia].

[Article in Russian]

Shuravina EN, Parovichnikova EN, Demidova IA, Misiurin AV, Isaev VG, Ol'shanskaia
IuV, Savchenko VG.

AIM: To study efficacy of different programs of maintenance therapy, to create
the program of differential therapy of minimal residual disease (MRD) and
molecular recurrences at all stages of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) basing 
on the results of monitoring.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 76 APL patients entered the trial. They received
therapy by the protocols APL-97/98, APL-01, AIDA, 5D. Expression of chymeric
oncogen PML/RARa in the disease onset was estimated by bone marrow and/or
peripheral blood examination with RT-PCR. The study of chymeric oncogen PML/RARa 
was made once in two months.
RESULTS: The program of differential therapy of APL is proposed on the basis of
molecular-biological monitoring of expression of chymeric oncogen PML/RARa. The
results of molecular monitoring of MRD correlated with development of molecular
and hematological recurrences. Therapeutic policy is determined after diagnosis
of molecular recurrence. Further therapy of APL is determined which allows a rise
in overall and recurrence-free survival of the patients.
CONCLUSION: The efficacy of maintenance therapy only with cytostatic drugs or
their combination with ATRA is similar. The response to biological therapy with
ATRA plus interferon-alpha is not sufficient. Molecular recurrences--probable or 
documented--are detected in maintenance therapy 2 months earlier, on the average,
than hematological ones. Changes in the treatment policy in registration of
molecular recurrence significantly diminish probability of hematological
recurrence (from 36 to 0%, p = 0.001.

PMID: 16944747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2006 Nov;45(11):1041-9.

Molecular dissection of t(11;17) in acute myeloid leukemia reveals a variety of
gene fusions with heterogeneous fusion transcripts and multiple splice variants.

Strehl S(1), König M, Meyer C, Schneider B, Harbott J, Jäger U, von Bergh AR,
Loncarevic IF, Jarosova M, Schmidt HH, Moore SD, Marschalek R, Haas OA.

Author information: 
(1)CCRI, Children's Cancer Research Institute, Kinderspitalgasse 6, Vienna,
Austria. sabine.strehl@ccri.at

The majority of translocations that involve the long arms of chromosomes 11 and
17 in acute myeloid leukemia appear identical on the cytogenetic level.
Nevertheless, they are diverse on the molecular level. At present, two genes are 
known in 11q23 and four in 17q12-25 that generate five distinct fusion genes:
MLL-MLLT6/AF17, MLL-LASP1, MLL-ACACA or MLL-SEPT9/MSF, and ZBTB16/PLZF-RARA. We
analyzed 14 cases with a t(11;17) by fluorescence in situ hybridization and
molecular genetic techniques and determined the molecular characteristics of
their fusion genes. We identified six different gene fusions that comprised seven
cases with a MLL-MLLT6/AF17, three with a MLL-SEPT9/MSF, and one each with
MLL-LASP1, MLL-ACACA, and ZBTB16/PLZF-RARA fusions. In the remaining case, a
MLL-SEPT6/Xq24 fusion suggested a complex rearrangement. The MLL-MLLT6/AF17
transcripts were extremely heterogeneous and the detection of seven different
in-frame transcript and splice variants enabled us to predict the protein domains
relevant for leukemogenesis. The putative MLL-MLLT6 consensus chimeric protein
consists of the AT-hook DNA-binding, the methyltransferase, and the CXXC
zinc-finger domains of MLL and the highly conserved octapeptide and the
leucine-zipper dimerization motifs of MLLT6. The MLL-SEPT9 transcripts showed a
similar high degree of variability. These analyses prove that the diverse types
of t(11;17)-associated fusion genes can be reliably identified and delineated
with a proper combination of cytogenetic and molecular genetic techniques. The
heterogeneity of transcripts encountered in cases with MLL-MLLT6/AF17 and
MLL-SEPT9/MSF fusions clearly demonstrates that thorough attention has to be paid
to the appropriate selection of primers to cover all these hitherto unrecognized 
fusion variants.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16897742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. DNA Repair (Amst). 2006 Sep 8;5(9-10):1282-97. Epub 2006 Aug 7.

Chromatin structural elements and chromosomal translocations in leukemia.

Zhang Y(1), Rowley JD.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
5841 S. Maryland Ave., Chicago, IL, USA.

Recurring chromosome abnormalities are strongly associated with certain subtypes 
of leukemia, lymphoma and sarcomas. More recently, their potential involvement in
carcinomas, i.e. prostate cancer, has been recognized. They are among the most
important factors in determining disease prognosis, and in many cases,
identification of these chromosome abnormalities is crucial in selecting
appropriate treatment protocols. Chromosome translocations are frequently
observed in both de novo and therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). The mechanisms that result in such chromosome
translocations in leukemia and other cancers are largely unknown. Genomic
breakpoints in all the common chromosome translocations in leukemia, including
t(4;11), t(9;11), t(8;21), inv(16), t(15;17), t(12;21), t(1;19) and t(9;22), have
been cloned. Genomic breakpoints tend to cluster in certain intronic regions of
the relevant genes including MLL, AF4, AF9, AML1, ETO, CBFB, MYHI1, PML, RARA,
TEL, E2A, PBX1, BCR and ABL. However, whereas the genomic breakpoints in MLL tend
to cluster in the 5' portion of the 8.3 kb breakpoint cluster region (BCR) in de 
novo and adult patients and in the 3' portion in infant leukemia patients and
t-AML patients, those in both the AML1 and ETO genes occur in the same clustered 
regions in both de novo and t-AML patients. These differences may reflect
differences in the mechanisms involved in the formation of the translocations.
Specific chromatin structural elements, such as in vivo topoisomerase II (topo
II) cleavage sites, DNase I hypersensitive sites and scaffold attachment regions 
(SARs) have been mapped in the breakpoint regions of the relevant genes. Strong
in vivo topo II cleavage sites and DNase I hypersensitive sites often co-localize
with each other and also with many of the BCRs in most of these genes, whereas
SARs are associated with BCRs in MLL, AF4, AF9, AML1, ETO and ABL, but not in the
BCR gene. In addition, the BCRs in MLL, AML1 and ETO have the lowest free energy 
level for unwinding double strand DNA. Virtually all chromosome translocations in
leukemia that have been analyzed to date show no consistent homologous sequences 
at the breakpoints, whereas a strong non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) repair
signature exists at all of these chromosome translocation breakpoint junctions;
this includes small deletions and duplications in each breakpoint, and
micro-homologies and non-template insertions at genomic junctions of each
chromosome translocation. Surprisingly, the size of these deletions and
duplications in the same translocation is much larger in de novo leukemia than in
therapy-related leukemia. We propose a non-homologous chromosome recombination
model as one of the mechanisms that results in chromosome translocations in
leukemia. The topo II cleavage sites at open chromatin regions (DNase I
hypersensitive sites), SARs or the regions with low energy level are vulnerable
to certain genotoxic or other agents and become the initial breakage sites, which
are followed by an excision end joining repair process.

PMID: 16893685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Aug;169(1):81-2.

PML/RARA rearrangement associated with a t(15;19;17) in a case of acute myeloid
leukemia with abundant myelocytes with salmon-pink cytoplasm.

Kim IS, Kim HJ, Choung HS, Jung CW, Kim JW, Kim SH.

PMID: 16875944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Blood. 2006 Nov 15;108(10):3484-93. Epub 2006 Jul 20.

Expression of T-lineage-affiliated transcripts and TCR rearrangements in acute
promyelocytic leukemia: implications for the cellular target of t(15;17).

Chapiro E(1), Delabesse E, Asnafi V, Millien C, Davi F, Nugent E, Beldjord K,
Haferlach T, Grimwade D, Macintyre EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Université Paris-Descartes, Faculté de Médecine, and
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) EMI0210,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP) Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris,
France.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is the most differentiated form of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) and has generally been considered to result from
transformation of a committed myeloid progenitor. Paradoxically, APL has long
been known to express the T-cell lymphoid marker, CD2. We searched for other
parameters indicative of T-cell lymphoid specification in a cohort of 36 APL
cases, revealing a frequent but asynchronous T-cell lymphoid program most marked 
in the hypogranular variant (M3v) subtype, with expression of PTCRA, sterile
TCRA, and TCRG transcripts and TCRG rearrangement in association with sporadic
cytoplasmic expression of CD3 or TdT proteins. Gene-expression profiling
identified differentially expressed transcription factors that have been
implicated in lymphopoiesis. These data carry implications for the hematopoietic 
progenitor targeted by the PML-RARA oncoprotein in APL and are suggestive of a
different cellular origin for classic hypergranular (M3) and variant forms of the
disease. They are also consistent with the existence and subsequent
transformation of progenitor populations with lymphoid/myeloid potential.

PMID: 16857994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006 Jul;118(1):250-6.

Predictive value of skin prick tests using recombinant allergens for diagnosis of
peanut allergy.

Astier C(1), Morisset M, Roitel O, Codreanu F, Jacquenet S, Franck P, Ogier V,
Petit N, Proust B, Moneret-Vautrin DA, Burks AW, Bihain B, Sampson HA, Kanny G.

Author information: 
(1)EA3999 Allergic Diseases: Diagnosis and Therapeutics Department of Internal
Medicine, Clinical Immunology and Allergology, University Hospital, Central
Hospital, 15 rue du Bois de la Champelle, 54500 Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, France.

BACKGROUND: Current diagnosis of peanut allergy relies on natural extracts that
lack standardization. Recombinant DNA technology allows production of pure
biochemically characterized proteins. Their usefulness for peanut allergy
diagnosis is not established.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the diagnostic value of the 3 major
recombinant peanut allergens.
METHODS: Recombinant (r) Ara h 1, rAra h 2, and rAra h 3 were produced according 
to the recommendations of good manufacturing practice for recombinant allergens. 
Skin prick tests (SPTs) and IgE ELISA assays were performed in 30 patients with
peanut allergy and 30 control subjects without food allergy: 15 nonatopic and 15 
sensitized to birch pollen. Disease severity was graded by clinical scoring.
RESULTS: All patients with peanut allergy showed positive SPT results to rAra h
2; 40% reacted with rAra h 1 and 27% with rAra h 3. No control subjects reacted
with any of the recombinant allergens. Monosensitization to rAra h 2 was observed
in 53% of patients. Neither SPT size nor levels of specific IgE were correlated
with the disease severity. However, patients with monosensitization to rAra h 2
had a significantly lower severity score than polysensitized subjects and a lower
level of specific IgE against peanut extract and rAra h 2.
CONCLUSION: Skin prick tests to individual recombinant peanut allergens appear to
be a safe and effective diagnostic tool. Cosensitization to rAra h 2 and rArah 1 
and/or rAra h 3 is predictive of more severe reactions.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Recombinant peanut allergens can be used by SPTs for
diagnosis and evaluation of allergy severity.

PMID: 16815163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Leuk Res. 2007 Feb;31(2):239-43. Epub 2006 Jun 21.

Identification of PML-RARA rearrangement by RT-PCR and sequencing in an acute
promyelocytic leukemia without t(15;17) on G-banding and FISH.

Han JY(1), Kim KE, Kim KH, Park JI, Kim JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Dong-A University College of Medicine,
Busan, Republic of Korea. jyhan@dau.ac.kr

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by a reciprocal
translocation, t(15;17) (q22;q12), resulting in fusion of the genes promyelocytic
leukemia (PML) and retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA). With conventional
cytogenetic methods, these translocations are detected in about 70-90% of
patients, with most of the negative results due to technical problems or cryptic 
variants. Those masked PML-RARA fusions can be identified by molecular analyses
such as reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH). We have studied a patient showing morphological,
cytochemical, and immunophenotypic features of hypergranular APL with trisomy 8
as a sole anomaly. t(15;17) was not evident on FISH tests, while RT-PCR and cDNA 
sequencing revealed the presence of PML-RARA transcripts.

PMID: 16797070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Jul 1;168(1):73-6.

A t(17;20)(q21;q12) masking a variant t(15;17)(q22;q21) in a patient with acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

García-Casado Z(1), Cervera J, Valencia A, Pajuelo JC, Mena-Duran AV, Barragán E,
Bolufer P, Sanz MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Hospital Universitario La Fe, Avenida Campanar, 21, 
46009 Valencia, Spain.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is genetically characterized by a reciprocal
translocation between chromosomes 15 and 17, the t(15;17)(q22;q21), which results
in the fusion gene PML/RARA. A small proportion of patients with APL have complex
or simple variants of this translocation. We report the case of a 31-year-old
woman with APL (FAB-M3 classical form) carrying an apparently balanced
translocation t(17;20)(q21;q12) masking a t(15;17)(q22;q21) confirmed by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and molecular studies. The patient was 
treated with an all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) plus anthracycline-based protocol 
and achieved complete remission, with no recurrence to date. These results
illustrate the usefulness of combining cytogenetics, FISH, and reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) methods to evidence the PML/RARA
fusion gene in cases with morphologic suspicion of APL with variant or cryptic
t(15;17).

PMID: 16772124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jun 13;103(24):9238-43. Epub 2006 Jun 6.

Dimerization-induced corepressor binding and relaxed DNA-binding specificity are 
critical for PML/RARA-induced immortalization.

Zhou J(1), Pérès L, Honoré N, Nasr R, Zhu J, de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 7151,
Université de Paris 7, Equipe labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer,
Hôpital St. Louis, 1 Avenue C. Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France.

The pathogenesis of acute promyelocytic leukemia involves the transcriptional
repression of master genes of myeloid differentiation by the promyelocytic
leukemia-retinoic acid receptor alpha (PML/RARA) oncogene. PML-enforced RARA
homodimerization allows the tighter binding of corepressors, silencing RARA
target genes. In addition, homodimerization dramatically extends the spectrum of 
DNA-binding sites of the fusion protein compared with those of normal RARA. Yet, 
any contribution of these two properties of PML/RARA to differentiation arrest
and immortalization of primary mouse hematopoietic progenitors was unknown. We
demonstrate that dimerization-induced silencing mediator of retinoid and thyroid 
receptors (SMRT)-enhanced binding and relaxed DNA-binding site specificity are
both required for efficient immortalization. Thus, enforced RARA dimerization is 
critical not only for triggering transcriptional repression but also for
extending the repertoire of target genes. Our studies exemplify how
dimerization-induced gain of functions converts an unessential transcription
factor into a dominant oncogenic protein.

PMCID: PMC1474145
PMID: 16757557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Jun;167(2):168-71.

A complex, four-way variant t(15;17) in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Yoo SJ(1), Seo EJ, Lee JH, Seo YH, Park PW, Ahn JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Sanggye Paik Hospital, Sanggye 7 dong
761-7, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Complex variant 15;17 translocations are increasingly recognized in acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL). We report the case of a 47-year-old woman with APL 
harboring a novel four-way translocation. She presented with persistent bleeding 
after a tooth extraction. Blood cell counts at admission were hemoglobin at 9.0
g/dL, platelets at 15 x 10(9)/L, and white blood cells at 0.460 x 10(9)/L with
abnormal promyelocytes. Most nucleated cells of bone marrow aspirates were
abnormal promyelocytes with Auer rods. Chromosome analysis of unstimulated bone
marrow cell cultures revealed a variant t(15;17) in the form of
t(10;17;15;22)(q22;q21;q22;q11.2). Fluorescence in situ hybridization with a
PML/RARA dual-color DNA probe showed the fusion signals on der(15) and the
residual PML signals on der(22). RT-PCR showed long-form PML/RARA fusion
transcripts. A complete remission was attained with a course of conventional
chemotherapy including ATRA. A literature review revealed that our case is one of
the very rare four-way translocations and the first report of the involvement of 
chromosomes 10 and 22 in a variant t(15;17).

PMID: 16737919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Neurosci Lett. 2006 Jul 24;402(3):233-7. Epub 2006 May 11.

Anatomical changes in selected cardio-respiratory brainstem nuclei following
early post-natal chronic intermittent hypoxia.

Reeves SR(1), Guo SZ, Brittian KR, Row BW, Gozal D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kosair Children's Hospital Research Institute,
University of Louisville School of Medicine, KY 40202, USA.

Early post-natal environmental exposures, including chronic intermittent hypoxia 
(CIH), may lead to long-term alterations in cardio-respiratory control, such as
reductions in baroreflex sensitivity and acute hypoxic ventilatory responses in
adult rats. Although the mechanisms underlying CIH-induced functional
metaplasticity are unclear, anatomical alterations within selected brainstem
nuclei may develop after CIH. To examine this issue, male rats were exposed to
CIH (RAIH) or room air (RARA) for the first 30 days of life and were
microinjected unilaterally in the right nodose ganglion with the neuronal tracer 
tetramethylrhodamine-dextran (TMR-D) to label brainstem neurons receiving vagal
and glossopharyngeal projections. Substantial reductions in labeled afferents
within the nucleus tractus solitarii (nTS) and significant increases in the total
number of labeled neurons within the ventrolateral medulla (VLM), principally in 
the nucleus ambiguus (Namb; p<0.01) occurred in RAIH. Furthermore,
5-bromo-2'deoxyuridine labeling revealed enhanced neurogenesis within the Namb in
RAIH and could partially account for the increased neuronal population in Namb.
Thus, CIH-associated cardio-respiratory metaplasticity is accompanied by
substantial structural changes within both the nTS and Namb.

PMID: 16697524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Vet Med Sci. 2006 Apr;68(4):311-8.

Gastrointestinal helminths of feral raccoons (Procyon lotor) in Wakayama
Prefecture, Japan.

Sato H(1), Suzuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology, Faculty of Agriculture, Yamaguchi
University, Japan.

The population and distribution of feral raccoons (Procyon lotor) are expanding
in Japan after escape or release from animal-owners. Wakayama Prefecture is one
of the most typically devastated areas by this exotic carnivore, particularly in 
the last five years after a latent distribution for more than ten years. Official
control measures of feral raccoons commenced in the summer of 2002 by several
municipalities, and 531 animals collected in 12 municipalities between May 2003
and April 2005 were submitted for parasitological examination of gastrointestinal
helminths. Detected parasites included six nematodes (Physaloptera sp.
[prevalence; 5.1%], Contracaecum spiculigerum [0.9%], Strongyloides procyonis
[25.5%], Ancylostoma kusimaense [0.8%], Arthrostoma miyazakiense [0.4%], and
Molineus legerae [1.1%]), seven trematodes (Isthmiophora hortensis [4.9%],
echinostomatid sp. with 34-39 collar spines [1.7%], Metagonimus takahashii
[12.4%], M. yokogawai [0.8%], Plagiorchis muris [0.2%], Macroorchis spinulosus
[1.9%], and Consinium ten [0.2%]), one cestode (Mesocestoides sp. [0.2%]), and
six acanthocephalan spp. (Centrorhynchus bazalenticus [0.2%], Centrorhynchus
teres [5.5%], Sphaerirostris lanceoides [2.4%], Plagiorhynchus ogatai [0.6%],
Porrorchis oti [1.5%], and Southwelina hispida [1.9%]). Most of the collected
parasites are food-borne, indigenous helminth species. Physaloptera sp. has never
been recorded in indigenous wild carnivores in Japan, and resembles closely P.
rara, prevalent in raccoons of North America, in morphology. The position of a
pair of phasmids in the posteroventral region of the adult male, however, could
differentiate it from P. rara. Since Strongyloides procyonis is known to cause
creeping eruption as well as intestinal infection in a healthy human volunteer,
we should be concerned about the rapid increase in the population and
distribution of feral raccoons in Japan from the viewpoint of public health as
well.

PMID: 16679720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Mol Diagn. 2006 May;8(2):254-9.

Denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography: a valid approach for
identifying NPM1 mutations in acute myeloid leukemia.

Roti G(1), Rosati R, Bonasso R, Gorello P, Diverio D, Martelli MF, Falini B,
Mecucci C; Gruppo Italiano Malattie Ematologiche dell' Adulto Working Party.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, University of Perugia,
Italy.

NPM1 gene mutations are the most frequent genetic lesion in the 60% of adult
acute myeloid leukemias (AMLs) with normal karyotype and no evidence of typical
fusion genes (BCR/ABL1, PML/RARA, AML1/ETO, CBFB/MYH11, DEK/CAN). Using direct
sequencing we previously identified six different heterozygous mutants within
exon 12 encoding the nucleophosmin C-terminus. Because of these mutations the
shuttling protein nucleophosmin is aberrantly delocalized in the cytoplasm of
leukemic cells (NPMc+). Here, we designed and tested a denaturing
high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) assay to detect NPM1 mutated
variants. To assess specificity, sensitivity, reliability, and reproducibility,
we analyzed DNA from 120 primary adult AMLs and compared DHPLC results with
immunohistochemistry and sequencing. All electropherogram profiles in the 26
NPMc+ leukemias were different from the wild type, indicating 100% sensitivity.
Sequencing categorized mutations A, B, and D, and all mutation A cases gave
identical elution profiles. The other mutations showed typical chromatograms,
with mutations B and D differing for one nucleotide. Elution profiles and
sequencing also identified four new variants. Our results suggest that DHPLC
detects NPM1mutations as well as direct sequencing and immunohistochemistry,
providing a helpful approach in the diagnosis of NPMc+ AML.

PMCID: PMC1867590
PMID: 16645213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Apr;14(2):228-31.

[Detection of fusion genes associated with specific translocations in acute
leukemia patients with normal karyotypes by using multiplex RT-PCR].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma L(1), Xue YQ, Pan JL, He J, Wu YF, Cen JN, Wen BZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi 830054, China.

This study was aimed to explore the usefulness of multiplex reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (multiplex RT-PCR) in detection of fusion
genes associated with specific translocations in acute leukemia (AL) patients
with normal karyotypes. 37 AL patients with normal karyotypes were analyzed by
multiplex RT-PCR. The results showed that 4 types of fusion genes such as
PML/RARA, AML1/ETO, CBFbeta/MYH11, BCR/ABL were detected in 8 (21.6%) patients by
multiplex RT-PCR. In conclusion, multiplex RT-PCR is useful in detection of
fusion genes associated with specific translocations in acute leukemia (AL) with 
normal karyotypes and it would refine the karyotype analysis. When the normal
karyotypes were detected in acute leukemia patients by conventional cytogenetic
method, the multiplex RT-PCR should be performed for them.

PMID: 16638186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Apr 15;166(2):139-45.

Deletion of MYC and presence of double minutes with MYC amplification in a
morphologic acute promyelocytic leukemia-like case lacking RARA rearrangement:
could early exclusion of double-minute chromosomes be a prognostic factor?

Frater JL(1), Hoover RG, Bernreuter K, Batanian JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, Health
Sciences Center, MO 63104-1095, USA.

Gene amplification on double minutes is rarely found in acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) and is often linked to poor prognosis. It is often associated with acute
myeloid leukemia with differentiation (AML-M2) and is rarely reported in acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL), which is characterized in the vast majority of
cases by the reciprocal t(15;17)(q22;q21) with resultant translation of an
abnormal PML-RARA fusion protein. Most of the rare cases of APL that lack this
translocation have a demonstrable RARA breakpoint. We report on a morphologic
APL-like case lacking t(15;17) and the RARA breakpoint and also has the deletion 
MYC of 8q24 associated with the occurrence of MYC amplification on double-minute 
chromosomes (dmin). Excessive exclusion of dmin was observed at the initial
diagnosis. These findings are compared to the few cases previously reported in
the literature.

PMID: 16631470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Immunol. 2007 Jan;44(4):463-71. Epub 2006 Mar 31.

IgE cross-reactivity between the major peanut allergen Ara h 2 and tree nut
allergens.

de Leon MP(1), Drew AC, Glaspole IN, Suphioglu C, O'Hehir RE, Rolland JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy, Immunology and Respiratory Medicine, The Alfred
Hospital and Monash University, Commercial Road, Melbourne, Vic. 3004, Australia.

Allergy to peanut and tree nuts is characterised by a high frequency of
life-threatening anaphylactic reactions and typically lifelong persistence.
Although peanut is the most common cause of nut allergy, peanut allergic patients
are frequently also sensitive to tree nuts. It is not known if this is due to
cross-reactivity between peanut and tree nut allergens. In this study, the major 
peanut allergen Ara h 2 was cloned from peanut cDNA, expressed in E. coli cells
as a His-tag fusion protein and purified using a Ni-NTA column. Immunoblotting,
ELISA and basophil activation indicated by CD63 expression all confirmed the IgE 
reactivity and biological activity of rAra h 2. To determine whether or not this 
allergen plays a role in IgE cross-reactivity between peanut and tree nuts,
inhibition ELISA was performed. Pre-incubation of serum from peanut allergic
patients with increasing concentrations of almond or Brazil nut extract inhibited
IgE binding to rAra h 2. Purified rAra h 2-specific serum IgE antibodies also
bound to proteins present in almond and Brazil nut extracts by immunoblotting.
This indicates that the major peanut allergen, Ara h 2, shares common IgE-binding
epitopes with almond and Brazil nut allergens, which may contribute to the high
incidence of tree nut sensitisation in peanut allergic individuals.

PMID: 16580071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Methods Mol Med. 2006;125:115-26.

Diagnosis and monitoring of PML-RARA-positive acute promyelocytic leukemia by
qualitative RT-PCR.

Rossi V(1), Levati L, Biondi A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Ricerca M. Tettamanti, Clinica Pediatrica Università di Milano Bicocca,
Monza, Italy.

The t(15;17) is the diagnostic hallmark of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). As
a result, the RARA and the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) genes are fused. The use 
of reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for the detection of 
the PML-RARA and RARA-PML fusion genes is the only technique that defines the PML
breakpoint type and that allows the definition of a correct strategy for
subsequent minimal residual disease (MRD) monitoring. Standardized conditions for
RT-PCR analysis of fusion transcripts from chromosome aberrations in acute
leukemia, including APL, have recently been reported in the context of the
Biomed-1 Concerted Action, and are described in detail in this chapter.

PMID: 16502581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cancer Cell. 2006 Feb;9(2):81-94.

Forced retinoic acid receptor alpha homodimers prime mice for APL-like leukemia.

Sternsdorf T(1), Phan VT, Maunakea ML, Ocampo CB, Sohal J, Silletto A, Galimi F, 
Le Beau MM, Evans RM, Kogan SC.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2006 Feb;9(2):73-4.

RARA becomes an acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) oncogene by fusion with any of
five translocation partners. Unlike RARalpha, the fusion proteins homodimerize,
which may be central to oncogenic activation. This model was tested by replacing 
PML with dimerization domains from p50NFkappaB (p50-RARalpha) or the
rapamycin-sensitive dimerizing peptide of FKBP12 (F3-RARalpha). The X-RARalpha
fusions recapitulated in vitro activities of PML-RARalpha. For F3-RARalpha, these
properties were rapamycin sensitive. Although in vivo the artificial fusions
alone are poor initiators of leukemia, p50-RARalpha readily cooperates with an
activated mutant CDw131 to induce APL-like disease. These results demonstrate
that the dimerization interface of RARalpha fusion partners is a critical element
in APL pathogenesis while pointing to other features of PML for enhancing
penetrance and progression.

PMID: 16473276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2006 Jun;290(6):R1664-71. Epub 2006 Feb
2.

Early postnatal chronic intermittent hypoxia modifies hypoxic respiratory
responses and long-term phrenic facilitation in adult rats.

Reeves SR(1), Mitchell GS, Gozal D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kosair Children's Hospital Research Institute,
University of Louisville School of Medicine, Suite 204, 570 South Preston St.,
Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

Acute isocapnic intermittent hypoxia elicits time-dependent, serotonin-dependent 
enhancement of phrenic motor output in anesthetized rats (phrenic long-term
facilitation, pLTF). In adult rats, pLTF is enhanced by chronic intermittent
hypoxia (CIH). To test the hypothesis that early postnatal CIH induces persistent
modifications of ventilation and pLTF, we exposed male Sprague-Dawley rat pups on
their first day of life to a CIH profile consisting of alternating room air and
10% oxygen every 90 s for 30 days during daylight hours (RAIH) or to comparable
exposures consisting of room air throughout (RARA). One month after cessation of 
CIH, respiratory responses were recorded using whole body plethysmography, and
integrated phrenic nerve activity was recorded in urethane-anesthetized,
vagotomized, paralyzed, and ventilated rats at baseline and after exposures to
three 5-min hypoxic episodes [inspired O2 fraction (FiO2)=0.11] separated by 5
min of hyperoxia (FiO2=0.5). RAIH rats displayed greater normoxic ventilation and
also increased burst frequency compared with RARA rats (P<0.01). Ventilatory
responses to hypoxia and short-term phrenic responses during acute hypoxic
challenges were reduced in RAIH rats (P<0.01). Although pLTF was present in both 
RAIH and RARA rats, it was diminished in RAIH rats (minute activity: 74+/-2% in
RARA vs. 55+/-5% in RAIH at 60 min; P<0.01). Thus we conclude that early
postnatal CIH modifies normoxic and hypoxic ventilatory and phrenic responses
that persist at 1 mo after cessation of CIH (i.e., metaplasticity) and markedly
differ from previously reported increased neural plasticity changes induced by
CIH in adult rats.

PMID: 16455761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Jun;6(5):546-55. Epub 2006 Feb 7.

Characterization of the retinoic acid receptor genes raraa, rarab and rarg during
zebrafish development.

Hale LA(1), Tallafuss A, Yan YL, Dudley L, Eisen JS, Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, 1254 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.

Retinoic acid signaling is important for patterning the central nervous system,
paired appendages, digestive tract, and other organs. To begin to investigate
retinoic acid signaling in zebrafish, we determined orthologies between zebrafish
and tetrapod retinoic acid receptors (Rars) and examined the expression patterns 
of rar genes during embryonic development. Analysis of phylogenies and conserved 
syntenies showed that the three cloned zebrafish rar genes include raraa and
rarab, which are co-orthologs of tetrapod Rara, and rarg, which is the zebrafish 
ortholog of tetrapod Rarg. We did not, however, find an ortholog of Rarb. RNA in 
situ hybridization experiments showed that rarab and rarg, are maternally
expressed. Zygotic expression of raraa occurs predominantly in the hindbrain,
lateral mesoderm, and tailbud. Zygotic expression of rarab largely overlaps that 
of raraa, except that in later stages rarab is expressed more broadly in the
brain and in the pectoral fin bud and pharyngeal arches. Zygotic expression of
zebrafish rarg also overlaps the other two genes, but it is expressed more
strongly in the posterior hindbrain beginning in late somitogenesis as well as in
neural crest cells in the pharyngeal arches. Thus, these three genes have largely
overlapping expression patterns and a few gene-specific expression domains.
Knowledge of these expression patterns will guide the interpretation of the roles
these genes play in development.

PMID: 16455309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2006 Apr;45(4):420-5.

Genomewide array-based comparative genomic hybridization analysis of acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Karnan S(1), Tsuzuki S, Kiyoi H, Tagawa H, Ueda R, Seto M, Naoe T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is typically associated with the t(15;17) that
generates the PML-RARA fusion protein. Animal models have shown that although the
fusion protein is necessary, it is insufficient for the development of APL,
implying that additional mechanisms are responsible for full-blown leukemia. The 
mutation of specific genes has been implicated in leukemogenesis; however,
alterations in gene copy number have not been well investigated. Here, we applied
the genomewide array-comparative genomic hybridization technique to 30 APL
clinical samples and 2 APL cell lines. It was found that (1) approximately half
the clinical samples (14 of 30 APL cases) had no detectable chromosomal
imbalances; and (2) the remaining 16 cases, including the cell lines, exhibited
recurrent chromosomal imbalances, such as loss of 1p36, 2p11, 16p, and 17p, and
gain of 8p, 8q, and 13q. These results suggest that chromosomal imbalances are
largely absent in APL, although some nonrandom chromosomal imbalances could be
linked to the development of APL in a limited number of cases.

PMID: 16419057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Eur J Haematol. 2006 Feb;76(2):164-6.

A unique case of acute promyelocytic leukemia showing monocytic differentiation
after ATRA (all-trans retinoic acid) therapy.

Naeem M(1), Harrison K, Barton K, Nand S, Alkan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL 60153, 
USA.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (PML) is characterized by a reciprocal translocation
between chromosomes 15 and 17 resulting in a chimeric PML and retinoic acid
receptor alpha (RARA) oncogene. The resultant fusion protein (PML/RARA) is
thought to block differentiation of bone marrow cells arrested at the
promyelocytic stage. In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that the large
majority of APL cells undergo granulocytic maturation after ATRA therapy. We
report a unique case of a PML/RARA positive APL patient exhibiting extensive
monocytic differentiation after ATRA therapy as documented by morphology, flow
cytometry, and FISH studies. We discuss potential dual capability for
granulocytic/monocytic differentiation of PML/RARA positive APL cells and
implications of monocytic differentiation in the management of APL patients
treated with ATRA.

PMID: 16405439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Dec;13(6):924-31.

[hCG-PLZF-RARalpha/hCG-RARalpha-PLZF transgenic mice developing into leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen LJ(1), Dong Y, Chen SY, Zhang L, Zhou GB, Chen B, Wang L, Chen Z, Chen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Ruijin Hospital, The Shanghai Second Medical University, Shanghai 200025, China.

To investigate the potential role and the mechanism of
PLZF-RARalpha/RARalpha-PLZF double fusion gene in the pathogenesis of acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) in vivo at systematic biological level,
PLZF-RARalpha/RARalpha-PLZF double transgenic mouse model was established by
intercross; the integration and expression of fusion genes were analyzed by PCR
and RT-PCR; the disease phenotype was detected by morphological and pathological 
examination of peripheral blood and bone marrow cells, as well as flow cytometry 
assays; the effects of ATRA with or without tricostatin A on bone marrow blast
cells from PLZF-RARalpha/RARalpha-PLZF double TM were observed. The results
showed that leukemia occurred in 5 PLZF-RARalpha/RARalpha-PLZF double TM 7, 7, 9,
11 and 11 months respectively, out of them two (40%) with classic APL features,
the others (60%) with chronic myeloid leukemia through an observation period of
18 months. The leukemia occurrence of PLZF-RARalpha/RARalpha-PLZF TM was about
10%, which was similar to PLZF-RARalpha TM as that reported before. The latency
was over 6 months, not earlier than PLZF-RARalpha TM only. No morphologic changes
of PLZF-RARalpha/RARalpha-PLZF double TM blast cells to ATRA were observed, but
increased cytoplasmic-nuclear ratio and nuclear condensation in bone marrow blast
cells were found in combination of ATRA with tricostatin A. It is concluded that 
PLZF-RARalpha/RARalpha-PLZF double fusion gene transgenic mice have heterogeneity
of pathogenesis. HDAC inhibitors such as trichostatin A, in combination with
ATRA, induce differentiation of the blast/promyelocytic cells from
PLZF-RARa/RARa-PLZF double TM, but not ATRA alone.

PMID: 16403252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Blood. 2006 Apr 15;107(8):3330-8. Epub 2005 Dec 13.

ATRA resolves the differentiation block in t(15;17) acute myeloid leukemia by
restoring PU.1 expression.

Mueller BU(1), Pabst T, Fos J, Petkovic V, Fey MF, Asou N, Buergi U, Tenen DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital, 3010 Bern, Switzerland. 
beatrice.mueller@insel.ch

Tightly regulated expression of the transcription factor PU.1 is crucial for
normal hematopoiesis. PU.1 knockdown mice develop acute myeloid leukemia (AML),
and PU.1 mutations have been observed in some populations of patients with AML.
Here we found that conditional expression of promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid
receptor alpha (PML-RARA), the protein encoded by the t(15;17) translocation
found in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), suppressed PU.1 expression, while
treatment of APL cell lines and primary cells with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA)
restored PU.1 expression and induced neutrophil differentiation. ATRA-induced
activation was mediated by a region in the PU.1 promoter to which CEBPB and OCT-1
binding were induced. Finally, conditional expression of PU.1 in human APL cells 
was sufficient to trigger neutrophil differentiation, whereas reduction of PU.1
by small interfering RNA (siRNA) blocked ATRA-induced neutrophil differentiation.
This is the first report to show that PU.1 is suppressed in acute promyelocytic
leukemia, and that ATRA restores PU.1 expression in cells harboring t(15;17).

PMCID: PMC1895760
PMID: 16352814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Leukemia. 2006 Feb;20(2):376-9.

A novel t(3;17)(p25;q21) variant translocation of acute promyelocytic leukemia
with rearrangement of the RARA locus.

Redner RL, Contis LC, Craig F, Evans C, Sherer ME, Shekhter-Levin S.

PMID: 16341036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Rev Med Chil. 2005 Sep;133(9):1051-8. Epub 2005 Nov 9.

[Possible association due to linkage disequilibrium of TGFA, RARA and BCL3 with
nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate in the Chilean population].

[Article in Spanish]

Suazo J(1), Santos JL, Silva V, Jara L, Palomino H, Blanco R.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Genética Humana, Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de Chile.

BACKGROUND: Nonsyndromic cleft lip/palate (NSCLP) is a congenital malformation
with the characteristics of a complex genetic trait. Based on experimental
evidences as well as on association and linkage studies candidate genes TGFA,
RARA and BCL3 have been postulated as being involved in the genetic etiology of
this pathology.
AIM: To test the possible association due to linkage disequilibrium between
microsatellite markers located at less than 1cM from the three candidate genes
and nonsyndromic cleft lip/palate using the case-parents trio design.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The sample consisted of 58 case-parents trios. Two
microsatellite markers, flanking each one of the candidate genes were analyzed by
means of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with fluorescent labeled
microsatellite markers. Electrophoresis of the PCR products was performed on a
laser-fluorescent automatic DNA sequencer. Nonparametric ETDT was used to analyze
the genotype data.
RESULTS: Significant linkage disequilibrium was detected between D2S443 (TGFA)
and NSCLP. Significance was almost reached between D17S800 (RARA) and NSCLP.
Alleles 239bp (D2S443) and 172bp (D17S800) showed significant preferential
transmission from heterozygous parents to affected offspring. In the case of BCL3
both markers showed no significant results.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present study do not show clear evidence that
TGFA or RARA could be involved in the genetic etiology of NSCLP. Even though the 
importance of retinoic acid in the development of the embryo is well documented
the results obtained for RARA are difficult to analyze. In relation to the
possible role of BCL3 in NSCLP, recent information postulates that other genes
located in the same chromosome region could be involved in NSCLP.

PMID: 16311697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2006 Oct 15;47(5):549-54.

Molecular cytogenetic findings of acute leukemia included in the Brazilian
Collaborative Study Group of Infant acute leukemia.

Emerenciano M(1), Agudelo Arias DP, Coser VM, de Brito GD, Macedo Silva ML,
Pombo-de-Oliveira MS; Brazilian Collaborative Study Group of Infant Acute
Leukemia.

Author information: 
(1)Divisão de Medicina Experimental, Coordenação de Pesquisa, Instituto Nacional 
de Câncer, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Chromosome abnormalities often occur prenatally in childhood
leukemia, characterizing an early event in leukemogenesis. The majority of the
abnormalities occurring in infants involve the MLL gene on chromosome band 11q23.
We describe the molecular cytogenetic findings of 207 infant acute leukemia (IAL)
cases included in the Brazilian Collaborative Study Group of Infant acute
leukemia.
PROCEDURE: The diagnosis of Acute Lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) or acute
myeloblastic leukemia (AML) was made according to morphology and
immunophenotyping classification, followed by conventional karyotyping. Samples
were then screened using RT-PCR for the presence of specific chromosome
translocations. FISH assay for MLL rearrangements was performed only in cases
with negative or inconclusive cytogenetic or PCR results.
RESULTS: The characteristics of children with IAL were as follows: 115 boys and
92 girls, age range 0-23 months, mean age 12 months, 145 ALL, and 62 AML. A
statistically significant association was observed between pro-B ALL cases and
MLL+ve (P=0.0001) cases and the age group 0-3 months with MLL+ve (P=0.008) cases.
Two rare cases of pro-T ALL with MLL+ve were found. Other than MLL
rearrangements, various other molecular aberrations were detected including
TEL/AML1+ve (n=9), E2A/PBX1+ve (n=4), PML/RARA+ve (n=4), and AML1/ETO+ve (n=2).
Cytogenetic analysis revealed hyperdiploidy (n=6), del(7) in two cases and
del(11)(q23) in seven cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that not only MLL rearrangements, but also other
molecular abnormalities occur before birth and may contribute to leukemogenesis.

Copyright (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16261608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Leukemia. 2005 Dec;19(12):2241-6.

Aberrant promoter methylation of the retinoic acid receptor alpha gene in acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Chim CS(1), Wong SY, Pang A, Chu P, Lau JS, Wong KF, Kwong YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong.

The retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene is disrupted by PML/RARA fusion in
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). The P2 promoter of RARA, controlling the
RARalpha2 isoform, contains an RA-responsive element and may be targeted in APL. 
To test whether aberrant methylation of P2 was involved, 47 APL at diagnosis, 16 
APL at first relapse, 50 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and 22 acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia (ALL) were tested by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction.
RARA P2 methylation was highly associated with APL (APL: 25/63 vs AML/ALL: 2/75, 
P<0.0001). P2 methylation occurred at similar frequencies in APL at diagnosis and
relapse, suggesting it was an initiating leukemogenic event. In the APL line NB4,
RARalpha2 was not expressed, with the untranslocated RARA shown to be P2
methylated. 5-Azacytadine treatment of NB4 led to progressive P2 demethylation
and re-expression of RARalpha2, confirming that RARA methylation collaborated
with PML/RARA in totally suppressing RARalpha. In APL, RARA P2 methylation was
unrelated to gender, age, presenting leukocyte counts and additional cytogenetic 
aberrations. For APL patients receiving all-trans retinoic acid for induction, P2
methylation did not affect the complete remission rates and survivals. RARA is
the first myeloid-specific transcription factor shown to be dysregulated by both 
translocation and aberrant methylation.

PMID: 16239915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2005 Aug;141(4):384-92. Epub 2005 Sep
29.

Regulation of estrogen receptors in primary cultured hepatocytes of the amphibian
Xenopus laevis as estrogenic biomarker and its application in environmental
monitoring.

Lutz I(1), Blödt S, Kloas W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inland Fisheries, Institute of Freshwater Ecology and Inland
Fisheries, Müggelseedamm 310, 12587 Berlin, Germany. ilka.lutz@igb-berlin.de

The present study aims to introduce the regulation of estrogen receptors (ER) in 
primary cultured hepatocytes of the amphibian Xenopus laevis as a further
potential estrogenic biomarker. Time courses of free ER in cell cultures treated 
with 17beta-estradiol (E2), nonylphenol (NP), and bisphenol A (BPA) were
determined by means of radioreceptorassay (RARA). All compounds led to an
immediate drop of free ER followed by a significant increase. The estrogen
specific induction of ER-mRNA in vitro during time course was verified by using
semiquantitative RT-PCR demonstrating greatest differences after 36 h.
Dose-response curves of ER-mRNA for E2, NP, and BPA revealed that E2 possessed
highest estrogenicity starting at 10(-9) M, while NP and BPA induced significant 
increases at 10(-8) and 10(-7) M, respectively. Extracts of the river Alb were
subjected to RARA for ER binding to cytosolic liver fraction as well as to
primary cultured hepatocytes for assessment of ER-mRNA induction. The results by 
RARA demonstrated clearly that binding to ER was highest in sewage treatment
plant effluents and increased during the course of the river. These findings
could be correlated with induction of ER-mRNA levels in vitro indicating that
both techniques are suitable for application in monitoring of estrogenic EDC.

PMID: 16198636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Pediatrics. 2005 Oct;116(4):e601-7. Epub 2005 Sep 1.

Nephrotic syndrome and aberrant expression of laminin isoforms in glomerular
basement membranes for an infant with Herlitz junctional epidermolysis bullosa.

Hata D(1), Miyazaki M, Seto S, Kadota E, Muso E, Takasu K, Nakano A, Tamai K,
Uitto J, Nagata M, Moriyama K, Miyazaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kitano Hospital, Tazuke Kofukai Medical Institute,
2-4-20 Ohgimachi, Osaka, 530-8480, Japan. d-hata@kitano-hp.or.jp

Herlitz junctional epidermolysis bullosa (H-JEB) is a hereditary bullous disease 
caused by absent expression of laminin-5, a component of anchoring filaments
within the dermal-epidermal basement membrane zone. Affected individuals usually 
die during the first 1 year of life. We studied an infant with H-JEB who
presented with nephrotic syndrome, a previously unreported complication that may 
contribute to early death in this disease. DNA analysis revealed a compound
heterozygote for mutations 2379delG and Q995X in the LAMB3 gene. The patient had 
massive albuminuria, attributable to failure of the glomerular filtration
barrier, and high urinary N-acetylglucosaminidase levels, indicating renal
tubular involvement. Electron-microscopic examination of the renal tissue
revealed diffuse fusion of the foot processes, irregular swelling of the lamina
rara interna, and disappearance of endothelial cell fenestrations.
Immunohistopathologic analysis of the patient's renal tissue revealed
compositional changes in laminin isoforms of the glomerular basement membrane and
no detectable laminin-5 in the renal tubular basement membrane, which suggests
that laminin-5 may play an important role in renal function. Our findings
strongly suggest that H-JEB should be considered in the spectrum of congenital
nephrotic syndromes. Combination therapy with meticulous skin care and treatment 
strategies established for congenital nephrotic syndromes may rescue patients
with this disease.

PMID: 16147969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Cancer Res. 2005 Sep 1;65(17):7603-11.

The distal zinc finger domain of AML1/MDS1/EVI1 is an oligomerization domain
involved in induction of hematopoietic differentiation defects in primary cells
in vitro.

Senyuk V(1), Li D, Zakharov A, Mikhail FM, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and The Cancer Center, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA. vsenyuk@uic.edu

AML1/MDS1/EVI1 (AME) is a chimeric transcription factor produced by the
(3;21)(q26;q22) translocation. This chromosomal translocation is associated with 
de novo and therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia and with the blast crisis of
chronic myelogenous leukemia. AME is obtained by in-frame fusion of the AML1 and 
MDS1/EVI1 (ME) genes. The mechanisms by which AME induces a neoplastic
transformation in bone marrow cells are unknown. AME interacts with the
corepressors CtBP and HDAC1, and it was shown that AME is a repressor in contrast
to the parent transcription factors AML1 and ME, which are transcription
activators. Studies with murine bone marrow progenitors indicated that the
introduction of a point mutation that destroys the CtBP-binding consensus impairs
but does not abolish the disruption of cell differentiation and replication
associated with AME expression, suggesting that additional events are required.
Several chimeric proteins, such as AML1/ETO, BCR/ABL, and PML/RARa, are
characterized by the presence of a self-interaction domain critical for
transformation. We report that AME is also able to oligomerize and displays a
complex pattern of self-interaction that involves at least three oligomerization 
regions, one of which is the distal zinc finger domain. Although the deletion of 
this short domain does not preclude the self-interaction of AME, it significantly
reduces the differentiation defects caused in vitro by AME in primary murine bone
marrow progenitors. The addition of a point mutation that inhibits CtBP binding
completely abrogates the effects of AME on differentiation, suggesting that AME
induces hematopoietic differentiation defects through at least two separate but
cooperating pathways.

PMID: 16140925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Blood. 2005 Dec 1;106(12):3768-76. Epub 2005 Aug 16.

Relationship between FLT3 mutation status, biologic characteristics, and response
to targeted therapy in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Gale RE(1), Hills R, Pizzey AR, Kottaridis PD, Swirsky D, Gilkes AF, Nugent E,
Mills KI, Wheatley K, Solomon E, Burnett AK, Linch DC, Grimwade D; NCRI Adult
Leukaemia Working Party.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University College London Hospitals, United
Kingdom.

The prognostic significance of FLT3 mutations in acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL) is not firmly established and is of particular interest given the
opportunities for targeted therapies using FLT3 inhibitors. We studied 203
patients with PML-RARA-positive APL; 43% of the patients had an FLT3 mutation (65
internal tandem duplications [ITDs], 19 D835/I836, 4 ITD+D835/I836). Both
mutations were associated with higher white blood cell (WBC) count at
presentation; 75% of the patients with WBC counts of 10 x 10(9)/L or greater had 
mutant FLT3. FLT3/ITDs were correlated with M3v subtype (P < .001), bcr3 PML
breakpoint (P < .001), and expression of reciprocal RARA-PML transcripts (P =
.01). Microarray analysis revealed differences in expression profiles among
patients with FLT3/ITD, D835/I836, and wild-type FLT3. Patients with mutant FLT3 
had a higher rate of induction death (19% vs 9%; P = .04, but no significant
difference in relapse risk (28% vs 23%; P = .5) or overall survival (59% vs 67%; 
P = .2) at 5 years. In in vitro differentiation assays using primary APL blasts
(n = 6), the FLT3 inhibitor CEP-701 had a greater effect on cell
survival/proliferation in FLT3/ITD+ cells, but this inhibition was reduced in the
presence of ATRA. Furthermore, in the presence of CEP-701, ATRA-induced
differentiation was reduced in FLT3/ITD+ cells. These data carry implications for
the use of FLT3 inhibitors as frontline therapy for APL.

PMID: 16105978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2005 Aug;161(1):70-3.

Variant acute promyelocytic leukemia translocation (15;17) originating from two
subsequent balanced translocations involving the same chromosomes 15 and 17 while
preserving the PML/RARA fusion.

Tirado CA(1), Jahn JA, Scheerle J, Eid M, Meister RJ, Christie RJ, Croft CD,
Wallingford S, Heritage DW, Mowrey PN, Meloni-Ehrig AM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cytogenetics, Quest Diagnostics Nichols Institute, 14225
Newbrook Drive, Chantilly, VA 20151, USA.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of the bone marrow of a
24-year-old man diagnosed with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) revealed a
variant pattern with one fusion signal instead of the typical two fusions
expected with the probe set used. The combined FISH and conventional chromosome
analyses suggested that two subsequent translocations had occurred in this
patient involving the same chromosomes 15 and 17. As the prognostic outcome in
APL is strictly associated with the presence of a PML/RARA fusion, it is useful
and necessary to perform both cytogenetic and FISH analyses of a variant t(15;17)
to determine the status of the PML/RARA fusion.

PMID: 16080960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2005 Aug;161(1):51-6.

Cytogenetic characterization of a BCR-ABL transduced mouse cell line.

Rudolph C(1), Hegazy AN, von Neuhoff N, Steinemann D, Schröck E, Stripecke R,
Klein C, Schlegelberger B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Pathology, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

Most patients with Philadelphia (Ph)-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) 
show evidence of secondary chromosome aberrations that may influence the course
of disease and response to treatment. To better understand how these secondary
chromosomal aberrations occur and to investigate whether the p185/p190 BCR-ABL
fusion protein may directly induce an increased chromosomal instability and
subsequently the appearance of clonal chromosome aberrations, three BRC-ABL
(p185/ p190)-transduced mouse pre-B cell lines were analyzed by spectral
karyotyping and fluorescence in situ hybridization. The human wild-type BCR-ABL
gene was expressed at a level comparable with that in human Ph-positive leukemias
at diagnosis. All BCR-ABL-transduced cell lines acquired similar clonal
chromosomal aberrations. Trisomy 5 was always present, followed by loss of the Y 
chromosome, trisomy of chromosomes 12 and 18, and an unbalanced translocation
between chromosomes X and 12. Thus, ectopic p185/p190 BCR-ABL expression, such as
p210 BCR-ABL, PML-RARA, or C-MYC transduction, may induce an increased
chromosomal instability leading to clonal karyotypic evolution, which may mimic
secondary chromosome aberrations in human Ph-positive ALL.

PMID: 16080957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Haematologica. 2005 Aug;90(8):1042-9.

Murine acute promyelocytic leukemia cells can be recognized and cleared in vivo
by adaptive immune mechanisms.

Pollock JL(1), Lane AA, Schrimpf K, Ley TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Siteman Cancer Center,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2005 Aug;90(8):1010B.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: In this study, we tested whether transgenic murine
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cells can be recognized and cleared by
adaptive immune responses and/or vaccination strategies.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Immunocompetent and SCID mice were examined for their ability
to survive a challenge of APL cells. We also vaccinated immunocompetent mice with
DNA vaccines encoding various portions of a bcr-1 PML-RARa fusion protein.
RESULTS: In genetically compatible, immunocompetent animals, APL cells routinely 
engrafted and caused lethal leukemia; however, immunodeficient SCID mice required
approximately 100-fold fewer APL cells to cause lethal disease. Massive doses of 
APL cells were efficiently eliminated in allogeneic recipients. Vaccination with 
a plasmid expressing a human PML-RARa cDNA conferred protection against leukemic 
cells in vivo; mice vaccinated with the human PML portion of the fusion gene
demonstrated similar protection. Analysis of 10-mer peptides spanning the
t(15;17) translocation-associated PML-RARa fusion breakpoint suggested that they 
were not involved in the generation of immune responses.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: These data show that tumor-specific immune
clearance of APL cells does occur in mice. In this model system, the relevant
immunogenic antigens may arise from the xenogenic PML portion of human PML-RARa, 
and not unique sequences derived from the breakpoint region. However, the study
proves that APL cells are capable of being recognized and killed in vivo by
adaptive immune responses, suggesting that therapeutic vaccines should be
possible for this disease when relevant tumor-specific antigens are identified.

PMID: 16079103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mod Pathol. 2005 Dec;18(12):1569-76.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization investigation of cutaneous lesions in acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Wrede JE(1), Sundram U, Kohler S, Cherry AM, Arber DA, George TI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305-5627, USA.

Cutaneous manifestations of acute promyelocytic leukemia are rare but well
documented. Skin biopsies of leukemia can be difficult to confirm using
morphology alone, and paraffin section immunophenotyping is not specific in
separating acute promyelocytic leukemia from other acute myeloid leukemias
involving the skin or inflammatory conditions, such as Sweet's syndrome and
all-trans retinoic acid-associated genital ulcers, which may mimic leukemia
cutis. Fluorescence in situ hybridization has been shown to be a fast and
effective method of detecting the PML/RARA fusion gene characteristic of acute
promyelocytic leukemia in fresh blood and bone marrow samples. Fluorescence in
situ hybridization has also been demonstrated to be effective in detecting other 
chromosomal rearrangements in paraffin-embedded tissue. This retrospective study 
of cutaneous lesions from four patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia
evaluates the utility of performing fluorescence in situ hybridization to confirm
the presence of cutaneous manifestations of acute promyelocytic leukemia in
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded skin biopsies. All patients had previous bone
marrow findings of acute promyelocytic leukemia with characteristic morphology,
immunophenotype, and cytogenetic studies, which detailed the presence of the
t(15;17)(q22;q12) rearrangement. Two skin biopsies showed an infiltrate of
blastic cells involving the dermis in a diffuse pattern and one biopsy had a
perivascular/periadnexal pattern. The fourth case, involving the scrotum, showed 
a predominant neutrophilic infiltrate diffusely involving the dermis and
epidermis with a subset of blastic cells. Nuclei were extracted from core
biopsies of the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue and fluorescence in situ 
hybridization was performed using a dual color, dual fusion PML / RARA probe. All
cases showed evidence of the t(15;17) rearrangement, with 90, 79, 51 and 16%
positive signal patterns, each well above background limits. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization appears to be a robust technique to detect cutaneous manifestations
of acute promyelocytic leukemia in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded skin
biopsies.

PMID: 16056248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Ann Hematol. 2005 Nov;84(12):774-80. Epub 2005 Nov 12.

AML bearing the translocation t(11;17)(q23;q21): involvement of MLL and a region 
close to RARA, with no differentiation response to retinoic acid.

Classen CF(1), Teigler-Schlegel A, Röttgers S, Reinhardt D, Döhner K, Debatin KM.

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital Ulm, Prittwitzstr. 43, 89070, Ulm, Germany.
cfclassen@gmx.de

We describe a case of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) bearing the translocation
t(11;17)(q23;q21). The morphological phenotype represented a monoblastic
leukemia, AML French-American-British (FAB) M5a. Further analysis of the
translocation revealed an involvement of the mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) gene
and a region closely proximal to the retinoic acid (RA) receptor alpha (RARA)
gene. AMLs involving both a rearranged MLL and the 17q21 region, in which the
RARA gene is located, have only been described in some individual cases. The
functional role of this translocation is still unknown. Rearrangements of the MLL
(11q23) gene in AML are usually related to the morphological phenotype FAB M5. In
general, they are associated with an adverse prognosis. In acute promyelocytic
leukemia, the translocation (15;17)(q22;q11-21) involving the RARA leads to a
maturation arrest that can be overcome by RA, often inducing remission. In other 
forms of AML, however, the effects of RA are limited and diverse. To study
whether RA might have a therapeutical potential in our case, we performed an in
vitro analysis of RA effects on AML cells. We found that RA leads to enhanced
cell death and up-regulation of CD38 and CD117. However, no hints of RA-induced
in vitro differentiation were visible. Our data indicate that in AML cells
bearing the t(11;17)(q23;q21), a differentiation arrest that is overcome by RA is
not present. On the contrary, RA induces alterations in cellular regulation that 
are similar to the RA-induced changes observed in early hematogenic progenitors; 
thus, a possible therapeutical benefit of RA in such cases remains open.

PMID: 16044313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. DNA Seq. 2005 Feb;16(1):7-15.

Identification and characterization of a canine highly similar to retinoic acid
receptor alpha.

Miyajima N(1), Watanabe M, Ohashi E, Ohmori K, Mochizuki M, Nishimura R, Ogawa H,
Sugano S, Sasaki N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Surgery, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8657,
Japan.

A canine highly similar to retinoic acid receptor alpha (canine HS-RARa) cDNA was
isolated from the spleen tissue. A database search and the alignment revealed
that the canine cDNA was most similar to highly similar type of human RARa and
was named canine HS-RARa. The expression of the genes encoding RARa in the dog
was the highest in the testis and moderate in the blood, lymph node, mammary
gland, pancreas, salivary gland, spleen, thyroid gland, tonsil and uterus. The
nucleotide sequence encoded the 462-amino acid containing the conserved sequence 
motif of RARa. Though the amino acid sequences were well-conserved among species,
some unique arrangements were observed within each class. In the phylogenetic
analysis, each species separated according to their class. In the branch of
mammals, the dog is in the cluster of humans, mice and western wild mice.
However, hamsters and rats formed another branch.

PMID: 16040341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Leuk Lymphoma. 2005 Jul;46(7):1061-6.

Upregulated hoxC4 induces CD14 expression during the differentiation of acute
promyelocytic leukemia cells.

Kim DY(1), Choi SJ, Kim SH, Chung HY, Yi S, Kim DW, Kim CC, Han TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, SBRI, Sungkyunkwan University School of 
Medicine, Suwon, Korea.

Homeobox (hox) genes encode transcription factors which are critically involved
in embryonic development. The 39 different hox genes are organized into four
unlinked chromosomal gene clusters (hoxA-D) in mammals and a number of studies
have suggested that hox genes play important roles in human leukemogenesis. Acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cells carrying the PML-RARa fusion protein, respond 
well by differentiating in their response to an all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA)
treatment. We examined the expression of the individual hox genes during this
differentiation. Besides the constitutive expression of hoxA9 and no expression
of hoxB7, the expression of hoxC4 increased significantly during differentiation 
of NB4 cells (PML-RAR(alpha)+). We also examined the expression of hoxC4 in bone 
marrow cells from APL patients and found that the hoxC4 expression was
reproducibly induced during an ATRA treatment. To further examine this finding,
HoxC4 was stably expressed in NB4 cells by retroviral transduction. The NB4 cells
expressing HoxC4 showed differentiated phenotypes including a CD14 expression,
which strongly suggests that upregulated hoxC4 is functionally involved in NB4
cell differentiation in response to ATRA. Upregulation of CD14 is at the
transcription level and mediated by the homeodomain of the HoxC4.

PMID: 16019559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Leuk Lymphoma. 2005 Apr;46(4):607-10.

Biphenotypic acute leukemia with t(15;17).

Scolnik MP(1), Aranguren PN, Cuello MT, Palacios MF, Sanjurjo J, Giunta M, Bracco
MM, Acevedo S.

Author information: 
(1)IIHEMA, Academia Nacional de Medicina de Buenos Aires.

Biphenotypic acute leukemias (BAL) represent 5% of all acute leukemias. The most 
frequent cytogenetic abnormalities described are Philadelphia chromosome and
11q23 involvement. Here we report a BAL case, with blasts showing lymphoblast
morphology and positivity for myeloperoxidase (in 6% of the blast cells).
Immunophenotype revealed the compromise of myeloid and B-lymphoid lineages.
Cytogenetic analysis showed the t(15;17) and 8 trisomy. PML/RARa rearrangement
was detected by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) on interphase nuclei
while PML/RARa fusion transcript was detected in the bone marrow and peripheral
blood by molecular biology studies (RT-PCR). This report describes a BAL case
with an unfrequent cytogenetic abnormality, and highlights the importance of
correlating the results of multiple diagnostic methods in order to establish a
correct diagnosis and treatment in BAL patients.

PMID: 16019491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Biotechnol. 2005 Jul;30(3):231-8.

Differentiation response of acute promyelocytic leukemia cells and PML/RARa
leukemogenic activity studies by real-time RT-PCR.

Caprodossi S(1), Pedinotti M, Amantini C, Santoni G, Minucci S, Pelicci PG,
Fanelli M.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Biotechnology, University of Urbino, Fano, Italy.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a human cancer generated by a chromosomal
translocation t(15;17) involving the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) and retinoic
acid receptor alpha (RARalpha) genes. The PML/RARalpha oncoprotein expressing
blasts show two of the most important biological features of neoplastic
progression: block of differentiation, at the promyelocytic state, and increased 
survival. Although PML/RARalpha interferes with the normal maturation of myeloid 
precursors to granulocytes, pharmacological doses of retinoic acid are sufficient
to restore the differentiation processes. We designed an assay based on the
Real-Time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to
experimentally follow the differentiation response of leukemic cells even after
short-time differentiating treatments. Amplifying CD11b, CD11c, and CD14 mRNAs,
as specific markers of differentiation, by the real-time RT-PCR assay we could
detect both retinoic acid (RA) and vitamin D3 and human transforming growth
factor beta1 (VitD3/TGFbeta1) induced cellular maturation more precociously than 
the canonical flow-cytofluorimetric assay. Moreover, by amplifying CD14 mRNA it
was possible to monitor the ability of PML/RARalpha oncoprotein to block
VitD3/TGFbeta1 induced differentiation in U937-PR9 promonocytic inducible model
systems.The proposed real-time quantitative RT-PCR approach is a reproducible and
highly sensitive assay and can be considered a valid method to study both
cellular maturation state and differentiation response.

PMID: 15988048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2005 Spring;35(2):195-8.

Case report: acute promyelocytic leukemia with +der(17)t(15;17) detected by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).

Kim M(1), Lim J, Kim Y, Han K, Lee S, Min CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University
of Korea, 62 Youido-dong, Youngdeungpo-gu, St Mary's Hospital, Seoul, 150-713,
Korea.

We describe an unusual case of acute promyelocytic leukemia with +der(17)t(15;17)
as the additional cytogenetic abnormality and with t(15;17) defined by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using a PML/RARA dual color, dual
fusion translocation probe. By performing a step-by-step, complementary approach 
to evaluate unusual chromosomal abnormalities, we detected RARA/PML fusion on a
marker chromosome similar to chromosome 17.

PMID: 15943185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Jul 1;307(1):52-64. Epub 2005 Mar 29.

Telomere-surrounding regions are transcription-permissive 3D nuclear compartments
in human cells.

Quina AS(1), Parreira L.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina de Lisboa, Av.
Professor Egas Moniz, 1649-028 Lisboa, Portugal.

Positioning of genes relative to nuclear heterochromatic compartments is thought 
to help regulate their transcriptional activity. Given that human subtelomeric
regions are rich in highly expressed genes, we asked whether human telomeres are 
related to transcription-permissive nuclear compartments. To address this
question, we investigated in the nuclei of normal human lymphocytes the spatial
relations of two constitutively expressed genes (ACTB and RARA) and three nuclear
transcripts (ACTB, IL2RA and TCRB) to telomeres and centromeres, as a function of
gene activity and transcription levels. We observed that genes and gene
transcripts locate close to telomere clusters and away from chromocenters upon
activation of transcription. These findings, together with the observation that
SC35 domains, which are enriched in pre-mRNA processing factors, are in close
proximity to telomeres, indicate that telomere-neighboring regions are permissive
to gene expression in human cells. Therefore, the associations of telomeres
observed in the interphase nucleus might contribute, as opposed to chromocenters,
for the establishment of transcription-permissive 3D nuclear compartments.

PMID: 15922726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Am J Clin Pathol. 2005 Jun;123(6):840-8.

Morphologic, cytogenetic, and molecular abnormalities in therapy-related acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Yin CC(1), Glassman AB, Lin P, Valbuena JR, Jones D, Luthra R, Medeiros LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, USA.

We describe 17 cases of therapy-related acute promyelocytic leukemia (tAPL).
Treatment for the initial neoplasms (mostly carcinomas and non-Hodgkin lymphomas)
included radiation and chemotherapy in 11 patients, radiation in 3, and
chemotherapy in 3. The interval between the initial neoplasm and tAPL ranged from
17 to 166 months (median, 40 months). Morphologically, all 13 cases with
available bone marrow aspirate smears showed tAPL. Dyserythropoiesis or
dysmegakaryopoiesis was identified in 11 cases. In 2 cases, too few nonneoplastic
cells and, in all cases, too few maturing granulocytes were present to assess for
dysplasia. Conventional cytogenetics or fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
showed the t(15;17)(q22;q21) in all cases; 6 as a sole abnormality, 9 with
additional abnormalities, and 2 assessed only by FISH. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) studies showed PML/RARa in 13 cases
(8 short form, 5 long form). Mutations of the flt3 gene were detected by PCR in 5
(42%) of 12 cases. We conclude that dysplastic features, secondary cytogenetic
abnormalities, and flt3 mutations are common in tAPL.

PMID: 15899774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2005 Jun;159(2):129-36.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia with PML-RARA fusion on i(17q) and therapy-related
acute myeloid leukemia.

Lee GY(1), Christina S, Tien SL, Ghafar AB, Hwang W, Lim LC, Lim TH.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Singapore General Hospital, 
Block 6, Level 5, Room A4, Outram Road, 169608 Singapore. geokyee@hotmail.com

We describe a patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) and the karyotype
46,XX,i(17)(q10) with PML-RARA fusion gene detected by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) and nested reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). FISH using dual-color translocation probes for PML (promyelocytic
leukemia) and RARA (retinoic acid receptor-alpha) showed fusion signal for
PML-RARA on both arms of i(17q). The patient attained complete remission (CR)
with all-trans retinoic acid treatment and became PML-RARA negative. One year
later, while PML-RARA negative on FISH and RT-PCR, the patient presented with
thrombocytopenia. Bone marrow examination suggested an acute monoblastic leukemia
(AML-M5a) including the karyotype 46,XX,t(8;16) (p11.2;p13.3),inv(11)(p15q22
approximately q23)[11]/47,idem,+i(8)(q10)[9]. She is currently in CR. The
occurrence of therapy related acute leukemia after successful therapy for APL is 
an emerging problem.

PMID: 15899384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Bacteriol. 2005 May;187(10):3538-47.

Gyrase inhibitors and thymine starvation disrupt the normal pattern of plasmid
RK2 localization in Escherichia coli.

Johnson EP(1), Yao S, Helinski DR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Genetics and Division of Biological Sciences, University 
of California at San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0322, USA.

Multicopy plasmids in Escherichia coli are not randomly distributed throughout
the cell but exist as defined clusters that are localized at the mid-cell, or at 
the 1/4 and 3/4 cell length positions. To explore the factors that contribute to 
plasmid clustering and localization, E. coli cells carrying a plasmid RK2
derivative that can be tagged with a green fluorescent protein-LacI fusion
protein were subjected to various conditions that interfere with plasmid
superhelicity and/or DNA replication. The various treatments included thymine
starvation and the addition of the gyrase inhibitors nalidixic acid and
novobiocin. In each case, localization of plasmid clusters at the preferred
positions was disrupted but the plasmids remained in clusters, suggesting that
normal plasmid superhelicity and DNA synthesis in elongating cells are not
required for the clustering of individual plasmid molecules. It was also observed
that the inhibition of DNA replication by these treatments produced filaments in 
which the plasmid clusters were confined to one or two nucleoid bodies, which
were located near the midline of the filament and were not evenly spaced
throughout the filament, as is found in cells treated with cephalexin. Finally,
the enhanced yellow fluorescent protein-RarA fusion protein was used to localize 
the replication complex in individual E. coli cells. Novobiocin and nalidixic
acid treatment both resulted in rapid loss of RarA foci. Under these conditions
the RK2 plasmid clusters were not disassembled, suggesting that a completely
intact replication complex is not required for plasmid clustering.

PMCID: PMC1112003
PMID: 15866942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Leukemia. 2005 Jun;19(6):1042-50.

Gene expression profiling of leukemic cell lines reveals conserved molecular
signatures among subtypes with specific genetic aberrations.

Andersson A(1), Edén P, Lindgren D, Nilsson J, Lassen C, Heldrup J, Fontes M,
Borg A, Mitelman F, Johansson B, Höglund M, Fioretos T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, SE-221 85 Lund,
Sweden. anna.andersson@klingen.lu.se

Hematologic malignancies are characterized by fusion genes of biological/clinical
importance. Immortalized cell lines with such aberrations are today widely used
to model different aspects of leukemogenesis. Using cDNA microarrays, we
determined the gene expression profiles of 40 cell lines as well as of primary
leukemias harboring 11q23/MLL rearrangements, t(1;19)[TCF3/PBX1],
t(12;21)[ETV6/RUNX1], t(8;21)[RUNX1/CBFA2T1], t(8;14)[IGH@/MYC],
t(8;14)[TRA@/MYC], t(9;22)[BCR/ABL1], t(10;11)[PICALM/MLLT10],
t(15;17)[PML/RARA], or inv(16)[CBFB/MYH11]. Unsupervised classification revealed 
that hematopoietic cell lines of diverse origin, but with the same primary
genetic changes, segregated together, suggesting that pathogenetically important 
regulatory networks remain conserved despite numerous passages. Moreover, primary
leukemias cosegregated with cell lines carrying identical genetic rearrangements,
further supporting that critical regulatory pathways remain intact in
hematopoietic cell lines. Transcriptional signatures correlating with clinical
subtypes/primary genetic changes were identified and annotated based on their
biological/molecular properties and chromosomal localization. Furthermore, the
expression profile of tyrosine kinase-encoding genes was investigated,
identifying several differentially expressed members, segregating with primary
genetic changes, which may be targeted with tyrosine kinase inhibitors. The
identified conserved signatures are likely to reflect regulatory networks of
importance for the transforming abilities of the primary genetic changes and
offer important pathogenetic insights as well as a number of targets for future
rational drug design.

PMID: 15843827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Jun;19(6):1584-92. Epub 2005 Apr 14.

Functional genomics identifies a mechanism for estrogen activation of the
retinoic acid receptor alpha1 gene in breast cancer cells.

Laganière J(1), Deblois G, Giguère V.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, McGill University Health Center, and Department of
Biochemistry, McGill University, Room H5-21, 687 Pine Avenue West, Montréal,
Québec, Canada H3A 1A1.

The identification of estrogen receptor (ERalpha) target genes is crucial to our 
understanding of its predominant role in breast cancer. In this study, we used a 
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-cloning strategy to identify
ERalpha-regulatory modules and associated target genes in the human breast cancer
cell line MCF-7. We isolated 12 transcriptionally active genomic modules that
recruit ERalpha and the coactivator steroid receptor coactivator (SRC)-3 to
different intensities in vivo. One of the ERalpha-regulatory modules identified
is located 3.7 kb downstream of the first transcriptional start site of the RARA 
locus, which encodes retinoic acid receptor alpha1 (RARalpha1). This module,
which includes an estrogen response element (ERE), is conserved between the human
and mouse genomes. Direct binding of ERalpha to the ERE was shown using EMSAs,
and transient transfections in MCF-7 cells demonstrated that endogenous ERalpha
can induce estrogen-dependent transcriptional activation from the module or the
ERE linked to a heterologous promoter. Furthermore, ChIP assays showed that the
coregulators SRC-1, SRC-3, and receptor-interacting protein 140 are recruited to 
this intronic module in an estrogen-dependent manner. As expected from previous
studies, the transcription factor Sp1 can be detected at the RARA alpha1 promoter
by ChIP. However, treatment with estradiol did not influence Sp1 recruitment nor 
help recruit ERalpha to the promoter. Finally, ablation of the intronic ERE was
sufficient to abrogate the up-regulation of RARA alpha1 promoter activity by
estradiol. Thus, this study uncovered a mechanism by which ERalpha significantly 
activates RARalpha1 expression in breast cancer cells and exemplifies the utility
of functional genomics strategies in identifying long-distance regulatory modules
for nuclear receptors.

PMID: 15831516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. N Engl J Med. 2005 Apr 14;352(15):1529-38.

DNA topoisomerase II in therapy-related acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Mistry AR(1), Felix CA, Whitmarsh RJ, Mason A, Reiter A, Cassinat B, Parry A,
Walz C, Wiemels JL, Segal MR, Adès L, Blair IA, Osheroff N, Peniket AJ,
Lafage-Pochitaloff M, Cross NC, Chomienne C, Solomon E, Fenaux P, Grimwade D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Guy's, King's, and St. Thomas'
School of Medicine, London.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2005 Apr 14;352(15):1591-4.

BACKGROUND: Chromosomal translocations leading to chimeric oncoproteins are
important in leukemogenesis, but how they form is unclear. We studied acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) with the t(15;17) translocation that developed after
treatment of breast or laryngeal cancer with chemotherapeutic agents that poison 
topoisomerase II.
METHODS: We used long-range polymerase chain reaction and sequence analysis to
characterize t(15;17) genomic breakpoints in therapy-related APL. To determine
whether topoisomerase II was directly involved in mediating breaks of
double-stranded DNA at the observed translocation breakpoints, we used a
functional in vitro assay to examine topoisomerase II-mediated cleavage in the
normal homologues of the PML and RARA breakpoints.
RESULTS: Translocation breakpoints in APL that developed after exposure to
mitoxantrone, a topoisomerase II poison, were tightly clustered in an 8-bp region
within PML intron 6. In functional assays, this "hot spot" and the corresponding 
RARA breakpoints were common sites of mitoxantrone-induced cleavage by
topoisomerase II. Etoposide and doxorubicin also induced cleavage by
topoisomerase II at the translocation breakpoints in APL arising after exposure
to these agents. Short, homologous sequences in PML and RARA suggested the
occurrence of DNA repair by means of the nonhomologous end-joining pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Drug-induced cleavage of DNA by topoisomerase II mediates the
formation of chromosomal translocation breakpoints in mitoxantrone-related APL
and in APL that occurs after therapy with other topoisomerase II poisons.

Copyright 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society.

PMID: 15829534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2005 Apr 1;158(1):43-8.

Identification of cell lineages involved by t(15;17) in acute promyelocytic
leukemia by combined fluorescence activated cell sorting and FISH.

Chang H(1), Qi XY, Sutherland DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Hematology, Princess Margaret Hospital/University
Health Network, University of Toronto, 610 University Avenue, 4-320, Toronto,
Ontario M5G-2M9, Canada. hong.chang@uhn.on.ca

Bone marrow cells from five patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) with
t(15;17) were studied by a combination of fluorescence activated cell sorting and
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to establish the cell lineage
involvement of t(15;17). Interphase FISH demonstrated that the fusion gene
(PML/RARA) was present in almost all abnormal promyelocytes. In one case, the
translocation was demonstrated in both CD34+ and CD34- APL cells. The t(15;17)
abnormality was not detectable in erythroblasts nor in T- or B-lymphoid cells.
These results suggest that lymphocytes and erythroblasts are not clonally
involved in APL, and that malignant transformation in some cases of APL may occur
at the level of CD34+ cells.

PMID: 15771903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Agric Food Chem. 2005 Mar 23;53(6):2289-96.

Influence of the maillard reaction on the allergenicity of rAra h 2, a
recombinant major allergen from peanut (Arachis hypogaea), its major epitopes,
and peanut agglutinin.

Gruber P(1), Becker WM, Hofmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsche Forschungsanstalt für Lebensmittelchemie, Lichtenbergstr. 4, D-85748 
Garching, Germany.

The influence of thermal processing and nonenzymatic browning reactions on the
IgE-binding activity of rAra h 2 was studied and compared to findings recently
reported for the allergen's natural counterpart. ELISA experiments as well as
inhibition assays revealed that thermal treatment of rAra h 2 in the presence of 
reactive carbohydrates and carbohydrate breakdown products induces a strong
increase of the IgE-binding activity, thus collaborating with the data reported
for the natural protein isolated from peanuts. To localize the Ara h 2 sequences 
responsible for the formation of highly IgE-affine glycation sites, model
peptides have been synthesized mimicking sequences which contain possible targets
for glycation as well as the immunodominant epitopes. Immunological evaluation of
these peptides heated in the absence or presence of reducing sugars and
carbonyls, respectively, revealed that neither the two lysine residues of Ara h 2
nor its N-terminus are involved in the formation of IgE-affine structures by
Maillard reaction. Also, the cysteine-containing major epitope 3 (aa 27-36) was
found to lose its IgE-binding capacity upon heating. By contrast, the overlapping
major epitopes 6 and 7, which do not contain any lysine or arginine moieties,
showed a distinct higher level of IgE binding when subjected to Maillard
reaction, thus giving the first evidence that nonbasic amino acids might be
accessible for nonenzymatic glycation reactions and that these posttranslational 
modifications might induce increased IgE binding of the glycated Ara h 2.
Analogous experiments were performed with peanut agglutinin, considered in the
literature as a minor allergen. ELISA experiments revealed that the majority of
tested sera samples from peanut-sensitive patients showed a high level of IgE
binding to the lectin even after heat treatment. In contradiction to published
data, nonenzymatic browning reactions seem to deteriorate the IgE affinity of the
lectin.

PMID: 15769170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Genes Cells. 2005 Mar;10(3):181-91.

Functional overlap between RecA and MgsA (RarA) in the rescue of stalled
replication forks in Escherichia coli.

Shibata T(1), Hishida T, Kubota Y, Han YW, Iwasaki H, Shinagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871,
Japan.

Escherichia coli RecA protein plays a role in DNA homologous recombination,
recombination repair, and the rescue of stalled or collapsed replication forks.
The mgsA (rarA) gene encodes a highly conserved DNA-dependent ATPase, whose yeast
orthologue, MGS1, plays a role in maintaining genomic stability. In this study,
we show a functional relationship between mgsA and recA during DNA replication.
The mgsA recA double mutant grows more slowly and has lower viability than a recA
single mutant, but they are equally sensitive to UV-induced DNA damage. Mutations
in mgsA and recA cause lethality in DNA polymerase I deficient cells, and
suppress the temperature-dependent growth defect of dnaE486 (Pol III
alpha-catalytic subunit). Moreover, recAS25P, a novel recA allele identified in
this work, does not complement the slow growth of DeltamgsA DeltarecA cells or
the lethality of polA12 DeltarecA, but is proficient in DNA repair, homologous
recombination, SOS mutagenesis and SOS induction. These results suggest that RecA
and MgsA are functionally redundant in rescuing stalled replication forks, and
that the DNA repair and homologous recombination functions of RecA are separated 
from its function to maintain progression of replication fork.

PMID: 15743409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Int J Hematol. 2005 Jan;81(1):29-31.

CD2+ tetraploid acute promyelocytic leukemia variant with double (15;17)
translocations.

Kaito K(1), Otsubo H, Dobashi N, Usui N, Kobayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Central Clinical Laboratory, Jikei University Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
ken.kaito@jikei.ac.jp

We report a patient with a variant form of CD2+ acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL) who had double translocations (15;17) in a single leukemic cell. The
patient presented with severe neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and disseminated
intravascular coagulation. The bone marrow showed marked hyperplasia with large
leukemic cells that had bizarre nuclear configuration and basophilic,
hypogranular cytoplasm. Leukemic cells were positive for CD2, 13, 33, 34, and 56 
and negative for HLA-DR. The karyotype of the abnormal clone was characterized as
92,XXYY, t(15;17)(q22;q21)x2. No other additional abnormal clone was found, and
the patient's condition was diagnosed as tetraploid APL variant. Fluorescence in 
situ hybridization assay revealed 2 promyelocytic leukemia and retinoic acid
receptor alpha (PML/RARA) fusion signals, and reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction assay revealed short-form PML/RARA fusion transcript. Tetraploidy 
in APL is a very rare abnormality. Double translocations were an additional
abnormality in this case, and this patient's karyotype might have had some
influence on morphological characteristics, expression of CD2, and poor clinical 
outcome.

PMID: 15717685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cancer Cell. 2005 Feb;7(2):143-53.

A sumoylation site in PML/RARA is essential for leukemic transformation.

Zhu J(1), Zhou J, Peres L, Riaucoux F, Honoré N, Kogan S, de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR 9051, laboratoire associé N11 du comité de Paris de la Ligue contre
le Cancer, affilié à l'Université de Paris VII, Hôpital St. Louis, 1 avenue
Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris, Cedex 10, France.

Pathogenesis of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) has been proposed to involve
transcriptional repression through enhanced corepressors binding onto RARA
moieties of PML/RARA homodimers. Unexpectedly, we show that the K160 sumoylation 
site in the PML moiety of PML/RARA is required for efficient
immortalization/differentiation arrest ex vivo, implying that RARA
homodimerization is insufficient to fully immortalize primary hematopoietic
progenitor cells. Similarly, PML/RARAK160R transgenic mice develop
myeloproliferative syndromes, but never APL. The Daxx repressor no longer binds
PML/RARAK160R, but fusion of these two proteins restores the differentiation
block ex vivo. Thus, transcriptional repression dependent on a specific
sumoylation site in PML is critical for the APL phenotype, while forced RARA
dimerization could control expansion of the myeloid compartment.

PMID: 15710327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Nephron Exp Nephrol. 2005;99(2):e56-62. Epub 2004 Dec 21.

Oral adsorbent prevents reduction of anionic sites of the glomerular basement
membrane in diabetic nephropathy.

Okada K(1), Matsumoto K, Takahashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Nihon
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. kokada@med.nihon-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: AST-120, an oral adsorbent, inhibits progression of diabetic
nephropathy by reducing albuminuria. The purpose of the present study was to
explore the mechanism underlying the protective effect of AST-120 against
albuminuria.
METHODS: Twenty-four male Sprague-Dawley rats underwent intravenous injection of 
streptozotocin and subsequent uninephrectomy. Half of the rats were fed standard 
rat chow, and the other half were fed rat chow containing AST-120. All rats were 
killed at week 6 after a clearance study.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in body weight, kidney weight,
urinary volume, blood pressure, blood glucose or inulin clearance between the two
groups at week 6. However, urinary albumin excretion at week 6 was significantly 
lower in the AST-120 group than in the control group (p < 0.05). Light
microscopic observation showed that the planar area of glomeruli was
significantly smaller in the AST-120 group than in the control group (p < 0.01), 
and the shortest diameter of proximal tubules was less in the AST-120 group than 
in the control group (p < 0.01). Electron microscopic observation showed a
significantly greater number of anionic sites on the lamina rara externa of the
glomerular basement membrane in the AST-120 group than in the control group (p < 
0.01).
CONCLUSION: We conclude that AST-120 reduces albuminuria by preventing the
decrease in the number of anionic sites in the glomerular basement membrane in
rats with diabetic nephropathy. In addition, AST-120 inhibits the appearance of
glomerular and tubular hypertrophy.

Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 15627801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2004 Dec;114(6):1410-7.

Ara h 8, a Bet v 1-homologous allergen from peanut, is a major allergen in
patients with combined birch pollen and peanut allergy.

Mittag D(1), Akkerdaas J, Ballmer-Weber BK, Vogel L, Wensing M, Becker WM,
Koppelman SJ, Knulst AC, Helbling A, Hefle SL, Van Ree R, Vieths S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital, Zurich.

BACKGROUND: We recently described patients with soybean allergy mainly mediated
by cross-reactivity to birch pollen allergens. A majority of those patients were 
reported to have peanut allergy.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to study the occurrence of peanut allergy in patients
allergic to birch pollen and characterized the Bet v 1-homologous peanut allergen
Ara h 8.
METHODS: Recombinant Ara h 8 was cloned with degenerated primers and expressed in
Escherichia coli. Nine Swiss and 11 Dutch patients with peanut and birch pollen
allergy and a positive double-blind, placebo-controlled food challenge result to 
peanut were investigated for IgE reactivity to birch pollen and purified peanut
allergens and cross-reactivity between birch and peanut. Ara h 8 stability
against digestion and roasting was assessed by means of RAST inhibition. The IgE 
cross-linking potency of Ara h 8 was tested on the basis of basophil histamine
release.
RESULTS: During double-blind, placebo-controlled food challenge, all patients
experienced symptoms in the oral cavity, progressing to more severe symptoms in
40% of patients. CAP-FEIA detected recombinant (r) Ara h 8-specific IgE in 85%.
IgE binding to Ara h 8 was inhibited by Bet v 1 in peanut extract immunoblotting 
and in RAST inhibition. In EAST inhibition recombinant rAra h 8 inhibited IgE
binding to peanut in 4 of 7 tested patient sera. Antipeanut response was
dominated by Ara h 8 in 12 of 17 tested patients. Furthermore, our results
demonstrate a low stability of Ara h 8 to roasting and no stability to gastric
digestion. Basophil histamine release with rAra h 8 was more than 20% in 5 of 7
tested sera.
CONCLUSIONS: Peanut allergy might be mediated in a subgroup of our patients by
means of cross-reaction of Bet v 1 with the homologous peanut allergen Ara h 8.

PMID: 15577846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Science. 2004 Nov 19;306(5700):1281-2.

High-energy physics. Rara avis or statistical mirage? Pentaquark remains at
large.

Seife C.

PMID: 15550637  [PubMed]


88. Ter Arkh. 2004;76(7):11-8.

[Preliminary results of a multicenter randomized study on the treatment of acute 
promyelocytic leukemias].

[Article in Russian]

Parovichnikova EN, Savchenko VG, Demidova IA, Isaev VG, Shuravina EN, Ustinova
EN, Gribanova EO, Aleksanian MZh, Misiurin AV, Domracheva EV, Ol'shanskaia IuV,
Khoroshko ND, Kravchenko SK, Konstantinova TS, Anchukova LV, Kaplanov K,
Zagoskina TP, Volkova SA, Filatov LB, Rekhtman GB, Sokolova I, Mashuk VN,
Miliutina GI, Lapin VA, Perekatova TN, Sviridova EI, Pristupa AS, Ziuzgin IS.

AIM: To study efficacy of maintenance therapy of patients with acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) in the APL treatment Russian multicenter trial.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The trial was made with participation of 18 hematological
departments of clinics in Russia. A total of 68 APL patients entered the trial.
The maintenance therapy consisted of 5-day courses of cytostatic drugs which
alternated or did not alternate with 5-day courses of ATRA. Cytogenetic tests
were made in 31 patients, t(15;17) was detected in 26 of them. Molecular
examination conducted in 28 patients discovered chimeric transcript PML/RARa in
26 of them. Of 20 patients examined in Hematological Research Center, 7 (35%) had
a bcr 1/2 variant of the transcript PML/RARa, 13 (65%)--bcr 3 variant.
RESULTS: 65 patients were eligible for assessment. A complete remission was
achieved in 90% cases. No resistance was observed. In follow-up within 30 months 
the recurrence rate was similar on both treatments. The results of the induction 
therapy and survival in patients with different variants of the transcripts were 
also similar. Overall 2.5 year survival for all the patients was 77%,
recurrence-free--80%. The survival analysis in patients with leukocytosis higher 
and lower 10 x 10(9)/l found no statistical differences by the survival. Patients
with hyperleukocytosis had higher early lethality than patients with leukocytes
under 10 x 10(9)/l (25% vs 5.3%, p = 0.03).
CONCLUSION: The APL 06.01 protocol showed high efficacy of the relevant
maintenance which provides a complete molecular remission in the majority of
patients with probable recurrence-free 2.5 year survival 80%.

PMID: 15379121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Aug;12(4):406-10.

Coexistence of tetrasomy 8 and trisomy 8 in acute promyelocytic leukemia (AML-M3)
with t(15;17)(q22;q12).

Wang HP(1), Li GX, Qiao ZH, Ren WY, Wang HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The Second Hospital of Shanxi Medical University,
Taiyuan 030001, China.

This study was purposed to characterize the first case of acute promyelocitic
leukemia (AML-M(3a)) with t(15;17), trisomy 8 and tetrasomy 8, and explore its
characteristics of morphology, cytogenetics, molecular biology, immunology and
clinical features. Morphological changes of peripheral blood and bone marrow
smears were observed under microscope. Chromosome specimen was prepared by 24 h
short-term culture of bone marrow cell, RHG-banding technique was used for
karyotypic analysis. PML-RARa fusion gene transcript was detected by
nested-reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (nested RT-PCR).
Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using chromosome 8
centromere specific probe were carried out to detect abnormal numbers of
chromosome 8. Immunophenotypic analysis was performed by flow cytometry. The
results showed that peripheral blood smear revealed 65% promyelocyte, and bone
marrow aspirate was hypercellular with 72.4% promyelocyte, moderately basophilic 
cytoplasm with numerous azurophilic granules. Karyotype analysis demonstrated 48,
XY, +8, +8, t(15;17)(q22;q12) [16]/47, XY, +8, t(15;17)(q22;q12) [3]/46, XY,
t(15;17)(q22;q12) [1]. RT-PCR assay revealed PML-RARa fusion gene transcript (+).
FISH showed that the percentages of cells exhibiting 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 green
fluorescence signals were 0.5, 7, 19, 55, 18 and 0.5, respectively. This
confirmed the presence of tetrasomy 8 and trisomy 8 and also revealed a low
percentage of a pentasomy 8 clone. Immunophenotypes of the blasts displayed that 
CD13 (96.2%), CD33 (55.9%), CYMPO (93.5%) were positive. All the lymphoid markers
tested were negative. The patient survival time was just 10 days. It is concluded
that tetrasomy 8 is secondary cytogenetic event after t(15;17) in this case. It
may be a consequence of clonal evolution of trisomy 8. t(15;17) AML-M(3) with
tetrasomy 8 heralds a poor prognosis.

PMID: 15363120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. FASEB J. 2004 Nov;18(14):1734-6. Epub 2004 Sep 2.

Retinoid-modulated MAT1 ubiquitination and CAK activity.

He Q(1), Peng H, Collins SJ, Triche TJ, Wu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California Keck School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90027, USA.

Human cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)-activating kinase (CAK) has a dual function
in cross-regulation of cell cycle and differentiation, whereas menage a trois 1
(MAT1) assembles CAK and determines CAK's substrate specificity. Although the
dynamic state of MAT1 protein levels is found to modulate CAK activity, how
intracellular regulation of MAT1 controls CAK activity is unknown. Recent studies
demonstrate that retinoic acid (RA)-induced human HL60 cell
proliferation/differentiation (P/D) transition is accompanied by MAT1 degradation
and decreased CAK phosphorylation of retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARa). Thus,
we investigated the biochemical pathway of MAT1 degradation and its relationship 
with CAK phosphorylation of RARa. We find that RA induces
ubiquitination-proteolysis of MAT1 and that ubiquitin-proteasome targets CAK-free
MAT1 only. RA-induced MAT1 ubiquitination reduces CAK abundance and decreases CAK
phosphorylation of RARalpha, whereas inhibition of MAT1 ubiquitination resists
this RA-effect. These findings reveal that RA induces MAT1 ubiquitination to
decrease CAK phosphorylation of RARalpha, suggesting a novel mechanism of
RA-mediated P/D transition in which MAT1 ubiquitination may act as an integral
part of RA-effect to decrease CAK activity in the switch from proliferation to
differentiation.

PMID: 15345685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Blood. 2005 Jan 1;105(1):341-9. Epub 2004 Aug 31.

Retinoids and myelomonocytic growth factors cooperatively activate RARA and
induce human myeloid leukemia cell differentiation via MAP kinase pathways.

Glasow A(1), Prodromou N, Xu K, von Lindern M, Zelent A.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematological Oncology, Institute of Cancer Research, London,
United Kingdom.

Use of all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) in combinatorial differentiation therapy of
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) results in exceptional cure rates. However,
potent cell differentiation effects of ATRA are so far largely restricted to this
disease and long-term survival rates in non-APL acute myelogeneous leukemia (AML)
remain unacceptably poor, requiring development of novel therapeutic strategies. 
We demonstrate here that myelomonocytic growth factors (granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor [G-CSF] and/or granulocyte macrophage
colony-stimulating factor [GM-CSF]) potentiate differentiation effects of ATRA in
different AML cell lines and primary cells from patients with myeloid leukemia.
The ligand-dependent activities of endogenous and transiently expressed retinoic 
acid receptor alpha (RARalpha) isoforms can be potentiated by G/GM-CSF in U-937
cells and correlate with increased expression of ATRA-inducible RARalpha2
isoform. Specific inhibitors of mitogen mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
(MEK)-1/-2 or p38 extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) kinase diminish the
ATRA as well as ATRA and G/GM-CSF-induced activation of the RARalpha proteins and
decreased the differentiation-induced decline in cell numbers. Our data
demonstrate that acting, at least in part, via the MAP kinase pathways,
myelomonocytic growth factors enhance ATRA-dependent activation of the RARalpha
isoforms and maturation of myeloid leukemia cells. These results suggest that
combinatorial use of these agents may be effective in differentiation therapy of 
AML.

PMID: 15339853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2004 Aug;15(8):2079-89.

Podocyte flattening and disorder of glomerular basement membrane are associated
with splitting of dystroglycan-matrix interaction.

Kojima K(1), Davidovits A, Poczewski H, Langer B, Uchida S, Nagy-Bojarski K,
Hovorka A, Sedivy R, Kerjaschki D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Vienna-Allgemeines Krankenhaus, 
Währinger Gürtel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

The transmembrane component of the dystroglycan complex, a heterodimer of alpha- 
and beta-dystroglycan, was recently localized at the basal cell membrane domain
of podocytes, and it was speculated that it serves as a device of the podocyte
for maintaining the complex podocyte foot process architecture, and for
regulating the exact position of its ligands, the matrix proteins laminin and
agrin, in the glomerular basement membrane (GBM). The redistribution of
dystroglycan in two experimental rat models of foot process flattening and
proteinuria-i.e., podocyte damage induced by polycationic protamine sulfate
perfusion, and reactive oxygen species (ROS)-associated puromycin aminonucleoside
nephrosis-was examined. In both experimental diseases, aggregation and reduced
density of alpha-dystroglycan by endocytosis by podocytes was observed. In in
vitro solid-phase binding assays, protamine and ROS competed with the binding of 
alpha-dystroglycan with purified laminin and a recombinant C-terminal fragment of
agrin that contains the dystroglycan-binding domain. These changes were
associated with disorder of the fibrillar components of the lamina rara externa
of the GBM, as confirmed quantitatively by fractal analysis. These results
indicate that both polycation and ROS induce similar changes in the distribution 
of podocyte alpha-dystroglycan that involve competitive disruption of
alpha-dystroglycan/matrix protein complexes, endocytosis of the liberated
receptor by podocytes, and disorganization of the matrix protein arrangement in
the lamina rara externa. This links functional damage of the dystroglycan complex
with structural changes in the GBM.

PMID: 15284294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Int J Hematol. 2004 May;79(4):405-6.

Tetraploid acute promyelocytic leukemia with double PML/RARA gene rearrangements 
successfully treated with all-trans retinoic acid.

Kuyama J, Tsumori Y, Aoyama K, Kosugi S, Take H, Matsuyama T.

PMID: 15218975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2004 Jul;26(7):427-30.

Secondary acute promyelocytic leukemia following chemotherapy for non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma in a child.

Ogami A(1), Morimoto A, Hibi S, Todo S, Sugimoto T, Mori K, Imamura T, Ishida H, 
Yoshihara T, Iguchi A, Imaizumi M, Imashuku S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Graduate
School of Medical Science, Kyoto, Japan. ayaoga@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

Of the several kinds of therapy-related leukemia, therapy-related acute
promyelocytic leukemia (t-APL) is most closely associated with topoisomerase II
inhibitor administration for treatment of malignancies in adults. Although rare
in children, the majority of therapy-related malignancies have been
etoposide-related APL associated with Langerhans cell histiocytosis. The authors 
describe the development of t-APL after chemotherapy administered for
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) in an 8-year-old girl. One month after cessation of 
the 3-year chemotherapy regimen of doxorubicin and other agents but not etoposide
or radiotherapy, the patient was diagnosed with t-APL with positive PML-RARA
molecular abnormality. The patient attained a complete remission following
treatment with all-trans retinoic acid-containing chemotherapy. Thereafter, she
successfully received hematopoietic stem cell transplantation from an HLA-matched
sibling donor. Development of t-APL associated with NHL in children appears to be
rare.

PMID: 15218416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2004 Jul 1;152(1):1-7.

The role of fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for monitoring hematologic 
malignancies with BCR/ABL or ETO/AML1 rearrangement: a comparative study with
FISH and G-banding on 919 consecutive specimens of hematologic malignancies.

Lee DY(1), Cho HI, Kang YH, Yun SS, Park SY, Lee YS, Kim Y, Lee DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, 28 Yongon-dong Chongno-gu, Seoul 110-744, Republic of Korea.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) can detect minor genetic changes that
cytogenetic analysis may miss; however, there are few reports on the kinds of
genetic changes that show large discrepancies between results obtained with FISH 
versus G-banding techniques. To investigate genetic changes that tend to be
detected with FISH only, we compared the results of cytogenetic study and FISH
analysis in 919 consecutive specimens from 304 patients with hematologic
malignancies, covering most of the frequent genetic changes by using 18 types of 
FISH probes. The genetic changes with especially large discrepancy rates at
diagnosis were del(7q) (20.0%), PML/RARA (17.6%), and trisomy 21 (12.5%) and, at 
follow-up, BCR/ABL (28.2%) and AML1/ETO (24.4%); the latter two showed only small
discrepancies at diagnosis (4.7 and 4.8%, respectively). The overall discrepancy 
rate was 6.0% at diagnosis and 11.9% at follow-up, indicating generally greater
discrepancy rates at follow-up. In all but one of the cases with discrepant
results, G-banding missed the corresponding chromosomal abnormalities revealed
with FISH. Considered by type of leukemia, the discrepancy rate at follow-up was 
higher in acute biphenoptypic leukemia (38%) and acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(24.5%) than in acute myelogenous leukemia (10.6%). Given these results, all
patients with known genetic changes should have FISH analysis in follow-up, for
an accurate assessment of the likelihood of complete remission or recurrence. If 
this is not practical, then at a minimum FISH analysis should be done in
follow-up for patients with genetic changes of BCR/ABL and AML1/ETO seen at
diagnosis.

PMID: 15193435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Ecol. 2004 Jul;13(7):2077-88.

Infiltration by alien predators into invertebrate food webs in Hawaii: a
molecular approach.

Sheppard SK(1), Henneman ML, Memmott J, Symondson WO.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, P.O.Box 915, Cardiff CF10
3TL, UK. SheppardSK1@Cardiff.ac.uk

Abstract Alien invertebrate predators have been introduced to Hawaii to control
pests, particularly in lowland areas where most crops are grown. We developed
techniques for assessing the impact of these predators on native food webs in
relatively pristine upland areas where, it was hypothesized, few lowland
predators might be found. Predator densities were assessed along transects within
the Alakaii Swamp on Kaua'i. The most numerous alien biocontrol agents found were
Halmus chalybeus (Coccinellidae), a species known to feed on Lepidoptera eggs.
Laboratory experiments were conducted using two genera of endemic Lepidoptera,
Scotorythra and Eupithecia (Geometridae), that are of considerable conservation
value, the former because of its recent speciation across Hawaii, the latter for 
its unique predatory larvae. Techniques were developed for detecting Lepidoptera 
DNA within the guts of alien predators using prey-specific PCR primers. General
primers amplified fragments of the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase I gene from
beetles and Lepidoptera. The sequences were aligned and used successfully to
design target-specific primers for general detection of the remains of
Geometridae and for particular species, including Scotorythra rara and Eupithecia
monticolans. DNA fragments amplified were short [140-170 base pairs (bp)],
optimizing detection periods following prey ingestion. Trials using the
introduced biocontrol agent Curinus coeruleus (Coccinellidae) demonstrated
detection of Lepidoptera DNA fragments = 151 bp in 85-100% of beetles after 24 h 
digestion of an early instar larva. This study provides a framework for future
use of molecular gut analysis in arthropod conservation ecology and food web
research with considerable potential for quantifying threats to endemic species
in Hawaii and elsewhere.

PMID: 15189227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2004 Aug;40(4):349-54.

Cryptic insertion of MLL gene into 9p22 leads to MLL-MLLT3 (AF9) fusion in a case
of acute myelogenous leukemia.

Shago M(1), Bouman D, Kamel-Reid S, Minden M, Chun K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The formation of a leukemogenic fusion product in hematopoietic malignancies is
commonly achieved by chromosomal translocation. Alternate and cytogenetically
undetectable mechanisms of fusion transcript generation have been documented for 
BCR-AB1, AML1-ETO, PML-RARA, NPM/ALK, and MLL-MLLT2 (AF4). Here, we report the
investigation of a cryptic rearrangement leading to MLL-MLLT3 transcript
formation. Cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood from a 50-year-old acute
myeloid leukemia patient yielded a karyotype of 47,XY,+8,del(11)(q21q23) in all
metaphase cells examined. Metaphase fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis
using the MLL probe at 11q23 revealed that the 5' portion of the MLL gene was
inserted into chromosome 9 at band p22, whereas the 3' region of the MLL gene
remained on chromosome 11. Whole-chromosome paint analysis confirmed the cryptic 
transfer of chromosome 11 material to 9p22. With this information, the karyotype 
was reassigned as 47,XY,+8,der(9)ins(9;11)(p22;q23q23),del(11)(q21q23). RT-PCR
was used to show that the cryptic rearrangement in this patient led to the fusion
of the MLL and MLLT3 transcripts on the der(9). The presence of the MLL-MLLT3
transcript is consistent with the clinical findings in this patient.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15188459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Acta Haematol. 2004;112(1-2):55-67.

Pathogenesis, diagnosis and monitoring of residual disease in acute promyelocytic
leukaemia.

Reiter A(1), Lengfelder E, Grimwade D.

Author information: 
(1)III. Medizinische Universitätsklinik, Klinikum Mannheim, Fakultät für
Klinische Medizin Mannheim der Universität Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.
andreas.reiter@med3.ma.uni-heidelberg.de

The clinical course of acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) has changed over the
last 25 years from one that was fatal for the majority of patients to
representing one of the most curable subtypes of acute myeloid leukaemia. Besides
improved supportive care this has mainly been achieved through the introduction
of novel targeted therapies in the form of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and
arsenic trioxide that specifically address the underlying molecular lesion. APL
is characterized by chromosomal rearrangements of 17q21 leading to the formation 
of fusion proteins involving retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA). To date five
different fusion partners of RARA have been identified, but the vast majority of 
cases are characterized by the presence of the t(15;17)(q22;q12-21), which
involves the promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) gene. The identification of different 
breakpoint microclusters within RARA intron 2 suggests that sequence-associated
or structural factors play a role in the formation of the t(15;17). In addition, 
the comparison of forward and reverse genomic junctions has revealed
microhomologies, deletions and/or duplications of either gene consistent with the
hypothesis that the t(15;17) occurs by non-homologous recombination of DNA after 
processing of the double strand breaks by a dysfunctional DNA damage repair
mechanism. The detection of the PML-RARA fusion gene by reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) is routinely used for diagnosis and monitoring
of minimal residual disease (MRD). In PML-RARA-positive APL about 70% of patients
are expected to be cured with a combination of ATRA and anthracycline-based
chemotherapy. However, relapse remains a major problem. The identification of
patients at high risk of relapse and the development of risk-adapted treatment
schedules are therefore clearly the most challenging tasks in the treatment of
APL. Recent studies have shown that pre-emptive chemotherapy at the time of
molecular relapse improves survival compared to treatment at the point of
haematological relapse. Quantitative RT-PCR technology is expected to further
improve the predictive value of MRD monitoring and therefore to guide therapy in 
order to reduce the rate of relapses and to increase rates of cure in high-risk
patients.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 15179005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Clin Chem. 2004 Jun;50(6):1088-92.

Quantitative assessment of PML-RARa and BCR-ABL by two real-time PCR instruments:
multiinstitutional laboratory trial.

Bolufer P(1), Colomer D, Gomez MT, Martínez J, Gonzalez SM, Gonzalez M, Nomdedeu 
J, Bellosillo B, Barragán E, Lo-Coco F, Diverio D, Hermosin L, García-Marco J, De
Juan MD, Barros F, Romero R, Sanz MA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology, Department of Medical Biopathology, Hospital Universitario 
La Fe, Avda Campanar 21, 46009 Valencia, Spain. bolufer_pas@gva.es

PMID: 15161732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2003;538:57-65; discussion 66.

KLF5/BTEB2, a Krüppel-like zinc-finger type transcription factor, mediates both
smooth muscle cell activation and cardiac hypertrophy.

Nagai R(1), Shindo T, Manabe I, Suzuki T, Kurabayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Tokyo Graduate School of 
Medicine, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Cardiac and vascular biology need to be approached interactively because they
share many common biological features as seen in activation of the local
renin-angiotensin system, angiogenesis, and extracellular matrix production. We
previously reported KLF5/BTEB2, a Krüppel-like zinc-finger type transcription
factor, to activate various gene promoters that are activated in phenotypically
modulated smooth muscle cells, such as a nonmuscle type myosin heavy chain gene
SMemb, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), iNOS, PDGF-A, Egr-1 and VEGF
receptors at least in vitro. KLF5/BTEB2 mRNA levels are downregulated with
vascular development but upregulated in neointima that is produced in response to
vascular injury. Mitogenic stimulation activates KLF5/BTEB2 gene expression
through MEK1 and Egr-1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed KLF5/BTEB2 to 
be induced and to bind the promoter of the PDGF-A gene in response to angiotensin
II stimulation. In order to define the role of KLF5/BTEB2 in cardiovascular
remodeling, we targeted the KLF5/BTEB2 gene in mice. Homozygous mice resulted in 
early embryonic lethality whereas heterozygous mice were apparently normal.
However, in response to external stress, arteries of heterozygotes exhibited
diminished levels of smooth muscle and adventitial cell activation. Furthermore, 
cardiac fibrosis and hypertrophy induced by continuous angiotensin II infusion.
We also found that RARa binds KLF5/BTEB2, and that Am80, a potent synthetic RAR
agonist, inhibits angiotensin II-induced cardiac hypertrophy. These results
indicate that KLF5/BTEB2 is an essential transcription factor that causes not
only smooth muscle phenotypic modulation but also cardiac hypertrophy and
fibrosis.

PMID: 15098654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Exp Med. 2004 Apr 19;199(8):1163-74.

PML-RARA-RXR oligomers mediate retinoid and rexinoid/cAMP cross-talk in acute
promyelocytic leukemia cell differentiation.

Kamashev D(1), Vitoux D, De Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR9051, Hôpital St. Louis, Laboratoire associé N degrees 11, 1, Av. C.
Vellefaux, 75475 Paris, Cedex 10, France. email: dethe@chu-st-louis.fr

PML-RARA was proposed to initiate acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) through
PML-RARA homodimer-triggered repression. Here, we examined the nature of the
PML-RARA protein complex and of its DNA targets in APL cells. Using a
selection/amplification approach, we demonstrate that PML-RARA targets consist of
two AGGTCA elements in an astonishing variety of orientations and spacings,
pointing to highly relaxed structural constrains for DNA binding and identifying 
a major gain of function of this oncogene. PML-RARA-specific response elements
were identified, which all conveyed a major transcriptional response to RA only
in APL cells. In these cells, we demonstrate that PML-RARA oligomers are
complexed to RXR. Directly probing PML-RARA function in APL cells, we found that 
the differentiation enhancer cyclic AMP (cAMP) boosted transcriptional activation
by RA. cAMP also reversed the normal silencing (subordination) of the
transactivating function of RXR when bound to RARA or PML-RARA, demonstrating
that the alternate rexinoid/cAMP-triggered APL differentiation pathway also
activates PML-RARA targets. Finally, cAMP restored both RA-triggered
differentiation and PML-RARA transcriptional activation in mutant RA-resistant
APL cells. Collectively, our findings directly demonstrate that APL cell
differentiation parallels transcriptional activation through PML-RARA-RXR
oligomers and that those are functionally targeted by cAMP, identifying this
agent as another oncogene-targeted therapy.

PMCID: PMC2211888
PMID: 15096541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Korean Med Sci. 2004 Apr;19(2):245-52.

Regulation of glomerular endothelial cell proteoglycans by glucose.

Ha TS(1), Duraisamy S, Faulkner JL, Kasinath BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Korea.
tsha@med.chungbuk.ac.kr

The presence of heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) in anionic sites in the
lamina rara interna of glomerular basement membrane suggests that the
proteoglycan may be deposited by the glomerular endothelial cells (GEndo). We
have previously demonstrated that bovine GEndo in vitro synthesize perlecan, a
species of glomerular basement membrane HSPG. In this study we examined whether
high glucose medium regulates the GEndo metabolism of glycopeptides including
perlecan. Metabolic labeling of glycoconjugates with 35S-SO4, sequential ion
exchange and Sepharose CL-4B chromatography of labeled glycoconjugates, and
northern analysis were performed. Incubation of GEndo for 8 to 14 weeks (but not 
for 1-2 weeks) in medium containing 30 mM glucose resulted in nearly 50%
reduction in the synthesis of cell layer and medium 35SO4-labeled low anionic
glycoproteins and proteoglycans, including that of basement membrane HSPG (Kav
0.42) compared to GEndo grown in 5 mM glucose medium; no changes in anionic
charge density or hydrodynamic size of proteoglycans were noted. Northern
analysis demonstrated that the mRNA abundance of perlecan was reduced by 47% in
cells incubated with 30 mM glucose. Our data suggest that high glucose medium
reduces the GEndo synthesis of perlecan by regulating its gene expression.
Reduced synthesis of perlecan by GEndo may contribute to proteinuria seen in
diabetic nephropathy.

PMCID: PMC2822306
PMID: 15082898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2004 Jan 29;359(1441):61-9.

Recombination and chromosome segregation.

Sherratt DJ(1), Søballe B, Barre FX, Filipe S, Lau I, Massey T, Yates J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QU, UK. sherratt@bioch.ox.ac.uk

The duplication of DNA and faithful segregation of newly replicated chromosomes
at cell division is frequently dependent on recombinational processes. The
rebuilding of broken or stalled replication forks is universally dependent on
homologous recombination proteins. In bacteria with circular chromosomes,
crossing over by homologous recombination can generate dimeric chromosomes, which
cannot be segregated to daughter cells unless they are converted to monomers
before cell division by the conserved Xer site-specific recombination system.
Dimer resolution also requires FtsK, a division septum-located protein, which
coordinates chromosome segregation with cell division, and uses the energy of ATP
hydrolysis to activate the dimer resolution reaction. FtsK can also translocate
DNA, facilitate synapsis of sister chromosomes and minimize entanglement and
catenation of newly replicated sister chromosomes. The visualization of the
replication/recombination-associated proteins, RecQ and RarA, and specific genes 
within living Escherichia coli cells, reveals further aspects of the processes
that link replication with recombination, chromosome segregation and cell
division, and provides new insight into how these may be coordinated.

PMCID: PMC1693297
PMID: 15065657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cancer Cell. 2004 Mar;5(3):203-4.

The sum is greater than the FGFR1 partner.

Braun BS(1), Shannon K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California San Fransisco, San Francisco, CA 94143 USA.

Cancer-associated chromosomal translocations create chimeric oncoproteins that
contribute to aberrant growth by dominant or dominant negative mechanisms.
Interestingly, genes such as MLL, RARA, and EWS are fused to multiple partners.
This molecular promiscuity can provide important functional information, as
specific translocations may be associated with discrete clinical and molecular
features. In this issue of Cancer Cell, use a murine retroviral
transduction/transplantation system to analyze two FGFR1 fusions found in
hematologic malignancies. Their results show that these chromosomal
rearrangements play a central role in pathogenesis, underscore the role of
partner genes in modulating disease phenotypes, and uncover potential therapeutic
targets.

PMID: 15050910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2004 Apr 1;150(1):78-80.

Translocation (11;13)(q23;q14) as the sole abnormality in a childhood de novo
acute myelocytic leukemia.

Tsang KS(1), Li CK, Lau TT, Wong AP, Leung Y, Ng MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Ngan Shing Street, Hong Kong, China.
tsangks@cuhk.edu.hk

We report a case of childhood de novo acute myelocytic leukemia (AML) with
hyperleukocytosis with monoblastic features and deranged hemostasic function.
G-band karyotyping demonstrated a previously unreported t(11;13)(q23;q14) in
metaphase preparations from a fluorodeoxyuridine synchronized 1-day culture of
leukophoresed cells. Multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization revealed no
cryptic rearrangements except for the translocation. Reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction showed no concomitant positivity of AML1/ETO, BCR/ABL, 
PML/RARA, and CBFbeta/MYH11 resulting from t(8;21)(q22;q22), t(9;22)(q34;q11),
t(15;17)(q22;q11), and inv(16) (p13q22), respectively. This report of childhood
de novo AML harboring t(11;13)(q23;q14) as the sole cytogenetic abnormality
provides more data on the leukemogenesis of de novo AML with a 11q23
rearrangement.

PMID: 15041229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2004 Mar;149(2):131-6.

Secondary near-tetraploidy with double der(15)t(15;17) in acute promyelocytic
leukemia in relapse.

Morita Y(1), Takahashi A, Yamamoto K, Miki T, Murakami N, Miura O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Yushima 1-5-45, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Tetraploidy or near-tetraploidy is a rare cytogenetic abnormality in acute
myelocytic leukemia. We report here a case of acute promyelocytic leukemia that
showed near-tetraploidy with double der(15)t(15;17) the leukemia relapsed. At
diagnosis, cytogenetic analysis failed to reveal any karyotypic abnormality;
however, a promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid receptor alpha (PML/RARA) fusion 
transcript of the bcr3-type was detected with reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction analysis, and a single PML/RARA fusion signal was observed with
fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis. At the first relapse, the majority
of leukemic cells showed pseudodiploid karyotypes with der(15)t(15;17), as well
as additional chromosomal abnormalities, and exhibited a single PML/RARA fusion
signal. A small fraction of leukemic cells, however, showed near-tetraploid
karyotypes with double der(15)t(15;17), as well as some additional chromosomal
abnormalities in common with the pseudodiploid clones, and exhibited double
PML/RARA fusion signals. At the second and third relapses, leukemic cells with
near-tetraploidy and double PML/RARA fusion signals became predominant. The
PML/RARA fusion transcript of the bcr3 type was also observed at each relapse. In
addition, Southern blot analysis of the RARA gene at diagnosis and at the second 
relapse showed a common rearranged band. Notably, giant, bizarre, and
hypogranular promyelocytes expressing CD2, CD34, and HLA-DR appeared at the first
relapse and became predominant at the second and third relapses. These
observations indicate that the APL cells with near-tetraploidy and double
der(15)t(15;17) clonally evolved from the pseudodiploid leukemic cells and
exhibited the bizarre morphology and aberrant surface immunophenotypes.

PMID: 15036889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Mar 1;125A(2):135-44.

Genetic analysis of candidate loci in non-syndromic cleft lip families from
Antioquia-Colombia and Ohio.

Moreno LM(1), Arcos-Burgos M, Marazita ML, Krahn K, Maher BS, Cooper ME,
Valencia-Ramirez CR, Lidral AC.

Author information: 
(1)Dows Institute for Dental Research, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242,
USA.

Non-syndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL/P) is a genetically
complex birth defect, with a prevalence from 1/500 to 1/1,000 live births.
Evidence from linkage and linkage disequilibrium studies is contradictory
suggesting that heterogeneity between study populations may exist. A recent
report of a genome widescan in 92 sib pairs from the United Kingdom revealed
suggestive linkage to 10 loci [Prescott et al., 2000]. The purpose of this study 
is to replicate those results and evaluate additional candidate genes in 49
Colombian and 13 Ohio families. Genotypes were obtained for STRPs at 1p36, 2p13
(TGFA), 4p16 (MSX1), 6p23-25, 6q25-27, 8q23-24, 11p12-q13, 12q13, 14q24 (TGFB3), 
16q22-24, 17q12-21 (RARA), and Xcen-q21. Linkage was performed using parametric
(dominant and recessive models) and non-parametric (GenehunterNPL and SimIBD)
analyses. In addition, heterogeneity was analyzed using GenehunterHLOD, and
association determined by the TDT. The Colombian families showed significant
SimIBD results for 11p12-q13 (P = 0.034), 12q13 (P = 0.015), 16q22-24 (0.01), and
17q12-21 (0.009), while the Ohio families showed significant SimIBD results for
1p36 (P = 0.02), TGFA (P = 0.005), 6p23 (P = 0.004), 11p12-q13 (P = 0.048) and
significant NPL results for TGFA (NPL = 3.01, P = 0.009), 4p16 (MNPL = 2.07, P = 
0.03) and 12q13 (SNPL = 3.55, P = 0.007). Significant association results were
obtained only for the Colombian families in the regions 1p36 (P = 0.046), 6p23-25
(P = 0.020), and 12q13 (P = 0.046). In addition several families yielded LOD
scores ranging from 1.09 to 1.73, for loci at 4p16, 6p23-25, 16q22-24, and 17q13.
These results confirm previous reports for these loci. However, the differences
between the two populations suggest that population specific locus heterogeneity 
exists. This article contains supplementary material, which may be viewed at the 
American Journal of Medical Genetics website at
http://www.interscience.wiley.com/jpages/0148-7299/suppmat/index.html.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14981713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cell Cycle. 2004 Apr;3(4):389-90. Epub 2004 Apr 1.

A new role for C/EBPbeta in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Duprez E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie Marsielle Luminy, France. eduprez@ciml.univ-mrs.fr

The differentiating properties of retinoic acid (RA) have been used beneficially 
for the treatment of Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia (APL) for more than a decade.
However, the molecular mechanisms of how RA induces APL cell differentiation are 
still poorly understood. In our previous work, we provided a novel mechanism to
explain the unique sensitivity to RA of APL cells. We proposed that C/EBPbeta is 
an ATRA-dependent PML/RARA target gene and that its activation is critical during
ATRA-induced differentiation of APL cells. Here, I discuss how C/EBPbeta could be
an important gene in APL pathogenesis.

PMID: 14976428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Indian J Cancer. 2003 Oct-Dec;40(4):135-9.

Cytogenetics and fluorescence in-situ hybridization in detection of hematological
malignancies.

Frenny VJ(1), Antonella Z, Luisa A, Shah AD, Sheth JJ, Rocchi M.

Author information: 
(1)FRIGE, Genetic Centre, 20/1, Bima Nagar, Satellite, Ahmedabad-380 015, India. 
jshethad1@sancharnet.in

BACKGROUND: The technique of Fluorescence In-Situ Hybridization (FISH), a hybrid 
of cytogenetics and molecular biology has increased the resolution and
application of cytogenetics in various neoplastic processes. In various types of 
leukemias, primary investigation by conventional cytogenetic [CC] technique
followed by FISH has increased our understanding of the abnormal clonal formation
involving different gene region.
AIMS: Present study is aimed to use different kinds of in-house FISH probes in
various hematological malignancies and its correlation with conventional
cytogenetic finding.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Cytogenetic study was carried out in 360 patients either
from peripheral blood or from bone marrow cells suspected for various types of
leukemias. Four of 360 cases were further selected for FISH study by using
different types of in-house probes, such as BAC [Bacterial Artificial
Chromosome], PAC [Phague Artificial Chromosome], alphoid, PCP [Partial Chromosome
Paint] and WCP [Whole Chromosome paint].
RESULTS: The results confirmed breakpoints of inversion 16 and del 16 in case 2
and 3 respectively. Whereas, case 1 did not confirm the cytogenetic findings of
t(15;17) by PML/RARa fusion signals as multiple cell lines were involved in the
patients. PCP and WCP were helpful in the identification of the marker chromosome
in case 1. Telomeric and centromeric probes confirmed the cytogenetic findings of
t(5;7) in case 4.
CONCLUSION: We observe from this study that, in addition to the conventional
cytogenetic study, FISH study provide further confirmation of chromosomal
rearrangements. This facilitates our understanding of the neoplastic process more
precisely for the better prognostication of the patient.

PMID: 14716109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2003 Dec 1;28(23):E490-1.

Peculiar fracture of the cervical spine: a rara avis.

Ozçakar L(1), Basgöze O.

Author information: 
(1)Hacettepe University Medical School, Department of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, Ankara, Turkey. lozcakar@yahoo.com

STUDY DESIGN: Case report.
OBJECTIVES: To report a peculiar case of the cervical spine that ensued after a
sudden harsh extension along with its prompt evaluation and management.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Fractures of the cervical spine do occur and are
usually inconsequential because of the rarity of accompanying neurologic
complications. Accordingly, they are often treated conventionally.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cervical radiographies and magnetic resonance imaging were
performed to depict the fracture.
RESULTS: Cervical radiographies demonstrated the C7 fracture in our patient but
the magnetic resonance imaging also disclosed a T1 fracture. He was treated by
physical therapy and close follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: This type of an unexpected incident in daily life can be seen and it
should always orient the clinicians toward being vigilant against concomitant
vertebral fractures or neurologic complications. And once it is proven that the
spinal cord is not compromised, one might feel comfortable in treating solely
these inconsequential fractures conventionally.

PMID: 14652483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2003 Sep 25;83(18):1561-4.

[Autologous transplantation of recombinant interleukine-2 activated bone marrow
for acute promyelocytic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu QF(1), Sun J, Zhang Y, Liu XL, Xu B, Xu D, Feng R, Meng FY, Song LL, Zhou SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Nanfang Hospital, First Military Medical University,
Guangzhou 510515, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the benefit of autologous transplantation of interleukine-2
activated bone marrow (ABM) in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) as
consolidation therapy.
METHODS: 31 patients with APL, 27 in first complete remission (CR1), 3 in CR2,
and 1 in partial remission (PR) after the second relapse, were treated with
autologous transplantation of ABM. The conditioning regimens included MACC
protocol (Melphalan, Ara-C, CTX, and CCNU) in 26 patients and TBI + CY protocol
in 5 patients. The PML/RARa fusion gene was measured by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis model was used to estimate the
disease-free survival (DFS) rate at 5 years post-transplantation and COX
regression model was used to analyze the DFS-influencing factors, including sex, 
PML/RARa positive state, pre-transplantation state (CR1, CR2, or PR), white blood
cell (WBC) count, and platelet (PBC) count.
RESULTS: The 27 patients in CR1 had a DFS time of 3 to 113 months (with a mean
DFS time of 46 months), and a 5-year DFS rate of 100%; none of them suffered a
relapse after transplantation. One of the 3 patients in CR2 relapsed in 19 months
after the transplantation and the other two patients had been in DFS state for 7 
and 33 months respectively. The patient in PR obtained CR and relapsed 8 months
after the transplantation. All the patients showed reconstitution of
hematopoiesis. None of the patients died of transplantation-related complication.
Multivariate analysis showed that long-term survival was correlated with the
pre-transplantation statues and not with sex, positivity of PML/RARa, and WBC and
PBC counts.
CONCLUSION: Autologous transplantation of ABM reduces the relapse and increases
the long-term survival in the patients with APL in CR, especially in CR1.

PMID: 14642108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Appl Genet. 2003;44(4):553-6.

Molecular diagnostics of promyelocytic leukaemia.

Kocki J(1), Constantinou M, Cioch M, Lancut M, Kaluzewski B, Dmoszynska A,
Wojcierowski J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland. 
janusz.kocki@inetia.pl

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) is characterised by proliferation of abnormal
promyelocytes. The reciprocal translocation between the long arms of chromosomes 
15 and 17, and the fusion between the retinoic acid receptor (RARa) gene, and PML
gene, is unique to APL. Because of unsuccessful cytogenetic analysis of
conventional G-banding technique (mitoses were not observed), we diagnosed three 
non-treatment patients with APL by following molecular methods: reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). At the time of 
diagnosis our patients showed reciprocal translocation t(15;17)(q22;q12) in all
cases studied (66-85% of positive bone marrow cells). With the use of CGH we
observed the unbalanced chromosomal aberrations: losses of 5q13.1, 5q31.3, 9p21
regions, gain of 5q32 region and trisomy of 18 chromosome.

PMID: 14617837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. EMBO J. 2003 Nov 3;22(21):5806-16.

C/EBPbeta: a major PML-RARA-responsive gene in retinoic acid-induced
differentiation of APL cells.

Duprez E(1), Wagner K, Koch H, Tenen DG.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis
Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA. eduprez@ciml.univ-mrs.fr

In acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), the translocation t(15;17) induces a block
at the promyelocytic stage of differentiation in an all-trans-retinoic acid
(ATRA)-responsive manner. Here we report that upon treatment with ATRA, t(15;17) 
cells (NB4) reveal a very rapid increase in protein level and binding activity of
C/EBPbeta, a C/EBP family member, which was not observed in an ATRA-resistant NB4
cell line. We further provide evidence that ATRA mediates a direct increase of
C/EBPbeta, only in PML-RARA (promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid receptor
alpha)-expressing cells. In addition, transactivation experiments indicate that
the PML-RARA fusion protein, but not PML-RARA mutants defective in
transactivation, strongly transactivates the C/EBPbeta promoter. These results
suggest that PML-RARA mediates ATRA-induced C/EBPbeta expression. Finally, we
demonstrate the importance of C/EBPbeta in granulocytic differentiation. We show 
that not only does C/EBPbeta induce granulocytic differentiation of non-APL
myeloid cell lines independent of addition of ATRA or other cytokines, but also
that C/EBPbeta induction is required during ATRA-induced differentiation of APL
cells. Taken together, C/EBPbeta is an ATRA-dependent PML-RARA target gene
involved in ATRA-induced differentiation of APL cells.

PMCID: PMC275413
PMID: 14592978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Clin Immunol. 2003 Oct;109(1):80-8.

Profiling aberrant DNA methylation in hematologic neoplasms: a view from the tip 
of the iceberg.

Esteller M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics Laboratory, Spanish National Cancer Center (CNIO), Melchor 
Fernandez Almagro 3,28029 Madrid, Spain. mesteller@cnio.es

Cancer is also an epigenetic disease. The main epigenetic modification in humans 
is DNA methylation. Transformed cells undergo a dramatic change in their DNA
methylation patterns: certain CpG islands located in the promoter regions of
tumor-suppressor genes become hypermethylated and the contiguous gene rests
silenced and this phenomenon occurs in an overall genomic environment of DNA
hypomethylation. The profile of CpG island hypermethylation in hematologic
malignancies is an epigenetic signature unique for each subtype of leukemia or
lymphoma. Although the most widely studied genes are the cell-cycle inhibitors
p15INK4b and p16INK4a (specially in AML and ALL), the list of
methylation-repressed genes in these neoplasms is expanding very rapidly,
including MGMT, RARB2, CRBP1, SOCS-1, CDH1, DAPK1, and others. A necessary
cross-talk between genetic alterations and DNA methylation exists: certain
chromosomal translocations may induce hypermethylation, such as the PML-RARa, or 
attract methylation, such as BCR-ABL, but DNA hypomethylation can be the culprit 
behind the genesis of certain abnormal recombination events. From a translational
standpoint, hypermethylation can be used as a marker of recurrent disease or
progression, for example, in MDS, or response to chemotherapy, such as MGMT
methylation in B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Furthermore, promising studies
using DNA demethylating agents and histone deacetylase inhibitors are underway to
awake these dormant tumor-suppressor genes for a better treatment of the patient 
with a hematologic malignancy.

PMID: 14585279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Wildl Dis. 2003 Jul;39(3):683-9.

Helminths of the ocelot from southern Texas.

Pence DB(1), Tewes ME, Laack LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, 3601
4th Street, Lubbock, Texas 79430, USA.

In the USA, the ocelot (Leopardus pardalis) is a highly endangered felid found
only in a few remaining vestiges of native thornshrub brushland in the Lower Rio 
Grande Valley (LRGV) of extreme southern Texas. From 1987-1998, carcasses of 15
adult ocelots that died of vehicular accidents or natural causes were examined
for helminths. All cats had 1-8 (mean = 3) helminth species. All were infected
with 1-101 (mean +/- SE = 32 +/- 7) Toxascaris leonina. Other helminths from
these ocelots were Alaria marcianae, Brachylaima sp., Mesocestoides lineatus,
Taenia rileyi, Oncicola canis, Dirofilaria immitis, Physaloptera rara,
Ancylostoma tubaeformae, Cylicospirura chevreuxi, Vogeloides felis, and
Metathelazia californica. Additionally, two cats had scarring of the aorta with
lesions typical of those caused by Spriocerca lupi, although larval nematodes
were not seen. A clinal variation in size of nearly three orders of magnitude was
noted in the diplostomatid trematodes in the small intestine of one adult male
ocelot. Despite the differences in size, all specimens appeared morphologically
identical and were regarded as A. marcianae. Helminth prevalences and abundances,
including those of potentially pathogenic species like D. immitis, were low.
Although a single heartworm infection may have contributed to the death of one
ocelot, helminth infections in general seemed to be of no great consequence to
this endangered ocelot population. The helminth fauna of ocelots in the LRGV is
reflective of that from wild felids in general; all have been reported previously
from the bobcat (Lynx rufus) and mountain lion (Puma concolor) elsewhere in
Texas.

PMID: 14567231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Nat Med. 2003 Nov;9(11):1413-7. Epub 2003 Oct 19.

PML-RARA-targeted DNA vaccine induces protective immunity in a mouse model of
leukemia.

Padua RA(1), Larghero J, Robin M, le Pogam C, Schlageter MH, Muszlak S, Fric J,
West R, Rousselot P, Phan TH, Mudde L, Teisserenc H, Carpentier AF, Kogan S,
Degos L, Pla M, Bishop JM, Stevenson F, Charron D, Chomienne C.

Author information: 
(1)LBCH INSERM E0-03, U462 & U396, Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Hôpital 
Saint-Louis, AP-HP 75010, Paris, France. rose.padua@kcl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2003 Nov;9(11):1354-6.

Despite improved molecular characterization of malignancies and development of
targeted therapies, acute leukemia is not curable and few patients survive more
than 10 years after diagnosis. Recently, combinations of different therapeutic
strategies (based on mechanisms of apoptosis, differentiation and cytotoxicity)
have significantly increased survival. To further improve outcome, we studied the
potential efficacy of boosting the patient's immune response using specific
immunotherapy. In an animal model of acute promyelocytic leukemia, we developed a
DNA-based vaccine by fusing the human promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid
receptor-alpha (PML-RARA) oncogene to tetanus fragment C (FrC) sequences. We show
for the first time that a DNA vaccine specifically targeted to an oncoprotein can
have a pronounced effect on survival, both alone and when combined with all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA). The survival advantage is concomitant with time-dependent
antibody production and an increase in interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). We also show
that ATRA therapy on its own triggers an immune response in this model. When DNA 
vaccination and conventional ATRA therapy are combined, they induce protective
immune responses against leukemia progression in mice and may provide a new
approach to improve clinical outcome in human leukemia.

PMID: 14566333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Leukemia. 2004 Jan;18(1):183-6.

A cryptic insertion (17;15) on both chromosomes 17 with lack of PML-RARA
expression in a case of atypical acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Tchinda J, Volpert S, Liersch R, Zühlsdorf M, Serve H, Neumann T, Kennerknecht I,
Berdel WE, Büchner T, Horst J.

PMID: 14562122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Oncogene. 2003 Sep 29;22(42):6489-96.

Epigenetic targets in hematopoietic malignancies.

Claus R(1), Lübbert M.

Author information: 
(1)Department Internal Medicine I, Division Hematology/Oncology, University of
Freiburg Medical Center, Hugstetter Str., D-79106 Freiburg, Germany.

Frequent genetic alterations in hematopoietic neoplasias (chromosomal
translocations, point mutations, etc.) have provided biologic targets for the
development of effective novel therapies. A rapidly increasing body of knowledge 
provides evidence also for multiple epigenetic alterations in these disorders,
which can complement or even precede genetic aberrations. Gene inactivation
('silencing') of tumor suppressor and growth inhibitory genes (e.g. the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p16, p15, p21) is frequently mediated by DNA
methylation of gene promoters. The acetylation state of histones (functionally
linked to the DNA methylation state by the methylcytosine binding protein 2,
recruiting histone deacetylases) provides a second major epigenetic silencing
mechanism. Therapeutic reversal strategies are being developed for acute
leukemias, myelodysplastic syndromes and malignant lymphomas. Since the discovery
of the DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt) inhibitory activity of two azanucleosides
(5-azacytidine, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine/decitabine) even at doses with minimal
nonhematologic toxicity, both have been clinically studied in several myeloid
neoplasias, particularly in elderly patients unable to tolerate aggressive
treatment. Further development of agents counteracting aberrant methylation is
directed at more targeted approaches, for example, antisense molecules against
Dnmts. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) can be inhibited by numerous compounds
(sodium phenylbutyrate, valproic acid, novel compounds such as depsipeptide),
which have entered the clinical arena in similar indications as Dnmt inhibitors. 
Impressive effects of HDAC inhibition in acute promyelocytic leukemia models
(PML/RARA expression) translate the finding of HDAC recruitment by this chimeric 
transcription factor to its target genes. The recent discovery of recruitment by 
PML/RARA also of Dnmt activity to the retinoic acid receptor-beta promoter makes 
it an interesting candidate for Dnmt inhibitors. Studies combining a
're-expressor' strategy with inhibitors of Dnmts and HDACs are underway. Thus,
resensitization to biological agents such as retinoids, colony-stimulating
factors and other differentiation inducers may be envisioned.

PMID: 14528273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2003 Sep;145(2):144-51.

New highly sensitive fluorescence in situ hybridization method to detect PML/RARA
fusion in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Brockman SR(1), Paternoster SF, Ketterling RP, Dewald GW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Laboratory Genetics, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, 
MN 55905, USA.

We investigated a new fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) method to detect 
PML/RARA fusion and/or anomalies of the RARA gene (alias RARalpha) in interphase 
nuclei from patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). This method uses a 
commercially available product with two different colored fluorescent probes to
detect both PML/RARA gene fusion products (double fusion signal or dual-color
fluorescence in situ hybridization [D-FISH]). A total of 82 bone marrow specimens
were studied, including 30 from normal bone marrow transplant donors, 33 from
patients with untreated APL, 14 from patients with treated APL, and 5 from APL
patients with known translocation variants or alternate translocations. The
signal patterns and percentage of abnormal nuclei were determined in a blinded
study on 500 interphase nuclei for each specimen. Based on 25 normal specimens,
the normal cutoff was >0.6% and >1.6% for t(15;17) and t(17;var), respectively.
The clinical sensitivity for this series of patients was 98% and the clinical
specificity was 100%. The results suggest that the new D-FISH probe set can
detect all t(15;17)(q22;q21) and all variant forms of this translocation
associated with PML and RARA. In addition, this FISH method can detect all
alternate translocations involving RARA and not PML. This FISH method can be used
both for the accurate diagnosis of APL and to monitor low levels of disease in
treated patients.

PMID: 12935927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2003 Aug;145(1):54-9.

Rearrangement of the MLL gene and a region proximal to the RARalpha gene in a
case of acute myelocytic leukemia M5 with a t(11;17)(q23;q21).

Dubé S(1), Fetni R, Hazourli S, Champagne M, Lemieux N.

Author information: 
(1)Département de pathologie et de biologie cellulaire, Faculté de médecine,
Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

A case of acute myelocytic leukemia (AML) M5 subtype (French-American-British
classification), in a 13-year-old girl showed the abnormal karyotype
46,XX,t(11;17)(q23;q21) in all bone marrow cells analyzed. Rearrangements
involving 11q23 are frequent in cases of AML M5 and often involve the MLL gene.
Nevertheless, t(11;17)(q23;q21) is very rare in this type of leukemia. In acute
promyelocytic leukemia, the RARalpha gene, located at 17q21, is involved in
almost all cases. Fluorescence in situ hybridization studies revealed a deletion 
of the C-terminal part of the MLL gene and a translocation of the RARalpha gene
on the derivative chromosome 11, proximal to the remaining part of the MLL gene. 
However, hybridization with the LSI RARA dual color break-apart rearrangement
probe showed that the RARalpha gene was not rearranged in this translocation.
This is the first study reporting a t(11;17)(q23;q21) with a deletion distal to
MLL gene exon 6 in a case of AML M5. Furthermore, this is the second study that
strongly suggests the implication of a gene proximal and close to the RARalpha
locus in a case of AML M5. According to these results, the discovery of new
fusion partner genes of MLL and the precise characterization of t(11;17) will be 
important for the understanding of neoplastic cell differentiation in AML M5.

PMID: 12885463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Haematologica. 2000 Jul;85(7):758-62.

Cutaneous promyelocytic sarcoma at sites of vascular access and marrow
aspiration. A characteristic localization of chloromas in acute promyelocytic
leukemia?

Sanz MA(1), Larrea L, Sanz G, Martín G, Sempere A, Gomis F, Martínez J, Regadera 
A, Saavedra S, Jarque I, Jiménez C, Cervera J, de La Rubia J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Hematología, Hospital Universitario La Fe, Av. Campanar 21, 46009 
Valencia, Spain. msanz@uv.es

Extramedullary disease (EMD) is a rare clinical event in acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL). Although the skin is involved in half of the reported EMD cases, 
the occurrence of cutaneous promyelocytic sarcoma (PS) has been described very
rarely. We report here three cases of PS which have the peculiarity of appearing 
at sites of punctures for arterial and venous blood and marrow samples (sternal
manubrium, antecubital fossa, wrist over the radial artery pulse, catheter
insertion scar). At presentation, all patients had hyperleukocytosis and a
morphologic diagnosis of microgranular acute promyelocytic leukemia variant
confirmed at the genetic level by demonstration of the specific chromosomal
translocation t(15;17). A BCR3 type PML/RARa transcript was documented in the two
patients for whom diagnostic RT-PCR was available. Patients had morphologic bone 
marrow remission at the time the PS appeared. A predilection for the development 
of cutaneous PS at sites of previous vascular damage has been noted, but the
pathogenesis remains largely unknown. A potential role for all-trans retinoic
acid has been advocated, although one of the three patients in our series had
received no ATRA. A review of the literature revealed six similar cases and
hyperleukocytosis at diagnosis was a consistent finding in all of them. A careful
physical examination of these particular sites in the follow-up of patients at
risk, as well as cutaneous biopsy and laboratory examination of suspected lesions
are strongly recommended.

PMID: 10897129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Biocell. 1998 Dec;22(3):187-96.

Structure of the Bufo arenarum kidney: renal corpuscle, neck segment and proximal
tubule.

Farías A(1), Fiorito LE, Hermida GN.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The structural organization of the renal corpuscle (RC), ciliated neck segment
(NS) and the proximal tubule (PT) were studied in the toad, Bufo arenarum, by
means of light and transmission electron microscopy. The ciliated neck segment
and the proximal tubule are located in the dorsolateral zone of the kidney, while
the distal tubules are located in a ventromedial zone. RC are found between these
two zones. The glomerular filter apparatus consists of the podocyte epithelium, a
basement membrane, a subendothelial space and an endothelium. The podocyte emits 
cytoplasmatic processes extending over the surface of the glomerular capillaries.
These processes divide into further processes ending in expansions known as
pediceles. The basement membrane consists of a lamina rara externa and a rather
thin lamina densa, while the subendothelial space contains collagen fibers and
slender cytoplasmic processes of the mesangial cells. NS are composed of ciliated
cells with a characteristic location of the mitochondria. The PT consists of
prismatic cells with a dense luminal brush border of long microvilli and numerous
apical vesicles. The basal cell membrane is increased by small infoldings. One
characteristic structure of the cytoplasm is the presence of lipid droplets. The 
cytological structure of PT cells can be considered as an adaptation for the
reabsorption of organic materials.

PMID: 10892449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2000 Feb;38(2):171-7.

Evaluation of RNA isolation methods and reference genes for RT-PCR analyses of
rare target RNA.

Mannhalter C(1), Koizar D, Mitterbauer G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Molecular Biology Division, University
School of Medicine, Vienna, Austria. christine.mannhalter@univie.ac.at

Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis is increasingly
becoming part of the diagnostic and prognostic evaluation for hematologic and
oncologic disorders. Currently, different RNA isolation methods are used in the
diagnostic laboratories. No data are available on their suitability for sensitive
detection of breakpoint cluster region-abelson (BCR-ABL) gene transcripts. We
have extracted RNA from mononuclear cell (MNC) fractions and from lysed blood
samples of 4 patients (1 with leukocytosis, 1 with chronic myelogeneous leukemia 
(CML) under interferon treatment, and 2 CML patients after bone marrow
transplantation) with 3 RNA isolation reagents (TRIzol, RNAzol, FastTube
reagent). RNA yield was slightly higher with RNAzol than with TRIzol as indicated
by agarose gel electrophoresis and spectrophotometric measurement at 260 nm. The 
FastTube reagent was unsuitable for RNA isolation from MNC, and was not evaluated
for lysed blood. Quantitative competitive RT-PCR amplification of the ABL gene
showed comparable results for RNA isolated with RNAzol and TRIzol. In RNA samples
extracted from lysed whole blood, the presence of amplifiable RNA/cDNA was
confirmed by amplification of 4 selected reference genes (porphobilinogen
deaminase (PBGD), ABL, the gene spanning the BCR on chromosome 22 and retinoic
acid receptor alpha (RARA)) in a multiplex PCR. High quality, DNA-free RNA was
obtained with RNAzol, and 1 BCR-ABL-positive (specific for translocation t [9;
221) cell among 2x10(4) normal cells was successfully detectable by single step
RT-PCR. In RNA isolated with TRIzol, major contaminations with genomic DNA were
observed which significantly impaired the interpretation of the results of RT-PCR
analysis.

PMID: 10834406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Clin Lab Haematol. 2000 Apr;22(2):97-102.

Rapid detection of BCR/ABL and PML/RARA using fluorescence in situ hybridization 
in cytospin preparations.

Horton Y(1), Ford A, MacKie MJ, Johnson PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Laboratory Haematology, Western General Hospital,
Edinburgh, UK.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is increasingly used as an adjunct to
conventional cytogenetic analysis in the diagnosis of haematological malignancies
and in monitoring minimal residual disease. FISH, however, is generally performed
on slides prepared after short-term sample incubation and therefore, whilst
faster than conventional cytogenetics, still requires a minimum of 2 days for a
result to be obtained. A simplification of the FISH procedure is reported using
uncultured cytospin preparations of bone marrow or peripheral blood for the rapid
diagnosis of the BCR-ABL and PML-RARa gene rearrangements. It demonstrates that
culturing has no effect on the ratio of normal to abnormal cells in the
nondividing population. Data is presented from an analysis of 24 cases in whom
unequivocal results were obtained in less than 12 h and in complete concordance
with results obtained by conventional cytogenetics and/or interphase FISH.

PMID: 10792399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Epidemiol Prev. 2000 Jan-Feb;24(1):21-7.

[Environment and genetics in the etiology of cleft lip and cleft palate with
reference to the role of folic acid].

[Article in Italian]

Bianchi F(1), Calzolari E, Ciulli L, Cordier S, Gualandi F, Pierini A, Mossey P.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Fisiologia Clinica del CNR, Pisa.

The combined birth prevalence of cleft palate [CP] and cleft lip with or without 
cleft palate [CL(P)] in Europe is approximately one in 700 with characteristic
regional variations. Orofacial clefting (OC) is therefore now one of the most
frequent congenital anomalies, with a higher birth prevalence that Down's
Syndrome or Neural Tube defects, but still lower than cardiovascular
malformation. Babies with OC require a multidisciplinary medical approach,
surgery and rehabilitative treatments over time. This means an important effort
in terms of social organization as well as economical costs for the health care
system. In Italy, the health care costs for approximately 800 children born with 
orofacial clefting per year has been estimated at around 150 billion Lire (80
million Euros). The etiology of OC is complex and heterogeneous both for isolated
and associated defects; causes linked to environment, genetics and
gene-environment interaction are known, although there is still a lot to do,
especially in clarifying the role of genetics in producing susceptibility to the 
environment. Four categories of genes for which there are results suggestive of a
genetic susceptibility to OCs are: 1) genes expressed in a particular area of the
embryo or in a particular period of the palatine arch development, such as the
transforming growth factors alpha and beta (TGF alpha, TGF beta 2, TGF beta 3);
2) genes having biological activities linked to the OC's pathogenesis without
direct involvement (e.g. the retinoic acid receptor (RARA), the
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase receptor (MTHFR) and the folic acid receptor 
(FOLR1); 3) genes or locus identified in experimental animals as the homeotic
genes MSX-1 and MSX-2; 4) genes involved in the interaction with the xenobiotics 
metabolism as those in P-450 cytochrome system. Several environmental factors
have been implicated in the OC etiology; among those, the folic acid
supplementation during the periconceptional period that was found effective in
the prevention of neural tube defects. In fact, folic acid deficiency may be
responsible for different malformations through a common mechanism that
interferes with the embryonic development, depending on the maternal or embryo
genotype. Further investigation is required to study in depth how the genotype
would modify the role of environmental factors like folic acid. Well-designed and
conducted epidemiological studies seem to be able to give worthwhile information.
Studies carried out in Europe on these issues are a few, particularly those on
gene-environment interaction. Recent results obtained in molecular biology and
the availability of wealth of data can allow to perform ad hoc investigations,
being important not only for the basic research but also for their public health 
implications. For this objective a specific scientific network at the European
level has been set by the European Science Foundation (ESF), whose first step
will be to establish consistent case ascertainment and data collection across
Europe and to develop standardized protocols and methods of analysis. It is hoped
that in the longer term such multicentre collaborative research will enable
combined analysis and lead to the identification of genetic susceptibility to
certain environmental factors, including nutrition. Such studies would inform the
current debate about the efficacy of folic acid and other nutritional factors in 
prevention of disease in the developing embryo. Subsequent public health measures
targeted according to risk might reduce the prevalence of disorders such as
orofacial clefting.

PMID: 10748547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Clin Lab Med. 2000 Mar;20(1):105-17, ix.

Minimal residual disease in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Weil SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center in Population Science, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. scw_mail_98@yahoo.com

In the last decade our understanding of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) has
advanced tremendously. The recognition of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) as a
powerful therapeutic agent paralleled the cloning of the t(15;17) breakpoint.
RtPCR for the PML-RARA hybrid mRNA has become the hallmark of molecular diagnosis
and molecular monitoring in APL. Current techniques are useful in predicting
complete remission and a possible cure in many patients who repeatedly test
negative by PCR. Standardizing techniques and improving the sensitivity of the
assay are important. Doing this in a way so that clinically relevant minimal
residual disease can be distinguished from "indolent disease" remains among the
future challenges in APL.

PMID: 10702899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Clin Lab Med. 2000 Mar;20(1):83-103, ix.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia. From morphology to molecular lesions.

Mattson JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, William Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak,
Michigan, USA. jmattson@beaumont.edu

Acute promyelocytic leukemia is a unique subtype of acute myelogenous leukemia
characterized by distinct morphologic, cytogenetic, and clinical characteristics.
The t(15;17) translocation, which is a hallmark of this disease, results in a
transcriptionally active fusion gene-derived from the PML gene from chromosome 15
and the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARa) gene from chromosome 17. The PML/RARa
protein product is responsible for the leukemic phenotype in these patients, but 
is also able to respond to pharmacologic levels of retinoic acid and induce cell 
differentiation. Treatment of this leukemia by retinoic acid represents the first
example of gene-directed differentiation therapy for acute leukemia and has lead 
to greater understanding of the pathogenesis of this disease at the molecular
level.

PMID: 10702898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Hunan Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1998;23(5):503-4.

[Bcl-2 mRNA expression in acute promyelocytic leukemia by RT-PCR].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu J(1), Qi Z, Jian Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Xiangya Hospital, Hunan Medical University,
Changsha.

To check the anti-apoptosis gene bcl-2 mRNA expression in 20 APL patients by PCR,
and analyse the relationship between bcl-2 mRNA and the PML-RARa isoform. The
result is that the bcl-2 mRNA expression has no significance between the isoforms
(P > 0.05). This shows that the PML-RARa transcription type has no influence on
the clinical features and prognosis.

PMID: 10682575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Leukemia. 2000 Feb;14(2):255-61.

A mutated PML/RARA found in the retinoid maturation resistant NB4 subclone,
NB4-R2, blocks RARA and wild-type PML/RARA transcriptional activities.

Duprez E(1), Benoit G, Flexor M, Lillehaug JR, Lanotte M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U-496, Centre G Hayem, Hopital Saint-Louis, Paris, France.

The fusion protein PML/RARA, associated with acute promyelocytic leukemia behaves
as an abnormal retinoic acid (RA) receptor with altered transactivation
properties but is still inducible by RA. The chimeric protein is thought to
promote leukemogenesis but also paradoxically to mediate the sensitivity to ATRA 
of APL cells. This has been supported by works reporting that in vitro ATRA
resistance is characterized by defects in the RARA/E-domain of PML/RARA. In the
present report, we identified a new mutation in the E domain of PML/RARA which is
associated with a RA-resistant subline of NB4 cells; NB4-R2. This mutation,
identical to the Gln411 mutation found in HL60-R, changes the amino acid Gln903
to an in-phase stop codon, generating a truncated form of PML/RARA which has lost
52 amino acids at its C-terminal end. We have studied the effect of the truncated
PML/RARA protein on PML NB formation and RARA and PML/RARA transcriptional
activity. We show here that the fusion mutant exerts a dominant negative effect
on wild-type PML, PML/RARA and RARA transcription activity. These findings
highlight the important role of the RARA E-domain of PML/RARA in mediating RA
sensitivity in APL cells.

PMID: 10673742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Nat Genet. 1999 Nov;23(3):287-95.

A RA-dependent, tumour-growth suppressive transcription complex is the target of 
the PML-RARalpha and T18 oncoproteins.

Zhong S(1), Delva L, Rachez C, Cenciarelli C, Gandini D, Zhang H, Kalantry S,
Freedman LP, Pandolfi PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Molecular Biology Program, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Sloan-Kettering Division, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Cornell University, New York, New York, USA.

PML and Tif1a are fused to RARA and Braf, respectively, resulting in the
production of PML-RARalpha and Tif1alpha-B-Raf (T18) oncoproteins. Here we show
that PML, Tif1alpha and RXRalpha/RARalpha function together in a transcription
complex that is dependent on retinoic acid (RA). We found that PML acts as a
ligand-dependent coactivator of RXRalpha/RARalpha. PML interacts with Tif1alpha
and CBP. In Pml-/- cells, the RA-dependent induction of genes such as RARB2 and
the ability of Tif1alpha and CBP to act as transcriptional coactivators on RA are
impaired. We show that both PML and Tif1alpha are growth suppressors required for
the growth-inhibitory activity of RA. T18, similar to PML-RARalpha, disrupts the 
RA-dependent activity of this complex in a dominant-negative manner resulting in 
a growth advantage. Our data define a new pathway for the control of cell growth 
and tumorigenesis, and provide a new model for the pathogenesis of acute
promyelocytic leukaemia (APL).

PMID: 10610177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Leukemia. 1999 Dec;13(12):1901-28.

Standardized RT-PCR analysis of fusion gene transcripts from chromosome
aberrations in acute leukemia for detection of minimal residual disease. Report
of the BIOMED-1 Concerted Action: investigation of minimal residual disease in
acute leukemia.

van Dongen JJ(1), Macintyre EA, Gabert JA, Delabesse E, Rossi V, Saglio G,
Gottardi E, Rambaldi A, Dotti G, Griesinger F, Parreira A, Gameiro P, Diáz MG,
Malec M, Langerak AW, San Miguel JF, Biondi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital Rotterdam/Erasmus University
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Prospective studies on the detection of minimal residual disease (MRD) in acute
leukemia patients have shown that large-scale MRD studies are feasible and that
clinically relevant MRD-based risk group classification can be achieved and can
now be used for designing new treatment protocols. However, multicenter
international treatment protocols with MRD-based stratification of treatment need
careful standardization and quality control of the MRD techniques. This was the
aim of the European BIOMED-1 Concerted Action 'Investigation of minimal residual 
disease in acute leukemia: international standardization and clinical evaluation'
with participants of 14 laboratories in eight European countries (ES, NL, PT, IT,
DE, FR, SE and AT). Standardization and quality control was performed for the
three main types of MRD techniques, ie flow cytometric immunophenotyping, PCR
analysis of antigen receptor genes, and RT-PCR analysis of well-defined
chromosomal aberrations. This study focussed on the latter MRD technique. A total
of nine well-defined chromosome aberrations with fusion gene transcripts were
selected: t(1;19) with E2A-PBX1, t(4;11) with MLL-AF4, t(8;21) with AML1-ETO,
t(9;22) with BCR-ABL p190 and BCR-ABL p210, t(12;21) with TEL-AML1, t(15;17) with
PML-RARA, inv (16) with CBFB-MYH11, and microdeletion 1p32 with SIL-TAL1. PCR
primers were designed according to predefined criteria for single PCR (external
primers A <--> B) and nested PCR (internal primers C <--> D) as well as for
'shifted' PCR with a primer upstream (E5' primer) or downstream (E3' primer) of
the external A <--> B primers. The 'shifted' E primers were designed for
performing an independent PCR together with one of the internal primers for
confirmation (or exclusion) of positive results. Various local RT and PCR
protocols were compared and subsequently a common protocol was designed, tested
and adapted, resulting in a standardized RT-PCR protocol. After initial testing
(with adaptations whenever necessary) and approval by two or three laboratories, 
the primers were tested by all participating laboratories, using 17 cell lines
and patient samples as positive controls. This testing included comparison with
local protocols and primers as well as sensitivity testing via dilution
experiments. The collaborative efforts resulted in standardized primer sets with 
a minimal target sensitivity of 10-2 for virtually all single PCR analyses,
whereas the nested PCR analyses generally reached the minimal target sensitivity 
of 10-4. The standardized RT-PCR protocol and primer sets can now be used for
molecular classification of acute leukemia at diagnosis and for MRD detection
during follow-up to evaluate treatment effectiveness.

PMID: 10602411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Haematologica. 1999 Nov;84(11):963-8.

Missense mutations in the PML/RARalpha ligand binding domain in ATRA-resistant
As(2)O(3) sensitive relapsed acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Marasca R(1), Zucchini P, Galimberti S, Leonardi G, Vaccari P, Donelli A, Luppi
M, Petrini M, Torelli G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Hematology, University of Modena
and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 1999 Nov;84(11):961-2.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Acute promyelocytic leukemia is characterized by the
chromosomal translocation t(15;17) which yields the fusion product PML/RARa.
All-trans retinoic acid probably induces differentiation of atypical
promyelocytes and clinical remission in APL patients by binding to the ligand
binding domain (LBD) of the RARa portion of the PML-RARa chimeric protein.
Structural alterations of the LBD of the PML/RARa have been revealed in
ATRA-resistant APL cell lines and in a few APL patients with acquired clinical
resistance to ATRA therapy. Two APL relapsed patients with clinical resistance to
ATRA therapy were evaluated for the presence of nucleotide mutations in the LBD
of PML/RARa gene and then treated with arsenic trioxide (As2O3).
DESIGN AND METHODS: DNA fragments from the LBD of the PML/RARa chimeric
transcript were obtained by reverse-transcribed polymerase chain reaction. Direct
sequencing was performed by an unambiguous bi-directional automatic analysis.
Samples representative of APL onset and relapse were analyzed from both patients.
RESULTS: In both patients, at the ATRA-resistant relapse, a missense point
mutation in the LBD of the PML/RARa gene was found. The mutations, absent at APL 
onset, led to an Arg272Gln and to an Arg276Trp amino acid substitution, according
to the sequence of the RARa protein. Both patients had complete clinical and
hematologic remission after treatment with As2O3.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: LBD missense mutations appear to be a significant
mechanism of acquired ATRA-resistance in vivo, closely related to clinical APL
relapse. The two cases reported here provide the first in vivo evidence of APL
relapsed patients, who have become ATRA-resistant for molecular reasons, being
sensitive to arsenic trioxide.

PMID: 10553155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Mol Diagn. 1999 Sep;4(3):195-209.

A novel, non-nested reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test
for the detection of the t(15;17) translocation: a comparative study of RT-PCR
cytogenetics, and fluorescence In situ hybridization.

Rennert H(1), Golde T, Wilson RB, Spitalnik SL, Van Deerlin VM, Leonard DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
Health System, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

BACKGROUND: The development of a rapid and simple reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay is described that identifies the
promyelocytic leukemia- retinoic acid receptor alpha (PML-RARa) hybrid messenger 
RNA (mRNA), a characteristic feature of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Randomly primed complementary (cDNA) is synthesized from
leukocyte RNA and amplified in the presence of Taq Gold in 2 separate reaction
tubes containing primer pairs specific for intron 3 (bcr 3, long [L] form mRNA
transcript) and intron 6 (bcr 1, short [S] form)/exon 6 (bcr 2, variant [V] form)
breakpoints in PML, respectively. The different sized products generated from
each RNA transcript (S, L, or V forms) are readily and unambiguously
distinguishable after agarose gel electrophoresis without the need for either
nested PCR or hybridization. The sensitivity of the assay is 1 in 10,000 to 1 in 
100,000. The separate amplification of a b2-microglobulin transcript controls for
adequate RNA and cDNA preparation. The newly developed assay was used clinically 
for the evaluation of 78 patients with APL. It was rapid and more sensitive than 
cytogenetic karyotyping, both for the diagnosis of APL and the assessment of
minimal residual disease (MRD) after therapy. RT-PCR detected PML-RARa mRNA in
all cases positive for the t(15;17) translocation by cytogenetics. However, as
many as 50% and 80% of the diagnostic specimens and the specimens for MRD
assessment, respectively, that were positive by RT-PCR were negative by
cytogenetics. The ratio of cases with L-form to S-form PML-RARa fusion transcript
was 2:1, whereas 3 cases (10%) had fusion sites in exon 6 of the PML gene (V
forms). In addition, approximately 50% of the patients were diagnosed
morphologically with microgranular M3V-type leukemia, but no significant
correlation with PML breakpoints was found.
CONCLUSION: The current assay is rapid, sensitive, and specific without using
nested PCR or hybridization.

PMID: 10553020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2000 Jan;27(1):35-43.

Two new 3' PML breakpoints in t(15;17)(q22;q21)-positive acute promyelocytic
leukemia.

Chillón MC(1), González M, García-Sanz R, Balanzategui A, González D, López-Pérez
R, Mateos MV, Alaejos I, Rayón C, Arbeteta J, Hernández JM, Orfao A, San Miguel
J.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Service, Hospital Universitario de Salamanca and Centro de
Investigacíon del Cancer (CIC), Universidad de Salamanca/CSIC, Salamanca, Spain.

In the present article, two new types of PML/RARA junctions are described. Both
were identified in diagnostic samples from two t(15;17)(q22;q21)-positive acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patients who failed to achieve complete remission.
By using different sets of primers, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) of PML/RARA junctions showed atypical larger bands compared
with those generated from the three classical PML breakpoints already described. 
Sequence analysis of the fusion region of the amplified cDNAs allowed us to
determine the specificity of these fragments in both patients. This analysis
showed two new hybrid transcripts that were 53 and 306 base pairs (bp) longer
than that expressed by the NB4 cell line (PML breakpoint within intron 6), and
are the result of the direct joining of RARA exon 3 with PML exon 7a (patient 2) 
or the 5' portion of PML exon 7b (patient 1), respectively. In patient 1, RT-PCR 
analysis of the reciprocal RARA/PML junction showed a smaller transcript than
that expected in bcr1 cases, while in patient 2 no amplified fragment was
obtained. Cytogenetic analysis and/or fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
showed that both patients had the t(15;17) translocation. The clinical and
hematological profiles expressed by the two patients carrying these unexpected
types of PML/RARA rearrangement did not differ significantly from that commonly
seen in other APLs with the exception of the poor outcome. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 27:35-43, 2000.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10564584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 1999 Oct-Dec;29(4):286-98.

Anionic charge sites in the kidney: comparison of two diabetic rat models.

Ward-Cook KM(1), Mahan JD, Frenchko CE, Albright A, Chiasera JM, McAllister C.

Author information: 
(1)The Ohio State University, Springfield Community Hospital, USA.

The distribution and appearance of anionic charge sides (ACS) in the glomerular
basement membrane (GBM) and mesangium were studied in two different animal models
of diabetes mellitus (DM), the obese Zucker rat as an animal model of type 2
diabetes mellitus (DM) and streptozocin-induced Sprague-Dawley rat as an animal
model of type 1 DM. Four obese Zucker rats (ZR) and four Sprague-Dawley rats were
analyzed for the following parameters: number of ACS per length of lamina rara
externa (LRE), (ACS/LRE); number of ACE per length of lamina rara interna (LRI)
(ACS/LRI); percent of mesangial matrix as ACS (%MMACS); percent of LRE as ACS
(%LREACS); percent of LRI as ACS (%LRIACS); length of ACS in LRI (LACSLRI);
length of ACS in LRE (LACSLRE); width of ACS in LRI (WACSLRI); width of ACS in
the LRE (WACSLRE); area of ACS in the LRI (AACSLRI); and the area of ACS in the
LRE (AACSLRE). Statistical analyses include a one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA), Pearson's correlation coefficient, and stepwise multiple regression.
This study confirms that a loss of ACS occurs as proteinuria develops in a
variety of animal models. The majority of the ACS were more prominently
localized, and thus lost form the LRE of the GBM in DN. This study also
demonstrated that defined alterations in the glomerular ACS can be identified
early in the evolution of DN in both animal models, and that the similarity of
the changes in the ACS suggest that a common pathophysiologic mechanism induced
the changes in both animal models.

PMID: 10528828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Nephron. 1999 Sep;83(1):53-8.

Initial ultrastructural changes in pore size and anionic sites of the glomerular 
basement membrane in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats and their prevention by
insulin treatment.

Isogai S(1), Mogami K, Shiina N, Yoshino G.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Toho University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIM: The present study was conducted to elucidate the mechanism(s) of 
the development of early diabetic nephropathy, examining ultrastructural changes 
employing electron microscopy, especially changes in pore size of the glomerular 
basement membrane (GBM) of streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetics rats.
METHODS: Urinary albumin excretion rate (UAE), pore size of the lamina densa of
the GBM visualized directly by the tissue negative staining method, and number of
anionic sites (AS) in the corresponding portion of the lamina rara externa were
determined for 6 weeks in diabetic rats without and with insulin treatment.
RESULTS: The UAE of the diabetic rats increased with time and was significantly
greater than that of the nondiabetic control rats after 4 weeks (p < 0.01), while
insulin treatment suppressed the increased UAE of diabetic rats. The median
values in both short diameter and long dimension of the pores in the diabetic
group were markedly increased at the 2nd week as compared with those in the
nondiabetic control rats, whereas no significant change was found in the pore
size of the diabetic rats with insulin treatment. Moreover, the number of AS in
the GBM of the diabetic rats was significantly (p < 0.001) decreased from the 2nd
week onward. Insulin treatment also prevented a decrease in AS number in diabetic
rats.
CONCLUSIONS: It is suggested from these results that an impairment of barrier
size selectivity occurs at a very early stage of STZ-induced diabetes in rats,
which may enhance the abnormality of the charge-selective properties of the GBM. 
In addition, insulin treatment may protect this barrier system through
normalizing blood glucose control in STZ-diabetic rats.

PMID: 10461036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Sep;8(9):1741-9.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription STAT5b gene is a new partner
of retinoic acid receptor alpha in acute promyelocytic-like leukaemia.

Arnould C(1), Philippe C, Bourdon V, Gr goire MJ, Berger R, Jonveaux P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique, UPRES-INRA 952, CHRU, Rue du Morvan, 54511
Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France.

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) exhibits a characteristic t(15;17)
translocation that fuses the promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) gene on 15q22 to the
retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene on 17q12-q21.1. In a small subset of
acute promyelocytic-like leukaemias (APL-L), RARA is fused to a different
partner: the pro-myelocytic leukaemia zinc finger (PLZF) gene on 11q23, the
nucleophosmin (NPM) gene on 5q35 or the nuclear mitotic apparatus (NuMA) gene on 
11q13. We report on the molecular characterization of a RARA gene re-arrangement 
in a patient with APL-L and demonstrate that the signal transducer and activator 
of transcription STAT5b gene is fused with RARA. STAT5b belongs to the janus
kinase (JAK)-STAT signalling pathway. Remarkably, the STAT5b component of the
chimeric protein is delocalized from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, where it
displays a microspeckled pattern. Therefore, unusual features of this APL-L might
result from dysregulation of the JAK/STAT5 signal transducing pathways in the
patient leukaemic cells. In this study, we identified STAT5b as a new gene fused 
to RARA in leukaemia; this is the first human tumour bearing a structurally
abnormal STAT gene.

PMID: 10441338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Biomed Mater Res. 1999;48(4):546-58.

A new generation of polyurethane vascular prostheses: rara avis or ignis fatuus?

Eberhart A(1), Zhang Z, Guidoin R, Laroche G, Guay L, De La Faye D, Batt M, King 
MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Laval University and Quebec Biomaterials Institute,
Pavillon St. François d'Assise, CHUQ, Quebec, Quebec Canada.

Three polyurethane (PU) vascular grafts with novel designs were investigated and 
compared in terms of the microporous structure, reinforcement technology, polymer
chemistry, microphase separation, and mechanical properties. The Corvita graft,
composed of a poly(carbonate urethane) polymer, displayed a helically wound
filament structure with communicating inter-fiber spaces. The reinforced model
contained an external PET mesh impregnated with a protein sealant, and displayed 
good microphase separation, the highest Young's modulus in the longitudinal
direction, and the second highest in the radial direction. The Thoratec graft was
made of a polyetherurethaneurea with an average micropore size of 15 microns.
Silicone was observed on both surfaces of the graft. The Thoratec device
displayed a low degree of hydrogen-bonding among the urethane groups and had no
well-organized hard-segment domains. Its mechanical strength was superior to that
of the Pulse-Tec graft. A solid PU layer underneath the luminal surface precluded
any communication between the luminal and adventitial sides. The Pulse-Tec
prosthesis was composed of polyetherurethane, with an average micropore size of
28 microns. It offered the highest radial compliance, a high degree of
hydrogen-bonding, a narrow molecular weight distribution, and a certain degree of
microphase separation. Its tensile strength and hysteresis loss were inferior to 
those of the other two grafts.

Copyright 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 10421700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Leukemia. 1999 Jun;13(6):862-8.

Atypical response to all-trans retinoic acid in a der(5)t(5;17) acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Mozziconacci MJ(1), Liberatore C, Grignani F, Sainty D, Pelicci PG, Birg F,
Lafage-Pochitaloff M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Hematology, Institute Paoli-Calmettes, INSERM U119, 
Marseille, France.

Typical acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is associated with the t(15;17)
translocation, expression of a PML/RARA fusion transcript, and responsiveness to 
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). Rare APL cases implicating the RARA but not the
PML gene have been reported. Cases with t(11;17)(q23;q21) which fuses the PLZF
and RARA genes do not respond to ATRA. In contrast, cases with t(11;17)(q13;q21) 
and t(5;17)(q35;q21) which fuse RARA with NuMA and NPM, respectively, were
reported to be sensitive to ATRA. We described previously an APL case with an
unbalanced t(5;17) implicating RARA but neither PML nor PLZF. Here, we show that 
in this case: (1) the NPM gene is not involved, as demonstrated by RT-PCR and
Southern blot; (2) response to ATRA in vitro is atypical, as demonstrated by
morphological and functional maturation assays; and (3) PML nuclear bodies are
not disrupted, as evidenced by immunofluorescence staining.

PMID: 10360373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1999 Jun;111(2):139-43.

Complex variant 15;17 translocations in acute promyelocytic leukemia. A case
report and review of three-way translocations.

Wan TS(1), Chim CS, So CK, Chan LC, Ma SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital,
People's Republic of China.

Complex variant 15;17 translocations are increasingly recognized in acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL). We report a novel three-way translocation in APL
involving chromosomes 15, 17, and X in the form of t(X;17;15)(q13;q12;q21).
Southern blot analysis showed retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene
rearrangement at intron 2. Clinical and morphologic findings are typical of APL, 
and a complete remission was attained with a course of conventional chemotherapy.
A review of three-way complex variants of 15;17 translocation in the literature
reveals 21 published cases in addition to ours. PML/RARA fusion was observed in
all 8 cases in which molecular genetic analysis had been performed. More cases
need to be analyzed to determine if clustering to particular chromosomal bands
occurs in variant translocations, and whether APL cases harboring complex 15;17
variants differ clinically from those with classical 15;17 translocation.

PMID: 10347551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Leuk Lymphoma. 1999 Apr;33(3-4):403-6.

Aml1/ETO and Pml/RARA rearrangements in a case of AML-M2 acute myeloblastic
leukemia with t(15;17).

Varella-Garcia M(1), Brizard F, Roche J, Flandrin G, Drabkin H, Brizard A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Cancer Center and Division of
Medical Oncology, Denver, USA.

We report a case of acute myeloid leukemia FAB-type 2 with a translocation
t(15;17)(q22;q12) On the basis of the cytological findings, a translocation
t(8;21)(q22;q22) was suspected. FISH analyses using specific probes for t(15;17) 
and t(8;21) detected both PML/RARalpha and AML1/ETO rearrangements in a few
percentage of cells. This case demonstrates the complexities that may occur
between cytology and cytogenetic findings and the usefulness of FISH methods to
detect an AML1/ETO rearrangement only suspected by cytological examination of
bone marrow smears.

PMID: 10221524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Ann Hematol. 1999 Mar;78(3):131-7.

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia: a retrospective analysis of patients treated at
St. Bartholomew's Hospital 1969-1995.

Slater S(1), Carter M, Howe K, Amess J, Rohatiner AZ, Lister TA.

Author information: 
(1)ICRF Department of Medical Oncology, St. Bartholomew's Hospital, London, Great
Britain.

Seventy-two patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APML) were treated at
St.Bartholomew's Hospital (SBH) over a 25-year period. Improvements in supportive
care and the use of more intensive chemotherapy have led to an increase in the
complete remission rate from 14 to 58%. Similarly, the median survival has
increased from 3 weeks to 2 years; the median duration of remission, which was 7 
months in 1974, has not yet been reached. There was also a significant difference
in survival from first recurrence, compared with that of patients with other
subtypes of acute myeloid leukemia. RT-PCR analysis on bone marrow samples from
14 patients confirmed the presence of the PML/RARA fusion; 13 of the 14 patients 
achieved 'molecular remission' after therapy. The one patient who remained
persistently positive experienced recurrence within 4 months. In seven of the
eight patients in whom the disease recurred, the translocation was identified by 
RT-PCR at the time of relapse, whilst in one patient it was noted 4 months prior 
to morphological recurrence. These results illustrate the improvement in
prognosis that occurred over a 25-year period in patients with APML treated at a 
single centre.

PMID: 10211755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Genomics. 1999 Apr 15;57(2):289-92.

Linkage of the nuclear hormone receptor genes NR1D2, THRB, and RARB: evidence for
an ancient, large-scale duplication.

Koh YS(1), Moore DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The THRA gene encoding thyroid hormone receptor alpha shares an unusual partial
overlap with the NR1D1 gene encoding the orphan receptor Rev-ErbAalpha. Though
THRA and NR1D1 have close relatives in THRB and NR1D2, which encode TRbeta and
Rev-ErbAbeta, these beta isoforms do not share an analogous overlap. Here we
report that the human THRB and NR1D2 genes are separated by approximately 1 Mb on
chromosome 3 and that these two genes are also linked to the RARB gene, which
encodes retinoic acid receptor beta. Since previous results indicate that the
THRA/NR1D1 locus is also linked to the RARA gene, these results suggest that the 
two receptor gene clusters were generated by a single large-scale duplication.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10198169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Cell Sci. 1999 Feb;112 ( Pt 3):381-93.

SUMO-1 modification of the acute promyelocytic leukaemia protein PML:
implications for nuclear localisation.

Duprez E(1), Saurin AJ, Desterro JM, Lallemand-Breitenbach V, Howe K, Boddy MN,
Solomon E, de Thé H, Hay RT, Freemont PS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Structure and Function Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund,
London WC2A 3PX, UK.

PML is a nuclear phosphoprotein that was first identified as part of a
translocated chromosomal fusion product associated with acute promyelocytic
leukaemia (APL). PML localises to distinct nuclear multi-protein complexes termed
ND10, Kr bodies, PML nuclear bodies and PML oncogenic domains (PODs), which are
disrupted in APL and are the targets for immediate early viral proteins, although
little is known about their function. In a yeast two-hybrid screen, we first
identified a ubiquitin-like protein named PIC1 (now known as SUMO-1), which
interacts and co-localises with PML in vivo. More recent studies have now shown
that SUMO-1 covalently modifies a number of target proteins including PML,
RanGAP1 and IkappaBalpha and is proposed to play a role in either targeting
modified proteins and/or inhibiting their degradation. The precise molecular role
for the SUMO-1 modification of PML is unclear, and the specific lysine residues
within PML that are targeted for modification and the PML sub-domains necessary
for mediating the modification in vivo are unknown. Here we show that SUMO-1
covalently modifies PML both in vivo and in vitro and that the modification is
mediated either directly or indirectly by the interaction of UBC9 with PML
through the RING finger domain. Using site-specific mutagenesis, we have
identified the primary PML-SUMO-1 modification site as being part of the nuclear 
localisation signal (Lys487 or Lys490). However SUMO-1 modification is not
essential for PML nuclear localisation as only nuclear PML is modified. The
sequence of the modification site fits into a consensus sequence for SUMO-1
modification and we have identified several other nuclear proteins which could
also be targets for SUMO-1. We show that SUMO-1 modification appears to be
dependant on the correct subcellular compartmentalisation of target proteins. We 
also find that the APL-associated fusion protein PML-RARA is efficiently modified
in vitro, resulting in a specific and SUMO-1-dependent degradation of PML-RARA.
Our results provide significant insights into the role of SUMO-1 modification of 
PML in both normal cells and the APL disease state.

PMID: 9885291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Genetika. 1998 Sep;34(9):1200-4.

[Chromosome localization and analysis of synteny analysis of some genes in swine,
cattle, and sheep (Artiodactyla)].

[Article in Russian]

Kuznetsov SB(1), Larkin DM, Kaftanovskaia EM, Ivanova EV, Astakhova NM,
Cheriakene OV, Zhdanova NS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, 
Russia.

Using the hybrid cell lines pig-American mink, cow-American mink, and
sheep-American mink, the localization of some genes included in a large
conservative block localized on human chromosome (chr) 17 was performed by means 
of electrophoresis of proteins and Southern blot hybridization. Genes NF1, RARA, 
PRKCA, and ERBB2 were assigned to chr 12 in swine; TK1 and UMPH2, to chr 19 in
cattle; and TK1, UMPH2, and PEPA, to chr 11 in sheep. The conserved synteny of
these genes in three representatives of the order Artiodactyla was shown.

PMID: 9879008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Haematologica. 1998 Nov;83(11):1051-5.

Role of autologous bone marrow transplantation as consolidation therapy in acute 
promyelocytic leukemia patients in complete remission.

Ottaviani E, Martinelli G, Testoni N, Visani G, Tani M, Tura S.

Autologous bone marrow transplantation (ABMT), which consents a low mortality
rate, has been proposed as an alternative approach to maintenance chemotherapy in
patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) in first complete remission
irrespective of the patients' molecular status. Sixteen patients with acute APL
in complete remission were submitted to ABMT and were analyzed for the presence
of the PML-RARa fusion gene by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). Our study demonstrated that continued positivity of PCR analysis before
ABMT could predict subsequent relapse in patients who undergo un-purged ABMT
procedures.

PMID: 9864933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Virchows Arch. 1998 Nov;433(5):449-55.

Alterations in the distribution of plasma fibronectin and the ultrastructure of
podocytes in the peripheral glomerular loops in nephrotic rats.

Kubosawa H(1), Kondo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

Glomerular distribution of rat plasma fibronectin was examined during the course 
of puromycin (PAN)- and daunomycin (DM)-induced nephrosis. In control animals,
fibronectin was detected in the mesangial matrix and along the glomerular
basement membrane (GBM), closely associated with the plasma membrane of
glomerular cells. In peripheral loops, immunoprecipitates were preferentially
distributed in the laminae rarae externa and interna. Fibronectin was densely
precipitated in a glomerulosclerotic lesion induced by DM at 8 weeks after the
injection. In peripheral loops, loss and reconstruction of epithelial foot
processes occurred in PAN nephrosis but the change was accompanied by negligible 
perturbation of fibronectin distribution in the lamina rara externa. In contrast,
a remarkable decrease of fibronectin was observed in DM nephrosis, unrelated to
the presence or absence of foot processes. The decrease in immunoreactivity for
fibronectin in the lamina rara externa seemed to have no association with
podocyte attachment to or detachment from the GBM. Plasma fibronectin distributed
in the lamina rara externa is not directly involved in the modification of
podocyte configuration or podocyte attachment, although its spatial distribution 
may have some functional significance for preserving the ultrastructure of the
GBM.

PMID: 9849860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Kidney Int. 1998 Nov;54(5):1491-500.

Altered anionic GBM components in monoclonal antibody against slit
diaphragm-injected proteinuric rats.

Fujigaki Y(1), Nagase M, Hidaka S, Matsui K, Shirai M, Nosaka H, Kawachi H,
Shimizu F, Hishida A.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
Hamamatsu; Department of Medicine, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo.
yf0516@hama-med.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: We previously reported that monoclonal antibody (mAb) 5-1-6 bound to 
renal filtration slits induces massive proteinuria without causing
ultrastructural changes in the glomerulus. This study evaluated the underlying
mechanisms of the increase in glomerular permeability.
METHODS: The distribution of endogenous albumin and IgG in the glomerular
basement membrane (GBM) was studied in in situ drip-fixed glomeruli of
Munich-Wistar rats by use of immunogold immunocytochemistry in the presence and
absence of mAb 5-1-6. The density of foot process glycocalyx components was
estimated by labeling with Limax fluvus lectin- or Helix pomatia lectin-gold
complexes. Anionic sites in the GBM were examined by labeling with cationic gold 
at pH 2.0 or 7.4. Carboxyl groups, which also furnish an anionic charge to the
GBM, were examined by specific biotinylation and colloidal gold probe methods. In
addition, the infusion-staining of anionic sites was performed by use of
ruthenium red in both Munich-Wistar and Wistar rats.
RESULTS: The urinary excretion of albumin and IgG was increased markedly in the
treated rats, indicating a non-selective barrier defect. In the control rats,
albumin and IgG molecules were mainly located along the inner half of the GBM,
and to a lesser degree in the lamina rara externa. In the treated rats, the
albumin and IgG moieties were more equally distributed throughout the width of
the GBM. Newly appearing, small dense peaks at the outer side of the GBM were
evident, indicating a barrier function of outer zone of the GBM and/or epithelial
cell layer. No intergroup differences in the density of lectin binding sites on
foot processes were seen. The reduction in the number of ruthenium red-positive
anionic sites and cationic gold (pH 2. 0)-labeled anionic sites in the lamina
rara externa was significant in the treated rats at day 3, indicating a possible 
alteration of charged proteoglycan in the lamina rara externa. No such changes
were seen with cationic gold (pH 7.4)-labeled anionic sites in the GBM. The
density of labeled carboxyl groups was significantly reduced in the treated rats 
relative to the controls.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that the injection of mAb 5-1-6 induced a
perturbation of the charge- and probably the size-selective glomerular filtration
barrier. The observed reduction in the levels of various negatively charged
substances resulted in massive proteinuria, implying that alteration of target
antigens can affect the integrity of the GBM constituents maintaining the normal 
barrier function.

PMID: 9844125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Morphol. 1998 Dec;238(3):337-42.

Effects of maternal uninephrectomy on the development of fetal rat kidney:
numerical and volumetric changes of the glomerulus and formation of the anionic
site in the glomerular basement membrane.

Okada T(1), Yamagishi T, Morikawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, College of Agriculture, Osaka Prefecture
University, Japan. okada@vet.osakafu-u.ac.jp

Developmental processes of the fetal rat kidney from uninephrectomized mothers
were studied. The uninephrectomy was performed on day 5 of gestation. Glomerular 
number and volume in the fetal kidneys on days 18, 20, and 22 of gestation were
morphometrically determined. To investigate the anionic site formation in the
glomerular basement membrane, distribution of cationized ferritin (CF) in the
fetal glomerulus was examined electron microscopically after CF injection. Blood 
urea nitrogen (BUN) concentration in the pregnant rats was also determined on
various days after uninephrectomy. On fetal days 20 and 22, the glomerular volume
was significantly larger in the fetuses from uninephrectomized mothers than in
those from sham-operated ones. On fetal day 20, the CF particles were clustered
in the laminae rarae interna and externa of the glomerular basement membrane in
the fetuses from uninephrectomized mothers, while the clusters were arrayed in
three to four layers in the glomerular basement membrane in the fetuses from
sham-operated ones. On fetal day 22, the CF particles noted in the lamina rara
externa in the fetuses from uninephrectomized mothers were slightly larger in
number than such particles in the age-matched control fetuses. The BUN
concentration of the uninephrectomized pregnant rats was significantly higher
than that of the sham-operated pregnant ones on each postoperative day. These
results suggest that the development of the fetal renal glomerulus is accelerated
by the elevated BUN level following maternal uninephrectomy when the fetal kidney
is functional in effective filtration in the rat.

PMID: 9839457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Haematologica. 1998 Sep;83(9):860-3.

Long-term disease-free acute promyelocytic leukemia patients really can be cured 
at molecular level.

Martinelli G, Ottaviani E, Visani G, Testoni N, Montefusco V, Tura S.

The characteristic t(15;17) translocation involving chromosomes 15 and 17 is
specifically associated with both the common and the variant subtypes of acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) (M3 according to FAB classification). At the
molecular level, it fuses genes encoding PML on chromosome 15 and the nuclear
retinoic acid receptor-alpha (RAR alpha) on chromosome 17. The subsequent
expression of PML/RAR alpha fusion mRNA provides a potential molecular marker
that can be detected in leukemic cells taken from patients with APL. Using PML
and RARa sequence specific primers, reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) assays have been developed for detection of PML/RAR alpha
transcript in leukemic cells obtained from patients; these RT-PCR assays are more
sensitive than conventional cytogenetic analysis.

PMID: 9825588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Br J Haematol. 1998 Oct;103(1):93-9.

Cell lineage specific involvement in acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) using a 
combination of May-Grünwald-Giemsa staining and fluorescence in situ
hybridization techniques for the detection of the translocation
t(15;17)(q22;q12).

Haferlach T(1), Löffler H, Nickenig C, Ramm-Petersen L, Meeder M, Schoch R,
Schlegelberger B, Schnittger S, Schoch C, Hiddemann W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology and Oncology, University of Göttingen, Germany.

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) is strongly associated with the translocation
t(15;17) which therefore provides a reliable marker to assess the potential
involvement of different cell lineages. Six cases with morphologically,
cytogenetically and molecularly proven APL were analysed at diagnosis or relapse 
by combining fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with standard
May-Grünwald-Giemsa (MGG) staining at the single cell level on bone marrow and
blood smears. With the FICTION technique, combining immunophenotyping with FISH, 
haemopoietic precursor cells were identified using monoclonal antibodies against 
CD34, B- and T-lymphocytes could be identified with CD19 and CD3. In addition,
HLA-DR-positive cells were studied for the presence of t(15;17). Morphologically 
identified myeloblasts were relocated on the smear after FISH and were found to
be PML/RARA positive in 91%, abnormal promyelocytes in 97%. In contrast, a
positive signal was obtained in only 18% of PMN. Erythroblasts, lymphocytes and
plasma cells did not show a PML/RARA rearrangement. Accordingly, all cells
expressing CD3 or CD19 were PML/RARA negative. CD34 positive precursor cells
identified by FICTION were PML/RARA positive in 97%. HLA-DR-positive cells
contained a PML/RARA rearrangement in 24% of cells in one case and were negative 
in the two other cases investigated. These data indicate that APL appears to
originate from a level of haemopoietic precursor cells but is restricted to the
myeloid lineage. The low proportion of PML/RARA-positive PMN points to the
impairment of blast cell differentiation beyond the promyelocyte stage but also
emphasizes the existence of normal residual haemopoietic stem cells from which
PML/RARA-negative PMN must be derived.

PMID: 9792295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Leukemia. 1998 Sep;12(9):1349-54.

RT-PCR method with increased sensitivity shows persistence of PML-RARA fusion
transcripts in patients in long-term remission of APL.

Tobal K(1), Liu Yin JA.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Haematology, Manchester Royal Infirmary, UK.

RT-PCR methods have been developed, to date, by various groups to amplify the
PML-RARA fusion gene produced by the t(15;17) in APL patients. However, these
methods lack the necessary sensitivity to detect minimal residual disease (MRD)
below the level of 1 leukaemic cell in 10(4) cells. Patients who test positive by
these methods after treatment are likely to relapse. However, up to 25% of
patients who test negative after treatment relapse within a short period. We have
developed a 'hot-start' RT-PCR method for the amplification of PML-RARA with
increased sensitivity at the level of two leukaemic cells in 10(6) cells. Using
this method we were able to detect MRD in seven out of 15 patients tested in
remission. Of the 11 patients in medium to long-term remission, five patients
tested positive. None of these 11 patients tested positive with the standard
RT-PCR. These results show that some patients in remission of APL continue to
express PML-RARA even in long-term remission, when they can be considered
clinically 'cured' of their disease.

PMID: 9737682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Invest Clin. 1998 Jun;39(2):85-96.

[Clonal chromosome abnormalities in malignant hematological diseases using
fluorescence in situ hybridization].

[Article in Spanish]

Soto-Quintana M(1), Rojas-Atencio A, Chirino H, Alvarez-Nava F, Pineda-Del Villar
L, Urdaneta K, González-Ferrer S, González R.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Genética Médica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad del Zulia,
Maracaibo, Venezuela.

Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) is a rapid, sensitive and reliable
method for the identification of complete chromosomes, or segments of them,
during metaphase or nuclear interphase. The present study shows the results of
the analysis of 32 bone marrow aspirates from patients with malignant
hematological diseases (11 AML, 7 ALL, 12 CML and 2 CLL), referred to the Medical
Genetics Unit of the Faculty of Medicine, Zulia University, Maracaibo, Venezuela 
between 1994 and 1996. All samples were studied by conventional and molecular
techniques (FISH), using probes of total chromosomes, alpha-satellites and locus 
specific. In patients with AML and ALL and FISH technique detected clonal
chromosomal abnormalities, that were not found by the conventional cytogenetic
technique. Furthermore, the PML-alpha RARA complex was identified in the
promyelocytic acute leukemias. The presence of the molecular complex ABL-BCR was 
also demonstrated in CML. The present study demonstrates the usefulness of the
FISH technique in the detection of clonal chromosomal abnormalities, which are
important when considering the clinical care of patients with these pathologies.

PMID: 9707920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Ann Genet. 1998;41(2):89-117.

Orofacial cleft defects: inference from nature and nurture.

Houdayer C(1), Bahuau M.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Hôpital d'Enfants
Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France. biochimie.trousseau@trs.ap-hop-paris.fr

Cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL/P), and cleft palate (CP) are most
common congenital malformation conditions. Prognosis mainly rests on the
possibility of associated symptoms, since more than a hundred recognised
Mendelian disorders involve this orofacial defect (thereby defining syndromic
CL/P, or CP). Multiplex non-syndromic CL/P, or CP families indicate that genetic 
factors are likely involved in causation. Inheritance is generally regarded as
multigenic, allelic variation at different loci (TGF alpha, TGF beta 3, RARA)
determining a fraction of the genetic risk, as demonstrated by association or
transmission/disequilibrium non-parametric tests. Some pedigrees are however
clearly monogenic, consistent with either autosomal dominant or recessive
inheritance. X-linked recessive CP (with or without ankyloglossia) is an
additional possibility. Significant linkage to 6p23 (EDN1) or 19q13 (BCL3) could 
be achieved using parametric models with reduced penetrance. Environmental
exposures were also demonstrated to interfere with lip and/or palatal formation
when present during the first trimester of pregnancy. Whereas ethanol, retinoids 
or folate antagonists are clearly teratogenic, indictment of more common
exposures such as caffeine is merely tentative. The development of animal models 
allowed to confirm the genetic bases of CL/P, or CP, exemplify the role of
teratogens, and study the interaction of nature and nurture.

PMID: 9706339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1998 Jul;22(3):241-50.

In vitro response to all-trans retinoic acid of acute promyelocytic leukemias
with nonreciprocal PML/RARA or RARA/PML fusion genes.

Mozziconacci MJ(1), Liberatore C, Brunel V, Grignani F, Arnoulet C, Ferrucci PF, 
Fernandez F, Sainty D, Pelicci PG, Birg F, Lafage-Pochitaloff M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by the t(15;17) cytogenetic
abnormality leading to the expression of two fusion genes, PML/RARA and RARA/PML,
and by its sensitivity to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) differentiating
treatment. Rare APL cases lacking the t(15;17) have been described. We have
previously reported two cases presenting with submicroscopic insertions of RARA
or PML into chromosome 15 or 17, respectively. These insertions lead to the
formation of potentially functional, nonreciprocal, PML/RARA or RARA/PML fusion
genes, providing the unique opportunity to investigate in a human noncell-line
model the respective role of PML/RARA or RARA/PML in retinoid signaling. Here, we
report the in vitro response to ATRA of these two cases as well as of a third
case presenting with submicroscopic insertion (15;17) and expressing exclusively 
PML/RARA, by morphological, functional, and immunological assays. The two cases
expressing PML/RARA presented with an immunostaining pattern typical of APL and a
positive response to ATRA, whereas the APL case expressing only a RARA/PML fusion
transcript exhibited an immunostaining pattern typical of non-APL cells, and was 
resistant to ATRA. Our results confirm that sensitivity to ATRA requires
expression of PML/RARA and strongly correlates with immunostaining, and
demonstrate that expression of RARA/PML alone is sufficient for a cytological APL
phenotype, but does not confer sensitivity to ATRA.

PMID: 9624536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Diabetes Complications. 1998 May-Jun;12(3):170-5.

Protective effects of a small dose of captopril on the reduction of glomerular
basement membrane anionic sites in spontaneously hypertensive rats with
streptozotocin-induced diabetes.

Isogai S(1), Kameyama M, Iso K, Yoshino G.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Toho University School of Medicine,
Japan.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors have been used in several clinical
trials to slow a progressive decline in glomerular function in patients with
diabetic nephropathy independent of their effects on blood pressure. The purpose 
of this study was to clarify the mechanisms(s) through which an ACE inhibitor,
captopril, exerts its protective effect on renal function using spontaneously
hypertensive rats (SHR) with streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetes. Male SHRs
were made diabetic by intravenous injection of STZ (45 mg/kg). One hundred or 25 
mg/kg of captopril was administered daily for 4 weeks to them. Urine albumin
excretion (UAE) rate was markedly increased in diabetic SHRs, while captopril
treatment resulted in a significant suppression of UAE in diabetic SHRs,
independent of both its daily dose and effects on blood pressure as well as
glycemic control. Examination by electron microscope revealed that the number of 
anionic sites (AS) in the lamina rara externa per 1000 nm of glomerular basement 
membrane (GBM) was significantly decreased (22.9+/-0.2 to 16.1+/-0.3, p < 0.001),
after induction of diabetes, whereas, significant recovery (18.2+/-0.1, p <
0.001) could be obtained even by the smaller dose (25 mg/kg) of captopril which
did not exert either antihypertensive or antidiabetic effect on diabetic SHRs.
Thus, we demonstrate here the direct evidence that captopril, an ACE inhibitor,
can protect against damage on GBM of diabetic SHR without controlling blood
pressure as well as blood glucose level.

PMID: 9618073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Cell Sci. 1998 May;111 ( Pt 10):1319-29.

Ret finger protein is a normal component of PML nuclear bodies and interacts
directly with PML.

Cao T(1), Duprez E, Borden KL, Freemont PS, Etkin LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd, Houston TX 77030, USA.

The ret finger protein (rfp) is a member of the B-box zinc finger gene family
many of which may function in growth regulation and in the appropriate context
become oncogenic. Members of this family are nuclear proteins that possess a
characteristic tripartite motif consisting of the RING and B-box zinc binding
domains and a coiled-coil domain. The promyelocytic leukemia gene (PML), another 
B-box family member, produces a protein product that is detected within punctate 
nuclear structures called PML nuclear bodies (NBs) or PML oncogenic domains
(PODs). These NBs are complex structures that consist of a number of different
proteins many of which have yet to be identified. In the disease acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) a fusion protein, PML-RARA, is produced through the 
t(15:17) translocation. In APL the morphology of the NBs is altered. We report
that rfp co-localizes with PML in a subset of the PML NBs and that it interacts
directly with PML. This interaction is mediated through the rfp B-box and the
distal two coils. In contrast, homomultimerization of rfp preferentially involves
the B-box and the proximal coil. The association of rfp with the PML NBs is
altered by mutations that affect rfp/PML interaction and in NB4 cells that are
derived from APL patients. When treated with retinoic acid, rfp reassociates with
the NBs in a pattern similar to non APL cells. Additionally, we found that rfp
colocalizes with PML-RARA protein produced in APL patients. These results suggest
that rfp, along with the other known/unknown components of PML NBs, have an
important role in regulating cellular growth and differentiation.

PMID: 9570750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Am J Med Genet. 1998 Apr 28;77(1):23-7.

Smith-Magenis syndrome resulting from a de novo direct insertion of proximal 17q 
into 17p11.2.

Park JP(1), Moeschler JB, Davies WS, Patel PI, Mohandas TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, New
Hampshire 03767, USA. jonathan.p.park@hitchcock.org

We report on a de novo intrachromosomal rearrangement of chromosome 17 in a
patient with Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS). This 11-year-old boy had short
stature, midfacial hypoplasia, and behavioral problems characteristic of this
syndrome. Cytogenetic analysis showed that the proximal long arm of a chromosome 
17 (q11.2-q21.3) was inserted into its short arm at p11.2, resulting in an
apparent deletion of the SMS critical region [ins(17)(p11.2q11.2q21.3)].
Fluorescence in situ hybridization studies (FISH) demonstrated that the inserted 
segment included both the ERBB2 and RARA loci, and dual color hybridizations
defined the insertion as direct, with ERBB2 located more proximally on the short 
arm of the der(17). The resulting deletion of the short arm included loci c130G3,
D17S258, FLI, and D17S29, while the more proximal loci, D17S446 and D17S58,
remained apparently unaffected and in their native locations. The CMT1A locus
also remained in its native location on the short arm of the metacentric der(17) 
chromosome. A de novo intrachromosomal insertional rearrangement of chromosome 17
in a case of SMS has not been reported previously and further illustrates the
instability of this chromosomal region.

PMID: 9557889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 17;95(6):3048-53.

Linkage analysis and comparative mapping of canine progressive rod-cone
degeneration (prcd) establishes potential locus homology with retinitis
pigmentosa (RP17) in humans.

Acland GM(1), Ray K, Mellersh CS, Gu W, Langston AA, Rine J, Ostrander EA,
Aguirre GD.

Author information: 
(1)James A. Baker Institute for Animal Health, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Cornell University, Ithaca NY 14853, USA. gma2@cornell.edu

Progressive rod-cone degeneration (prcd) is the most widespread hereditary
retinal disease leading to blindness in dogs and phenotypically is the canine
counterpart of retinitis pigmentosa (RP) in humans. In previous efforts to
identify the genetic locus for prcd, the canine homologs for many of the genes
causally associated with RP in humans, such as RHO, PDE6B, and RDS/peripherin,
have been excluded. In parallel with a recent undertaking to establish a
framework map of the canine genome, multiple prcd-informative pedigrees have been
typed with a panel of more than 100 anchor loci and microsatellite-based markers.
Identification of a linkage group flanking prcd ([TK1, GALK1, prcd]-[MYL4,
C09.173, C09.2263]-RARA-C09.250-C09.474-NF1) localizes prcd close to the
centromeric end of canine chromosome 9 (CFA9), and excludes RARA as a candidate
gene. The conserved synteny of this region of CFA9 and distal human chromosome
17q establishes the potential locus homology of prcd in the dog with RP17, a
human retinitis pigmentosa locus for which no gene has yet been identified.
Assignment of the prcd disease locus to an identified canine autosome represents 
a powerful application of the developing canine linkage map in medical genetics. 
The usefulness of this approach is further demonstrated by identification of the 
correspondence of the prcd interval to homologous human and mouse chromosomal
regions. The rapid progress that is now occurring in the field of canine genetics
will expedite the identification of the genes underlying many of the inherited
traits and diseases that make the dog a unique asset for the study of mammalian
traits.

PMCID: PMC19692
PMID: 9501213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Ann Oncol. 1997 Dec;8(12):1273-5.

The role of all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) treatment in newly-diagnosed acute
promyelocytic leukemia patients aged > 60 years.

Latagliata R(1), Avvisati G, Lo Coco F, Petti MC, Diverio D, Spadea A, Fazi P,
Torromeo C, Breccia M, Malagnino F, Mandelli F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Hematology, University La Sapienza,
Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: To evaluate the role and toxicity of ATRA therapy in newly-diagnosed 
APL patients aged > 60 yrs, the outcome of 16 consecutive elderly APL patients
observed between January 1990 and June 1996 were analyzed.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Their median age was 65.5 yrs (range 60-81 years), the
male/female ratio was 7:9, and molecular biology analysis showed a PML/RARa
rearrangement in all patients. Seven patients had a concomitant cardiovascular
disease. ATRA 45 mg/sqm/day was given to all patients, and in 11 was associated
with idarubicin (AIDA protocol); in two patients ATRA was associated with
mitoxantrone + ara-C, while the remaining three patients received ATRA alone.
RESULTS: Fourteen patients (87.5%) achieved CR, and two patients (12.5%) died
during induction. Despite the high CR rate, eight episodes of severe
cardiovascular complication were observed in seven patients, three of whom had
previously had cardiovascular disease; in addition, three patients had sepsis
(two bacterial and one fungal). As of 31 March 1997, 9 of 14 patients were still 
in first CR after a 19-month (range 7-64 months) median follow-up since
attainment of the CR. One patient died in CR of a fungal complication and four
patients relapsed after 8, 9, 23 and 35 months following CR: two of them achieved
a second CR lasting seven and +15 months with ATRA alone. Of the nine patients
still in first CR, only three have received the planned consolidation therapy and
five have been in CR for more than 24 months (+25, +33, +34, +38, +63).
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the fact that most of these patients received shorter
consolidation treatments than do younger patients, the good results achieved in
them might be considered an indication for modifying treatment schedules in order
to reduce severe toxicity and improve protocol compliance.

PMID: 9496395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Nature. 1998 Feb 19;391(6669):815-8.

Fusion proteins of the retinoic acid receptor-alpha recruit histone deacetylase
in promyelocytic leukaemia.

Grignani F(1), De Matteis S, Nervi C, Tomassoni L, Gelmetti V, Cioce M, Fanelli
M, Ruthardt M, Ferrara FF, Zamir I, Seiser C, Grignani F, Lazar MA, Minucci S,
Pelicci PG.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Medicina Interna e Scienze Oncologiche, Perugia University, Italy.

The transforming proteins of acute promyelocytic leukaemias (APL) are fusions of 
the promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) and the promyelocytic leukaemia zinc-finger
(PLZF) proteins with retinoic acid receptor-alpha (RARalpha). These proteins
retain the RARalpha DNA- and retinoic acid (RA)-binding domains, and their
ability to block haematopoietic differentiation depends on the RARalpha
DNA-binding domain. Thus RA-target genes are downstream effectors. However,
treatment with RA induces differentiation of leukaemic blast cells and disease
remission in PML-RARalpha APLs, whereas PLZF-RARa APLs are resistant to RA.
Transcriptional regulation by RARs involves modifications of chromatin by histone
deacetylases, which are recruited to RA-target genes by nuclear co-repressors.
Here we show that both PML-RARalpha and PLZF-RARalpha fusion proteins recruit the
nuclear co-repressor (N-CoR)-histone deacetylase complex through the RARalpha CoR
box. PLZF-RARalpha contains a second, RA-resistant binding site in the PLZF
amino-terminal region. High doses of RA release histone deacetylase activity from
PML-RARalpha, but not from PLZF-RARalpha. Mutation of the N-CoR binding site
abolishes the ability of PML-RARalpha to block differentiation, whereas
inhibition of histone deacetylase activity switches the transcriptional and
biological effects of PLZF-RARalpha from being an inhibitor to an activator of
the RA signalling pathway. Therefore, recruitment of histone deacetylase is
crucial to the transforming potential of APL fusion proteins, and the different
effects of RA on the stability of the PML-RARalpha and PLZF-RARalpha co-repressor
complexes determines the differential response of APLs to RA.

PMID: 9486655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Mol Carcinog. 1998 Jan;21(1):13-6.

Analysis of the retinoic acid receptor alpha gene as a candidate for the
pulmonary adenoma resistance 1 gene.

Gariboldi M(1), Vivat V, De Gregorio L, Manenti G, Chiariello E, Falvella FS,
Pierotti MA, Dragani TA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Oncology A, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy.

The retinoic acid receptor alpha (Rara) gene, which maps in the same region as
the pulmonary adenoma resistance (Par1) locus on mouse chromosome 11 (Manenti G
et al., Nature Genet 12:455-457, 1996), was tested as a candidate gene for Par1. 
We report here the analysis of loss of heterozygosity, nucleotide sequence
comparison, gene expression, and biochemical activity of the Rara gene from the
Mus spretus(Par1/+) and A/J (Par1/-) mouse strains. The two Rara alleles were
distinguished by two amino-acid variations but had similar biochemical activity
and expression levels, leading to the exclusion of Rara as a candidate Par1 gene.

PMID: 9473767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Nat Genet. 1998 Feb;18(2):126-35.

Distinct interactions of PML-RARalpha and PLZF-RARalpha with co-repressors
determine differential responses to RA in APL.

He LZ(1), Guidez F, Tribioli C, Peruzzi D, Ruthardt M, Zelent A, Pandolfi PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL), associated with chromosomal translocations
involving the retinoic acid receptor alpha gene (RARA) and the PML gene, is
sensitive to retinoic acid (RA) treatment, while APL patients harbouring
translocations between RARA and the PLZF gene do not respond to RA. We have
generated PML-RARA and PLZF-RARA transgenic mice and show here that these fusion 
proteins play a critical role in leukaemogenesis and in determining responses to 
RA in APL, because PLZF-RARA transgenic mice develop RA-resistant leukaemia,
while PML-RARA mice are responsive to RA treatment. We demonstrate that both
PML-RARalpha and PLZF-RARalpha fusion proteins can act as transcriptional
repressors and are able to interact with nuclear receptor transcriptional
co-repressors, such as SMRT. PLZF-RARalpha, but not PML-RARalpha, can form, via
its PLZF moiety, co-repressor complexes which are insensitive to RA. Histone
deacetylase inhibitors such as Trichostatin A (TSA), in combination with RA, can 
overcome the transcriptional repressor activity of PML-RARalpha and PLZF-RARalpha
as well as the unresponsiveness of PLZF-RARalpha-expressing leukaemic cells to
RA. Thus, our findings unravel a crucial role for transcriptional silencing in
APL pathogenesis and resistance to RA in APL.

PMID: 9462740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Nephron. 1998;78(1):88-95.

Ultrastructural study of anionic sites in glomerular basement membranes at
different perfusion pressures by quick-freezing and deep-etching method.

Yu Y(1), Leng CG, Kato Y, Terada N, Fujii Y, Ohno S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Yamanashi Medical University, Tamaho, Japan.

The ultrastructures of anionic sites in rat glomerular basement membranes (GBM)
were studied at different perfusion pressures of 100, 150, 200 or 250 cm H2O by a
quick-freezing and deep-etching (QF-DE) method, in addition to conventional
fixation methods, using polyethyleneimine (PEI) as a cationic tracer. By the
QF-DE method, three-dimensional ultrastructures at each pressure were observed
more clearly than those seen on conventional ultrathin sections. When the
perfusion pressures were changed from low levels to higher ones, the total
thickness of GBM with anionic sites became gradually thinner. Many PEI particles 
were observed around filaments, not only in the laminae lucidae, but also in the 
lamina densa. These findings indicated the existence of anionic sites in both
laminae lucidae and lamina densa of GBM. The numbers of PEI particles in the
lamina rara externa were counted on conventional ultrathin sections for
morphometric analyses. The numbers per unit length of GBM were significantly
decreased at higher perfusion pressures (200 and 250 cm H2O) than those seen at
both normal (150 cm H2O) and lower (100 cm H2O) pressures. It is concluded that
the ultrastructures of anionic sites in the GBM may be changed in vivo, depending
on the hemodynamics in the glomerular capillary.

PMID: 9453409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Am J Med Genet. 1997 Dec 19;73(3):337-44.

Application of transmission disequilibrium tests to nonsyndromic oral clefts:
including candidate genes and environmental exposures in the models.

Maestri NE(1), Beaty TH, Hetmanski J, Smith EA, McIntosh I, Wyszynski DF, Liang
KY, Duffy DL, VanderKolk C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Extensive epidemiological and genetic studies of the cause of oral clefts have
demonstrated strong familial aggregation but have failed to yield definitive
evidence of any single genetic mechanism. We used the transmission/disequilibrium
test (TDT) to investigate the relationship between oral clefts and markers
associated with five candidate genes by utilizing 160 parent-offspring trios.
Conditional logistic regression models extended the TDT to include covariates as 
effect modifiers, thus permitting tests for gene-environment interactions. For
four of these candidates [transforming growth factor alpha (TGFA), transforming
growth factor beta 3 (TGFB3), retinoic acid receptor (RARA), and the
proto-oncogene BCL3], we detected modestly elevated odds ratios for the
transmission of one marker allele to cleft probands when all the trios were
analyzed together. These odds ratios increased when information on type of cleft,
race, family history, or maternal smoking were incorporated as effect modifiers. 
We detected significant interaction between maternal smoking and the transmission
of alleles for markers near TGFA and TGFB3; excess transmission of allele 3 at
BCL3 was most significant among cleft lip probands; and the odds ratios for
transmission of alleles at D19S178 and THRA1 were significant when ethnic group
was included in the model. We suggest that utilizing an analytical strategy that 
allows for stratification of data and incorporating environmental effects into a 
single analysis may be more effective for detecting genes of small effect.

PMID: 9415696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Neurosci. 1998 Jan 1;18(1):138-46.

Natural variation in neuron number in mice is linked to a major quantitative
trait locus on Chr 11.

Williams RW(1), Strom RC, Goldowitz D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience, Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of
Tennessee, Memphis, Tennessee 38163, USA.

Common genetic polymorphisms-as opposed to rare mutations-generate almost all
heritable differences in the size and structure of the CNS. Surprisingly, these
normal variants have not previously been mapped or cloned in any vertebrate
species. In a recent paper (), we suggested that much of the variation in retinal
ganglion cell number in mice, and the striking bimodality of strain averages, are
caused by one or two quantitative trait loci (QTLs). To test this idea, and to
map genes linked to this variable and highly heritable quantitative trait, we
have counted ganglion cells in 38 recombinant inbred strains (BXD and BXH)
derived from parental strains that have high and low cell numbers. A genome-wide 
search using simple and composite interval-mapping techniques revealed a major
QTL on chromosome (Chr) 11 in a 3 cM interval between Hoxb and Krt1 (LOD = 6.8;
genome-wide p = 0.001) and possible subsidiary QTLs on Chr 2 and Chr 8. The Chr
11 locus, neuron number control 1 (Nnc1), accounts for one third of the genetic
variance among BXH strains and more than half of that among BXD strains, but Nnc1
has no known effects on brain weight, eye weight, or total retinal cell number.
Three strong candidate genes have been mapped previously to the same region as
Nnc1. These genes-Rara, Thra, and Erbb2- encode receptors for retinoic acid,
thyroxine, and neuregulin, respectively. Each receptor is expressed in the retina
during development, and their ligands affect the proliferation or survival of
retinal cells.

PMID: 9412494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mamm Genome. 1998 Jan;9(1):20-5.

A new mutation Rim3 resembling Re(den) is mapped close to retinoic acid receptor 
alpha (Rara) gene on mouse chromosome 11.

Sato H(1), Koide T, Masuya H, Wakana S, Sagai T, Umezawa A, Ishiguro S, Tamai M, 
Shiroishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Miyagi-ken,
Japan.

Erratum in
    Mamm Genome 1998 Apr;9(4):344. Tama M [corrected to Tamai M].

A new mouse mutation, recombination-induced mutation 3 (Rim3), arose
spontaneously in our mouse facility. This mutation exhibits corneal opacity as
well as abnormal skin and hair development resembling rex denuded (Re(den)) and
bareskin (Bsk). Large-scale linkage analysis with two kinds of intersubspecific
backcrosses revealed that Rim3 is mapped to the distal portion of Chromosome
(Chr) 11, in which Re(den) and Bsk have been located, and is very close to the
retinoic acid receptor, alpha (Rara). The genes, keratin gene complex-1, acidic, 
gene 10, 12 (Krt1-10, 12), granulin (Grn), junctional plakoglobin (Jup) and Rara,
all of which regulate growth and differentiation of epithelial cells, are
genetically excluded as candidate genes for Rim3, but are clustered in the short 
segment on mouse Chr 11.

PMID: 9434940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Vet Med Sci. 1997 Oct;59(10):857-62.

Alteration of anionic sites in renal glomerular basement membrane of pigs.

Shirota K(1), Tanaka H, Sugimoto J, Nomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Azabu University, Kanagawa, Japan.

Ultrastructural alteration of anionic sites (ASs) in the glomerular basement
membrane (GBM) was studied in 10 cases of swine mesangial proliferative
glomerulonephritis using a cationic ultrastructural tracer, 0.5%
polyethyleneimine (M.W. = 1,800). Glomerular ASs were seen as discrete
electron-dense particles in the GBM, mesangial matrix and epithelial cell
surfaces by electron microscopy. In the lamina rara externa (LRE) of the normal
GBM, ASs were distributed regularly in a single layer. In those areas of the LRE 
that contained electron dense deposits or clusters of spherical microparticles
(SMPs), however, a distinct reduction or loss of ASs was observed in all the
pigs. Quantitative assessment of ASs in the LRE over 1,000 nm of the GBM revealed
a significant reduction in ASs in one case with diffuse global thickening of the 
GBM as compared with the remaining nine pigs without GBM thickening (P < 0.001,
Mann-Whitney's U-test). There were no ASs in the lamina densa (LD) of the normal 
GBM, but an irregular distribution of ASs was seen within the LD of the pig
showing diffuse global thickening of the GBM. These results suggest that a
disturbance of the charge-selective barrier in the GBM may be induced by
electron-dense deposits or SMPs, in the LRE as well as thickening of the GBM in
swine glomerulonephritis.

PMID: 9362031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Anat Rec. 1997 Oct;249(2):181-6.

Effects of maternal bilateral ureteral ligation on formation of the glomerular
basement membrane in fetal rat kidney.

Okada T(1), Morikawa Y, Kiso Y, Sasaki F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, College of Agriculture, Osaka Prefecture
University, Japan. okada@jyui.vet.osakafu-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The present study was designed to clarify development of filtration
property of fetal renal glomerulus when maternal kidney is dysfunctional.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Maternal bilateral ureteral ligation was performed on days
17, 19, and 21 of pregnancy. One day after each operation, cationized ferritin
(CF), native ferritin (NF), and horseradish peroxidase (HRP) were injected,
respectively, in the fetuses. Distribution of the tracers in the fetal kidneys
was investigated electron microscopically.
RESULTS: On fetal day 20, clustered CF particles were present in the laminae
rarae interna and externa of the glomerular basement membrane of the fetuses from
ureter-ligated mothers, while the clusters were arrayed in three to four layers
in that of the fetuses from sham-ligated ones. On fetal day 22, a relatively
large amount of CF particles was present in the lamina rara externa in the
fetuses from ureter-ligated mothers when compared to that in the age-matched
control fetuses. On fetal days 20 and 22, the number of NF particles was
decreased, and shortening of the time for filtration of HRP through the
glomerular basement membrane was observed in the fetuses from the ligated
mothers.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that dysfunction of maternal kidneys causes
accelerated formation of fetal glomerular basement membrane and stimulates
glomerular function in filtration in fetal rat kidney.

PMID: 9335463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Nat Genet. 1997 Sep;17(1):109-13.

Fusion of retinoic acid receptor alpha to NuMA, the nuclear mitotic apparatus
protein, by a variant translocation in acute promyelocytic leukaemia.

Wells RA(1), Catzavelos C, Kamel-Reid S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Toronto Hospital, University of Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) is uniquely associated with chromosomal
translocations that disrupt the gene encoding the retinoic acid receptor, RARA.
In more than 99% of cases, this disruption results in the formation of a PML-RARA
gene fusion. Two rare variants of APL have been described, in which RARA is fused
to one of two other genes, PLZF and NPM. Although RARA dysregulation is evidently
important in APL, the role of the various fusion partners remains unclear. We
have characterized a fourth APL gene fusion, which links exons encoding the
retinoic acid and DNA-binding domains of RARA to 5' exons of NuMA, a gene that
encodes the nuclear mitotic apparatus protein. The NuMA-RARA fusion protein
exists in sheet-like nuclear aggregates with which normal NuMA partly
co-localizes. In contrast to t(15;17) APL, the intracellular distribution of PML 
is normal in these cells. Our results suggest that interference with retinoid
signalling, and not disruption of PML organization, is essential to the APL
phenotype and implicates for the first time an element of the mitotic apparatus
in the molecular pathogenesis of human malignancy.

PMID: 9288109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Cesk Patol. 1997 Aug;33(3):89-98.

[Charge interactions of immune deposits in glomeruli (experimental study)].

[Article in Czech]

Rossmann P(1), Ríha I, Sírová M, Bilej M, Matousovic K, Bohdanecká M.

Author information: 
(1)Mikrobiologický ústav Akademie ved CR.

An i.v. injection of 8-40 mg (kg cationized and heat-aggregated rabbit or human
Ig (cat-aggr RIg,-HuIg; pI 9.5) elicited a strong diffuse linear fixation in rat 
glomerular capillaries revealed by one-step immunofluorescence or immunoenzyme
histochemistry 1 and 2 h post-injection. Preferential binding to the lamina rara 
externa (LRE) was documented in ultrastructure by preembedding and postembedding 
assays (HRP-coupled antibody and protein A-colloidal gold, respectively). After
24 and 48 h the glomeruli were negative. Polyethylenimine (PEI)-reactive
polyanion of LRE was significantly reduced 1 h after cat-aggr-Ig; depletion
persisted even after 48 h. Non-cationized Ig aggregates did not bind to the
glomerular capillaries. A subsequent i.p. injection of swine anti-rabbit-Ig
antibody (SwAR, 15 mg i.p. after 4 h) produced the same linear binding of both
two antigens which, however, persisted after 10 days and assumed a granular
pattern. After presensitization with RIg (1-2 mg i.p. or s.c.; 4 days before
cat-aggr RIg) the early linear fixation underwent a gradual transformation into
the granular pattern and deposits of mesangial, rarely of epimembranous type were
found 1 week after cat-aggr RIg and later. RIg and SwIg were proved in both types
of deposits. After 2 weeks both rat Ig and C 3 were present, too. Rarefaction of 
deposits and their concentration in the vascular poles took place during 3
months, and deposits also appeared in the media of vas afferens. The antigen load
did not produce an acute glomerulonephritis or significant proteinuria; slight
focal mesangial sclerosis and a discrete increase in serum creatinine were noted 
after 2-3 months. To sum up: The one-shot charge interaction is prompt but
short-lived whereas the local binding of additional proteins, especially after a 
specific preimmunization, significantly prolongs the contamination of glomeruli
and promotes the build-up of immune complex-type deposits which gradually retreat
to the mesangial stalk and vascular pole.

PMID: 9471398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 1997 Aug;37(2):91-9.

Effect of an alpha-glucosidase inhibitor on glomerular basement membrane anionic 
sites in streptozotocin induced mildly diabetic rats.

Sato H(1), Shiina N.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Toho University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

The present study was conducted in order to examine the effect of acarbose, a
potent alpha-glucosidase inhibitor, on renal function in rats with mild
streptozotocin-diabetes. Male Wistar rats were made mildly diabetic by
intravenous injection of streptozotocin (40 mg/kg) and were supplied a standard
solid chow containing 0.1% acarbose for 8 weeks. Diabetic rats showed mild
hyperglycemia under non-fasting condition and their urine albumin excretion (UAE)
rate was markedly increased compared to non-diabetic control rats, while acarbose
treatment resulted in a significant suppression of blood glucose level and UAE in
diabetic rats. Examination by electron microscope revealed that the number of
anionic sites in the lamina rara externa per 1000 nm of glomerular basement
membrane (GBM) was significantly decreased in diabetic rats compared to control
value (15.7 +/- 0.9 vs. 20.9 +/- 0.3 P < 0.001), whereas, significant recovery
(19.6 +/- 0.6 P < 0.01) was observed after 8 weeks of acarbose treatment. In
conclusion, acarbose treatment suppressed blood glucose level of mildly-insulin
deficient animal model without insulin treatment and prevented from a reduction
in the number of anionic sites in GBM which might ameliorate an increased
permeability of GBM leading to albuminuria.

PMID: 9279479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Presse Med. 1997 Jun 21;26(21):1005-7.

[Molecular anomalies in malignant hemopathies].

[Article in French]

Mauvieux L, Macintyre E.

Much of our understanding of the molecular anomalies involved in the process of
oncogenesis has resulted from research into malignant hematologic diseases,
facilitated by the accessibility of hematopoietic cells. For example, in lymphoid
tumors, rearrangement of the genomic DNA can lead to the juxtaposition of
proto-oncogenes and the highly active sequences regulating synthesis of
immunoglobulins or T-cell receptors. The subsequent malignancy results from an
uncontrolled overexpression of a normal protein. This type of "quantitative"
anomaly occurs in follicular lymphomas where B-cells overexpress the normal BCL2 
protein which inhibits apoptosis, contributing to immortalization of the B done. 
The same type of rearrangement process can approach gene fragments which fusion
and lead to production of a highly oncogenic chimerical or truncated abnormal
protein. Such "qualitative" anomalies occur in myeloid hemopathies. Both types of
anomalies involve genes controlling the cell cycle, cell differentiation or cell 
death (apoptosis), in particular transcription factors (for example, E2A, RARA,
MYC) and molecules involved in signal transduction (for example RAS, ABL, LCK). A
molecular anomaly can be detected in approximately 30% of all cases of acute
leukemia and in up to 75% of the non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Analysis of the junction 
fragments of the different heavy chains of the immunoglobulins produced in these 
cases provides a specific marker for detecting the B or T-cell clone in digestive
or skin biopsies. For example, detection of a BCR-ABL transcript in a patient
with primary thrombocythemia or an atypical myeloproliferative syndrome can be
diagnostic and detection of the donal immunoglobulin or T-cell receptor
rearrangement can confirm the malignant nature of the lymphoid proliferation.
Molecular markers also have prognostic value allowing patient stratification and 
more adapted therapy. Molecular anomalies detected in malignant hematologic
diseases are thus examples of nearly perfect "tumor-specific" markers.

PMID: 9239151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Trop Pediatr. 1997 Jun;43(3):149-52.

Depletion of glomerular anionic sites and proteineuria in nephrotic syndrome of
children.

Ramjee G(1), Adhikari M, Coovadia HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics & Child Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Natal, Durban, South Africa.

The number and distribution of glomerular anionic sites using polyethyleneimine
(PEI) and the ultrastructural changes in the adjacent glomerular basement
membrane (GBM) of 33 children with nephrotic syndrome were studied. Compared to
the number of PEI-labelled anionic sites in the lamina rara externa per 1000 nm
length of the GBM in eight controls (mean +/- SD, 25.0 +/- 1.49); there was a
significant decrease in four patients with minimal change nephrotic syndrome
(MCNS; 15.25 +/- 2.98, P < 0.05); 10 patients with focal glomerulosclerosis (16.0
+/- 5.1, P < 0.014); 14 patients with membranous nephropathy (14.1 +/- 3.83, P < 
0.009), and five patients with membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (20.04
+/- 1.69, P < 0.036). A moderate inverse correlation between anionic site numbers
and proteineuria (estimated by urinary protein creatinine ratio) was found in
MCNS only (r = -0.6). These findings suggest that a reduction in the glomerular
anionic sites may be only partly responsible for proteineuria in the different
types of childhood nephrosis, except for minimal change nephrotic syndrome, where
it probably plays a major role.

PMID: 9231634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Genomics. 1997 May 15;42(1):74-82.

Physical and linkage mapping of human chromosome 17 loci to dog chromosomes 9 and
5.

Werner P(1), Raducha MG, Prociuk U, Henthorn PS, Patterson DF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Medical Genetics, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104-6010, USA.

Genome mapping in the dog is in its early stages. Here we illustrate an approach 
to combined physical and linkage mapping of type 1 anchor (gene) loci in the dog 
using information on syntenic homology from human and mouse, an interbreed
cross/backcross, and a strategy for isolation of dog genomic clones containing
both gene-specific sequences and simple sequence repeat polymorphisms. Eleven
gene loci from human chromosome 17q (HSA17q) were mapped to the centromeric
two-thirds of dog chromosome 9 (CFA9), an acrocentric chromosome of medium size: 
P4HB, GALK1, TK1, GH1, MYL4, BRCA1, RARA, THRA1, MPO, NF1, and CRYBA1. Eight of
these were also positioned on a linkage map spanning 38.6 cM. Based on combined
fluorescence in situ hybridization and linkage mapping, the gene order on CFA9 is
similar to that of the homologous genes on HSA17q and mouse chromosome 11
(MMU11), but in the dog the gene order is inverted with respect to the
centromere. Canine loci, GALK1, TK1, GH1, MYL4, THRA1, and RARA constitute a
closely linked group near the centromeric end of CFA9, spanning a genetic
distance of only 4.7 cM. Canine NF1 and CRYBA1 lie distally, near the lower
border of the Giemsa band adjacent to the distal one-third of CFA9. NF1 and
CRYBA1 are loosely linked to the more centromeric group (31.2 cM). No HSA17 genes
were found on the telomeric one-third of CFA9. Painting of dog chromosomes with a
human whole chromosome 17 probe showed hybridization with only the proximal
two-thirds of CFA9, consistent with the conclusion that the distal one-third
corresponds to a segment or segments of other human chromosomes. Two loci, GLUT4 
and PMP22, located on HSA17p, were mapped by FISH to dog chromosome 5 in a region
also identified by the whole human chromosome 17 paint, indicating disruption of 
HSA17 syntenic homology at the centromere.

PMID: 9177778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Anat Rec. 1997 May;248(1):51-62.

Immunocytochemistry of extracellular matrix components in the rat seminiferous
tubule: electron microscopic localization with improved methodology.

Yazama F(1), Esaki M, Sawada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, Yokohama City University, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Cell-cell interactions between Sertoli, myoid, Leydig, and germ cells
are thought to be essential for spermatogenesis. These cells interact with each
other through the extracellular matrices (ECMs) of the testicular lamina propria,
which thus may have an important function in spermatogenesis. For an
understanding of the role of ECMs in spermatogenesis, it is important to
investigate the molecular constitution of the testicular ECM. We examined the
distribution of type IV, V, and VI collagens (Cols), laminin (LM), fibronectin
(FN), and heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) in the rat testicular lamina
propria.
METHODS: Adult rat testes were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and 0.2%
glutaraldehyde. Ultrathin frozen sections were made and immunolabeling was
performed according to the method of Tokuyasu (1986 J. Microsc., 143:139-149).
Alternatively, for preembedding immunocytochemistry, we used labeling with
nanogold, followed by silver enhancement and gold toning. The tissues were then
fixed with osmium and embedded in Epon (Sawada and Esaki 1994 J. Electron
Microsc., 43:361-366). These specimens were examined in a JEOL JEM-100C
transmission electron microscope operated at 80 kV.
RESULTS: Col IV, LM, and HSPG were localized in the basement membranes of the
seminiferous tubule (ST-BM) and in the BM of myoid cells. Cols V and VI, and FN
were localized both in the connective tissue between the seminiferous tubule and 
the myoid cells (tubule-myoid connective tissue) and in the connective tissue
between the myoid cells and the lymphatic endothelial cells (myoid-endothelium
connective tissue). Furthermore, statistical analysis of the micrographs of
immunogold labeling for Col IV, LM, and FN around the ST-BM suggested that the
Col IV molecule is located uniformly in the ST-BM, whereas the LM molecule is
distributed mainly in the lamina rara of ST-BM, and the FN molecule appears to be
present predominantly in the tubule-myoid connective tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: Distinct distribution patterns were observed for each antigen within
the testicular lamina propria at the ultrastructural level. However, localization
of some components was not consistent with localizations reported by others.

PMID: 9143667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:287-8.

Molecular analysis of the t(15;17) translocation in de novo and secondary acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Naoe T(1), Kudo K, Yoshida H, Horibe K, Ohno R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Nagoya University Branch Hospital, Japan.

To study mechanism of chromosomal translocation, we analyzed the breakpoints
(b/p) of the PML and RARA genes in 120 and 5 patients with de novo and secondary 
(therapy-related) acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), respectively. In de novo
APL, the b/p in the PML gene were clustered in introns 3 (bcr 3; 30%) and around 
intron 6 (bcr 1 and 2: 70%). The b/p of the RARA gene were widely distributed in 
intron 2. In studied 8 de novo APL patients, no consensus sequence-motif was
found around the b/p, but there were identical stretches of one to seven
nucleotides between the PML and RARA genes in the joining regions, suggesting
non-selective DNA double strand cleavage followed by single strand base-pairing
within identical short stretches as a molecular mechanism of the translocation.
In 4 secondary APL patients after chemotherapy including etoposide against
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, the b/p of the PML gene were located in intron 6, 
and those of the RARA gene were in a restricted region within intron 2, 1 kb
EcoRI-BamHI fragment, while in an APL patient after chemotherapy without
etoposide against breast cancer, the b/p of the PML and RARA genes were located
in intron 6 and another region within intron 2, respectively. These data suggest 
that a different mechanism was associated with the t(15;17) translocation in
etoposide-related APL.

PMID: 9209367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:285-6.

Nuclear proteins binding to the recombination hotspot region of the retinoic acid
receptor alpha gene.

Tashiro S(1), Wang Z, Kotomura N, Niwa O, Ueda K, Kamada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Hiroshima University,
Japan.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) has been characterized by 15;17 chromosomal
translocation, which involves the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene on
chromosome 17 and the PML gene on chromosome 15. An extremely restricted region
(ERR) of 50 bps within the second intron of the RARA gene was identified as the
cluster region of breakpoints by sequencing analyses. ERR was tested by in vitro 
transfection-recombination assay, and was shown to be the recombination hot spot.
In this study, presence of DNA binding proteins to the 148 bps DNA fragment which
contains ERR was confirmed by gel-mobility shift analysis in the nuclear extract 
of NIH3T3 cells and human leukemia cell lines. Furthermore, in vitro study with
the mouse sarcoma cell lines using the recombination reporter plasmid containing 
ERR showed that ERR might be involved in the homologous recombination in addition
to the illegitimate recombination. The DNA binding proteins specific to ERR might
play an important role in chromosome translocation.

PMID: 9209366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Med J Aust. 1997 Mar 17;166(6):335-6.

Validation of the RaRA classification using general practitioner
self-classification.

Osborn M, Gupta L, Ward J.

Comment on
    Med J Aust. 1996 Jul 1;165(1):14-7.

PMID: 9087199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1997 Feb;18(2):151-3.

Isochromosome for derivative 17q in acute promyelocytic leukemia: evidence for
two copies of PML-RARA and favorable response to all-trans-retinoic acid therapy.

Park JP, Fairweather RB, Mohandas TK.

Comment on
    Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1996 Mar;15(3):147-56.

PMID: 9115966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Nephron. 1997;76(4):445-51.

Reevaluation of anionic sites in the rat glomerular basement membrane.

Kubosawa H(1), Kondo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chiba University School of Medicine, Chuo-Ku, Japan.

We reevaluated the distribution of anionic sites in the glomerular basement
membrane with ruthenium red, alcian blue, cationic ferritin, polyethyleneimine,
and cationic colloidal gold. Without the accentuation by the metal staining with 
uranyl acetate and lead citrate, we observed the existence of anionic sites
throughout all the layers of the glomerular basement membrane with a similar
reticular pattern and the structural difference between the lamina rara and
lamina densa, indicating that the lamina rara is an actual structural element.

PMID: 9274842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Nephron. 1997;76(1):62-71.

Early increase of chondroitin sulfate glycosaminoglycan in the glomerular
basement membrane of rats with diabetic glomerulopathy.

Karasawa R(1), Nishi S, Suzuki Y, Imai N, Arakawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Niigata University, School of Medicine, Japan.

A decrease in anionic change and the loss of heparan sulfate proteoglycan have
previously been observed in the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) during
diabetic glomerulosclerosis. We studied the chronological changes in the anionic 
character and the glycosaminoglycan content in the GBM of WBN/ Kob rats with
spontaneous diabetes. Two types of cationic probes were used: polyethyleneimine
(PEI) and cationic colloidal gold (CCG). Immunogold labeling was performed with
anti-monoclonal-heparan-sulfate-glycosaminoglycan (HS-GAG) and
anti-chondroitin-sulfate-glycosaminoglycan (CS-GAG) antibodies. The GBM width,
the anionic sites and the GAG sites were investigated in diabetic WBN/Kob rats at
2, 10 and 19 months, compared with control rats. Diabetes was confirmed in
WBN/Kob rats after 8 months in this study. The GBM width gradually thickened with
age. The PEI anionic sites significantly decreased in the lamina rara externa
(LRE) at 19 months (vs. 2 and 10 months). The HS-GAG sites also significantly
decreased in the LRE at 10 and 19 months (vs. 2 months). However, the CCG anionic
sites and the CS-GAG sites significantly increased in the LRE and the lamina
densa at 10 months (vs. 2 months) and, after 19 months, returned to the level
seen at 2 months. Results indicate that there is an early transient increase in
CS-GAG in the GBM while HS-GAG decreases. We noticed a transient increase in the 
CCG anionic sites at this early stage of diabetic glomerulosclerosis as well. The
increase in CS-GAG may provide a marker for early diabetic changes in the GBM.

PMID: 9171302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Nematol. 1996 Dec;28(4S):639-42.

Screening of Carnation Cultivars for Resistance to Meloidogyne incognita.

Cho MR, Kim JY, Song C, Ko JY, Na SY, Yiem MS.

A total of 33 carnation cultivars cultured in Korea were screened for resistance 
to the southern root-knot nematode, Meloidogyne incognita. Carnations were tested
by either inoculating with 5,000 eggs or by transplanting into a mixture of
bedding medium and soil infested with an average of 435 second-stage
juveniles/300 cm(3) soil. Cultivars, Desio, Castelaro, Kappa, Rara, Izu Pink,
Target, and Antalia were highly resistant to M. incognita. Twelve cultivars were 
moderately resistant, and the remaining 14 cultivars were susceptible. These
results were similar to those obtained when the cultivars were subjected to field
populations of the condition on a carnation farm.

PMCID: PMC2619746
PMID: 19277188  [PubMed]


244. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1996 Nov;92(1):54-7.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia with t(15;16;17;19) and unusual fluorescence in situ
hybridization pattern with PML and RARA probes.

Kamal NR(1), Hanson CA, Dewald GW.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, King Hussein Medical Center, Amman, Jordan.

We report a 58-year-old female with typical morphological and clinical features
of acute promyelocytic leukemia in whom a complex translocation involving
chromosomes 15, 16, 17 and 19 was detected using conventional cytogenetics and
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with chromosome specific paints.
RARA-PML fusion was not evident by FISH, but the RARA signal was split in 74.5%
of cells. GTL-banding and FISH with probes for PML, RARA and chromosome 15
specific paint raise the possibility of PML-RARA fusion on the abnormal
chromosome 19 in the complex translocation. The unusual PML-RARA fusion may be
related to this patient's poor response to induction therapy with
all-trans-retinoic acid.

PMID: 8956873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 1996 Nov;11(11):2185-91.

Impairment of endothelial and subendothelial sites by a circulating plasma factor
associated with minimal change disease.

Cheung PK(1), Baller JF, Bakker WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of albuminuria in minimal change disease (MCD) is
unknown. A human plasma factor (denoted as 100KF) is able to induce minimal
change-like glomerular alterations, i.e. loss of glomerular sialoglycoproteins
and decreased expression of glomerular ecto-ATPase, following in vitro incubation
with kidney tissue. In addition, increased (selective) permeability for plasma
proteins occurs after perfusion of 100KF into the rat kidney ex vivo. As in
kidney tissue from subjects with minimal change disease, subendothelial injury
has also been observed, i.e. reduced anionic sites in the lamina rara interna,
the question was raised whether injury induced by the plasma factor 100KF
involves vascular endothelium or subendothelial matrix of the glomerular
capillary wall.
METHODS: Permeability studies were carried out by using confluent endothelial
monolayers (HUVEC) cultured on a standard two-compartment system. The
permeability for a macromolecular marker (horse radish peroxidase) was tested
following incubation of the monolayers with either the native plasma factor 100KF
or the control factor (heat-inactivated 100KF), in combination with histochemical
evaluation of the cells for ecto-ATPase expression. Also quantification of
glomerular anionic sites at the ultrastructural level was carried out, after ex
vivo perfusion of 100KF or control factor into rat kidneys.
RESULTS: The plasma factor 100KF is able to increase the permeability of human
endothelial monolayers for macromolecules in a dose-dependent manner (relative
increase 122.4 +/- 24, 178.4 +/- 34 and 236.1 +/- 58% after preincubation with
0.05; 0.5 and 1.5 mg/ml 100KF respectively), concomitant with induction of
minimal change-like histochemical alterations such as reduced expression of
ecto-ATPase. The number of anionic sites in the lamina rara interna of the
glomerular capillary wall is significantly diminished following perfusion with
the plasma factor 100KF versus control factor (7.58 +/- 1.60 versus 12.57 +/-
2.05 per 1000 nm; P < or = 0.02); in contrast to the lamina rara externa (22.71
+/- 3.15 versus 22.27 +/- 2.92 per 1000 nm; statistically not significant).
CONCLUSIONS: Endothelial cells and subendothelial matrix along the glomerular
filtration barrier may be considered as target structures for the plasma factor
100KF, leading to initial minimal change-like alterations associated with
glomerular albumin leakage.

PMID: 8941577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Kidney Int. 1996 Oct;50(4):1278-87.

Re-evaluation of foot process effacement in acute puromycin aminonucleoside
nephrosis.

Inokuchi S(1), Shirato I, Kobayashi N, Koide H, Tomino Y, Sakai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Juntendo University, School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

The sequence of morphological changes during foot process effacement in acute
puromycin aminonucleoside (PAN) nephrosis was examined by means of NaOH
maceration and freeze cracking for scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The
micrographs of SEM and those of transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were
quantitatively analyzed by computerized morphometry, and were correlated with
renal function. On day 2 after PAN injection, the slit length was moderately
decreased by both shortening and degradation of the foot processes. On day 4,
membrane-bounded vesicles were scattered in the lamina rara externa. During foot 
process effacement, the basal surface of podocytes developed palm-like domains
that represented the cytoplasmic areas between interdigitation. The decrease in
the length of podocyte cell borders paralleled the decrease of 24-hour creatinine
clearance. The development of the palm-like domains on the basal aspects of
podocytes estimated by distance class analysis was closely correlated with the
sudden onset of proteinuria. We conclude that foot process effacement in PAN
nephrosis caused by the retraction and degradation of foot processes leads to the
development of palm-like domains, which is correlated with podocyte detachment as
well as massive proteinuria.

PMID: 8887289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Oncogene. 1996 Sep 5;13(5):971-82.

PIC 1, a novel ubiquitin-like protein which interacts with the PML component of a
multiprotein complex that is disrupted in acute promyelocytic leukaemia.

Boddy MN(1), Howe K, Etkin LD, Solomon E, Freemont PS.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Structure Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) arises following a reciprocal translocation
t(15;17) that fuses PML with retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA). The PML-RARA
fusion protein targets and disrupts nuclear multiprotein complexes called PODs,
ND10 or NBs, a process which is associated with a block in myeloid
differentiation leading to APL. A human B-cell cDNA library was screened for
PML-interacting clones and a single positive clone (PIC1) was isolated. The
sequence of PIC1 shows 52% identity to a S. cerevisiae ubiquitin-like protein
that was cloned as a suppressor of mutations in MIF2, a protein required for
mitotic spindle integrity during anaphase. Transient transfection of NIH3T3 cells
with PIC1 results in a nuclear staining pattern coincident with that of
endogenous mouse PML. Further, cotransfection of PIC1 with human PML produces a
completely overlapping staining pattern between the two proteins. An antibody
raised against PIC1 detects a punctate staining pattern in HeLa cells that is
coincident with endogenous human PML. There is no significant colocalisation
observed between the staining of PML/ PML-RARA and PIC1 in an APL-derived cell
line NB4, as compared to cells expressing only wild type PML. However, following 
all trans retinoic acid treatment of NB4 cells a significant relocalisation of
PIC1 and PML is observed. PIC1 is the first identified NB-associated protein that
interacts with PML, the function of which may lead to a fuller understanding of
the molecular events leading to APL.

PMID: 8806687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Oral Dis. 1996 Sep;2(3):238-41.

Molecular basis of familial cleft lip and palate.

Hibbert SA(1), Field JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Dental Sciences, University of Liverpool, UK.

Cleft lip and palate (CLP) is one of the commonest congenital malformations and
although the aetiology is still very unclear, a familial genetic component is
considered to be an important factor in certain individuals. Molecular biology
techniques are being used to identify the genes involved and this paper reviews
current knowledge and the advances that have already been made. Recent evidence
suggests a potential major gene on 6p, and a modifying role for transforming
growth factor alpha (TGFA). Moreover retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) (17q),
MSXI (4p), 4q and BCL3 (19q) could all be implicated in certain CLP families. In 
addition, the potential modifying role of various genes with the environment are 
considered to be important areas of research in the future. The identification of
a genetic locus associated with this disease would be an important advance in CLP
genetic counselling and lead to a better understanding of the genetic basis of
CLP.

PMID: 9081766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Leuk Res. 1996 Sep;20(9):733-7.

Relapse of acute promyelocytic leukemia follows serial negative RT-PCR assays: a 
cautionary tale.

Devaraj PE(1), Foroni L, Prentice GH, Hoffbrand VA, Secker-Walker LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Royal Free Hospital, School of Medicine, London,
U.K.

Six patients with acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) and t(15;17) were
investigated by cytogenetics and by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) for the fusion transcript PML-RARA. The clone was detected in
remission following all-trans retinoic acid and chemotherapy by cytogenetics
and/or by RT-PCR up to 2 months from diagnosis. Thereafter the PML-RARA
transcript was not seen in 20/21 first remission samples in five cases studied.
Remission was maintained in two patients, one following bone marrow
transplantation (BMT). Despite serial negative RT-PCR results, PML-RARA reemerged
at or prior to relapse following BMT in the remaining three cases. Frequent
molecular monitoring and caution in the interpretation of negative RT-PCR results
are indicated in APL.

PMID: 8947582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Curr Opin Hematol. 1996 Jul;3(4):249-58.

Acute leukemia in children.

Pui CH(1).

Author information: 
(1)St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Advances in the molecular characterization of leukemic cells have greatly
improved the precision of diagnosis and treatment assignment as well as the
monitoring of residual disease in both acute lymphoblastic leukemia and acute
myeloid leukemia. Currently, specific genetic rearrangements can be identified in
as many as 50% of children with either acute lymphoblastic leukemia or acute
myeloid leukemia. The genes p16 (or MTS1) and TEL/AML1 are now respectively
recognized as the most common tumor suppressor and fusion genes in childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Increasingly, contemporary protocols for the acute 
leukemias are relying on genetic information to guide treatment decisions.
Examples include the use of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
for acute lymphoblastic leukemia with the BCR-ABL fusion gene or MLL
rearrangement, and for acute myeloid leukemia with monosomy 7;
antimetabolite-based therapy for acute lymphoblastic leukemia cases with
hyperdiploidy of more than 50 chromosomes (DNA index > or = 1.16); and retinoic
acid and anthracycline-containing regimens for the acute promyelocytic acute
myeloid leukemia subtype with PML-RARA fusion. Other efforts are being made to
reduce the long-term sequelae of treatment. Indeed, extended intrathecal therapy 
and intensive systemic chemotherapy will, in all likelihood, replace cranial
irradiation as subclinical central nervous system therapy for patients with
intermediate-risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and perhaps even for those with
high-risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia. The challenge now is to identify specific
treatments for other genetically defined subtypes of leukemia. This goal will be 
realized only through protocol-based studies employing uniform criteria for
defining risk status.

PMID: 9372085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Leuk Lymphoma. 1996 Jul;22(3-4):221-8.

Variant and masked translocations in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Brunel V(1), Lafage-Pochitaloff M, Alcalay M, Pelicci PG, Birg F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U119, Marseillo, France.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by a unique hemorrhagic
syndrome, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and the association with the
specific (15;17 chi q22-23:q12-21) translocation, which disrupts the retinoic
acid receptor alpha (RARA) and the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) genes. The
t(15;17) leads to the formation of two reciprocal fusion genes, PML/RARA on
chromosome 15 and RARA/PML on chromosome 17; it is responsible for the unique
response of the disease to retinoic acid (ATRA) treatment. As was described for
chronic myeloid leukemia and its associated t(9;22) [Philadelphia chromosome],
variant translocations have been reported in APL, which are either complex
translocations involving additional chromosome(s), or simple variant
translocations involving only either one chromosome 15 or 17 and any of several
chromosomes. Rearrangements of RARA and PML were documented in some of these
variant translocations. In contrast, recent molecular analysis of APL cases with 
cytogenetically normal chromosomes 15 and 17 revealed the occurrence of
submicroscopic translocations, leading to the formation of non reciprocal fusion 
genes, either PML/RARA or RARA/PML only. Detailed analysis of such cases may shed
light on the mechanisms of translocation, on the selection of oncogenic products,
and on the respective role(s) of the products of the translocation. Demonstration
of the existence, in some APL-like leukemias, of masked translocations with
involvement of PML and RARA, thus allows to (i) confirm the diagnosis of APL,
(ii) adapt the treatment and (iii) monitor the residual disease. Finally APL-like
leukemias were recently reported, with either a t(11;17) or t(5;17), resulting in
the fusion of RARA to genes other than PML; these patients do not appear to
respond to ATRA treatment. Altogether, these results emphasize the usefulness of 
a molecular definition of APL.

PMID: 8819070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Anticancer Res. 1996 Jul-Aug;16(4C):2373-7.

Expression of retinoic acid receptors in squamous cell carcinomas and their
possible implication for chemoprevention.

Issing WJ(1), Wustrow TP.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Hals-Nasen-Ohrenkranke der Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Klinikum
Grosshadern, München, Germany.

Retinoic acid and its natural and synthetic analogs (retinoids) affect a wide
array of biological processes. Retinoids are used in the treatment of many skin
diseases and are promising drugs for several cancers. Most of their actions are
thought to result from changes in gene expression which is caused via nuclear
retinoic acid receptors and retinoid X receptors. We conducted a study to
determine whether the expression of these receptors is different in malignant
tumors and tumor cell lines versus normal tissue. We performed reverse
transcription PCR from 29 tissue specimens of squamous cell carcinomas and one
melanoma of the head and neck, as well as from 13 cell lines established from
head and neck cancer. We were looking for the expression pattern of RAR alpha,
beta, gamma and RXR alpha. Only RAR gamma was expressed 100% in cell lines and
tissue specimens. RAR beta showed 100% expression in tissue specimens whereas 54%
expression in cell lines was seen. All other receptors were diminished in their
expression. In the positive controls all receptors were expressed at 100%. The
expression of RAR alpha and RAR beta was partially lost in cell lines established
from squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. The 100% expression of RAR
beta in tissue samples versus 54% in cell lines can be explained by the clonal
growth of malignant cells in cell lines and also possible "contamination" by
normal cells in the tissue specimen. In concordance with the literature it seems 
that RARa and beta play a pivotal role in mediating the response to retinoids.

PMID: 8816837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Cancer Res. 1996 Jul 1;56(13):2945-8.

Accelerated degradation of PML-retinoic acid receptor alpha (PML-RARA)
oncoprotein by all-trans-retinoic acid in acute promyelocytic leukemia: possible 
role of the proteasome pathway.

Yoshida H(1), Kitamura K, Tanaka K, Omura S, Miyazaki T, Hachiya T, Ohno R, Naoe 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Nagoya University Branch Hospital, Japan.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is associated with a chromosomal translocation
t(15;17) and successfully differentiated by all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) in
vivo as well as in vitro. The PML-retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA)
oncoprotein, which is generated by the translocation, blocks the differentiation,
and ATRA is thought to modulate the dominant negative function of PML-RARA.
However, the molecular effect of ATRA on PML-RARA is unknown. In this study, we
showed by means of immunoblotting that the expression of PML-RARA decreased
within 12 h in APL cells treated with ATRA at concentrations greater than 0.1
microM. The decrease of PML-RARA was associated with restoration of the normal
subcellular PML localization. PML-RARA transcripts were not down-regulated by
ATRA. However, lactacystin, a specific inhibitor of the proteasome, almost
completely inhibited the decrease of PML-RARA. These data indicate that the
PML-RARA degradation is accelerated by pharmacological concentrations of ATRA,
suggesting that ATRA allows APL cells to differentiate by relieving the
differentiation block.

PMID: 8674046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Rinsho Byori. 1996 Jun;44(6):535-40.

[Detection of minimal residual leukemia using polymerase chain reaction method].

[Article in Japanese]

Naoe T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nagoya University Branch Hospital.

Until recently, it was impossible to identify leukemia cells making up less than 
1% of a bone marrow sample, which is designated as minimal residual disease
(MRD). Owing to the development of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) MRD can be
detected at the 10(-5) level by amplifying the leukemia-specific DNA
rearrangement (BCR/ABL, PML/RARA etc.) or clone-specific DNA sequences (IgH chain
CDR-III etc.). Here, our studies on MRD of acute lymphoblastic leukemia and acute
promyelocytic leukemia are presented, and their technical problems and clinical
significance are discussed.

PMID: 8752731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Anticancer Res. 1996 May-Jun;16(3A):1177-81.

Biochemical characteristics and differentiating activity of 4-oxo analogs of
retinoic acid.

Sani BP(1), Venepally P, Zhang XK, Hill DL, Shealy YF.

Author information: 
(1)Southern Research Institute, Birmingham, Alabama 35255-5305, USA.

3-Methyl-4-oxoretinoic acid and 3-cinnamyl-4-oxoretinoic acid bind to a cellular 
retinoic acid-binding protein (CRABP-II) and to a retinoic acid-receptor protein 
(RARa). These analogs of 4-oxoretinoic acid, as well as the parent compound, have
less binding affinity than retinoic acid. Cotransfection assays in CV-1 cells
with plasmids containing cDNAs for RAR alpha, RAR beta and RAR gamma (homodimers)
and RAR alpha-RXR alpha and RAR beta-RXR alpha (heterodimers), indicate that
3-cinnamyl-4-oxoretinoic acid induces relatively less transcriptional activity
than 4-oxoretinoic acid and its 3-methyl analog, both of which are less effective
than retinoic acid. In differentiating mouse F9 embryocarcarcinoma cells, the
order of effectiveness is retinoic acid > 4-oxoretinoic acid =
3-methyl-4-oxoretinoic acid > 3-cinnamyl-4-oxoretinoic acid. This order of
potency is similar to that for inhibition of induction of ornithine decarboxylase
(ODC) activity and for prevention of papillomas on the skin of mice. Binding to
CRABP-II and activation of RARs appear to be important factors for expression of 
differentiating activity, inhibition of induction of ODC activity and prevention 
of papillomas on the skin of mice.

PMID: 8702232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Nat Genet. 1996 Apr;12(4):455-7.

Genetic mapping of a pulmonary adenoma resistance (Par1) in mouse.

Manenti G(1), Gariboldi M, Elango R, Fiorino A, De Gregorio L, Falvella FS,
Hunter K, Housman D, Pierotti MA, Dragani TA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Oncology A, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy.

Lung cancer, a major cause of death in the Western world, has a poor prognosis.
So far, therapeutic strategies have had only a limited effect. Lung cancer risk
is strongly associated with cigarette smoking and lung cancer pedigrees are rare.
However, a possible polygenic nature of inherited predisposition to this cancer
has been envisaged. Mouse inbred strains with inherited predisposition and
resistance to lung cancer provide an important tool for the dissection of the
genetics of this complex disease. The A/J strain carries the pulmonary adenoma
susceptibility 1 (Pas1) locus and develops many lung tumours. We have mapped the 
M. spretus-derived locus that strongly resists the lung tumorigenesis in Pas1/+
mice. This locus, pulmonary adenoma resistance 1 (Par1) maps to mouse chromosome 
11, near the Rara locus, with a lod score of 5.3. In Pas1/+ mice Par1 accounts
for 23% of the phenotypic variance and 10 fold reduction in total tumour volume. 
These results provide evidence for a major resistance locus affecting the
expression of an inherited predisposition to lung cancer.

PMID: 8630506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Leukemia. 1996 Apr;10(4):735-40.

A new variant translocation in acute promyelocytic leukaemia: molecular
characterization and clinical correlation.

Wells RA(1), Hummel JL, De Koven A, Zipursky A, Kirby M, Dubé I, Kamel-Reid S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Haemotology, University of Toronto, ON, Canada.

Translocation t(15;17)(q22;q21) is an acquired clonal cytogenetic change present 
in almost all cases of acute promelocytic leukemia (APL). The molecular genetic
basis of the translocation supports its integral role in pathogenesis. We
describe a patient with APL in whom the leukaemic clone was characterized by a
true variant of the classical t(15;17). The patient whose disease had numerous
atypical clinical features, had t(11;17)(q13;121). The chromosome 17 breakpoint
was localized to intron 2 of RARA by Southern blotting, and there was no evidence
at the molecular level for rearrangement at PML locus. These data, along with
previous reports of rare variant translocations in APL, indicate that while
dysregulation of RARA by gene fusion may be essential for the APL phenotype, the 
particular fusion partner may determine clinicopathological aspects, including
presentation, response to treatment with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), and
prognosis. This heterogeneity suggests that the variant fusion partners of RARA
in APL encode factors with properties both common to and distinct from those of
PML. Investigation of these factors promises to shed light on the complex
development pathways involved in the regulation of haematopoiesis.

PMID: 8618456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Am Mosq Control Assoc. 1996 Mar;12(1):130-4.

Notes on the mosquitoes of Nepal. IV. Results of the 1994 collecting in the
Midwestern Region, including new country records and voucher confirmation
(Diptera, Culicidae).

Darsie RF Jr(1), Courtney GW, Pradhan SP.

Author information: 
(1)International Center for Public Health Research, University of Southern
Carolina, McClellanville 29458, USA.

During 1994, field studies were conducted in the Midwestern Region of Nepal. Two 
camps were located in the "inner terai," low mountain valleys between the Churia 
Range and the Mahabarat Lekh. A third camp was in the mountains at Jumla. Visits 
were made to 2 high mountain sites, Simikot, Humla District, and Rara National
Park. The result from all these sampling sites was the recovery of 6 new country 
records, 5 in the genus Aedes and 1 in the genus Heizmannia. Some mosquitoes in
the Nepal checklist had no voucher specimens. Locality data are given for 9 of
these. Biodata on another species that is quite rare in Nepal are given.

PMID: 8723270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1996 Mar;15(3):147-56.

Retinoic acid regulatory pathways, chromosomal translocations, and acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Chen Z(1), Tong JH, Dong S, Zhu J, Wang ZY, Chen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Rui-Jin Hospital, Shanghai Second Medical
University, Peoples Republic of China.

Comment in
    Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1997 Feb;18(2):151-3.

Retinoic acids (RAs) exert a broad range of physiologic actions during embryonic 
development and adult life. Two families of RA receptors, retinoic acid receptor 
(RAR) and retinoid X receptor (RXR), have been identified. The therapeutic effect
of all-trans-RA (ATRA) in induction of remission for acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL) has largely been proved, and this has, over the past 10 years, greatly
stimulated research on oncogenesis and RA-regulated differentiation pathways. In 
APL, one of the RAR genes, RARA, is fused to PML in the great majority of
patients as a result of the chromosomal translocation t(15; 17). However, a small
subset of APL patients have a different fusion gene, PLZF-RARA, resulting from
the variant translocation t(11;17). A third translocation, t(5;17), in which the 
NPM gene is fused to RARA, has been described. Current data suggest that PML-RAR 
alpha and PLZF-RAR alpha fusion receptors may play an important role in the
development of APL and that PML-RAR alpha could be the target of ATRA
differentiation therapy. Characterization of the genes regulated by retinoic acid
may open up new prospects for an understanding of the mechanisms of ATRA
differentiation therapy for APL and may help to extend the concept of
cancer-targeting treatment to other types of leukemias or solid tumors.

PMID: 8721678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Blood. 1996 Feb 1;87(3):882-6.

The t(5;17) variant of acute promyelocytic leukemia expresses a
nucleophosmin-retinoic acid receptor fusion.

Redner RL(1), Rush EA, Faas S, Rudert WA, Corey SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, PA 15213,
USA.

We have studied an acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patient with a variant
t(5;17)(q32;q12). This translocation fuses the gene for the nucleolar
phosphoprotein nucleophosmin (NPM) to the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA).
Two alternatively spliced transcripts are expressed, which differ in 129 bases
immediately upstream of the RARA sequence. The NPM sequences contained in the
shorter NPM-RAR cDNA are identical to the NPM sequences contained in the NPM-ALK 
fusion gene expressed in t(2;5) lymphomas. The RARA sequences are the same as the
RARA sequences found in the PML-RAR and PLZF-RAR fusion seen in t(15;17) and
t(11;17) APL, respectively. Both NPM-RAR transcripts fuse NPM and RARA sequence
in the same reading frame, to generate translation products of 57 kD and 62 kD.
Both NPM-RAR proteins are expressed in the patient's leukemic cells, along with
wild-type RARA derived from the uninvolved allele. In transcriptional assays
using a retinoic acid response element reporter construct, both NPM-RAR fusion
proteins act as retinoic acid-dependent transcriptional activators. This case
defines a third class of APL rearrangements, all of which generate fusion
proteins of RARA.

PMID: 8562957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1996;75(2-3):164-6.

Allelic fusion of DNA topoisomerase II alpha and retinoic acid receptor alpha
genes in adriamycin-resistant p388 murine leukemia revealed by fluorescence in
situ hybridization.

Squire JA(1), McPherson JP, Beatty BG, Goldenberg GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Toronto,
Canada.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of metaphase and decondensed
free chromatin fibers from Adriamycin (ADR)-sensitive and ADR-resistant murine
cells demonstrated a close juxtaposition of topoisomerase II alpha (Top2a) and
retinoic acid receptor alpha (Rara) genes in adjacent chromatin in the
drug-resistant cells, and a close but separate genetic proximity in normal murine
chromatin. This provides physical evidence that the chromosome 11 allelic
rearrangement resulting in a chimeric truncated Top2a/Rara transcript in the
ADR-resistant cells is due to a novel fusion of the Topo2a and Rara genes. This
is the first description of a Rara gene disruption in cells selected for
antineoplastic drug resistance.

PMID: 9040785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1996;74(1-2):133-7.

Shared synteny of human chromosome 17 loci in Canids.

Park JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon NH 03756,
USA. jonathan.p.park@dartmouth.edu

Canids are unusual among mammals in the large degree to which their karyotypes
have diverged during speciation. In many instances, chromosome segments from
different species share cytogenetic homology, and a presumed phylogenetic tree of
Canid evolution can be constructed based on the relative shuffling of chromosomal
elements. In this study, four gene probes (myeloperoxidase [MPO], Miller-Dieker
[MDCR], ERBB2, and retinoic acid receptor alpha [RARA]) from human chromosome 17 
were used in fluorescence in situ hybridizations with chromosomes of three
different Canids: two subspecies of the Asiatic raccoon dog (Nyctereutes) and the
domestic dog (Canis familiaris). The Nyctereutes subspecies have widely diverged 
karyotypes (2n = 38 versus 2n = 54) and Canis familiaris has a large number (2n =
78) of chromosomes. This study confirms the identity of two shared chromosomes of
Nyctereutes. The Japanese raccoon dog chromosome 13 shares linkage with the
Chinese raccoon dog chromosome 5. Both of these Nyctereutes chromosomes share
synteny with human chromosome 17. Human chromosome 17 shares linkage with Canis
familiaris chromosome 23. The relative order and spacing of the genes mapped in
these species suggests the occurrence of chromosome rearrangements, most notably 
inversions, during the evolution of these animals.

PMID: 8893820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Mamm Genome. 1995 Dec;6(12):882-4.

Assignment of three loci: tumor suppressor protein-53 (TP53), retinoic acid
receptor A (RARA), collagen 1A1 (COL1A1) to Syrian hamster chromosome 9. Evidence
that this chromosome is homologous with human chromosome 17, mouse chromosome 11,
and rat chromosome 10.

Islam MQ(1), Fång G, Islam K, Levan G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Göteborg University, Sweden.

PMID: 8747929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1995 Dec;14(4):307-12.

Unbalanced translocation t(5;17) in an typical acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Brunel V(1), Sainty D, Carbuccia N, Arnoulet C, Costello R, Mozziconacci MJ,
Simonetti J, Coignet L, Gabert J, Stoppa AM, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL; M3 in the FAB classification) is specifically 
associated with the t(15;17)(q23;q12) and the consequent formation of a PML/RARA 
fusion gene. A few cases of APL with a t(11;17)(q23;q12) and a PLZF/RARA fusion
gene have recently been reported. In addition, a new variant, t(5;17)(q32;q12),
with a RARA rearrangement was described in a child with atypical APL. We report
an unbalanced der(5)t(5;17) in an atypical APL case showing unusual
dysgranulopoiesis and some M2 features. The breakpoints were difficult to
localize precisely on chromosome 5, because the translocation may have occurred
on a previous del(5q). The karyotype also showed del(8q) and multiple
double-minutes (dmin). Molecular studies evidenced RARA rearrangement but showed 
neither PML rearrangement nor PML/RARA fusion. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
revealed that the dmin were of chromosome 8 origin and that they accounted for
the MYC amplification observed in Southern blots. The patient did very poorly
despite chemotherapy and all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) treatment. Thus, the
t(5;17) could represent a second type of variant translocation in APL that, like 
the disease associated with t(11;17), does not seem to respond to ATRA therapy.
Whereas RARA rearrangement appears sufficient for an APL-like phenotype, it seems
that the presence of a classical PML/RARA is required for typical APL with
response to ATRA.

PMID: 8605120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 1995 Nov;30(2):111-6.

Effect of an aldose reductase inhibitor on glomerular basement membrane anionic
sites in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats.

Isogai S(1), Inokuchi T, Ohe K.

Author information: 
(1)The Second Department of Internal Medicine, Toho University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

The present study was conducted in order to determine whether an aldose reductase
inhibitor (ARI), epalrestat, prevents the progression of diabetic nephropathy in 
rats. Rats were made diabetic by intravenous injection of streptozotocin (STZ 50 
mg/kg) and epalrestat (100 mg/kg) was administered orally through a gastric tube 
once daily for 4 weeks. Examination by electron microscope revealed that the
number of anionic sites (AS) in the lamina rara externa per 1000 nm of glomerular
basement membrane (GBM) was significantly decreased in diabetic rats compared to 
control values (17.6 + or - 0.4 vs. 21.9 + or -0.4, P < 0.01), whereas,
significant recovery (20.3 + or - 0.7, P < 0.05) was observed after 4 weeks of
epalrestat treatment. Urinary albumin excretion (UAE) rate was markedly increased
in diabetic rats and the treatment resulted in its significant suppression from
diabetic rats. In conclusion, administration of epalrestat to diabetic rats is
capable of preventing a reduction in the number of AS in GBM which would
ameliorate an increased permeability of the basement membrane leading to
albuminuria.

PMID: 8833631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Am J Hum Genet. 1995 Nov;57(5):1130-6.

Evidence for an association between nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft 
palate and a gene located on the long arm of chromosome 4.

Mitchell LE(1), Healey SC, Chenevix-Trench G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Health, St. Louis University Health Sciences Center,
School of Public Health, Missouri 63108-3342, USA.

Recent studies suggest that the familial aggregation of nonsyndromic cleft lip
with or without cleft palate (CL +/- P) is likely to be attributable to the
effects of several susceptibility loci, acting in a multiplicative fashion. Two
potential CL +/- P susceptibility loci (CSL), transforming growth factor alpha
(TGFA) and retinoic acid receptor (RARA), have been identified through
association studies. In addition, recent evidence of linkage between CL +/- P and
two markers (D4S175 and D4S192) in the region 4q25-4q31.3 raised the possibility 
that a CSL, with a larger effect than either TGFA or RARA, may reside within this
region of the human genome. The present analyses were undertaken to determine
whether D4S175 or D4S192 is significantly associated with CL +/- P in a sample of
unrelated patients that have previously provided evidence of associations between
CL +/- P and both TGFA and RARA. The results of these analyses provide further,
tentative, evidence for the presence of a CSL locus on the long arm of chromosome
4 and help to refine the location of this locus in the region of D4S175 and
D4S192.

PMCID: PMC1801363
PMID: 7485164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Diabetologia. 1995 Oct;38(10):1169-75.

Reduction of heparan sulphate-associated anionic sites in the glomerular basement
membrane of rats with streptozotocin-induced diabetic nephropathy.

van den Born J(1), van Kraats AA, Bakker MA, Assmann KJ, Dijkman HB, van der Laak
JA, Berden JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, University Hospital St. Radboud, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

Heparan sulphate-associated anionic sites in the glomerular basement membrane
were studied in rats 8 months after induction of diabetes by streptozotocin and
in age- adn sex-matched control rats, employing the cationic dye cuprolinic blue.
Morphometric analysis at the ultrastructural level was performed using a
computerized image processor. The heparan sulphate specificity of the cuprolinic 
blue staining was demonstrated by glycosaminoglycan-degrading enzymes, showing
that pretreatment of the sections with heparitinase abolished all staining,
whereas chondroitinase ABC had no effect. The majority of anionic sites (74% in
diabetic and 81% in control rats) were found within the lamina rara externa of
the glomerular basement membrane. A minority of anionic sites were scattered
throughout the lamina densa and lamina rara interna, and were significantly
smaller than those in the lamina rara externa of the glomerular basement membrane
(p<0.001 and p<0.01 for diabetic and control rats, respectively). Diabetic rats
progressively developed albuminuria reaching 40.3 (32.2-62.0) mg/24 h after 8
months in contrast to the control animals (0.8 (0.2-0.9) mg/24 h, p<0.002). At
the same time, the number of heparan sulphate anionic sites and the total anionic
site surface (number of anionic sites x mean anionic site surface) in the lamina 
rara externa of the glomerular basement membrane was reduced by 19% (p<0.021) and
by 26% (p<0.02), respectively. Number and total anionic site surface in the
remaining part of the glomerular basement membrane (lamina densa and lamina rara 
interna) were not significantly changed. We conclude that in
streptozotocin-diabetic rats with an increased urinary albumin excretion, a
reduced heparan sulphate charge barrier/density is found at the lamina rara
externa of the glomerular basement membrane.

PMID: 8690168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cas Lek Cesk. 1995 Sep 6;134(17):555-7.

[The human genome--chromosome 17].

[Article in Czech]

Brdicka R.

The submitted account on genes of the 17th chromosome pays attention to autosomal
dominant hereditary neurodegenerative diseases which have some characteristics in
common-they are relatively frequent, a considerable proportion of the cases is
conditioned by new mutations, contributed mainly by male gametes, and they affect
mostly the periphery of the nervous system. In addition to the cause of this
group of diseases which at present is not yet quite clear, the 17th chromosome is
the carrier of the locus the product of which--p53 protein--interferes with
oncogenesis. Its effect twofold--the normal product under normal conditions
(natural regulation) exerts an antioncogenic action, its shortage or altered
quality-(mutations) exert an oncogenic action. Another important locus which is
involved in oncogenic processes is locus RARA--the receptor of retinoic acid
which participates in the formation of promyelocytic acute leukaemia and locus
BRCA1 the pathogenic alleles of which are a dominant predisposition for breast
cancer.

PMID: 7553759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Leukemia. 1995 Sep;9(9):1478-82.

Isoforms of PML-retinoic acid receptor alpha fused transcripts affect neither
clinical features of acute promyelocytic leukemia nor prognosis after treatment
with all-trans retinoic acid. The Leukemia Study Group of the Ministry of Health 
and Welfare (Kohseisho).

Fukutani H(1), Naoe T, Ohno R, Yoshida H, Miyawaki S, Shimazaki C, Miyake T,
Nakayama Y, Kobayashi H, Goto S, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Nagoya University Branch Hospital, Japan.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) has been used as a potent differentiation drug for
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Although the mechanism of its effectiveness
upon APL remains unclear, the PML-retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) chimeric
protein produced by t(15;17) is assumed to underlie the sensitivity of APL cells 
to ATRA. There are two major isoforms of PML-RARA transcripts; short (S) and long
(L), according to the breakpoints in the PML gene. We therefore compared the
clinical variables, the response to ATRA and the prognosis between 28 patients
with type S and 68 patients with type L. Patients were treated in
multi-institutional trials with ATRA, and chemotherapy was combined when
peripheral blasts and leukocyte counts increased during the therapy. The clinical
features at diagnosis were similar between the two molecular subtypes, and there 
was no significant difference in remission induction rates; 86% for the type S
group and 90% for the type L group. There was no statistical difference in
overall survival and CR duration as well as disease-free survival (DFS). In newly
diagnosed patients, predicted 2-year DFS was 66% for the type S group and 67% for
the type L group. In refractory or relapsed patients, it was 19 and 23%,
respectively. These data indicated that isoforms of PML-RARA fused transcripts
affect neither the clinical features of APL nor the prognosis after treatment
with ATRA.

PMID: 7658715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 1995 Sep-Oct;25(5):389-93.

Cytogenetics, gene fusions, and cancer.

Glassman AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Laboratory Medicine, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Cytogeneticists recognize that karyotypic abnormalities are associated with
specific malignancies. In 1960, Nowell described the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)
and its relationship to chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). Subsequent work in
molecular genetics and biology has revealed that the Ph is a translocation that
causes fusion of gene sites that code for the break cluster region (BCR) and the 
avian blastic leukemia (ABL) proteins. This so-called fusion protein is present
in a large percentage of the patients who have CML. A related fusion protein is
seen in about one third of patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. The
BCR-ABL fusion protein results in increased tyrosine kinase activity. The
mechanism of action is thought to be via signal transduction related to guanosine
triphosphatase activating protein which interacts with a ras-p21 binding protein.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is associated with the cytogenetic abnormality
of t(15;17). This alters the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) and the retinoic acid
receptor alpha (RARA) gene sites. Two fusion proteins are the result of this
cytogenetic abnormality. They are termed PML-RARA and RARA-PML. Only one, the
PML-RARA, is associated with APL. The PML-RARA chimeric protein has two zinc
finger-like regions. It retains the ligand binding domain of RARA. The protein
called PML has some similarities with a family of proteins which are thought to
fuse to proto-oncogenes and to act as transforming proteins. The role of
classical cytogenetics and the added capability of molecular biology has helped
to elucidate some of the potential mechanisms for the development of cancer and
provided additional understanding of neoplasia. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7486813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Genomics. 1995 Aug 10;28(3):596-8.

The orphan nuclear receptor ROR alpha (RORA) maps to a conserved region of
homology on human chromosome 15q21-q22 and mouse chromosome 9.

Giguère V(1), Beatty B, Squire J, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Royal Victoria Hospital, Montréal, Canada.

ROR alpha is a novel member of the steroid/thyroid/retinoid receptor superfamily 
with unique DNA-binding properties. We have mapped the RORA gene by fluorescence 
in situ hybridization to human chromosome 15q21-q22. To map the mouse Rora gene, 
a partial mouse cDNA clone was isolated from brain. Using interspecific backcross
analysis, we have mapped the Rora gene to mouse chromosome 9. This places the
human RORA gene in the proximity of the PML gene, which is involved in a
reciprocal chromosomal translocation t(15:17) with the RARA gene in patients with
acute promyelocytic leukemia.

PMID: 7490103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Histochem J. 1995 Jul;27(7):536-46.

Glomerular anionic charge in congenital nephrotic syndrome of the Finnish type.

Ljungberg P(1), Rapola J, Holmberg C, Holthöfer H, Jalanko H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Erratum in
    Histochem J 1995 Sep;27(9):724.

Decrease of the anionic charge of the glomerular basement membrane and especially
the reduced amount of heparan sulphate proteoglycan in the lamina rara externa
has been suggested to be the basic pathogenetic defect in congenital nephrotic
syndrome. In the present study the anionic charge of glomeruli was examined in
the congenital nephrotic syndrome of the Finnish type and in controls using
cationic stains (polyethyleneimine, Ruthenium Red) in electron microscopy.
Chondroitinase and heparinase treatments were used to characterize further the
anionic elements detected. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used in
addition to transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to examine the tridimensional 
structure and secondary changes of podocytes in this syndrome. The number (mean
+/- SD) of polyethyleneimine granules per 1 micron length of lamina rara externa 
of the glomerular basement membrane was 24.9 +/- 4.5 in control and 23.2 +/- 4.3 
[corrected] in congenital nephrotic syndrome subjects. The Ruthenium Red staining
pattern was closely similar in syndrome and control kidneys. The granules evident
after staining with either cationic stain were seen after chondroitinase but not 
after heparinase treatment in control as well as in syndrome patient kidney
samples. No denuded areas of basement membrane in 42 glomeruli from four syndrome
patients were found in SEM. In conclusion, the amount of anionic sites in the
lamina rara externa as detected by either cationic stain was comparable to
controls. These results do not support the hypothesis of decreased anionic sites 
in the lamina rara externa of the glomerular basement membrane in congenital
nephrotic syndrome of the Finnish type.

PMID: 7591846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Rev Med Brux. 1995 May-Jun;16(3):102, 105-12.

[Contribution of molecular and genetic biology in oncology].

[Article in French]

Brohée D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département d'oncologie, C.H.U. André Vésale, Montigny-le-Tilleul.

During the last decades, major medical advances have been made in the
understanding of cancer biology and led to the appearance of new diagnostic tools
and development of innovative therapeutics. Some basic concepts in molecular
medicine, oncogenes and tumour-suppressor genes are reviewed. Special topics are 
devoted to Ras, erbB2, p 53 and characteristical gene rearrangements, such as
bcr-abl, RARA-PML, VDJ, bcl2-IgH. The greater knowledge of the molecular etiology
of cancer will contribute to disease screening, diagnosis, staging and therapy,
detection of residual or recurrent disease, and development of new treatments,
such as gene therapy or drugs targeted to oncogene products.

PMID: 7624661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Blood. 1995 Apr 15;85(8):2154-61.

Highly purified primitive hematopoietic stem cells are PML-RARA negative and
generate nonclonal progenitors in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Turhan AG(1), Lemoine FM, Debert C, Bonnet ML, Baillou C, Picard F, Macintyre EA,
Varet B.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Hématologie Adulte, CNRS URA 1461, Paris, France.

The hierarchical level of stem cell involvement in acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL) characterized by the pathognomonic PML-RARA fusion gene is unknown. To
determine if the cells of the primitive hematopoietic stem cell compartment are
involved in the leukemic process, we have used molecular and cell sorting
techniques in peripheral blood and bone marrow (BM) cells at diagnosis from three
patients with APL and t(15; 17). In two of them, clonality analysis was also
possible using the BstXI polymorphic site of the PGK gene. The PML-RARA fusion
gene was readily identified by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) analysis of BM cells obtained at diagnosis in all three patients. These 
same samples were then used to sort CD34+ cells and their CD38+ and CD38- subsets
by fluorescence-activated cell sorting. In both female patients, CD34+/CD38+ and 
CD34+/CD38- cell fractions were polyclonal using PCR, whereas a monoclonal
pattern was identified at the BM sample obtained at diagnosis either by Southern 
blotting or by PCR. Because of the high sensitivity of the PCR analysis, the
polyclonal pattern of these cell populations could mask the presence of a minor
clone. To detect this clone, we preformed RT-PCR analysis for t(15; 17). In one
female patient, the abnormal PML-RAR fusion gene was found only in the more
mature CD34+/CD38+ cell fraction using a nested PCR approach, whereas the
polyclonal CD34+/CD38- fraction was PML-RARA negative. These findings were
confirmed in a third patient with APL in whom the PML-RARA transcripts were
absent in the CD34+/CD38- cell fraction. To study the clonality at the level of
clonogenic progenitors, we used in one patient PGK analysis by PCR of individual 
burst-forming units-erythroid and colony-forming units-granulocyte-macrophage
obtained from the CD34+/CD38- and CD34+/CD38+ cell populations at diagnosis and
from the BM sample obtained during remission. The two highly purified cell
populations gave rise to morphologically normal colonies clonal for both the
BstXI site containing (A) and the BstXI site lacking (B) PGK allelles, indicating
their polyclonal content, a pattern that was also found in clonogenic progenitors
obtained at remission. These findings strongly suggest that the primitive
hematopoietic stem cells as defined by the CD34+/CD38- antigens are not involved 
by the neoplastic process in APL. These results may have important implications
for autografting strategies of retinoic acid/chemotherapy-resistant or relapsed
patients.

PMID: 7536493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Exp Mol Pathol. 1995 Apr;62(2):83-98.

Coexpression of a novel glomerular basement membrane matrix material in mesangial
cell culture and glomerulosclerosis.

Yang AH(1), Wang JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Veterans General
Hospital-Taipei, Taiwan.

After in vivo administration of purified antibody against cultured mesangial cell
(anti-MC IgG), glomerular basement membrane (GBM) was selectively bound. The
glomerular bound anti-MC IgG exhibited a monospecificity for a 109-kDa antigen
extracted from cultured mesangial cells and normal GBM. The antigen was not
digestible by collagenase, heparitinase, or chondroitinase and was revealed by
immunoelectron microscopy of a normal glomerular component to be predominantly
distributed along the lamina rara externa of GBM and to be absent in mesangium.
The ample expression of the antigen in puromycin aminonucleoside nephrosis
implies that it represents a significant sclerotic material in
glomerulonephritis. Abnormal production of GBM components by mesangial cells may 
play an important role in glomerulosclerosis.

PMID: 8549699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Leukemia. 1995 Apr;9(4):588-93.

Prognostic significance of the RT-PCR assay of PML-RARA transcripts in acute
promyelocytic leukemia. The Leukemia Study Group of the Ministry of Health and
Welfare (Kouseisho).

Fukutani H(1), Naoe T, Ohno R, Yoshida H, Kiyoi H, Miyawaki S, Morishita H, Sano 
F, Kamibayashi H, Matsue K, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Nagoya University Branch Hospital, Japan.

Minimal residual disease (MRD) was prospectively monitored at the 10(-5) level by
the reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) of PML-retinoic acid
receptor alpha (RARA) transcripts from 27 acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
patients who achieved complete remission (CR) with all-trans retinoic acid and
chemotherapy (previously untreated patients, 15; refractory to chemotherapy or
relapsed, 12). The RNA quality from bone marrow cells was firstly assessed by gel
electrophoresis to avoid false negativity because of the fragility of the APL
cells and the PML-RARA transcripts. In 12 of 15 untreated patients, RT-PCR became
negative during consolidation and intensification therapy 4-16 months after the
initiation of therapy, whereas it remained positive in nine of 12 refractory
patients. At the end of therapy, RT-PCR was negative in 14 patients and positive 
in 13 patients. The former patients remained in CR at median follow-up of 9
months after the end of therapy. In the latter, however, 10 patients relapsed at 
a median of 5 months after the end of therapy. These results suggest that the
RT-PCR assay can evaluate the quality of CR in APL and predict subsequent
relapse.

PMID: 7723389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Mar 14;92(6):2249-53.

Expression of the zinc-finger gene PLZF at rhombomere boundaries in the
vertebrate hindbrain.

Cook M(1), Gould A, Brand N, Davies J, Strutt P, Shaknovich R, Licht J, Waxman S,
Chen Z, Gluecksohn-Waelsch S, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Medical Research Council National
Institute for Medical Research, London, United Kingdom.

To investigate the potential biological role(s) of the PLZF gene, discovered as a
fusion with the RARA locus in a patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia
harboring a t(11;17) chromosomal translocation, we have isolated its murine
homologue (mPLZF) and studied its patterns of developmental expression. The
levels of mPLZF mRNAs increased perinatally in the liver, heart, and kidney, but 
with the exception of the heart, they were either absent or very low in the adult
tissues. In situ analysis of mPLZF expression in mouse embryos between 7.0 and
10.5 days of development revealed that mPLZF mRNAs and proteins were coexpressed 
in spatially restricted and temporally dynamic patterns in the central nervous
system. In the hindbrain region, a segmental pattern of expression correlated
with the development of the rhombomeres. From 9.0 days of development, starting
first in rhombomeres 3 and 5, there was an ordered down-regulation of expression 
in the center of each rhombomere, so that 1 day later elevated levels of mPLZF
mRNAs and proteins were restricted to cells surrounding the rhombomeric
boundaries. The chicken homologue of the PLZF gene, which we have also cloned,
demonstrated a similar segmental pattern of expression in the hindbrain. To date,
PLZF represents the only example of a transcription factor with elevated
expression at rhombomeric boundaries. The high degree of evolutionary
conservation between the patterns of PLZF expression during mammalian and avian
central nervous system development suggests that it has an important functional
role in the regionalization of the vertebrate hindbrain, potentially regulating
boundary cell interactions.

PMCID: PMC42461
PMID: 7892256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Blood. 1995 Mar 1;85(5):1169-74.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia cases with nonreciprocal PML/RARa or RARa/PML fusion
genes.

Lafage-Pochitaloff M(1), Alcalay M, Brunel V, Longo L, Sainty D, Simonetti J,
Birg F, Pelicci PG.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 119 de l'INSERM, Marseille, France.

Tumor-associated chromosome translocations usually lead to the formation of two
reciprocal fusion genes: one thought to be involved in the transformation
process, the other the mechanical consequence of the translocation event. In the 
case of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) blasts, the 15;17 chromosome
translocation generates the putatively transforming PML/RARa fusion gene and its 
reciprocal RARa/PML. We report APL cases with submicroscopic 15;17 recombinations
leading to the formation of nonreciprocal PML/RARa or RARa/PML fusion genes.
Therefore, each of the two reciprocal translocation products may be independently
formed and selected by the leukemic phenotype, implying that both are involved in
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 7858248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 1995 Mar;34(3):165-8.

[A study on the relationship between morphology and gene heterogeneity in acute
promyelocytic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiong S(1), Chen Z, Huang W.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Shanghai Ruijin Hospital.

Aucte promyelocytic leukemia (APL) can be treated by all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA) with high complete remission rate. 50 cases of APL diagnosed
morphologically were studied on their cytogenetics, molecular biology and
response to treatment with ATRA. Forty-five cases showed chromosomal
translocation t(15; 17) and PML/RAR alpha fusion gene (PML + RAR alpha + APL).
They had typical morphologic change, in which hypergranular cells appeared more
frequently in L type of PML/RAR alpha and microgranular cells in S type of
PML/RAR alpha. Among the 45 PML + RAR alpha + APL patients 8 died early and 37
had complete remission with ATRA. In the remainging 5 patients, three had typical
APL morphologic features in cytology, but one of them displayed t (11; 17) with
PLZF+RARA alpha +, the second showed RAR alpha + PML - (PML - RAR alpha + APL)
and the third PML - RAR alpha -(PML - RAR alpha - APL). They did not respond to
ATRA treatment. These data indicate that APL is not a homogeneous disease. The
other a patients had neither chromosomal translocation nor rearrangements of the 
two genes. On careful morphological reexamination, these two cases were not APL, 
but one of them responded well to ATRA. It is shown that morphology is the
important diagnostic basis of APL, but in a few APL cases diagnosis should be
made with the help of cytogenetics and molecular biology. Response of ATRA
treatment may be of diagnostic value of APL, but is not a specific criterion.

PMID: 7648936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Mamm Genome. 1995 Feb;6(2):63-9.

The major locus for multifactorial nonsyndromic cleft lip maps to mouse
chromosome 11.

Juriloff DM(1), Mah DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada.

Cleft lip with or without cleft palate, CL(P), a common human birth defect, has a
genetically complex etiology. An animal model with a similarly complex genetic
basis is established in the A/WySn mouse strain, in which 20% of newborns have
CL(P). Using a newly created congenic strain, AEJ.A, and SSLP markers, we have
mapped a major CL(P)-causing gene derived from the A/WySn strain. This locus,
here named clf1 (cleft lip) maps to Chromosome (Chr) 11 to a region having
linkage homology with human 17q21-24, supporting reports of association of human 
CL(P) with the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) locus.

PMID: 7767007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Anat Rec. 1995 Feb;241(2):175-80.

Distribution of colloidal gold tracer within rat parasternal lymph nodes after
intrapleural injection.

Glazyrin AL(1), Kolesnikov SI, Dragun GN, Zelentsov EL, Zolotarev KV, Zorin YuA, 
Kulipanov GN, Gorchakov VN, Dolbnya IP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Paediatrics, Irkutsk, Timiryazeva, Russia.

BACKGROUND: Tracer studies are an important tool to obtain information about the 
processes involved in the immunological response. Colloidal gold is widely used
as a tracer, but its small size of label can cause some difficulty during
low-resolution analysis. To overcome this difficulty, we developed a new method
to follow the route of tracer movement within lymph nodes.
METHODS: We applied conventional X-ray analysis, X-ray fluorescence analysis
(XFA) subtractional microscopy using synchrotron radiation (SR) beams, light
microscopy, and ultrastructural analysis to study the distribution and quantity
of colloidal gold coupled with albumin within rat parasternal lymph node 2, 4, 6,
8, and 10 h after intrapleural injection of the tracer.
RESULTS: At all the time points XFA-SR revealed that tracer formed a circle with 
a maximum concentration in the node periphery. XFA-SR measured colloidal gold
concentration in the nodes reached its maximum (0.5-0.75 weight %) in 6-8 h.
Subtractional microscopy revealed superficially located groups of cells filled
with colloidal gold tracer. Light microscopy and ultrastructural analysis
confirmed that the tracer was concentrated in the reticular cells, situated in
the sinuses of the node. Sinusoidal reticular cells concentrated tracer at much
higher rates than sinusoidal macrophages. Four hours after injection, gold
appeared in the lysosomes of the follicular reticular cells. At the same time
point, evidence of antigen presentation was obtained. Antigen presentation proved
to be an extremely rara event since only one ultrastructural incident was found
in 150 analysed grids.
CONCLUSIONS: SR is a valuable tool for the analysis of gold tracer passage within
the living organism.

PMID: 7710134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Nephron. 1995;70(1):72-6.

Three-dimensional ultrastructure of human glomerular basement membrane by a
quick-freezing and deep-etching method.

Moriya T(1), Ohno S, Yajima Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kitasato University School of Medicine,
Japan.

The three-dimensional ultrastructure of glomerular basement membrane (GBM) in
surgically resected human kidneys was observed by the quick-freezing and
deep-etching method. In three layers of human GBM, the middle layer exhibited
polygonal meshwork structures, which were composed of fine fibrils. In addition, 
the outer and inner layers were formed by lines of perpendicular fibrils, which
connected the epithelial or endothelial cell surfaces with the meshwork
structures of the middle layer. These ultrastructures might correspond to the
three layers, such as lamina densa and laminae rara externa and interna, which
were also observed on conventional ultrathin sections. It is concluded that the
human GBM has the same meshwork structures and perpendicular fibrils as those
previously observed in animals and that these structures may act functionally as 
size and/or charge barriers.

PMID: 7617120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1995 Jan;12(1):37-44.

Analysis of the joining sequences of the t(15;17) translocation in human acute
promyelocytic leukemia: sequence non-specific recombination between the PML and
RARA genes within identical short stretches.

Yoshida H(1), Naoe T, Fukutani H, Kiyoi H, Kubo K, Ohno R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Nagoya University Branch Hospital, Japan.

Molecular analysis of the t(15;17) translocation in 70 patients with acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) confirmed that the breakpoints of chromosome 15 were
located in two regions of the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene, mainly introns 3
and 6, whereas the breakpoints of chromosome 17 were consistently in intron 2 of 
the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene. To study the reason for the
clustering of the breakpoints and the underlying mechanism of the chromosomal
translocation, we characterized the joining sequences of der(15) and der (17) by 
polymerase chain reaction in samples from eight patients with APL. There was no
cluster of the breakpoints within the introns, and no consensus sequence-motif
was found around them. One or nine extra nucleotides were inserted into two
joining sites. There were identical stretches of one to seven nucleotides between
the PML and RARA genes in the majority of the joining sequences. These data
provide a potential model of the t(15;17) translocation: random DNA double strand
cleavage, modification of DNA ends by enzymes including terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase, and single strand base-pairing within identical short stretches.
Furthermore, APL develops only when the PML and RARA genes are rearranged, within
restricted genomic regions and a functional PML-RARA chimeric product is
produced, and this might lead to a clustering of the breakpoints.

PMID: 7534109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Mayo Clin Proc. 1994 Nov;69(11):1047-53.

Efficacy of fluorescence in situ hybridization for detecting PML/RARA gene fusion
in treated and untreated acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Schad CR(1), Hanson CA, Paietta E, Casper J, Jalal SM, Dewald GW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Laboratory Genetics, Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN 55905.

OBJECTIVE: To test the efficacy of fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for 
detection of fusion of the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) and retinoic acid
receptor alpha (RARA) genes in patients with treated or untreated acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL).
DESIGN: We conducted a retrospective blind study on a series of stored bone
marrow specimens from normal subjects and patients with APL.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Conventional cytogenetic and FISH analyses were done on
interphase and metaphase cells in specimens from 31 normal subjects and 19
patients with untreated or treated APL.
RESULTS: From 25 of the normal specimens, we calculated a normal cutoff of 10%
for interphase cells and 0% for metaphase cells. With use of these criteria, the 
other six specimens from normal subjects showed normal findings, and each of the 
seven specimens from patients with untreated APL was abnormal by FISH analysis.
The specimens from four patients in clinical relapse or with residual APL were
abnormal. Of the eight specimens from patients in clinical remission, three were 
abnormal; two of these patients had a relapse within 8 months, and the other
patient had received 1 month of chemotherapy and was entering remission. Of the
other five patients in remission, four had normal FISH results and have now been 
in remission for 2.5 to 10 years. The other patient in remission with normal FISH
results had a relapse within 6 months. PML/RARA fusion was detectable in three
patients with hypogranular APL and in three with a cytogenetic variant of the
t(15;17).
CONCLUSION: The results of this study suggest that FISH with PML and RARA probes 
can be used to diagnose APL and may be useful for monitoring treated patients.

PMID: 7967757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Anticancer Res. 1994 Nov-Dec;14(6A):2339-46.

Retinoids and differentiation treatment: a strategy for treatment in cancer.

Cornic M(1), Agadir A, Degos L, Chomienne C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire Hématopoïétique, Hôpital Saint-Louis,
Paris, France.

The retinoids are a large group of compounds structurally related to vitamin A.
Retinoids elicit specific biological responses by binding to and activating
nuclear receptors. Information about the metabolism and storage of vitamin A and 
retinoids, their plasma transport and uptake and the retinoid dose efficient on
target cell had to be established because retinoic acid (RA), the natural acidic 
derivative of vitamin A (retinol), is likely to be a key factor during specific
phases of embryonic development and maintenance of normal differentiated
phenotypes in adult, so vitamin A is involved in the normal morphological
differentiation of the visual system. RA appears an important agent since it
induces in vitro leukemic cells from acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) to
differentiate into mature functional granulocytes which lose their self-renewal
ability and die spontaneously. In vivo, APL patients treated with oral all-trans 
retinoic acid (all-trans RA) alone achieve complete remission in 80% of the
cases. APL results from a malignant process that leads to the accumulation in the
blood and in the bone marrow of myeloid precursor cells characterized by an
abnormal behavior and a differentiation arrest. APL is characterized
cytogenetically by a t(15;17) translocation which involves both the PML gene on
chromosome 15 and the RARa gene on chromosome 17 and gives rise to the PML/RARa
fusion protein. The high sensitivity of the promyelocytic blasts to all-trans RA 
should be related to the presence in APL blast of an abnormal protein, the
PML/RAR alpha. The antineoplastic effects of retinoids suggest that these drugs
could be used therapeutically for the chemoprevention of cancer.

PMID: 7825969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 1994 Sep;25(2):83-9.

Protective effect of heparin on renal glomerular anionic sites of
streptozotocin-injected rats.

Oshima Y(1), Isogai S, Mogami K, Ohuchi H, Ohe K.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Toho University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Albuminuria at the rate of 500 micrograms/24 h was observed in rats treated with 
50 mg/kg body wt. i.v. streptozotocin (STZ). When STZ was combined with heparin, 
administered twice daily (250 IU/kg subcutaneous injection) after 24 h following 
STZ injection, the daily urinary albumin excretion (U-AE) was less than half the 
amount found in non-heparinized rats (280.3 micrograms/24 h). The observation
period in both instances was 8 weeks. When animals were permitted to develop
albuminuria over the first 4 weeks, subsequent heparin administration for another
4 weeks lowered U-AE from 500 micrograms/24 h to less than half the amount (227.8
micrograms/24 h). A significantly negative correlation (P < 0.001) existed
between U-AE and the number of anionic sites (AS) in the lamina rara externa of
glomerular basement membranes, as visualized by electron microscopy. The number
of AS per 1000 nm in STZ-injected rats (15.5 +/- 0.2) was lower than that in
control rats (23.1 +/- 0.6); however, in heparinized animals, regardless of STZ, 
the values were not significantly different from normal. Heparin by itself had no
effect on the number of AS in normal rats. All STZ-injected animals became
hyperglycemic (400-550 mg/dl), but received no insulin. Heparin had no effect on 
plasma glucose levels. From these results, it is concluded that heparin
suppressed both of an increase in U-AE and a decrease in AS count of glomerular
basement membranes in STZ-injected rats.

PMID: 7821195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Oncogene. 1994 Jul;9(7):1939-45.

Identification of illegitimate recombination hot spot of the retinoic acid
receptor alpha gene involved in 15;17 chromosomal translocation of acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Tashiro S(1), Kotomura N, Tanaka K, Suzuki K, Kyo T, Dohy H, Niwa O, Kamada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Hiroshima University, Japan.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) has been characterized by 15;17 chromosomal
translocation, which involves the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene on
chromosome 17 and the PML gene on chromosome 15. The breakpoints have been mapped
to three cluster regions in the PML gene, and to RARA gene intron 2. We have
examined the distribution of breakpoints within RARA gene intron 2. An extremely 
restricted region (ERR) of 50 bp within RARA gene intron 2 was identified as the 
cluster region of breakpoints by polymerase chain reaction and sequence analysis 
of DNA from APL patients. To study experimentally the mechanism involved in the
translocation, ERR was tested in NIH3T3 cells by in vitro
transfection-recombination assay, in which target sequences were placed either
downstream of the SV40 promoter or upstream of the neo gene. Cells were conferred
resistance to G418 only when the promoter was fused to the neo gene by
recombination of two target sequences during transfection. The molecular
junctions were analysed in five clones, and all of them were shown to be confined
within a 20 bp region in a 148 bp DNA fragment containing ERR. This suggests that
ERR might be the illegitimate recombination hot spot in mammalian cells.

PMID: 8208541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Blood. 1994 May 15;83(10):2946-51.

Interstitial insertion of retinoic acid receptor-alpha gene in acute
promyelocytic leukemia with normal chromosomes 15 and 17.

Hiorns LR(1), Min T, Swansbury GJ, Zelent A, Dyer MJ, Catovsky D.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Department of Haematology and Cytogenetics, Royal Marsden Hospital,
Sutton, Surrey, UK.

The translocation t(15;17)(q22;q21) is seen exclusively in patients with acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) and in the promyelocytic blast crisis of chronic
myeloid leukemia (CML). This translocation juxta-poses the promyelocytic leukemia
(PML) gene on chromosome 15 and the retinoic acid receptor-alpha (RARA) gene on
chromosome 17, resulting in the formation of a chimeric mRNA transcript. We
describe a patient with the microgranular variant form of APL, with no detectable
cytogenetic abnormality of either chromosomes 15 or 17, who nevertheless had
juxtaposition of PML and RARA genes and expressed a chimeric transcript.
Conventional cytogenetics showed the karyotype 46,XY,d-er(3)t(3;8)(p25;q12).
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) with paints for chromosomes 8, 15, and
17 confirmed the presence of structurally intact chromosomes 15 and 17 and
trisomy for chromosome 8q. Nevertheless, FISH using cosmid probes for PML and
RARA showed their juxtaposition on one chromosome 15 homolog. Both genes were
also present on their normal homologs; in addition, part of the RARA gene was
still present on the remaining chromosome 17. DNA analysis by Southern blotting, 
performed with a variety of probes including PML, RARA and retinoic acid
receptor-beta (RARB), showed a rearrangement in PML. Reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) confirmed the existence of hybrid transcripts 
of 276, 455 bp and 623 bp, from PML-RARA on the der(15) chromosome, consistent
with alternate exon splicing of the long form of the transcript occurring in 50% 
to 60% of patients with APL. Our results show that APL patients with
cytogenetically normal chromosomes 15 and 17 may, nevertheless, have involvement 
of both PML and RARA genes defining a subgroup of APL,
t(15;17)-negative/PML-RARA-positive which is analogous to Philadelphia
chromosome-negative/BCR-ABL-positive CML. In this case, the presence of chimeric 
transcripts suggests that treatment with all-trans RA may be warranted in APL,
even in the absence of detectable cytogenetic change, showing the usefulness of
RT-PCR or FISH to aid diagnosis.

PMID: 8180390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1994 May;74(1):50-3.

A case of acute monocytic leukemia with t(11;17) involving a rearrangement of
MLL-1 and a region proximal to the RARA gene.

Reeves BR(1), Kempski H, Jani K, Borrow J, Howe K, Solomon E, Kearney L, Cotter
F.

Author information: 
(1)Leukaemia Research Fund Centre for Childhood Leukaemia, Institute of Child
Health, London, U.K.

A case of acute monocytic leukemia with t(11;17)(123;q11-21) arising in a
4-month-old boy is described. The breakpoint on chromosome 11 could be mapped to 
an 8-kb BamHI fragment within the MLL-1 gene, as seen in the majority of infant
leukemias. In situ hybridization with cosmid probes allowed us to map the
breakpoint on 17q proximal to the RARA gene, while Southern and Northern analyses
showed that the gene was not disrupted by the translocation.

PMID: 8194047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Toxicol Pathol. 1994 May-Jun;22(3):316-23.

Alterations in glomerular anionic sites in canine anti-glomerular basement
membrane nephritis with onset of severe proteinuria.

Sugimoto J(1), Wasaki M, Shirota K, Nomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Mitsubishi Kasei Corporation, Research Center, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
Azabu University, Yokohama, Japan.

Rabbit anti-glomerular basement membrane serum (AGBM) or normal rabbit serum
(NRS) were given intravenously (2 ml/kg body weight) to 8 male beagle dogs. Light
and transmission electron microscopy and immunofluorescence were performed on the
kidneys on day 7 postinjection. Alterations of anionic sites (ASs) of glomerular 
basement membrane (GBM) in peripheral, proximal, and paramesangial portions were 
studied quantitatively by electron microscopy using polyethyleneimine (PEI;
molecular weight = 1,800) as a cationic probe. Severe or mild proteinuria
developed on day 1 and continued until day 6 postinjection. On day 7 after AGBM
injection, the number of PEI granules per 1,000 nm length of the lamina rara
externa of GBM in all portions was significantly less than that in NRS-treated
dogs (10.48 +/- 1.78 versus 14.19 +/- 2.35 granules per 1,000 nm of GBM in
peripheral portion, 10.81 +/- 1.91 versus 14.97 +/- 1.35 granules per 1,000 nm of
GBM in proximal portion, 8.44 +/- 1.76 vs 13.43 +/- 2.10 granules per 1,000 nm of
GBM in paramesangial portion; p < 0.001). These results indicate that a reduction
glomerular AS occurs in AGBM-treated dogs in association with severe or mild
proteinuria and alterations in glomerular ASs might play an important role in the
pathogenesis of proteinuria in the canine anti-GBM nephritis in addition to
morphological changes.

PMID: 7817121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Pathol. 1994 May;173(1):45-52.

Alterations in the glomerular charge barrier in human lupus nephritis.

al-Nawab MD(1), Davies DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, UMDS of Guy's Hospital, London, U.K.

Renal tissue taken from ten patients with proteinuria and diagnosed as suffering 
from human lupus nephritis was examined by a post-embedding charge labelling
method using cationic gold (CG). The method allows localization of the anionic
charge in the glomerular epithelial cell coat and/or glomerular basement membrane
(GBM). Our results demonstrate that in human lupus nephritis there are gaps in
the charge barrier associated with immune deposits found in the lamina rara
externa of the GBM. These data suggest that the loss of glomerular fixed anionic 
charges in the GBM may play an important role in the development of proteinuria
in patients suffering from lupus nephritis.

PMID: 7523641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1994 May;10(1):15-25.

Myelodysplastic syndrome transforming to acute promyelocytic-like leukemia with
trisomy and rearrangement of chromosome 11.

Najfeld V(1), Chen A, Scalise A, Ambinder EP, Fernandez G, Waxman S.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Cytogenetics Laboratory, Polly Annenberg Levee Hematology Center, New
York, New York.

Variants of the t(15;17)(q22;q12-q21) chromosomal rearrangement associated with
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) have been previously described and they
frequently involve either chromosome 15 and/or 17. Previously we reported a rare 
variant t(11;17). We now describe two patients with myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS) that transformed to APL-like leukemia. Both had trisomy 11 at the diagnosis
of APL-like leukemia. Following treatment for APL, patient 1 reverted to MDS and 
showed a normal karyotype. When leukemia recurred, his bone marrow karyotype was 
47,XY,t(4;11), +11,der(22)t(1;22). Both patients were treated with all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA) for APL for 5 weeks, but failed to respond. The karyotype of
patient 1 after ATRA treatment was 46,XY,t(4;11); the trisomy 11 had been lost
and the bone marrow was replaced with immature myeloblasts without promyelocytes.
In patient 2, the karyotype remained the same as at diagnosis, i.e., 47,X,-Y,dir 
ins(4;7),del(5), +6,del(7), +8, + 11,-18. Molecular analysis by reverse
transcriptase PCR analysis showed the presence of wild type retinoic acid
receptor alpha (RARA) and the absence of the PML-RARA chimeric gene associated
with t(15;17). Additional analysis of PLZF, a new zinc finger gene associated
with t(11;17), also showed the absence of this hybrid gene. These data support
the concept that APL is a heterogeneous disorder and that variants with
chromosome 11 rearrangement exist that do not respond to ATRA.

PMID: 7519869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1994 Apr;9(4):234-43.

Molecular analysis of simple variant translocations in acute promyelocytic
leukemia.

Borrow J(1), Shipley J, Howe K, Kiely F, Goddard A, Sheer D, Srivastava A, Antony
AC, Fioretos T, Mitelman F, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Somatic Cell Genetics Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

The primary cytogenetic abnormality in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL; FAB M3)
is a reciprocal translocation, t(15;17)(q22;q12), which serves to fuse the PML
gene on chromosome 15 to the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene on
chromosome 17. A PML-RARA fusion message transcribed from the der(15) is thought 
to mediate leukemogenesis. Two APL patients with simple variants of this
translocation, t(3;15)(q21;q22) and t(X;15)(p11;q22), have previously been
reported who lack cytogenetic involvement of chromosome 17, although their
breakpoint positions on chromosome 15 still suggest the involvement of the PML
gene. Here we report on a combined analysis by molecular genetics and in situ
hybridization of these two patients, in which we wanted to determine whether the 
PML gene has alternative fusion partners or whether cryptic rearrangement of the 
RARA locus has occurred instead. A cryptic involvement of RARA was demonstrated
in both patients by a combination of Southern analysis, reverse transcription
coupled to PCR (RT-PCR), and fluorescence in situ hybridization. The results
indicate an absolute requirement for the rearrangement of the RARA gene in the
pathogenesis of APL and underline the importance of RARA during normal myeloid
differentiation.

PMID: 7519045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Feb 1;91(3):1178-82.

PLZF-RAR alpha fusion proteins generated from the variant t(11;17)(q23;q21)
translocation in acute promyelocytic leukemia inhibit ligand-dependent
transactivation of wild-type retinoic acid receptors.

Chen Z(1), Guidez F, Rousselot P, Agadir A, Chen SJ, Wang ZY, Degos L, Zelent A, 
Waxman S, Chomienne C.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Samuel Waxman Cancer Research Foundation
Laboratory of Shanghai Second Medical University, Rui-Jin Hospital, China.

Recently, we described a recurrent variant translocation, t(11;17)(q23;q21), in
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) which juxtaposes PLZF, a gene encoding a zinc 
finger protein, to RARA, encoding retinoic acid receptor alpha (RAR alpha). We
have now cloned cDNAs encoding PLZF-RAR alpha chimeric proteins and studied their
transactivating activities. In transient-expression assays, both the PLZF(A)-RAR 
alpha and PLZF(B)-RAR alpha fusion proteins like the PML-RAR alpha protein
resulting from the well-known t(15;17) translocation in APL, antagonized
endogenous and transfected wild-type RAR alpha in the presence of retinoic acid. 
Cotransfection assays showed that a significant repression of RAR alpha
transactivation activity was obtained even with a very low PLZF-RAR
alpha-expressing plasmid concentration. A "dominant negative" effect was observed
when PLZF-RAR alpha fusion proteins were cotransfected with vectors expressing
RAR alpha and retinoid X receptor alpha (RXR alpha). These abnormal
transactivation properties observed in retinoic acid-sensitive myeloid cells
strongly implicate the PLZF-RAR alpha fusion proteins in the molecular
pathogenesis of APL.

PMCID: PMC521477
PMID: 8302850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Int J Cancer. 1994 Jan 15;56(2):193-9.

Patterns of allele losses suggest the existence of five distinct regions of LOH
on chromosome 17 in breast cancer.

Kirchweger R(1), Zeillinger R, Schneeberger C, Speiser P, Louason G, Theillet C.

Author information: 
(1)Erste Frauenklinik, Allgemeines Krankenhaus, Vienna, Austria.

Chromosome 17 is a frequent target during breast-cancer formation and
progression. It has been shown to be affected by allele losses at multiple sites,
as well as by DNA amplification. Our aim was to delineate a map of the genetic
alterations on chromosome 17 in a given set of breast tumors. To this end we
analyzed 151 pairs of tumor and cognate lymphocyte DNAs by Southern blotting with
5 RFLP or VNTR probes and by PCR at 8 CA repeat polymorphic loci for LOHs.
Moreover, we studied DNA amplification of the evi2, erbB2, thraI, gcsf and rara
genes. Data presented here point strongly to the existence of 5 distinct regions 
of allele losses on chromosome 17:2 on 17p, 3 on 17q. Of the 2 regions on 17p,
one involves tp53 while the second is located more distally toward the telomere. 
LOH was found in 45.9% and 58.8% respectively. The 3 regions on 17q are located: 
(i) on the proximal portion of the long arm band q21, corresponding to the brcaI 
region; (ii) in a central region defined by the marker D17S74; (iii) on the
distal part of 17q (band q25) characterized by losses of the marker D17S24. Each 
of these regions presented respectively allele losses in 47.5%, 33.3% and 40.8%
of the informative tumors. Whereas some tumors presented patterns of LOH
consistent with the loss of a complete chromosomal arm or of large portions of
the chromosome, a high proportion of the analyzed tumors showed interstitial
losses. Amplifications were found in 15% of the tumors and were centered around
erbB2.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8314300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Am J Nephrol. 1994;14(1):30-6.

Ultrastructural localization of the three major basement membrane
components--type IV collagen, heparan sulfate proteoglycan and laminin--in human 
membranous glomerulonephritis.

Haramoto T(1), Makino H, Ikeda S, Wieslander J, Ota Z.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Okayama University Medical School,
Japan.

Membranous glomerulonephritis (MN) is characterized by the presence of
subepithelial immune complexes and thickening of the glomerular basement membrane
(GBM). Immune complexes are recognized as subepithelial electron-dense deposits
(EDDs) by electron microscopy. We used immunogold electron microscopy to detect
the GBM components--type IV collagen, heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HS-PG) and
laminin--in thickened GBM, and studied the relationship between immune complexes 
and these GBM components. We demonstrate that the three major basement membrane
components are distributed throughout the newly synthesized GBM. These findings
suggest that type IV collagen, HS-PG, and laminin together comprise the
spike-like structures and the newly synthesized GBM-like matrix in the thickened 
GBM of idiopathic MN and membranous lupus nephritis. The newly constructed matrix
in the GBM appears to be composed of nearly normal GBM. In type IV collagen, the 
alpha 1-chain was rarely present on the newly synthesized basement membrane in
the lamina rara externa, while alpha 3-chain was present on the subepithelial
newly synthesized basement membrane. HS-PG was found within EDDs in membranous
lupus nephritis. This suggests that anti-DNA antibody may cross-react with the
HS-PG component of the GBM and thus form a subepithelial immune complex.

PMID: 8017478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Urol Res. 1994;22(5):317-21.

Basement membrane and tumor invasion: ultrastructural observations in the
basement membrane of rat bladder with invasive transitional cell carcinoma
induced by N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl)nitrosamine.

Zhang XH(1), Takenaka I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Kagawa Medical School, Japan.

This study describes ultrastructural alterations in the basement membrane (BM) of
rat bladder with invasive transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) induced by
N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl)nitrosamine. Various alterations including thickening, 
degradation and neosynthesis were found in the bladder BM of one rat with
invasive TCC. Focal destruction of both the BM lamina zones was found in addition
to partially degraded BMs showing focal degradation and loss of only the BM
lamina rara. Neosynthesis of complete BM including the lamina rara and lamina
densa was observed surrounding the nests of carcinoma cells deep in the stroma,
while neosynthesis of incomplete BM including only a lamina densa-like structure 
was also found around carcinoma cells which had just crossed the BM into the
adjacent stroma from the original tumor masses. There was an increased
hemidesmosomal frequency in some areas of thickened BM, and focal loss of
hemidesmosome in the areas of degraded BM. It is suggested that BM degradation
may take place in two steps, and that BM neosynthesis may also be a two-step
process in invasive TCC of rat bladder.

PMID: 7879318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Nephron. 1994;68(3):308-13.

Pathogenetic mechanisms involved in mesangial interposition in IgA nephropathy.

Kubo S(1), Kim ST, Takasugi M, Kuroiwa A.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health Japan. School of Medicine, Kitakyushu.

To investigate the pathogenetic mechanisms of mesangial interposition (MI) in IgA
nephropathy, we examined renal biopsy samples from 20 patients with IgA
nephropathy. Electron microscopic morphometric analysis showed that cytoplasmic
protrusion of mesangial cells (MCs) into endothelial cells (ECs) or capillary
lumina, and widening of the lamina rara interna (LRI) were significantly more
prominent in glomeruli with MI than in those without. Immunoelectron microscopy
revealed that the ratio of positive endothelial staining with a polyclonal
antibody against human platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) BB was significantly
higher in capillary loops with MI than in those without. Enhanced capillary
staining of fibronectin related to MI was not recognized. These results suggest
that MI in IgA nephropathy is caused by factors such as enhancement of
cytoplasmic extensibility of the MCs, widening of the LRI and chemotactic
influence of PDGF-BB located in the glomerular ECs.

PMID: 7838253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Kidney Int. 1994 Jan;45(1):201-10.

Tenascin is an important component of the glomerular extracellular matrix in
normal and pathologic conditions.

Truong LD(1), Pindur J, Barrios R, D'Agati V, Lechago J, Suki W, Majesky M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Methodist Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas.

Tenascin (TN), a large oligomeric glycoprotein, is a recently described component
of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Previous reports focusing largely on the role 
of TN in nephrogenesis have documented the strong expression of TN in embryonic
kidney tissue and implied an important role for TN in nephrogenesis. However, the
expression of TN in normal and pathologic kidneys in adults has not been
systematically evaluated. In this study immunohistochemical staining for TN was
applied to 184 renal specimens diagnosed as: normal kidney (23 cases); minimal
change disease and its variants (8); mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis
(GN) including IgA nephropathy and mesangial proliferative lupus nephritis (9);
endocapillary proliferative GN including membranoproliferative GN, lupus
nephritis, and post-infectious GN (25); crescentic GN (11); membranous GN (19);
focal segmental sclerosis (15); thrombotic microangiopathy (8); amyloidosis (5); 
diabetic nephropathy (9); primary tubulointerstitial nephritis (14); transplant
rejection (14); and ischemia (24). It was found that: (a) there was unequivocal
global diffuse staining limited to the mesangium in normal kidney; (b) regardless
of the etiologies and the morphologic types of glomerular disease, whenever there
was expansion of the ECM, whether in the mesangial, endocapillary, or
extracapillary spaces, there was a concomitant and proportional in situ increase 
in the TN staining; (c) globally sclerotic glomeruli, regardless of causes,
showed diffuse, strong staining, especially in the subcapsular fibrous deposition
seen in ischemic sclerosis; (d) non-sclerotic glomeruli showing early ischemic
change uniformly displayed a marked decrease or complete loss of staining; (e) in
cases of thrombotic microangiopathy, there was segmental or global staining of
the capillary wall, probably corresponding to the enlarged lamina rara interna;
(f) all nodular lesions in diabetic glomerulosclerosis showed strong staining,
but in several of them this staining was much more pronounced in the periphery
than in the center of the lesion. Our study proves that TN is probably a
component of the normal mesangial matrix, that TN is an ubiquitous component of
the expanded glomerular ECM in pathologic conditions regardless of morphologic
subtypes, and that further studies on the cell types and mechanisms responsible
for TN synthesis may provide a new venue for the understanding of the process of 
glomerular sclerosis.

PMID: 7510349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1994 Jan;9(1):49-56.

RARA and PML gene rearrangements in acute promyelocytic leukemia with complex
translocations and atypical features.

McKinney CD(1), Golden WL, Gemma NW, Swerdlow SH, Williams ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville.

The translocation t(15;17) associated with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
results in fusion of the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene on chromosome
17 with the putative transcription factor gene, PML, on chromosome 15. We report 
three cases of APL with complex cytogenetic translocations and five cases with
atypical phenotypic features with rearrangements within or adjacent to the second
intron of the RARA gene. Two patients demonstrated three-way translocations
involving chromosomes 3, 15, and 17, but with differing breakpoints on the short 
arm of chromosome 3. A third patient developed a complex karyotype at the time of
third relapse, but with no change in RARA and PML gene rearrangement pattern.
Three patients had normal karyotypes; however, only small numbers of cells could 
be analyzed. One patient's leukemic cells expressed the T-cell-associated antigen
CD2 and revealed T-cell receptor beta and gamma gene rearrangements. The
localization of breakpoints to the second intron of the RARA gene in
cytogenetically and phenotypically atypical cases provides additional support for
a requisite role of the PML/RARA fusion gene in the pathogenesis of APL.

PMID: 7507700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Clin Exp Immunol. 1993 Dec;94(3):403-11.

Metabolic fate of monovalent and multivalent antibodies of Heymann nephritis
following formation of surface immune complexes on glomerular epithelial cells.

Singh AK(1), Kasinath BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rush Medical College, Chicago, IL.

Comment in
    Clin Exp Immunol. 1993 Dec;94(3):393-4.

Heymann nephritis of the rat has several similarities to human idiopathic
membranous glomerulo-nephropathy, and therefore serves as an animal model for
study of the human disease. The disease process in the rat is initiated by
autoantibodies forming in situ immune deposits on the surface of the glomerular
epithelial cell in the lamina rara externa region of the glomerular basement
membrane. It is now understood that multispecific antibodies (like anti-gp600)
form the nephritogenic deposits which cause proteinuria, while MoAb (like
anti-gp330, anti-90 kD and anti-gp70) form only transient deposits which do not
give rise to proteinuria. The reasons for differences between pathologic effects 
of mono- and multispecific antibodies are not known. Following characterization
of putative antigens of Heymann nephritis by immunofluorescence, immunogold and
immunoblot techniques, we have investigated the metabolic handling of a
multispecific (anti-600), monospecific antibody (anti-gp70) and a MoAb
(anti-gp330) by the cultured glomerular epithelial cell to gain an insight into
the mechanism of nephritogenicity of multispecific antibody. Anti-gp600 reacted
to multiple antigens in the 330-kD and 70-kD regions; anti-gp70 reacted to only
the 70-kD region. Ultrastructurally, all three types of antigens were present on 
the plasma membrane, concentrated in the microvillar region. The cells were
incubated with the antibodies, and clearance of the antibodies from the cells was
evaluated. Following binding, all three antibodies were internalized by the
cells. However, it was found that monoclonal anti-gp330 MoAb was cleared most
rapidly from the cell (t1/2 5 min), followed by anti-gp70 (t1/2 30 min).
Anti-gp600 was cleared at four times slower rate than anti-gp70 (t1/2 2h) by the 
cell. While anti-gp330 MoAb and monospecific anti-gp70 antibody were expelled
from the cell in 25-32% digested form, the multispecific anti-gp600 was digested 
to the extent of only 5-8%. No immune complexes were detected in the medium with 
any of the three antibodies. The shed label was in intact IgG form. It is
concluded that multispecific antibodies of Heymann nephritis are nephritogenic
because of their slower clearance and digestion and therefore, higher accretion
rate on the surface of the glomerular epithelial cell. The differential handling 
of the antibodies by the glomerular epithelial cell offers an explanation for the
in vivo differences in the nephritogenicity of these antibodies observed earlier.

PMCID: PMC1534444
PMID: 8252800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Semin Cancer Biol. 1993 Dec;4(6):359-67.

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia and the t(15;17) translocation.

Gillard EF(1), Solomon E.

Author information: 
(1)Somatic Cell Genetics Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London.

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) is a rare acute myeloid leukaemia
characterized by a distinctive coagulopathy, the differentiation of promyelocytes
in response to all-trans retinoic acid and a reciprocal chromosomal
translocation, t(15;17)(q22;q12-q21). Molecular analysis of the APL breakpoint
has revealed the involvement of the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene on
chromosome 17 and the promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) gene on chromosome 15. Both
reciprocal fusion products which arise as a result of the translocation, PML/RAR 
alpha and RAR alpha/PML, are expressed in many patients. PML/RAR alpha, is
implicated in leukaemogenesis, and may block myeloid differentiation directly
and/or interfere with the normal function(s) of PML and/or RAR alpha.

PMID: 8142621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 1993 Dec;22(6):350-2.

[Anionic site changes on glomerular basement membrane (GBM) in proteinuria rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen ZY(1), Li LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Second Affiliated Hospital, Hubei Medical
University, Wuhan.

The change of anionic sites on GMB was studied in both adriamycin induced
nephrosis and nephrotoxic serum nephritis in rats by means of calculating the PEI
stained particles under electron microscope. The results showed that the number
of anionic sites within lamina rara externa of GMB was reduced significantly in
both kinds of proteinuria rats and the size of anionic sites was also changed,
especially in the segments of GBM with fused foot processes. The results
demonstrate that the loss of anionic sites on GBM and the functional damage to
the charge selective barrier of glomeruli may play an important role in
proteinuria of these animal models.

PMID: 8033279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Nihon Jinzo Gakkai Shi. 1993 Nov;35(11):1221-6.

Studies on the glomerular permeability with human liver ferritin.

Kumagai I(1), Makino H, Ota Z.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Okayama University Medical School,
Japan.

To clarify the roles of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) in filtration
mechanisms, human liver ferritin was used for the first time as a tracer. Urinary
excretion of human liver ferritin was measured and the injected ferritin was
tracked under electron microscopy. Puromycin aminonucleoside (PAN) nephrosis was 
induced in Sprague Dawley rats and normal saline was injected into control rats. 
Monomeric and polymeric human ferritin were isolated from post mortem samples.
Both kinds of human liver ferritin were injected into the experimental and
control rats and urine samples were examined for human ferritin by
radioimmunoassay. Rats with PAN nephrosis excreted approximately 33 times more
monomeric ferritin than the controls. Appreciably more monomeric ferritin was
excreted than polymeric ferritin. In control rats, monomeric ferritin particles
were restricted in the lamina rara interna and inner aspect of the glomerular
basement membrane 30 min after injection. On the other hand, in rats with PAN
nephrosis, monomeric ferritin particles were seen throughout the width of the GBM
and in the epithelial cells. With human liver ferritin, we were able to
demonstrate the escape of the ferritin into the urine in addition to conducting
the conventional electron microscopic tracer study of the glomerular capillary
wall. Human liver ferritin shows potential as a useful tracer in the study of
glomerular permselectivity.

PMID: 8139133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Craniofac Genet Dev Biol. 1993 Oct-Dec;13(4):223-9.

Current status of genetic linkage studies of a major gene that causes CL(P) in
mice: exclusion map.

Juriloff DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada.

An exclusion map for the major gene that causes nonsyndromic cleft lip with or
without cleft palate, CL(P), in the A strain family of mice is presented. Because
of linkage homology between mice and humans, this map should be of value to
projects intended to map major human gene loci for CL(P). In both species, the
genetic complexity of the etiology of CL(P) necessitates unusual and candidate
locus approaches. More than 40% of the mouse genome has been swept. Some
candidate regions include mouse chromosomes 12, 18, and 19, and candidate loci on
other chromosomes should include Rara, Tgfa, Bmp2b1, and Igf-2.

PMID: 8288729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Clin Nephrol. 1993 Oct;40(4):199-204.

Glomerular anionic sites in minimal change nephrotic syndrome and focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis.

Kitano Y(1), Yoshikawa N, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Hospital, Japan.

In order to examine the changes in charge of the glomerular basement membrane
(GBM) in nephrotic syndrome, anionic sites in the GBM were studied
quantitatively. Renal biopsy specimens were obtained from 5 children with minimal
change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS) and 5 with nephrotic syndrome and focal
segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS). Biopsy specimens obtained from 5 patients
without proteinuria were also examined as controls. Anionic sites were stained
with polyethyleneimine (PEI) as a cationic probe and were examined by electron
microscopy. The number of PEI-labeled anionic sites in the lamina rara externa of
the GBM was counted in the glomerular capillary region and in the paramesangial
region separately. The number of anionic sites per 1000-nm GBM was 20.9 +/- 0.6
in the capillary and 21.2 +/- 0.7 in the paramesangium in controls. They were
significantly decreased in MCNS (16.5 +/- 0.7 in the capillary and 16.9 +/- 0.5
in the paramesangium, p < 0.001) and in FSGS (16.7 +/- 0.7 in the capillary and
17.0 +/- 0.6 in the paramesangium, p < 0.001). The decrease of anionic sites
suggests a defect in the charge-selective barrier in the lamina rara externa of
the GBM in MCNS and FSGS, and this defect both in the capillary and in the
paramesangium may be responsible for the proteinuria in these two conditions.

PMID: 8261675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Nat Genet. 1993 Oct;5(2):158-62.

Identification of the genetic locus for keratosis palmaris et plantaris on
chromosome 17 near the RARA and keratin type I genes.

Rogaev EI(1), Rogaeva EA, Ginter EK, Korovaitseva GI, Farrer LA, Shlensky AB,
Pritkov AN, Mordovtsev VN, St George-Hyslop PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Familial keratosis palmaris et plantaris (KPPF) is characterized by extreme
keratinization and desquamation of the skin of the palmar and plantar surfaces of
the hands and feet. We have mapped the causative genetic defect to an 8 cM
interval on 17q12-24 in or close to the acidic keratin (type I) gene cluster. We 
show that KPPF co-segregates with a rare, high molecular weight allele of an
insertion-deletion polymorphism in the C-terminal coding region of the keratin 10
gene (Z = 8.36 at theta = 0.00) and segrates as a true autosomal dominant trait. 
Some pedigrees with familial hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles have
co-inherited diseases such as congenital malformations and familial cancers. Our 
analysis provide a region which should be investigated for contiguous gene
syndromes in such pedigrees.

PMID: 7504553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Med Genet. 1993 Sep;30(9):773-8.

Exclusion of candidate genes from a role in cleft lip with or without cleft
palate: linkage and association studies.

Vintiner GM(1), Lo KK, Holder SE, Winter RM, Malcolm S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit, Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

Comment in
    J Med Genet. 1994 May;31(5):425.
    J Med Genet. 1995 Jan;32(1):78.

Candidate genes and marker loci for cleft lip/palate (CL/P) were tested using
linkage analyses and association studies. Eight British families with apparent
autosomal dominant inheritance of non-syndromic CL/P participated in the linkage 
analyses while the association analyses involved 61 unrelated British white
people with CL/P and 60 controls. The report of an association between RARA
(17q21) and unrelated Australian persons with CL/P (p = 0.016) was not confirmed 
in British CL/P persons (chi 2 = 0.954, p > 0.1). There was also no evidence of
linkage between RARA and the eight CL/P families (Z = -3.211, theta = 0.001).
Linkage was excluded between familial CL/P and F13A1 (map position 6p24-25) with 
an observed maximum lod score of Z = -2.052 at theta = 0.05. No association was
found between alleles at VIM (10p13) and the British CL/P subjects (chi 2 =
0.110, p > 0.5). Multipoint analysis excluded linkage between familial CL/P and
the markers D1S65 and D1S58 which flank the Van der Woude syndrome locus with a
maximum lod score of Z = -4.0. This suggests that the genetic defect underlying
VWS is not the same as in non-syndromic CL/P. There was no evidence of linkage
between CRTL1 (5q15) and the eight CL/P families (Z = -3.466, theta = 0.05).

PMCID: PMC1016536
PMID: 8411074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Sci China B. 1993 Sep;36(9):1101-9.

Molecular study on the chromosome 15 breakpoints in the translocation t(15; 17)
in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL).

Dong S(1), Tong JH, Huang W, Chen SJ, Chen Z, Wang ZY, Geng JP, Qi ZW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Shanghai
Rui-Jin Hospital, Shanghai Second Medical University, PRC.

Chromosomal translocation t(15; 17) is a specific marker of acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL). In this study, molecular cloning of the t(15; 17) breakpoint was 
carried out in a Chinese APL patient. It has been shown that the retinoic acid
receptor alpha (RARA) gene, normally located on chromosome 17, was fused with a
new transcription unit PML, normally localized on chromosome 15. We have
subsequently cloned a portion of the PML gene and generated a panel of probes. A 
PML gene rearrangement was detected in 33 out of 36 APL cases studied. 24
rearrangements were clustered in a 4.4 kb region, designated here as PMLbcr1
whereas 9 rearrangements were concentrated in a 6.5 kb region, defining another
breakpoint cluster region (PMLbcr2). These two types of rearrangement constitute 
the basis for the heterogeneity of the PML-RARA fusion gene and its possible
biological significance remains to be explored.

PMID: 8274203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Genomics. 1993 Sep;17(3):618-23.

High-density genetic map of the BRCA1 region of chromosome 17q12-q21.

Anderson LA(1), Friedman L, Osborne-Lawrence S, Lynch E, Weissenbach J, Bowcock
A, King MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley
94720.

To facilitate the positional cloning of the breast-ovarian cancer gene BRCA1, we 
constructed a high-density genetic map of the 8.3-cM interval between D17S250 and
GIP on chromosome 17q12-q21. Markers were mapped by linkage in the CEPH and in
extended kindreds in our breast cancer series. The map comprises 33 ordered
polymorphisms, including 12 genes and 21 anonymous markers, yielding an average
of one polymorphism every 250 kb. Twenty-five of the markers are PCR-based
systems. The order of polymorphic genes and markers is
cen-D17S250-D17S518-HER2-THRA1-RARA-D17S80 -KRT10-[D17S800-D17S857]-GAS-
D17S856-EDH17B-D17S855-D17S859-D17S858-[++ +PPY-D17S78]-D17S183-EPB3-D17S579-
D17S509-[D17S508-D17S190 = D17S810]-D17S791-[D17S181 = D17S806]-D17S797-
HOX2B-GP3A-[D17S507 = GIP]-qter. BRCA1 lies in the middle of the interval,
between THRA1 and D17S183. Markers from this map can be used to determine whether
cancer is linked to BRCA1 in families, to evaluate whether tumors have lost
heterozygosity at loci in the region, and to identify probes for characterizing
chromosomal rearrangements from patients and from tumors.

PMID: 8244378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Nihon Jinzo Gakkai Shi. 1993 Sep;35(9):1007-14.

[Changes in anionic sites on glomerular basement membrane following
mesangiolysis--observation in incipient anti-rat Thy1 nephritis].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohe K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Toho University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

To clarify whether heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPG) on glomerular basement
membrane (GBM) are produced by mesangial cell in vivo, the number of anionic
sites (AS) on lamina rara externa of GBM and the changes in urinary albumin
excretion rate (UAE) were observed on mesangiolysis in rats induced by monoclonal
anti-rat Thy1 antibody. Mesangiolysis was remarkable at day 3 after the
administration of anti-rat Thy1 antibody, whereas GBM as well as epithelial cell 
remained well preserved, and detached endothelial cell was observed. The number
of AS on GBM was significantly (p < 0.001) decreased in anti-rat Thy1 antibody
treated rats (18.6 +/- 0.4/1000nm), when compared with that of normal control
rats (22.8 +/- 0.4/1000nm). Furthermore, UAE was markedly (p < 0.05) increased at
day 3 (1692.6 +/- 627.5 micrograms/24h) compared with the value before (188.2 +/-
30.6 micrograms/24h) administration of anti-rat Thy1 antibody. From these
results, it can be concluded that some part of AS on GBM may be produced by the
mesangial cell.

PMID: 8230810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Hum Mol Genet. 1993 Aug;2(8):1193-9.

Genetic mapping of the breast-ovarian cancer syndrome to a small interval on
chromosome 17q12-21: exclusion of candidate genes EDH17B2 and RARA.

Simard J(1), Feunteun J, Lenoir G, Tonin P, Normand T, Luu The V, Vivier A, Lasko
D, Morgan K, Rouleau GA, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Group in Molecular Endocrinology, CHUL Research
Center, Quebec, Canada.

A susceptibility gene for hereditary breast-ovarian cancer, BRCA1, has been
assigned by linkage analysis to chromosome 17q21. Candidate genes in this region 
include EDH17B2, which encodes estradiol 17 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase II 
(17 beta-HSD II), and RARA, the gene for retinoic acid receptor alpha. We have
typed 22 breast and breast-ovarian cancer families with eight polymorphisms from 
the chromosome 17q12-21 region, including two in the EDH17B2 gene. Genetic
recombination with the breast cancer trait excludes RARA from further
consideration as a candidate gene for BRCA1. Both BRCA1 and EDH17B2 map to a 6 cM
interval (between THRA1 and D17S579) and no recombination was observed between
the two genes. However, direct sequencing of overlapping PCR products containing 
the entire EDH17B2 gene in four unrelated affected women did not uncover any
sequence variation, other than previously described polymorphisms. Mutations in
the EDH17B2 gene, therefore do not appear to be responsible for the hereditary
breast-ovarian cancer syndrome. Single meiotic crossovers in affected women
suggest that BRCA1 is flanked by the loci RARA and D17S78.

PMID: 8401501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Leukemia. 1993 Aug;7(8):1302-14.

Molecular evidence of minimal residual disease after treatment for leukaemia and 
lymphoma: an updated meeting report and review.

Potter MN(1), Cross NC, van Dongen JJ, Saglio G, Oakhill A, Bartram CR, Goldman
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Fourth Workshop of the Molecular Biology/BMT Study Group, Bristol, UK.

The very rapid development in the last few years of techniques based on use of
the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for characterizing molecular lesions in
leukaemia and lymphoma now offers the opportunity for monitoring residual disease
at a sensitivity of one malignant cell in 10(5) or 10(6) normal cells. Maximal
specificity is presumably achieved when the DNA sequences amplified are truly
leukaemia-specific, such as BCR/ABL in chronic myelogenous leukemia, RARA
PML/RARA in t(15;17) acute myelogenous leukemia, DEK/CAN in t(6;9) AML, PBX1/E2A 
in t(1;19) acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), or TAL-1 deletions in other
T-ALLs. Comparable sensitivity may be achieved by using immunoglobulin heavy
chain (IGH) and T-cell receptor (TCR) gene rearrangements if a clonospecific
probe can be generated. However, the presence of similar sequences in IgH genes
from normal B lymphocytes may decrease the specificity. For clinical purposes the
crucial issues are the following. Can PCR techniques be used for confirmation of 
diagnosis and evaluation of extent of disease? Can PCR data obtained in remission
provide information about the probability of cure or of relapse? Can techniques
be developed to quantitate the PCR product and thereby increase its predictive
value? These and other issues were addressed at the 4th Workshop of the Molecular
Biology/BMT Study Group that took place in Bristol UK on 9-10 May 1992.

PMID: 8350633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Nihon Jinzo Gakkai Shi. 1993 Aug;35(8):933-9.

Ultrastructural localization of three major basement membrane components--type IV
collagen, heparan sulfate proteoglycan and laminin in the normal human GBM.

Haramoto T(1), Makino H, Ikeda S, Ota Z.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Okayama University Medical School,
Japan.

Human glomerular basement membrane (GBM) is known to contain type IV collagen,
heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HS-PG) and laminin in the extracellular matrix. In 
this study, ultrastructural distribution of these antigens was investigated in
normal human glomeruli using the immunogold technique. Type IV collagen was
present throughout the GBM, mainly on the lamina densa, and all over the
mesangial region. HS-PG was present on the laminae rarae, predominantly on the
lamina rara externa, and periphery of the mesangial region. Laminin was present
throughout the GBM and peripheral region of the mesangial matrix. Our study
demonstrated the preferential localization of each component in the GBM.

PMID: 8255003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Cell Tissue Res. 1993 Jul;273(1):41-52.

The basement membranes of cryofixed or aldehyde-fixed, freeze-substituted tissues
are composed of a lamina densa and do not contain a lamina lucida.

Chan FL(1), Inoue S, Leblond CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

When tissues are processed for electron microscopy by conventional methods, such 
as glutaraldehyde fixation followed by rapid dehydration in acetone, basement
membranes show two main layers: the electron-lucent "lamina lucida". (or rara)
and the electron-dense "lamina densa". In an attempt to determine whether this
subdivision is real or artefactual, two approaches have been used. Firstly, rat
and mouse seminiferous tubules, mouse epididymis and associated tissues, and
anterior parts of mouse eyes were subjected to cryofixation by instant freezing
followed by freeze substitution in a -80 degrees C solution of osmium tetroxide
in dry acetone, which was gradually warmed to room temperature over a 3-day
period. The results indicate that, in areas devoid of ice crystals, basement
membranes consist of a lamina densa in direct contact with the plasmalemma of the
associated cells without an intervening lamina lucida. Secondly, a series of
tissues from mice perfused with 3% glutaraldehyde were cryoprotected in 30%
glycerol, frozen in Freon 22 and subjected to a 3-day freeze substitution in
osmium tetroxide-acetone as above. Under these conditions, no lamina lucida
accompanies the lamina densa in the basement membranes of the majority of
tissues, including kidney, thyroid gland, smooth and skeletal muscle, ciliary
body, seminiferous tubules, epididymis and capillary endothelium. Thus, even
though these tissues have been fixed in glutaraldehyde, no lamina lucida appears 
when they are slowly dehydrated by freeze substitution. It is concluded that the 
occurrence of this lamina in conventionally processed tissues is not due to
fixation but to the rapid dehydration. However, in this series of experiments,
the basement membranes of trachea and plantar epidermis include a lamina lucida
along their entire length, while those of esophagus and vas deferens may or may
not include a lamina lucida. To find out if the lamina lucida appearing under
these conditions is a real structure or an artefact, the trachea and epidermis
were fixed in paraformaldehyde and slowly dehydrated by freeze substitution.
Under these conditions, no lamina lucida was found. Since this result is the same
as observed in other tissues by the previous approaches, it is proposed that the 
lamina lucida is an artefact in these as in the other investigated basement
membranes. Thus, basement membranes are simply composed of a lamina densa that
closely follows the plasmalemma of the associated cells.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT
400 WORDS)

PMID: 8364960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Jpn J Genet. 1993 Jun;68(3):175-84.

Mapping of the mouse Rar loci encoding retinoic acid receptors RAR alpha, RAR
beta and RAR gamma.

Taketo M(1), Hoopes C, Howard TA, Linney E, Seldin MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710.

Nuclear retinoic acid receptors RAR alpha, RAR beta and RAR gamma are
transcription factors that bind all-trans retinoic acid as their ligand and
mediate its action by activating particular set of genes that contain retinoic
acid responsive elements in their promoter-enhancers. We have mapped genetic loci
for these genes using restriction fragment length variants (RFLVs) in
interspecific backcross mice. None of the Rar loci cosegregated with each other
or with the new subclass of retinoid receptors, Rxr loci. Rara mapped to mChr 11,
Rarb mapped to mChr 14, and Rarg mapped to mChr 15. The results are consistent
with the previous reports and the human data in terms of syntenic homology
between mouse and human chromosomes.

PMID: 8251184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Am J Pathol. 1993 May;142(5):1641-53.

Podocytic cytoskeletal disaggregation and basement-membrane detachment in
puromycin aminonucleoside nephrosis.

Whiteside CI(1), Cameron R, Munk S, Levy J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Puromycin aminonucleoside--(PAN) treated rats develop acute nephrotic syndrome,
mimicking human minimal lesion disease. In PAN nephrosis, podocyte detachment
from the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) is the most likely cause of massive
proteinuria in this model. To elucidate further the mechanisms of PAN-induced
cellular dysfunction, new methods were employed to visualize podocyte
cytoskeletal aggregation and to measure fibrillar attachment to the GBM. Adult
Sprague-Dawley rats (n = 4/group) received a single tail-vein injection of PAN
(75 mg/kg). On days 1, 2, 3, and 5 following injection, 24-hour urine collections
were obtained for creatinine clearance, albuminuria, and total proteinuria. Then 
kidneys from each group were fixed by perfusion. Podocytic cytoskeleton was
visualized by scanning electron microscopy. Subepithelial GBM staining and
attachment fiber number, observed on digitized images of transmission electron
micrographs, were quantitated with computer-based density analysis. A significant
reduction in attachment fiber number in the GBM lamina rara externa occurred by
day 5. On scanning electron micrographs, the secondary and tertiary podocytic
processes were observed to be formed by highly aggregated cytoskeleton, which
became partially disaggregated by day 3, was totally absent by day 5, and
normalized by day 20. Immunogold staining revealed that actin and vinculin
localized to the tertiary podocytic processes in the normal state were dispersed 
into the cell body following PAN. Podocyte cytoskeletal disaggregation precedes, 
and detachment from the GBM occurs simultaneously with, the onset of massive
proteinuria in the PAN model.

PMCID: PMC1886918
PMID: 8494056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Histochem J. 1993 May;25(5):367-75.

Anionic sites in glomerular basement membrane of rats with serum sickness
nephritis: quick-freezing and deep-etching study.

Duan HJ(1), Ohno S, Shigematsu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto,
Japan.

Serum sickness nephritis was induced in male Fisher 344/JCL rats by injecting egg
albumin into the foot pads and peritoneal cavity. The alteration of anionic sites
in the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) of the rats with significant
proteinuria was studied with a quick-freezing and deep-etching method using
polyethyleneimine as a cationic probe. In control rats, anionic sites were
located around the fibrils of the lamina rara externa, which radiated
perpendicularly from the lamina densa to podocyte cell membranes. In the
glomeruli of proteinuric rats, many electron-dense deposits were observed in the 
subepithelial side of the GBM, where the fibrils of the lamina rara externa were 
usually obscured and anionic sites around them could not be recognized. However, 
in some areas, a clear boundary could be observed between deposits and the lamina
densa. Electron micrographs of freeze-fractured deposits showed that the fibrils 
radiated perpendicularly from the lamina densa and that anionic sites around them
had been preserved. These results suggest that some of the deposits simply passed
through the GBM and masked transiently the fibril structures of the GBM, but
others probably destroyed these fibril structures, including anionic sites.

PMID: 8320129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Histochem J. 1993 May;25(5):401-5.

Cationic gold staining of glomerular anionic sites in archived tissue,
reprocessed from paraffin wax into LR gold resin.

Goode NP(1), Shires M, Aparicio SR, Davison AM.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Research Unit, St James's University NHS Trust, Leeds, UK.

Glomerular capillary wall anionic sites have been demonstrated by cationic gold
staining of archived renal biopsy tissue (up to 10 years old), obtained from six 
patients, originally embedded in paraffin wax, and subsequently reprocessed into 
LR gold resin. The staining patterns at pH 2.5 and pH 7.0, demonstrating
different glomerular basement membrane (GBM) anionic constituents, were compared 
in three patients from whom tissue directly processed into LR gold and
reprocessed tissue was available. Ultrastructural preservation was poorer and
shrinkage artefact greater in paraformaldehyde-lysine periodate (PLP) as opposed 
to formol saline-fixed reprocessed tissue. However, GBM anionic site expression
was well preserved, or even enhanced (lamina rara externa, pH 7.0) in reprocessed
tissue, using either fixative. Although it may not be possible to compare subtle 
changes in anionic site distribution in variously fixed and processed tissues,
due to these artefacts, the technique enables retrospective study of charge
status in archived material from disease groups in which there are distinct
anionic site aberrations.

PMID: 7686544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Am J Hum Genet. 1993 Apr;52(4):718-22.

THRA1 and D17S183 flank an interval of < 4 cM for the breast-ovarian cancer gene 
(BRCA1) on chromosome 17q21.

Bowcock AM(1), Anderson LA, Friedman LS, Black DM, Osborne-Lawrence S, Rowell SE,
Hall JM, Solomon E, King MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas.

In order to pinpoint the locale of the gene for early-onset familial breast and
ovarian cancer (BRCA1), polymorphisms were developed within the locus for thyroid
hormone receptor alpha (THRA1) and for several anonymous sequences at chromosome 
17q12-q21. The THRA1 polymorphism is a dinucleotide repeat with 10 alleles and
heterozygosity.79. Gene mapping in extended families with inherited, early-onset 
breast and ovarian cancer indicates that BRCA1 is distal to THRA1 and proximal to
D17S183 (SCG43), an interval of < 4 cM. This locale excludes HER2, THRA1, WNT3,
HOX2, NGFR, PHB, COLIA1, NME1, and NME2 as candidates for BRCA1 but does not
exclude RARA or EDH17B. Resolving the remaining recombination events in these
families by new polymorphisms in the THRA1-D17S183 interval will facilitate
positional cloning of the breast-ovarian cancer gene on chromosome 17q12-q21.

PMCID: PMC1682071
PMID: 8460637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Am J Hum Genet. 1993 Apr;52(4):702-10.

A somatic cell hybrid map of the long arm of human chromosome 17, containing the 
familial breast cancer locus (BRCA1).

Black DM(1), Nicolai H, Borrow J, Solomon E.

Author information: 
(1)Somatic Cell Genetics Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, Lincoln's Inn
Fields, London, England.

We describe a detailed somatic cell hybrid map of human chromosome 17q11.2-q23,
containing the familial breast and ovarian cancer locus (BRCA1) and highly
informative closely linked markers. An X-irradiation panel of 38 hamster/human
and mouse/human hybrids with fragments of chromosome 17 was generated and
characterized with 22 STS markers from this chromosome. A detailed map of 61
probes onto chromosome 17q, subdividing the chromosome arm into 25 regions, was
done by using a panel of hybrids with well-defined breakpoints and nine
chromosome-mediated gene transfectants. Our localization of RARA, TOP2, EDH17B1
and 2, and possibly WNT3, between THRA1 and D17S181, two markers known to flank
BRCA1, suggests that any of these is a potential candidate for the BRCA1 locus.
The marker D17S579 (Mfd188), which is believed to be very close to BRCA1, maps
closest to the EDH17B genes.

PMCID: PMC1682064
PMID: 8460635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Kidney Int. 1993 Mar;43(3):567-74.

Intra-GBM site of the functional filtration barrier for endogenous proteins in
rats.

Fujigaki Y(1), Nagase M, Kobayasi S, Hidaka S, Shimomura M, Hishida A.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Japan.

The passage of various endogenous proteins [such as albumin, transferrin,
immunoglobulin G (IgG), and immunoglobulin M (IgM)] across GBM was studied in
vivo in normal Munich-Wistar rats. Glomeruli were fixed by three different
methods: in situ drip-fixation, perfusion- and immersion-fixation; then they were
processed for immunogold electron microscopy. The most reproducible results were 
obtained with in situ drip-fixation. Albumin, transferrin and IgG penetrated into
GBM, but IgM did not. Morphometry revealed that density of albumin increased
towards the inner 1/5 to 1/3 of GBM (junction of lamina rara interna and lamina
densa) and decreased towards the subepithelial region of GBM, whereas density of 
IgG and transferrin was the highest at the subendothelial site and declined
towards the subepithelial side of GBM. These findings suggest that central and/or
outer zone of GBM constitute the main filtration barrier for albumin, and that
subendothelial zone may contribute also to the charge-selective barrier. It is
also suggested that the subendothelial zone acts more effectively as a filtration
barrier for IgG and transferrin than for albumin. In the outer zone of GBM, which
roughly corresponds to lamina rara externa visualized by conventional electron
microscopy, the relative density of IgG and transferrin was higher than that of
albumin. Since the pI of albumin was lower than that of IgG and transferrin, this
finding suggests that subepithelial zone of GBM also acts as a charge-selective
barrier. In conclusion, the main GBM filtration barrier for albumin might be the 
central and outer zones of GBM, and that for transferrin and IgG might be the
entire width of GBM.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8455355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Histochem Cytochem. 1993 Mar;41(3):401-14.

Basement membrane proteoglycans in glomerular morphogenesis: chondroitin sulfate 
proteoglycan is temporally and spatially restricted during development.

McCarthy KJ(1), Bynum K, St John PL, Abrahamson DR, Couchman JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Medicine, University of Alabama,
Birmingham 35294.

We previously reported the presence of a basement membrane-specific chondroitin
sulfate proteoglycan (BM-CSPG) in basement membranes of almost all adult tissues.
However, an exception to this ubiquitous distribution was found in the kidney,
where BM-CSPG was absent from the glomerular capillary basement membrane (GBM)
but present in other basement membranes of the nephron, including collecting
ducts, tubules, Bowman's capsule, and the glomerular mesangium. In light of this 
unique pattern of distribution and of the complex histoarchitectural
reorganization occurring during nephrogenesis, the present study used light and
electron microscopic immunohistochemistry to examine the distribution of BM-CSPG 
and basement membrane heparan sulfate proteoglycan (BM-HSPG) during prenatal and 
postnatal renal development in the rat. Our results show that the temporal and
spatial pattern of expression of BM-CSPG during nephrogenesis is unlike that
reported for other basement membrane components such as laminin, fibronectin, and
BM-HSPG, all of which can be found in the earliest formed basement membranes of
the vesicle-stage nephron. Although BM-CSPG is present in the basement membranes 
of the invading vasculature and ureteric buds, its first appearance in nephron
basement membrane occurs during the late comma stage. In capillary loop-stage
glomeruli of prenatal animals, BM-CSPG is present in the presumptive mesangial
matrix but undetectable in the GBM. However, as postnatal glomerular maturation
progresses BM-CSPG is also found in both the lamina rara interna and lamina densa
of the GBM in progressively increasing amounts, being most evident in the GBM of 
21-day-old animals. Micrographs of glomeruli from 42-day-old animals show that
BM-CSPG gradually disappears from the GBM and, by 56 days after birth, appears to
be completely absent from the GBM, its pattern of distribution resembling that of
the adult animal. Our results show that BM-CSPG is not required for the initial
assembly of basement membranes but may in fact serve to stabilize basement
membrane structure after histoarchitectural reorganization is completed.

PMID: 8429203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1993 Mar;6(3):133-9.

Breakpoint clusters of the PML gene in acute promyelocytic leukemia: primary
structure of the reciprocal products of the PML-RARA gene in a patient with
t(15;17).

Dong S(1), Geng JP, Tong JH, Wu Y, Cai JR, Sun GL, Chen SR, Wang ZY, Larsen CJ,
Berger R, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Shanghai Rui-Jin Hospital, Shanghai Second
Medical University, China.

DNA studies of the translocation t(15;17) in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
have shown that the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene on chromosome 17 is 
juxtaposed to the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene on chromosome 15. The PML
breakpoints have been mapped to 3 clusters: bcr1, bcr2, and bcr3. We have
examined the PML breakpoint distribution in a series of 33 Chinese patients with 
APL. Twenty-two patients fell within bcr1, 2 within bcr2, and 9 within bcr3. The 
primary structure of the reciprocal chromosome translocation joints of one
patient and that of their normal counterparts have been determined and compared
to those of 2 previously reported cases. These studies revealed possible
topoisomerase II cleavage sites close to the breakpoints and suggested
implications of DNA attachment sites to nuclear matrix. We propose that these
features are relevant to the process of illegitimate recombination generating the
translocation.

PMID: 7682097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 1993 Feb;7(1):109-38.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia. New insights into diagnosis and therapy.

Frankel SR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York.

The clinical and laboratory features of APL are distinct. APL has been
effectively treated with anthracyclines. Postremission therapy and the addition
of other cytotoxic agents in induction may be beneficial. Early deaths remain a
problem despite improved management of coagulopathy. The cytogenetic marker,
t(15;17), reflects a molecular defect that splices two transcription factors, PML
and RARA, to produce chimeric mRNA and proteins. RA, the natural ligand for RARA,
is able to induce CR by stimulating differentiation and maturation of the
malignant cells. The addition of RA to the therapeutic armamentarium of the
hematologic oncologist will allow further refinement of the management of these
patients. Diagnosis is unambiguous because the molecular defect can be readily
detected. Our understanding of the biology downstream of the affected genes is
incomplete. Other retinoids may be more effective than all-trans RA and may avoid
the fall in plasma levels seen in patients chronically treated with RA.
Combination of retinoids with other cytokines or cytotoxic agents may decrease
the immediate mortality and improve long-term DFS in APL.

PMID: 8449855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Genomics. 1993 Feb;15(2):323-31.

Somatic cell hybrid mapping on mouse chromosome 11 (MMU11): assignment of markers
relative to two breakpoints in band D.

Morris DJ(1), Adler ID, Robinson TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Mammal Research Institute, University of Pretoria, South Africa.

Mouse x rat somatic cell hybrids were generated by fusing mouse cell lines that
are heterozygous for reciprocal translocations involving the T42H and T9Ad
breakpoints on mouse chromosome 11 (MMU11) to a thymidine kinase-negative (Tk-)
rat cell line, RT2Tk-. Selection in HAT medium with geneticin disulfate (G418)
resulted in some hybrid clones retaining only one derivative translocation
chromosome with that part of MMU11 carrying the Tk-1 locus. Southern blot and PCR
analyses of these hybrids were used to map the two breakpoints and 30 markers
relative to them. The T42H breakpoint has been localized between Mpo and the
Cola-1/Hox-2 cluster of loci and is proximal to the T9Ad breakpoint. The T9Ad
breakpoint is proximal to the distal loci Tk-1, Gaa, D11Jkn1, and P4hb. The
positions of 14 loci (Hox-2, Cola-1, Rara, Phb, Erba, Rnula-1, D11Pas1, Gfap,
D11Mit13, D11Mit11, D11Mit12, Myla, Empb3 and Gh) have been further refined by
their localization between the two breakpoints in band D. This study therefore
improves the correlation of the genetic and physical maps of MMU11 and extends
the known homology between MMU11 and human chromosome 17 (HSA17) by the
assignment of three additional HSA17 markers, the profilin gene, Pfn, an
anonymous marker, D17s28h, and the Crk oncogene, to above the T42H breakpoint;
and the prohibitin gene, Phb, to between the T42H and T9Ad breakpoints in band D 
on MMU11.

PMID: 8449498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Anat Rec. 1993 Feb;235(2):191-205.

Cryofixation of basement membranes followed by freeze substitution or freeze
drying demonstrates that they are composed of a tridimensional network of
irregular cords.

Chan FL(1), Inoue S, Leblond CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Since conventional chemical fixation may extract tissue components and thus alter
structural organization, cryofixation was used to reexamine the ultrastructure of
three thick basement membranes: lens capsule, Reichert's membrane, and
Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm (EHS) tumor matrix, and two thin basement membranes, those 
of epididymis and semi-niferous tubules. Cryofixation was achieved by slam
freezing followed by either freeze substitution in dry acetone containing 1%
osmium tetroxide and 0.05% uranyl acetate or freeze drying in a molecular
distillation dryer. The results by both procedures demonstrate that thick
basement membranes and the lamina densa of thin basement membranes are composed
of a network of anastomosing strands referred to as cords. The cords vary in
density and distinctiveness, but their thickness averages 3 to 5 nm in every
tissue examined. The spaces separating the cords vary within wide limits, but
their mean diameter is approximately 15 nm in every case. Two other common
features are 1) the presence within the network of a few 1.5-3.0-nm-thick
filaments and 2) 4.5-nm-wide sets of parallel lines referred to as double tracks.
When these results are compared with those previously described after
conventional fixation, no significant difference is observed in either the cord
network or the associated filaments and "double tracks." However, in the thin
basement membranes processed by cryofixation, the lamina densa is in direct
contact with epithelial cells, whereas, after conventional fixation, the lamina
densa is separated from the epithelial cells by a pale layer referred to as
lamina lucida or lamina rara. Immunogold labeling of three basement membranes
after cryofixation and freeze substitution in acetone containing 0.3%
glutaraldehyde yields strong reactions for laminin, type IV collagen, and heparan
sulfate proteoglycan. Comparison with previous results indicates that
conventional formaldehyde fixation adequately preserves laminin and type IV
collagen but causes the loss of some proteoglycan. It is concluded that, except
for this loss and the absence of lamina lucida in cryofixed thin basement
membranes, the morphological and antigenic features obtained after cryofixation
are similar to those observed in the past after conventional fixation.

PMID: 8420389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1993 Feb;84(2):110-3.

Detection of PML/retinoic acid receptor a gene rearrangements by polymerase chain
reaction using genomic DNA in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Tashiro S(1), Tanaka K, Asou H, Kyo T, Dohy H, Suzuki K, Kamada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Hiroshima University.

Breakpoints of the 15;17 translocation in patients with acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL) have been identified within PML and retinoic acid receptor a
(RARA) genes in chromosomes 15 and 17, respectively. A wide heterogeneity was
observed in the breakpoints on the PML and RARA genes. Therefore, amplification
of the breakpoints region by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with genomic DNA has
been considered to be difficult. In the present study, a method was developed to 
detect the 15;17 translocation with genomic DNA. Of 13 patients with APL, four
were detected to have the rearrangement of genomic DNA. At present, reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis is one of the methods available 
for diagnosis and detection of the residual leukemic cells in APL. In this study,
PCR analysis using genomic DNA of APL cells is proved to be useful for
identifying the breakpoints of the PML and the RARA genes. Furthermore, this
method is applicable to patients for whom RNA samples of the leukemic cells are
not available.

PMID: 8385082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1993 Feb;6(2):118-20.

Rearrangements of the RARA and PML genes in a cytogenetic variant of acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Baranger L(1), Gardembas M, Hillion J, Foussard C, Ifrah N, Boasson M, Berger R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique, CHU Angers, France.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is usually associated with the translocation
t(15;17)(q22;q12-21), which disrupts the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene
on chromosome 17 and the PML gene on chromosome 15. We report a patient with
typical APL without the common t(15;17). Cytogenetic studies demonstrated a
normal appearance of chromosomes 15, while a small marker seemed to be an
i(17q-). Molecular analysis showed RARA and PML rearrangements, suggesting that
the chromosome abnormality corresponded to a variant translocation.

PMID: 7680887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp. 1993 Jan-Feb;44(1):43-6.

[Hypertrophy of lingual ectopic thyroid gland in pregnancy. A clinical case].

[Article in Spanish]

Abrante Jiménez A(1), Pérez Fernández F, Cordero Fraile A, Delgado Moreno F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de ORL, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío de Sevilla.

A 28-year-old female, diagnosed two years ago of euthyroid lingual thyroid, has
been asymptomatic under observation without treatment until her first pregnancy. 
During her first pregnancy the lingual thyroid tissue increases of size and
produces dysphagia, pain and oral hemorrhages. We realize a thyroid hormone
treatment (thyroxine) with regular results. Two months after child-birth the
female was completely asymptomatic and doesn't need actually thyroxine
suppression. Various aspects are reviewed, such as the predisposing factors
(puberty, pregnancy, trauma ...), clinical manifestations, diagnosis and medical 
and surgical treatments in this rara congenital anomaly.

PMID: 8471284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Am J Pathol. 1993 Jan;142(1):261-71.

Poly-L-lysine-gold probe for the detection of anionic sites in normal glomeruli
and in idiopathic and experimentally-induced nephrosis. A comparative
ultrastructural study.

Russo P(1), Gingras D, Bendayan M.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pathologie, Hôpital Ste-Justine, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Anionic sites play a key role in the charge selectivity of glomerular filtration 
as well as in the maintenance of the structural integrity of the visceral
epithelium and podocytes. Alterations in these sites are believed to be a major
factor underlying human idiopathic nephrosis and puromycin-nephrosis in the rat. 
The poly-L-lysine-gold complex was used for the ultrastructural detection of
anionic sites in renal glomeruli of patients with idiopathic nephrosis as well as
of rats with puromycin-induced nephrosis, allowing for study of the changes
occurring in the anionic sites during nephrosis and for the comparison between
human disease and this experimental model. In both normal human and rat controls,
the probe was detected on epithelial and endothelial cell surfaces and on the
glomerular basement membrane, mainly in both laminae rarae. In proteinuric rats, 
a decrease in labeling intensity was noted on podocyte membranes and in the
lamina rara externa, with a corresponding increase in the more central areas of
the glomerular basement membrane. These changes were not as evident in
proteinuric humans. Furthermore, a reduction in labeling density was noted in the
glomerular basement membrane of proteinuric animals, although this could not be
substantiated in human tissues. Poly-L-lysine-gold is a useful probe for anionic 
sites in fixed tissues, and allows for comparison between human disease and its
experimental counterpart.

PMCID: PMC1886853
PMID: 8424459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Lab Invest. 1993 Jan;68(1):45-55.

Ultrastructural changes of extracellular matrices in diabetic nephropathy
revealed by high resolution scanning and immunoelectron microscopy.

Makino H(1), Yamasaki Y, Haramoto T, Shikata K, Hironaka K, Ota Z, Kanwar YS.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Okayama University Medical School,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Diabetic nephropathy is invariably associated with proteinuria.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: To delineate the mechanism(s) of proteinuria in diabetic
nephropathy, ultrastructural changes of the glomerular basement membranes (GBMs) 
were studied by high resolution scanning and immunoelectron microscopy. Acellular
glomeruli from diabetic and age-matched control human subjects were prepared by
detergent method and subjected to conductive staining, the technique in which the
tissues are impregnated with metals rather than surface-coated with metallic
alloys for visualization by electron microscopy. Subsequent to conductive
staining, the tissues were examined by in-lens field emission scanning electron
microscopy.
RESULTS: Thirty glomeruli, each from the control and diabetic groups, were
examined by scanning microscopy. In diabetic GBMs, a loose meshwork structure
consisting of numerous pores of approximately 8 nm in diameter and distinct
strands was observed. In contrast, meshwork structure was not readily discernible
in controls and a few pores were observed. Five glomerular capillary loops, each 
from control and diabetic groups, were examined by immunoelectron microscopy. In 
controls, heparan sulfate-proteoglycan was localized in the lamina rara interna
and externa, and type-IV collagen was distributed throughout the whole width of
the GBM. In diabetic GBMs, a relative loss of staining of heparan
sulfate-proteoglycan, both in the lamina rara interna and externa of the GBM, was
observed. Type IV collagen was distributed in all layers of the thickened GBM,
and the absolute number of the immunogold particles was increased. However,
immunogold particle density of type IV collagen per unit area was decreased as
compared with the control.
CONCLUSIONS: These ultrastructural and immunoelectron microscopic changes in the 
GBM may explain the loss of charge as well as size selectivities of the
glomerulus, as observed in diabetic nephropathy associated with proteinuria.

PMID: 8423676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Leukemia. 1993 Jan;7(1):20-6.

Localization of the chromosome 15 breakpoints and expression of multiple PML-RAR 
alpha transcripts in acute promyelocytic leukemia: a study of 28 Chinese
patients.

Geng JP(1), Tong JH, Dong S, Wang ZY, Chen SJ, Chen Z, Zelent A, Berger R, Larsen
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Rui-Jin Hospital, Shanghai Second Medical
University, China.

Translocation (15;17)(q22;q12-q21) is a chromosome aberration specifically found 
in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), that generates a chimeric gene between the
promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene on chromosome 15 and the retinoic acid receptor
alpha (RARA) gene, on chromosome 17. In the course of molecular investigations of
a series of 28 Chinese patients with APL, we have simultaneously used Southern
blot and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis to
characterize the PML gene breakpoints on chromosome 15 and identify PML-RARA
fusion transcripts. Our results confirmed the existence of the three recently
described bcr1, bcr2, and bcr3 breakpoint cluster regions. In addition,
structural data provided by PML-RARA transcripts allowed us to more accurately
locate the 3' borders of clusters bcr1 and bcr3. Moreover, our data suggest a
preferential localization of the breakpoints within bcr1 and bcr3. The primary
structure of a 1.4 kb DNA segment flanking the 5' part of the PML gene and that
of the bcr3 cluster (2.1 kb) were also established.

PMID: 8380300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol. 1993;423(2):121-9.

Widening of capillary neck and alteration of extracellular matrix ultrastructure 
in diabetic rat glomerulus as revealed by computer morphometry and improved
tissue processing.

Shirato I(1), Sakai T, Fukui M, Tomino Y, Koide H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Juntendo University, School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Morphological and morphometric studies of glomeruli were carried out in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats using improved tissue processing and
computerized morphometry. Increased mesangial matrix, occupying the enlarged
diabetic mesangium, contained an abundance of dark granular material in addition 
to the microfibrils which were usually found in the control glomeruli. In the
diabetic glomeruli, the lamina densa was thick and heterogeneous showing a dense 
layer both on its epithelial and endothelial aspects, and the lamina rara externa
contained more fibrils than in control rats. Detailed estimation of the absolute 
values of the various compartments of the diabetic glomeruli by using
perfusion-fixed materials and a computer-assisted digitizer revealed that the
volume and surface area of the mesangium were increased more extensively than
those of the capillary; the enlargement of the mesangial-capillary interface area
was the most pronounced among the morphometric changes of the diabetic glomeruli;
and that the moderate increase in capillary volume was associated with an
increased radius. Our quantitative results showed that capillaries in the
diabetic glomeruli had an extensively wider neck which may be the first sign of
structural damage to the glomerular tuft.

PMID: 8212540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Yi Chuan Xue Bao. 1993;20(5):381-8.

[Molecular study of the mechanism of chromosomal translocation (15;17) in acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL)].

[Article in Chinese]

Dong S(1), Tong J, Wu Y, Cai J, Sun G, Chen S, Wang Z, Chen S, Chen Z, Geng J, et
al.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Shanghai Rui-Jin Hospital, Shanghai Second
Medical University.

Molecular studies of chromosomal translocation (15;17) in acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL) have shown that retinoic acid receptor A (RARA) gene on chromosome
17 is juxtaposed to the PML gene on chromosome 15. This results in a PML-RARA
chimeric gene. Our work has demonstrated that the PML breakpoints in APL patients
are clustered in two limited regions, PML-bcr1 and PML-bcr2, separated from each 
other by about 10 kb. DNA sequence of PML-bcr1 and primary structure of the
junctional region of reciprocal chromosomal translocation in a patient have been 
determined in this paper. Compared to those of two previously reported cases
abroad, we found that the breakpoint may be situated in the topoisomerase II
cleavage site. A working model has been proposed for the mechanism of DNA
illegitimate recombination in t (15;17).

PMID: 8161469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Blood Cells. 1993;19(3):633-41; discussion 642-7.

Problems existing in differentiation therapy of acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL) with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA).

Wang ZY(1), Chen Z, Huang W, Li XS, Lu JX, Huang LA, Zhang FQ, Gu LJ, Ouyang RR, 
Chen SJ, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Rui-jin Hospital, Shanghai Second Medical
University, PR China.

A large number of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patients, treated with
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and chemotherapy, were studied. The results of the
studies are as follows: (1) Among 65 patients investigated for the
postremissional therapy, the 5-year survival probabilities were 0.20 +/- 0.13
(mean +/- SE) in the group treated with ATRA alone, 0.47 + 0.10 (mean +/- SE) in 
the group using chemotherapy alone and 0.42 +/- 0.09 (mean +/- SE) in the group
treated with chemotherapy and ATRA. (2) The main severe adverse effects in the
ATRA treatment include retinoic acid syndrome, renal failure, and thrombosis.
These sequelae were observed more frequently in cases with persistent, marked
elevation of white blood cell count without significant maturation of leukemic
promyelocytes. (3) APL is not a homogeneous disease in that among 50 patients
studied at the molecular level, although a PML-RARA fusion gene was detected in
45 cases, one had a variant translocation t(11;17) bearing fusion gene PLZF-RARA,
one presented no obvious structural alteration of the PML gene while the RARA
gene was rearranged, and three patients had no rearrangement of either PML or
RARA genes. (4) Using RT/PCR to detect minimal residual disease, we found
positive rates of 22%, 18.4%, and 11.5%, respectively, 12, 24, and 36 months
after CR. This observation justifies the use of chemotherapy for at least 3 years
after CR induced by ATRA. (5) It seems likely that the fusion gene PML-RARA plays
an important role in APL leukemogenesis and in its response to the ATRA
treatment.

PMID: 8018944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Am J Hum Genet. 1992 Dec;51(6):1377-85.

Cleft lip with or without cleft palate: associations with transforming growth
factor alpha and retinoic acid receptor loci.

Chenevix-Trench G(1), Jones K, Green AC, Duffy DL, Martin NG.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Cancer Fund Research Unit, Queensland Institute of Medical
Research, Australia.

Comment in
    Am J Hum Genet. 1993 Nov;53(5):1156-7.

The first association study of cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL/P),
with candidate genes, found an association with the transforming growth-factor
alpha (TGFA) locus. This finding has since been replicated, in whole or in part, 
in three independent studies. Here we extend our original analysis of the TGFA
TaqI RFLP to two other TGFA RFLPs and seven other RFLPs at five candidate genes
in 117 nonsyndromic cases of CL/P and 113 controls. The other candidate genes
were the retinoic acid receptor (RARA), the bcl-2 oncogene, and the homeobox
genes 2F, 2G, and EN2. Significant associations with the TGFA TaqI and BamHI
RFLPs were confirmed, although associations of clefting with previously reported 
haplotypes did not reach significance. Of particular interest, in view of the
known teratogenic role of retinoic acid, was a significant association with the
RARA PstI RFLP (P = .016; not corrected for multiple testing). The effect on risk
of the A2 allele appears to be additive, and although the A2A2 homozygote only
has an odds ratio of about 2 and recurrence risk to first-degree relatives
(lambda 1) of 1.06, because it is so common it may account for as much as a third
of the attributable risk of clefting. There is no evidence of interaction between
the TGFA and RARA polymorphisms on risk, and jointly they appear to account for
almost half the attributable risk of clefting.

PMCID: PMC1682912
PMID: 1361101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Yonsei Med J. 1992 Dec;33(4):351-6.

Electron microscopic study of the cases of minimal change nephrotic syndrome with
mesangial IgA deposition.

Jeong HJ(1), Jung SH, Choi IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Twenty-five cases of minimal change nephrotic syndrome(minimal change disease,
MCD) with mesangial IgA deposition were evaluated electron microscopically. The
thickness of the glomerular basement membrane(GBM) was 3875 +/- 1271 A and 3056
+/- 1201 A in adults and children, respectively. Alteration of the GBM was noted 
in 3 adults and eight children: splitting in 4, focal thinning in one, widening
of the lamina rara interna in 10, and widening of the lamina rara externa in 4
cases. Minimal mesangial electron dense deposits were found in all but one adult,
and an increase of the mesangial matrix and minimal mesangial proliferation were 
observed in 8 and 6 cases, respectively. Electron microscopic findings show
representative findings of MCD in our cases. A relationship between the GBM
alterations in these cases and frequent association of hematuria is suggested and
discussed.

PMID: 1309015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Br J Haematol. 1992 Nov;82(3):529-40.

Diagnosis of acute promyelocytic leukaemia by RT-PCR: detection of PML-RARA and
RARA-PML fusion transcripts.

Borrow J(1), Goddard AD, Gibbons B, Katz F, Swirsky D, Fioretos T, Dube I,
Winfield DA, Kingston J, Hagemeijer A, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London.

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL; AML M3) is identified by a unique t(15;17)
translocation which fuses the PML gene to the retinoic acid receptor alpha gene
(RARA). Reverse transcription coupled with the polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
has been used to develop a diagnostic test for APL based on the PML-RARA fusion
message. Separate PCR assays were designed to amplify either PML-RARA (15q+
derived) or RARA-PML (17q- derived) chimaeric transcripts. PML-RARA transcripts
were detected in every case from a series of 18 APL patients with cytogenetically
confirmed t(15;17) translocations, whereas RARA-PML messages were detected in
only 67% (12/18) of these patients. This suggests that it is the 15q+ derivative 
which mediates leukaemogenesis. Furthermore the PCR approach (or Southern
analysis) may be used to identify in which of the alternative PML introns the
breakpoint occurs; 52% of cases (15/29 patients) utilize a 5' PML intron and 48% 
the 3' intron (14/29 cases). Neither the choice of PML intron nor the expression 
of the 17q- derivative could be correlated with the microgranular variant of APL 
(M3V), overall survival rate, age, sex or presence of coagulopathy. Finally, the 
fusion message is undetectable in five remission samples. This indicates a
possible use for RT-PCR in monitoring remission patients for evidence of relapse.

PMID: 1486033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Am J Kidney Dis. 1992 Nov;20(5):516-8.

Unusual glomerular lesion in a patient receiving long-term interferon alpha.

Lederer E(1), Truong L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Louisville, KY 40292.

A 60-year-old man with long-standing chronic myelogenous leukemia presented with 
renal insufficiency and proteinuria after more than 6 years of therapy with daily
interferon alpha injections. He also manifested unusual skin lesions and a
low-titer antinuclear antibody (ANA). Percutaneous renal biopsy disclosed an
unusual glomerular lesion characterized by global, diffuse, and marked widening
of the lamina rara interna, and focal segmental mesangial proliferation.
Discontinuation of the drug resulted in resolution of the proteinuria, but not
the renal insufficiency. These glomerular changes have not been reported
previously as a complication of this form of malignancy and are similar to
lesions reported in newborn rats and mice receiving interferon alpha. The
potential role of interferon alpha in the development of this glomerular disease 
is discussed.

PMID: 1442766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Leuk Lymphoma. 1992 Nov;8(4-5):253-60.

RARA and PML genes in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Chen Z(1), Chen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, China.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by a specific chromosome
translocation t(15;17). Recently, using molecular biology techniques, a number of
laboratories have demonstrated that the gene coding for the retinoic acid
receptor alpha (RARA), normally located on chromosome 17, is disrupted by the
t(15;17) and fused with the PML gene on chromosome 15. The chromosome 17 breaks
were mapped consistently within the second intron of the RARA gene while the
chromosome 15 breaks were clustered in two limited regions within the PML gene.
Molecular cloning and sequence analysis of the PML gene demonstrated a complex
splicing pattern and this gene may encode a transcription factor. Different
isoforms of the PML-RARA fusion transcripts were discovered which are produced as
a result of distinct PML gene rearrangements. Sequence analysis of the reciprocal
products of the translocation t(15;17) in some APL cases suggested the
implication of topoisomerase II in mediating the DNA recombination. The RT/PCR
procedure has been established to characterize the expression patterns of the
PML-RARA fusion gene and to detect minimal residual disease (MRD). The biological
activity of the PML-RARA fusion gene and its isoforms should be further explored.

PMID: 1337847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Eur J Clin Chem Clin Biochem. 1992 Oct;30(10):627-33.

The physiological and pathophysiological basis of glomerular permeability for
plasma proteins and erythrocytes.

Schurek HJ(1), Neumann KH, Flohr H, Zeh M, Stolte H.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Zentrum Innere Medizin, Abt. Nephrologie,
Germany.

The barrier function of glomerular capillaries in vivo, which prevents the
leakage of plasma proteins and cellular elements, depends on the basic
morphological and electro-chemical fine structure of the glomerular capillary
wall, and on a functional barrier maintained by components obtained from blood,
which effect the definitive barrier against the leakage of plasma proteins and
cellular elements. The functional component of the barrier may explain the
variability and some of the phenomena known as functional proteinuria. A certain 
size and number of morphological "defects" are thought to represent the normal
condition, but under pathological conditions they may increase in size and
number, resulting in a shift to an increasing permeability for higher molecular
mass proteins; also an increase of the size and number of larger defects may
enable more red cells to pass the barrier compared with the normal condition.
These defects are different from the minimal glomerular lesions which are due to 
charge defects in the glomerular capillary membrane, primarily the lamina rara
interna and the lamina rara externa of the basement membrane.

PMID: 1493154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Baillieres Clin Haematol. 1992 Oct;5(4):833-56.

Molecular analysis of the t(15;17) translocation in acute promyelocytic
leukaemia.

Borrow J(1), Solomon E.

Author information: 
(1)Somatic Cell Genetics Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

APL (FAB M3) is a unique type of myeloid leukaemia characterized by specific
clinical, morphological, cytogenetic and molecular features. An early and
accurate diagnosis is necessary to initiate therapy and treat the
life-threatening coagulopathy caused by release of procoagulants from the
abundant promyelocytic granules. Cytogenetically the disease is characterized by 
a reciprocal translocation between the long arms of chromosomes 15 and 17,
t(15;17)(q21;q22), which is seen in almost every patient with APL but in no other
form of malignancy. The presence of this translocation, often as the only
karyotypic change, suggests that potentially leukaemogenic sequences are located 
at the breakpoints and are activated by rearrangement. The recent cloning of the 
breakpoints by three groups has demonstrated that the retinoic acid receptor
alpha gene (RARA) on chromosome 17 is fused to a previously undescribed
transcription factor gene, PML, on chromosome 15. The DNA-binding motifs of both 
the RARA and PML proteins, together with the ligand-binding domain of RARA, are
combined in a single fusion protein which may dysregulate either retinoic acid or
PML-sensitive pathways. Identification of these dysregulated target genes has
become the next molecular goal for research on APL. Intriguingly, some APLs not
only express the PML-RARA fusion protein but also the reciprocal RARA-PML fusion 
protein, although the contribution of this product is unclear. The PML-RARA
chimaeric protein is presumably the target during the striking differentiation
therapy achieved with all-trans retinoic acid. This therapy induces the malignant
promyelocytes to mature and die, rather than continue proliferating. Moreover, it
represents the first direct connection between a genetic defect and clinical
treatment.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1339190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Histochem Cytochem. 1992 Sep;40(9):1257-67.

Post-embedding staining with high-iron diamine-thiocarbohydrazide-silver
proteinate and its application to visualizing sulfated glycoconjugates in
cryofixed kidney and cartilage.

Kogaya Y(1), Nanci A.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Stomatologie, Faculté de Médecine Dentaire, Université de
Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Cryofixation is generally believed to provide optimal tissue preservation.
However, certain post-embedding cytochemical reactions, such as high-iron diamine
(HID) staining for sulfated glycoconjugates, are not applicable to cryofixed and 
freeze-substituted tissues. In the present study, the HID technique was therefore
adapted for post-embedding staining. HID staining was performed on thin sections 
of chemically and cryofixed kidney and growth plate cartilage, embedded in Epon
and various acrylic-based resins. All resins and most tissue preparation
conditions allowed post-embedding staining with HID, albeit to variable degrees. 
However, no significant cytochemical reaction was obtained with tissue sections
of osmicated kidney embedded in Epon. Profile views of re-embedded sections
showed that large stain deposits were usually restricted to the surface, whereas 
small ones were observed throughout the entire thickness of the section. The
staining pattern was essentially similar between chemically fixed and cryofixed
specimens. In the glomerulus, stain deposits were mainly seen over the free
surface of podocyte foot processes and over the lamina rara externa. The
pericellular cartilage matrix of chemically fixed specimens often appeared as
condensed elements, usually stained with large deposits. In cryofixed tissues
this matrix formed a meshwork composed of thin, extended filamentous structures, 
many of which showed linear arrays of smaller stain deposits. The data presented 
here indicate that post-embedding HID-TCH-SP staining can be successfully
performed on thin sections of tissues embedded in various resins and, as a
result, can be further adapted to cryo-prepared specimens to give a high
resolution localization of sulfated glycoconjugates in tissues with optimal
molecular preservation.

PMID: 1380528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1992 Sep;23(3):272-5.

[Changes in glomerular polyanions and ultrastructure induced by protamine in
rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Z, Liu Z, Zhang X, Tan J.

Perfusion of rat kidneys with polycation protamine, resulted in pathologic
alterations of glomeruli very similar to those observed in minimal change
nephrotic syndrome in human. In the experimental model, colloidal iron stained
kidney tissue sections were analyzed quantitatively by image analyzer and
stereology in combination with the observation of other glomerular
ultrastructure. The mean thickness of foot processes and the foot processes
making up the volume fraction of glomerular capillary were determined. The
studies showed that there was a significant decrease in glomerular polyanions of 
kidneys perfused with protamine as compared with that of the control group (P <
0.01). The glomerular alterations included swelling and fusion of foot processes 
and narrowing or loss of filtration slits. Electron-dense particles formed by
binding of protamine to polyanions were seen primarily in the lamina rara externa
of glomerular basement membrane and also along the lamina rara interna and on the
foot process surface, which showed the distribution feature of glomerular filter.
These results suggest that the ultrastructure alterations of glomeruli may result
from the neutralization of polyanions by perfusion with protamine.

PMID: 1298716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Am J Pathol. 1992 Aug;141(2):409-19.

Ultrastructural immunohistochemical localization of polyclonal IgG, C3, and
amyloid P component on the congo red-negative amyloid-like fibrils of fibrillary 
glomerulopathy.

Yang GC(1), Nieto R, Stachura I, Gallo GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University Medical Center, New York 10016.

Renal biopsies from seven patients with Congo red-negative amyloid-like
fibrillary glomerulopathy (FGP) were examined by protein A gold immuno-electron
microscopy. Ultrastructurally, the fibrils in all cases exhibited positive
immunostaining for IgG, both Ig light chains, C3, and amyloid P component (AP),
but did not show positive immunostaining for glomerular basement membrane
(GBM)-associated proteins (collagen type IV and heparan-sulfate proteoglycans) or
microfibril-associated proteins (fibronectin and fibrillin). In a triple-label
study, AP and IgG were colocalized along the same fibril, whereas the gold probes
for the detection of collagen type IV were absent. The results suggest that the
fibrils are comprised of polyclonal IgG and C3 that bind AP. AP was
immunolocalized sparsely but regularly along the lamina rara interna of normal
GBM. AP was absent in the fibrils in a case of diabetic glomerulopathy, was
scattered randomly without specificity for the electron-dense deposits in the GBM
of membranous glomerulopathy, and lined up regularly along the fibrils in amyloid
deposits. FGP is an entity in which the fibrils bind AP but lack the beta-pleated
sheet structure necessary for Congo red staining that is typical of amyloid.

PMCID: PMC1886617
PMID: 1497092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Chin Med J (Engl). 1992 Aug;105(8):671-5.

Effect of heparin on the anionic sites of glomerular basement membrane in
adriamycin nephrosis in rats.

Chen ZY(1), Jiang XY, Fei L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Second Affiliated Hospital, Hubei Medical College,
Wuhan.

The effect of heparin on the anionic sites of glomerular basement membrane (GBM) 
in adriamycin-induced nephrotic rats was studied by means of calculating the
polyethyleneimine (PEI) stained particles under electron microscope. The results 
showed that treatment with heparin under the anticoagulant effect markedly
reduced the loss of anionic sites within lamina rara externa (LRE) of GBM and
also the urinary protein excretion in nephrotic rats. The results demonstrated
that one of the mechanisms of heparin in preventing the structural damage of
glomeruli in kidney diseases was the reduction of the loss of anionic sites
within LRE, indicating that changes in biomembrane charge played an important
role in the pathogenesis of nephrotic syndrome. The results provided a scientific
basis for the use of heparin to treat glomerular diseases.

PMID: 1458971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Nihon Rinsho. 1992 Jun;50(6):1363-8.

[Retinoic acid receptor alpha gene in t (15; 17) APL].

[Article in Japanese]

Takashima T(1), Misawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine.

A t(15; 17) (q22; q21) translocation is identified in most patients with acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL). This translocation constructs fusion genes between 
retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) at 17q21 and PML at 15q22. These
rearrangements can be detected in the majority of patients with APL but not in
other types of leukemias, by Southern blotting. Breakpoints cluster in limited
regions of RARA and PML, and PML/RARA and RARA/PML transcripts can also be
detected by RT-PCR. Although PML/RARA and RARA/PML fusion products are
transcribed in APL, PML/RARA may play an important role in the etiology of APL.
Clinically, most APL patients achieve remission by oral administration of high
dose all-trans retinoic acid.

PMID: 1325570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Kidney Int. 1992 Apr;41(4):1070-80.

Heparan sulfate proteoglycan in the glomerular basement membrane in type 1
diabetes mellitus.

Vernier RL(1), Steffes MW, Sisson-Ross S, Mauer SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455.

Heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPG) are negatively charged constituents of the
renal extracellular matrix including the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and
mesangial matrix. Biochemical and functional studies of patients with type-1
insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) suggest that alterations of HSPG may
occur in diabetic nephropathy. We have utilized a specific cytochemical method
and electron microscopy to quantitate the distribution of HSPG in the GBM of 10
normal people and in 16 IDDM patients with a spectrum of clinical and structural 
changes. Enzyme incubation studies of normal infant kidney demonstrated that
heparitinase removed 94% of the stainable anionic sites in the lamina rara
externa (LRE) and 77% of the sites in the lamina rara interna (LRI) of the GBM.
In contrast, incubation in the enzyme chondroitinase ABC did not reduce the
number of sites in the LRE but reduced the number of sites in the LRI by 26%. The
HSPG anionic sites in normal subjects were distributed in the LRE as 20.9 +/-
1.3, and in the LRI as 13.1 +/- 2.2 per micron GBM length. Anionic sites were
slightly reduced (19.6 +/- 1.3, P less than 0.04) in the LRE of IDDM patients
with normal urinary albumin excretion rates (UAE), or microalbuminuria, and were 
reduced in both the LRE and LRI of IDDM patients with clinical proteinuria (13.1 
+/- 2.3, P less than 0.001 and 8.9 +/- 2.1, P less than 0.001, respectively). The
number of anionic sites in the LRE and LRI, respectively, correlated with UAE (r 
= +0.78, P less than 0.001, r = +0.58, P less than 0.02), with GBM thickness
(LRE, r = +0.81, P less than 0.001; LRI, r = +0.67, P less than 0.01) and with
the volume fraction of mesangium (LRE, r = +0.59, P less than 0.02; LRI, r =
+0.58, P less than 0.03). These data confirm earlier biochemical findings of a
reduction of HSPG in the GBM in advanced diabetic nephropathy but do not provide 
evidence for the loss of HSPG in the GBM as a mechanism for early
microalbuminuria.

PMID: 1513088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Nihon Jinzo Gakkai Shi. 1992 Apr;34(4):387-95.

Alterations of anionic charge and/or sites of the glomerular basement membrane in
the heterologous phase of passive Heymann nephritis.

Arai T(1), Nagase M, Kobayashi S, Tamura H, Ichinose N.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Japan.

Alterations of the anionic charge and/or sites of the glomerular basement
membrane (GBM) in the heterologous phase of passive Heymann nephritis (PHN) were 
studied. Rats with PHN induced by a single injection of anti-Fx1A IgG were
examined at days 1, 2, 3 and 4. The left kidney was perfused with ruthenium red
(RR) solution as a cationic probe. The RR particles (= anionic sites) in the GBM 
were counted and expressed as the number of RR particles per unit length of GBM. 
For quantitative determination of the total anionic charge of the GBM, the
GBM-bound ruthenium (= anionic charge) was measured with an atomic absorption
spectrophotometer (AAS). Abnormal proteinuria corresponding to a decrease in
anionic charge was detected at days 3 and 4. The anionic sites in the lamina rara
externa (LRE) adjacent to immune complex (IC) deposits were found to have
diminished earlier from day 1 onwards. This diminution was largely confined to
areas adjacent to the IC deposits and was significantly correlated with the
amount of urinary albumin excretion. Proteinuria in the heterologous phase of PHN
would thus appear to be causally related to a decrease in the number of anionic
sites in the LRE adjacent to IC deposits.

PMID: 1378913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1992 Apr;72(4):229-33, 255.

[Retinoic acid receptor alpha gene rearrangement as specific marker of acute
promyelocytic leukemia and its use in the study of cell differentiation].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Rui-Jin Hospital, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Shanghai Second Medical
University.

The chromosomal translocation t (15; 17), hallmark of human acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL), has been shown to disrupt the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA)
gene. Using a panel of probes covering the whole RARA gene generated in our own
laboratory, we detected the gene rearrangement in 23 out of 25 cases of APL. It
is conceivable that RARA gene rearrangement may serve as a highly specific marker
of APL. The RARA gene configuration was investigated in two APL patients during
the course of treatment with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). It was shown that
phenotypically differentiated bone marrow myelocytes under ATRA therapy could
still carry RARA gene rearrangement. This provides further evidence that ATRA
induce complete remission of APL through differentiation induction of the
leukemic cells.

PMID: 1327453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Blood. 1992 Apr 1;79(7):1802-10.

Specific expression of the annexin VIII gene in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Chang KS(1), Wang G, Freireich EJ, Daly M, Naylor SL, Trujillo JM, Stass SA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Laboratory Medicine, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030.

Since the translocation breakpoint t(15;17) (q22;q21) in acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL) occurs within the retinoic acid receptor-alpha (RARA) gene, the
expression of many genes normally regulated by RARA may be affected by this
translocation. To identify genes that may be aberrantly expressed in APL, a
subtraction cDNA library of an APL patient with t(15;17) was constructed. A cDNA,
pRD1, specifically expressed in APL was identified. DNA sequence analysis of pRD1
showed that this gene is similar to the DNA sequence of annexin VIII, a gene
which encodes a vascular anticoagulant. The annexin VIII gene was assigned to
chromosome 10, which indicates that specific expression of this gene in APL is
not directly involved in the t(15;17) breakpoint region. We have analyzed the
expression of annexin VIII gene in nine t(15;17)-positive APL patients and one
APL patient with a chromosome 17q-abnormality. We found that all APL samples
expressed high levels of the annexin VIII gene. Expression of the annexin VIII
gene in all other leukemias, including acute myelogenous leukemia, chronic
myelogenous leukemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and acute lymphoblastic
leukemia, was undetectable, except in one patient with acute myelogenous leukemia
in which a very low level of expression was detected. Annexin VIII is highly
expressed in the APL cell line, NB4. Its expression was significantly reduced
after 8 hours of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) treatment, whereas the expression
of RARA increased several-fold within 4 hours postinduction. Thus, increased
expression of RARA preceded the downregulation of annexin VIII after ATRA
induction, suggesting an inverse relationship between RARA and annexin VIII
expression. Since increased expression of the fusion transcript was seen after
ATRA induction and an APL without a t(15;17) translocation expressed high levels 
of annexin VIII, it appears that increased expression of annexin VIII in APL is
not related to the fusion transcript. Therefore, dysregulation of the RARA gene
may be related to the overexpression of annexin VIII in APL.

PMID: 1313714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Parasitol. 1992 Feb;78(1):163-6.

Helminth parasites of the raccoon (Procyon lotor) from north-central Arkansas.

Richardson DJ(1), Owen WB, Snyder DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Central Arkansas, Conway 72032.

Twenty-three species of helminths (4 trematodes, 2 cestodes, 14 nematodes, and 3 
acanthocephalans) were found in the gastrointestinal tract, lungs, pancreas,
tongue, urinary bladder, and subcutaneous tissues of 30 live-trapped or
hunter-shot raccoons from north-central Arkansas between November 1989 and April 
1990. Helminths were not detected in the brain, diaphragm, gallbladder, heart,
liver, reproductive system, or trachea. Each raccoon examined was infected with 3
or more of the following helminths: Brachylaima virginiana, Eurytrema procyonis, 
Fibricola cratera, Pharyngostomoides procyonis, Atriotaenia procyonis,
Mesocestoides spp., Arthrocephalus lotoris, Capillaria aerophila, Capillaria
plica, Capillaria procyonis, Capillaria putorii, Crenosoma goblei, Cruzia
americana, Dirofilaria tenuis, Dracunculus insignis, Enterobius sp., Gnathostoma 
procyonis, Molineus barbatus, Physaloptera rara, Trichinella spiralis,
Centrorhynchus wardae, Macracanthorhynchus ingens, and Oligacanthorhynchus
tortuosa. All helminths collected with the exception of D. insignis constitute
new geographic distribution records. Occurrences of C. aerophila, C. wardae, and 
O. tortuosa are new host records. One nymphal pentastome, Porocephalus crotali,
was found in the liver of 1 raccoon, constituting a new host record.

PMID: 1738063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1992 Feb;6(2):219-24.

Effects of oxygen toxicity on cuprolinic blue-stained proteoglycans in alveolar
basement membranes.

Ferrara TB(1), Fox RB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology, Minneapolis Children's Medical Center, Minnesota
55404.

Effects of oxygen toxicity on distribution and density of proteoglycans in
basement membranes of newborn rat lungs were assessed by electron microscopic
analysis of tissues processed with cuprolinic blue, a cationic label that
characteristically labels these anionically charged macromolecules. Newborn rats 
placed in greater than 95% oxygen at birth were killed at weekly intervals for 4 
wk, and lung tissues fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde with 0.2% cuprolinic blue were 
processed for electron microscopy. Alveolar basement membranes from
oxygen-treated and control animals were compared for differences in thickness and
proteoglycan concentration and distribution. Results showed progressive
thickening of alveolar basement membranes with increased duration of oxygen
exposure. The normal distribution of proteoglycans, which is predominantly in the
lamina rara externa of alveolar basement membranes, was frequently lost in
thickened membranes found in oxygen-treated animals. Density of proteoglycans in 
these membranes decreased to 56% of normal by 2 wk of age and remained low with
continued oxygen administration. Proteoglycan concentration in basement membranes
on the interstitial side of alveolar capillaries in both control and
oxygen-treated animals was low compared with proteoglycan concentration in
basement membranes that opposed the alveolar air space, and administration of
oxygen diminished these differences. These results demonstrate a direct
alteration of proteoglycan distribution and density in the developing lung as a
result of oxygen toxicity. This could result in decreased cell adhesion,
influence the cellular response to lung injury, and contribute to the increased
permeability seen with this disorder.

PMID: 1540385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Oncogene. 1992 Feb;7(2):311-6.

Molecular rearrangements of the MYL gene in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL,
M3) define a breakpoint cluster region as well as some molecular variants.

Tong JH(1), Dong S, Geng JP, Huang W, Wang ZY, Sun GL, Chen SJ, Chen Z, Larsen
CJ, Berger R.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Shanghai Rui-Jin Hospital, Shanghai Second
Medical University, China.

Genomic DNA probes generated from the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene
located on chromosome 17 and from the MYL gene located on chromosome 15 were used
to study the chromosome 15 breakpoints resulting from the t(15; 17) translocation
in 26 patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). In 20 out of 22 patients 
with a detectable MYL rearrangement, the breakpoints were clustered within a 4.4 
kb segment designated MYLbcr. The two remaining patients exhibited a more 5'
rearrangement at about 10 kb upstream of the MYLbcr region, implying the lack of 
at least one MYL gene exon in the resulting MYL-RARA fusion gene. The variation
of chromosome breakpoints within the MYL gene may explain size heterogeneity
previously observed in some MYL-RARA fusion transcripts expressed in APL cells.

PMID: 1312695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Feb;12(2):800-10.

Characterization of a fusion cDNA (RARA/myl) transcribed from the t(15;17)
translocation breakpoint in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Chang KS(1), Stass SA, Chu DT, Deaven LL, Trujillo JM, Freireich EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Laboratory Medicine, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030.

A nonrandom chromosomal translocation breakpoint, t(15;17)(q22;q21), is found in 
almost all patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Most of these
breakpoints occur within the second intron of the retinoic acid receptor-alpha
(RARA) gene. We screened a cDNA library of APL and have identified and sequenced 
a cDNA transcribed from the t(15;17) translocation breakpoint. The 5' end of cDNA
p1715 consists of 503 bp of the RARA exon II sequence. A 1.76-kb cDNA without
homology to any known gene available in GenBank was found truncated downstream.
This cDNA sequence was assigned to chromosome 15 by dot blot hybridization of the
flow cytometry-sorted chromosomes. We designate this fusion cDNA RARA/myl, which 
is different from myl/RARA reported by de The et al. (H. de The, C. Chomienne, M.
Lanotte, L. Degos, and A. Dejean, Nature (London) 347:558-561, 1990). This result
demonstrates that the two different types of hybrid mRNA can be transcribed from 
this breakpoint. We screened a non-APL cDNA library and identified a 2.8-kb myl
cDNA. This cDNA is able to encode a polypeptide with a molecular weight of
78,450. Alternative splicing of the myl gene which resulted in myl proteins with 
different C terminals was found. Southern blot analysis of the genomic DNA
isolated from 17 APL patients by using the myl DNA probe demonstrated that the
myl gene in 12 samples was rearranged. Northern (RNA) blot analysis of RARA gene 
expression in two APL RNA samples showed abnormal mRNA species of 4.2 and 3.2 kb 
in one patient and of 4.8 and 3.8 kb in another patient; these were in addition
to the normal mRNA species of 3.7 and 2.7-kb. The myl DNA probe detected a 2.6-kb
abnormal mRNA in addition to the normal mRNA species of 3.2, 4.2, and 5.5 kb.
Using the polymerase chain reaction, we demonstrated that both RARA/myl and
myl/RARA were coexpressed in samples from three different APL patients. From this
study, we conclude that the t(15;17) translocation breakpoint results in the
transcription of two different fusion transcripts which are expected to be
translated into fusion proteins.

PMCID: PMC364308
PMID: 1310153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol. 1992;420(2):163-70.

Morphological characteristics of tumours formed by Lewis lung carcinoma-derived
cloned cell lines with different metastatic potentials: structural differences in
their basement membranes formed in vivo.

Nakanishi H(1), Takenaga K, Oguri K, Yoshida A, Okayama M.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Institute, National Nagoya Hospital, Japan.

Tumour basement membrane (BM) is an extracellular matrix produced by tumour cells
of epithelial origin. We examined the structure and function of the tumour BM of 
tumour tissues formed by Lewis lung carcinoma-derived cloned cell lines (P29,
LM12-3 and LM60-D6 cells) with low, medium and high metastatic potentials,
respectively. Immunohistochemical staining of major BM constituents laminin and
type IV collagen demonstrated that all the cell lines produced and deposited
these materials extracellularly in vivo. However, the continuity of the tumour BM
composed of these materials was much greater in the higher metastatic LM12-3 and 
LM60-D6 tumours than in those with the low metastatic P29 tumour. Electron
microscopic examination revealed that in the higher metastatic tumours,
especially the LM60-D6 tumour, the tumour BM had a highly organized structure
consisting of lamina densa and lamina rara. Parallel bilayers of BM and their
fusion were often observed and tumour cells were in direct contact with the BM.
In the vicinity of tumour blood vessels, similar interactions between the tumour 
BM and the vascular BM were observed, and the tumour cells rested on their own
BM, the fused BM or the vascular BM. In contrast, in the low metastatic tumour in
which the tumour BM was not clearly defined, this close contact between tumour
cells and the vascular BM was not observed. In vitro studies showed that the
higher metastatic cells adhered more firmly than the LMP cells to a
subendothelial matrix. These results suggest that the adhesiveness of tumour
cells to the vascular BM in vivo is correlated with their ability to form an
integrated BM in vivo, and that this adhesiveness of the tumour cells may be
mediated in part by the tumour BM via BM fusion.

PMID: 1549905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol Incl Mol Pathol. 1992;62(3):179-88.

Intraglomerular fibronectin in rat experimental glomerulonephritis.

Yoneyama T(1), Nagase M, Ikeya M, Hishida A, Honda N.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Japan.

To clarify the mechanisms of glomerular pericapillary fibronectin deposition in
human membranous nephropathy and mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis,
intraglomerular fibronectin distribution was examined by light and electron
microscopy using the experimental rat models of Heymann and nephrotoxic serum
nephritis. As previously demonstrated by immunofluorescence microscopy
(Pettersson and Colvin 1978; Ikeya et al. 1985, 1986), fibronectin was
distributed in the mesangial areas and occasionally on percicapillary walls of
normal glomeruli, while in nephrotoxic serum nephritis and Heymann nephritis,
fibronectin was diffusely located along glomerular capillary walls as well as in 
the mesangium. By immunoelectron microscopy using the immunogold technique,
fibronectin was also noted in the mesangial areas and the lamina densa of the
glomerular basement membrane (GBM) in normal glomeruli. In nephrotoxic serum
nephritis, fibronectin was seen around mesangial cells situated between
endothelial cells and the GBM, suggesting that pericapillary fibronectin in
nephrotoxic serum nephritis reflects mesangial extension. However, in Heymann
nephritis, it was found uniformly in the lamina rara interna, lamina densa and
lamina rara externa of the GBM, indicating no specific relation to glomerular
cells. When sections of normal and both experimental nephritis kidneys were
incubated with fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugated with rat plasma fibronectin,
a linear pattern of fluorescein staining along the glomerular capillary walls was
observed in Heymann nephritis but not in normal or nephrotoxic serum nephritic
rats. The GBM in Heymann nephritis would thus appear to have an affinity for
plasma fibronectin. Based on the above findings, fibronectin in the GBM of rats
with Heymann nephritis may reasonably be concluded to originate from the plasma.

PMID: 1357819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Leukemia. 1992;6 Suppl 3:117S-119S.

A previously uncharacterized gene, PML, is fused to the retinoic acid receptor
alpha gene in acute promyelocytic leukaemia.

Goddard AD(1), Borrow J, Solomon E.

Author information: 
(1)Somatic Cell Genetics Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Center Research Fund,
London, United Kingdom.

It has become apparent that a number of genes disrupted by chromosomal
rearrangements during leukaemogenesis encode protein factors involved in
transcriptional regulation (20-25) and PML may be another such gene. The
replacement of the NH2-terminal transactivation domain in RAR alpha by the PML
putative DNA binding and transactivation domains in the PML/RARA fusion produces 
a novel chimeric protein which may act to block normal myeloid differentiation
through disregulation of the genes normally regulated by either or both of the
normal proteins.

PMID: 1318462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Electron Microsc (Tokyo). 1991 Dec;40(6):392-8.

Influence of subepithelial deposits on permeability of the glomerular capillary
wall in serum sickness nephritis in the rat.

Duan HJ(1), Nakazawa K, Ishigame H, Yamaguchi N, Itoh N, Shigematsu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto,
Japan.

Serum sickness nephritis was induced in male Fisher rats by immunization with egg
albumin (EA). Correlations of subepithelial deposits (SD) with size and charge
barriers of the glomerular filter were investigated using native (NF) and
cationized (CF) ferritin as tracer probes. In proteinuric animals large numbers
of NF molecules perfused from the abdominal aorta were observed to cross the
glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and enter SD. The concentration of NF
molecules was higher in GBM segments with SD than in GBM segments without SD, and
the concentration of these molecules was higher within SD than in the intervening
GBM. In contrast, CF clusters were fewer in number in the lamina rara externa
(LRE) of GBM segments with SD than in the GBM segments without SD. CF particles
could not be observed within SD, even in the areas of podocyte detachment. It is 
suggested that permeability in GBM segments with SD increases and that the
development of proteinuria in this model can be attributed to alterations in both
charge- and size-selective barriers to glomerular filtration.

PMID: 1806651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Science. 1991 Nov 29;254(5036):1371-4.

Characterization of a zinc finger gene disrupted by the t(15;17) in acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Goddard AD(1), Borrow J, Freemont PS, Solomon E.

Author information: 
(1)Somatic Cell Genetics Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London,
United Kingdom.

The translocation t(15;17) associated with acute promyelocytic leukemia results
in the fusion of the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene to the PML gene.
Characterization of PML revealed that it is a putative zinc finger protein and
potential transcription factor that is commonly expressed, with at least three
major transcription products. PML breakpoints cluster in two regions on either
side of an alternatively spliced exon. Although leukemic cells with
translocations characteristically express only one fusion product, both PML/RARA 
(on the 15q+ derivative chromosome) and RARA/PML (on the 17q- derivative) are
transcribed.

PMID: 1720570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Blood. 1991 Nov 15;78(10):2696-701.

Rearrangements in the second intron of the RARA gene are present in a large
majority of patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia and are used as molecular 
marker for retinoic acid-induced leukemic cell differentiation.

Chen SJ(1), Zhu YJ, Tong JH, Dong S, Huang W, Chen Y, Xiang WM, Zhang L, Li XS,
Qian GQ, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Rui-Jin Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Chromosome 17 breakpoints in translocation t(15;17), a hallmark for acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL), have been shown to disrupt the retinoic acid
receptor-alpha (RARA) gene. In this study, DNA probes around the second exon of
the RARA gene showed rearrangements not previously detected. Analysis of 25
Chinese APL cases showed that RARA gene rearrangements were present in 23 cases
(92%). The breakpoints were mapped unequivocally in 22 cases within the second
intron of the gene. Therefore, the RARA gene rearrangement provides us with a
specific marker of the disease. Simultaneous molecular and cytologic studies
showed that the RARA gene rearrangements persisted during the first 2 to 3 weeks 
of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) therapy when differentiated granulocytes
predominated in bone marrow, while these rearrangements disappeared after
achieving complete remission. These data indicate that ATRA induces
differentiation of APL cells.

PMID: 1668609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi. 1991 Nov;66(6):829-40.

[Electron microscopic study of the glomerular basement membrane charge barrier
and the charge of immune deposits in lupus nephritis].

[Article in Japanese]

Tochimaru H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan.

In order to evaluate the pathogenesis of proteinuria and the charge of immune
deposits in lupus nephritis, anionic sites of periodate-lysin-paraformaldehyde
(PLP) fixed renal tissue (5 patients with renal pelvic tumor as normal control
and 17 patients with lupus nephritis), were stained with the critical electrolyte
concentration method. Cuprolinic blue (CB) was used as a cationic probe.
Ultra-structural study and semi-quantitative analysis were done. In the normal
glomerular basement membrane (GBM), the CB stainable anionic sites appeared as
filamentous structure with several short lateral branches. On the basis of
electron microscopic observation of isolated proteoglycan, it is suggested that
the central filaments are the protein core and the branches are the
glycosaminoglycans of proteoglycan molecules. These filamentous anionic sites
were located mainly in the laminae larae and lie close to each other forming a
mesh-like network pattern. The semi-quantitative analysis of the normal GBM
revealed that the number of anionic sites in the lamina rara externa (LRE) was
22.9 +/- 1.9-23.7 +/- 1.4/1000 nm GBM and in the lamina rara interna (LRI) 14.0
+/- 1.6-15.1 +/- 1.5/1000 nm GBM. These findings suggest that the anionic sites
composed of heparan sulphate proteoglycan occupy large area of the laminae larae 
and prevent permeation of anionic molecules. In non-proteinuric 5 patients with
class II lupus nephritis, the number of anionic sites of the GBM (LRE; 21.3 +/-
2.0-22.3 +/- 1.8/1000 nm GBM, LRI; 13.5 +/- 2.0-14.2 +/- 2.0/1000 nm GBM) showed 
no significant difference from that of the normal GBM. In contrast, the GBM of
proteinuric patients with class IV (6 patients, LRE; 14.8 +/- 2.7-19.3 +/-
1.8/aooo nm GBM, LRI; 5.8 +/- 1.9-11.3 +/- 2.4/1000 nm GBM) and (V) (6 patients, 
LRE; 13.0 +/- 2.4-17.9 +/- 2.8/1000 nm GBM, LRI; 12.0 +/- 1.9-13.0 +/- 2.5/1000
nm GBM) exhibited loss of the anionic sites in association with the localization 
of the immune deposits (ID). From these findings, it is concluded that in severe 
and active lupus nephritis the failure of charge barrier of the GBM is
responsible for the proteinuria. The ID observed in the patients with lupus
nephritis were not stained with CB. This finding suggests that net charge of the 
ID could be cationic and that cationic immune complex and/or antibody could
involve in the pathogenesis of lupus nephritis.

PMID: 1783370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Cell Tissue Res. 1991 Oct;266(1):1-10.

Fine structure of the glomerular basement membrane of the rat kidney visualized
by high-resolution scanning electron microscopy.

Shirato I(1), Tomino Y, Koide H, Sakai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Juntendo University, School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

The fine structure of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) of the rat kidney
was studied by means of high resolution scanning electron microscopy. Specimens
were taken from kidneys perfused with paraformaldehyde, freeze-fractured and then
processed with conductive staining. The fractured surface of glomerular tufts
exhibited the inner and outer surface of the GBM uncovered by endothelial and
epithelial cells. The lamina densa was composed of densely packed granular
material together with scattered fibrils. The laminae rarae interna and externa
were composed of a meshwork that showed some structural heterogeneities. The
meshwork composing the lamina rara interna contained 5- to 9-nm-thick fibrils,
had pores 11-30 nm wide, and was associated with granular material except in
those places that corresponded with endothelial fenestrae. The meshwork of the
lamina rara externa was made up of 6- to 11-nm-thick fibrils, and had smaller
pores under the foot processes (10-24 nm wide) than those near the filtration
slits (16-32 nm wide). In addition to the meshwork, the lamina rara interna
contained microfibrils that were arranged differently depending on the topography
of the capillary wall: scattered fibrils had no predominant orientation at the
convex side, circumferential bundles lay at the concave side of the peripheral
capillary wall, and had a circumferential arrangement in the paramesangial wall.

PMID: 1747907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Anat Rec. 1991 Oct;231(2):178-84.

The anionic charge barrier in the renal corpuscle of the pronephros in the
lamprey, Petromyzon marinus L.

Ellis LC(1), Youson JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Toronto, West Hill, Ontario, Canada.

The charge barrier within the renal corpuscle of the pronephric kidney of the
lamprey, Petromyzon marinus, was investigated at two life cycle intervals using
cationized ferritin and polyethyleneimine. In the larval renal corpuscle the
endothelium of the glomerular capillaries and the laminae rarae externa and
interna of the glomerular basement membrane show regularly-spaced deposits of the
tracers. The lamina densa remains unstained. Concomitant with a loss of major
processes of the visceral epithelial podocytes and development of an extensive
mesangial matrix in late adult life are alterations in the distribution of the
anionic sites. The lamina rara interna is no longer a distinct entity and the
mesangium contains irregularly-distributed anionic sites surrounding
electron-dense deposits. The results indicate that the distribution of the
anionic sites during adult life most likely affects the ability of the renal
corpuscle to act as an efficient filtration device. This charge distribution is
consistent with that seen during some renal pathologies of higher vertebrates.

PMID: 1746718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Nippon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi. 1991 Oct;95(10):951-8.

[Studies on the ultrastructure of the inner limiting membrane of the
retina--distribution of anionic sites in the inner limiting membrane of the
retina].

[Article in Japanese]

Nishihara H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Okayama University Medical School, Japan.

For demonstrating ultrastructurally the distribution of anionic sites (AS) in the
inner limiting membrane (ILM) of the rabbit's retina, the immersion method with
cationic tracer, polyethyleneimine (PEI) was applied. This method was found to be
simple and useful for the observation of AS in the ILM. In the posterior pole of 
the eyeball (visual streak and medullary ray), PEI particles were arranged evenly
in the lamina rara (LR) of the ILM. The mean diameter of PEI particles was 20 nm,
and intervals between them (40-50 nm) were the same as those of fine strands in
the LR. However, the peripheral retina, the distribution of PEI particles were
sparse and random, while in the lamina densa (LD) of each ILM, PEI particles were
absent. AS stained with PEI were present in the residual vitreous fibers. These
results may provide the morphological basis for the theory that AS of the ILM act
as a charge barrier between the retina and the vitreous cavity.

PMID: 1746371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1991 Oct;2(4):902-12.

Reactive oxygen metabolites cause massive, reversible proteinuria and glomerular 
sieving defect without apparent ultrastructural abnormality.

Yoshioka T(1), Ichikawa I, Fogo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN.

To identify the specific in vivo renal effect of reactive oxygen species (ROS),
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) was infused directly into the left renal artery in
Munich-Wistar rats. H2O2 (5 to 50 mumol over 1 h) induced a dose-dependent
increase in urine protein excretion rate in infused kidneys, reaching a maximum
at the dose of 35 mumol (on average, a 60-fold increase from baseline). The H2O2 
(35 mumol)-induced proteinuria peaked over 1 h and completely normalized by 24 h 
after the infusion. Electrophoresis revealed that the urine protein is primarily 
of glomerular origin. Fractional clearances of graded-size neutral dextran of
larger molecular radii, an index of glomerular size selectivity, were
significantly and substantially elevated immediately but normalized by 24 h after
the infusion. GFR and RPF rate remained unchanged throughout the entire time
course examined. The H2O2-induced proteinuria was largely prevented by
pretreatment with catalase (20 mg, iv) or deferoxamine (30 mg/100 g body wt, iv).
Thus, iron-dependent metabolites of hydrogen peroxide appear to be involved in
this proteinuria and glomerular size-selective defect. Light and electron
microscopy, including determination of anionic site density at lamina rara
externa of glomerular capillary wall by polyethyleneimine staining, did not
reveal any appreciable abnormality throughout the study period, including at the 
peak of proteinuria. Thus, ROS can cause massive, reversible proteinuria by
inducing a molecular size-selectivity defect of the glomerular capillary wall
without apparent ultrastructural abnormalities. The results raise the
possibilities: (1) that persistent proteinuria of a variety of renal diseases may
reflect persistence of pathogenic ROS acting on glomeruli because the potent
proteinuric effect of ROS can be transient (2) that the light and electron
microscopy abnormalities in glomeruli of ROS-induced renal injuries reported thus
far may have no direct causal linkage to proteinuria; and, finally, (3)
ROS-induced reversible proteinuria may relate to the mechanism of clinical
functional proteinuria, which involves increased oxygen and ROS metabolism, e.g.,
exercise-induced proteinuria.

PMID: 1721553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Clin Exp Immunol. 1991 Sep;85(3):469-75.

Circulatory antigen of Heymann nephritis. III. Presence of the 70-kD circulatory 
protein in the immune deposits of Heymann nephritis.

Singh AK(1), Schwartz MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rush-Presbyterian-St Luke's Medical Center, Chicago,
IL.

An antigen of 70 kD size has been isolated previously from normal rat serum which
has immunological cross-reactivity to the Heymann nephritis antigen, F x 1A. Its 
role in the pathogenesis of Heymann's nephritis was unknown. In this
investigation we tested for the presence of 70-kD circulatory antigen in the
glomerular immune deposits of Heymann's nephritis. Further, its presence was
correlated with severity of disease. It was observed that the presence of the
70-kD antigen strongly correlated with the existence of electron-dense deposits
in the lamina rara externa (LRE) of the glomerular capillary wall and with
pathologic proteinuria. Temporally, the presence of the 70-kD antigen in the
immune deposits was followed by large electron-dense deposits, enhanced
complement activity and proteinuria. The data suggest that in the growing immune 
complex lattice in the LRE, the 70-kD circulatory antigen by virtue of its small 
size, mobility and antigen cross-reactivity facilitates cross linking and
coalescence of immune complexes, resulting in electron-dense immune deposits
(EDD) formation which initiates complement activation and consequent proteinuria.

PMCID: PMC1535605
PMID: 1893629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Anat Rec. 1991 Sep;231(1):35-47.

Anionic site and immunogold quantitation of heparan sulfate proteoglycans in
glomerular basement membranes of puromycin aminonucleoside nephrotic rats.

Rada JA(1), Carlson EC.

Author information: 
(1)Pittsburgh Eye and Ear Institute, Pennsylvania 15213.

Renal glomerular basement membranes (GBMs) exhibit a charge-selective barrier,
consisting of heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) that restricts the passage of
anionic molecules into the urine. Previous efforts to localize the HSPG core
protein within various layers of the GBM have been contradictory. Furthermore,
attempts to correlate proteinuria in several disease states with a decrease in
anionic sites of HSPG core protein have yielded conflicting results. When
antibodies to HSPG from the EHS tumor matrix [anti-(EHS) HSPG] and GBMs
[anti-(GBM) HSPG] were used together with immunogold to label renal tissues from 
puromycin aminonucleoside nephrotic (PAN) rats, immunolabeling results indicated 
that a portion of the protein core recognized by anti-(EHS) HSPG was
significantly reduced, while immunolabeling with anti-(GBM) HSPG was only
slightly reduced in early PAN. Anionic sites (stained with the cationic probe,
polyethyleneimine) within the lamina rara externa of the GBM remained unaltered
throughout the course of PAN.

PMID: 1750710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Genomics. 1991 Aug;10(4):1061-9.

Chromosomal assignment of retinoic acid receptor (RAR) genes in the human, mouse,
and rat genomes.

Mattei MG(1), Rivière M, Krust A, Ingvarsson S, Vennström B, Islam MQ, Levan G,
Kautner P, Zelent A, Chambon P, et al.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 242, Hôpital d'Enfants de la Timone, Centre de Génétique Médicale,
Marseille, France.

The human genes encoding the alpha and beta forms of the retinoic acid receptor
are known to be located on chromosomes 17 (band q21.1:RARA) and 3 (band
p24:RARB). By in situ hybridization, we have now localized the gene for retinoic 
acid receptor gamma, RARG, on chromosome 12, band q13. We also mapped the three
retinoic acid receptor genes in the mouse, by in situ hybridization, on
chromosomes 11, band D (Rar-a); 14, band A (Rar-b); and 15, band F (Rar-g),
respectively, and in the rat, using a panel of somatic cell hybrids that
segregate rat chromosomes, on chromosomes 10 (RARA), 15 (RARB), and 7 (RARG),
respectively. These assignments reveal a retention of tight linkage between RAR
and HOX gene clusters. They also establish or confirm and extend the following
homologies: (i) between human chromosome 17, mouse chromosome 11, and rat
chromosome 10 (RARA); (ii) between human chromosome 3, mouse chromosome 14, and
rat chromosome 15 (RARB); and (iii) between human chromosome 12, mouse chromosome
15, and rat chromosome 7 (RARG).

PMID: 1655630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Histochem Cytochem. 1991 Jul;39(7):965-72.

Detection of glomerular anionic sites in post-embedded ultra-thin sections using 
cationic colloidal gold.

Goode NP(1), Shires M, Crellin DM, Davison AM.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Research Unit St. James's University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom.

We detected glomerular anionic sites in fixed, LR Gold-embedded ultra-thin tissue
sections using cationic colloidal gold. Manual and computer-assisted quantitation
were compared, and the influence of pH and glycosaminoglycan-degrading enzymes on
site expression was examined. Both quantitation methods produced similar results.
Alteration of pH within a narrow range (pH 2.5-3.0) markedly affected the
staining pattern. At pH 2.5, epithelial and endothelial glycocalyx and regular
sites restricted to the lamina rara externa were stained. At pH 3.0 and above,
glycocalyx was unstained but intracellular and nuclear staining was present;
glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and mesangial matrix sites were abundant.
After chondroitinase ABC or hyaluronidase digestion, GBM staining was eliminated 
at pH 2.0 and reduced at pH 7.0 (p less than 0.001), suggesting that degraded
sites are associated with chondroitin sulfate or hyaluronic acid. By contrast,
prolonged heparitinase I digestion was ineffective at either pH. Digestion of
purified substrates revealed crossreactivity of heparitinase towards chondroitin 
sulfate and of chondroitinase towards hyaluronic acid. Since tissue sites were
reduced by chondroitinase but not heparitinase, we suggest that degradation is
due to hyaluronidase activity of chondroitinase and the anionic sites are
associated with hyaluronic acid. However, the influence of pH indicates that
lamina rara externa sites are structurally distinct from other GBM anionic sites.

PMID: 1907627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1991 Jun;32(7):1986-95.

Distribution of glycoconjugates in the human retinal internal limiting membrane.

Russell SR(1), Shepherd JD, Hageman GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, St. Louis University School of Medicine, Bethesda
Eye Institute, MO 63110.

The internal limiting membrane (ILM), or basal lamina, of the neural retina is
located between the end feet of retinal Müller cells and the vitreous cortex.
Recent studies of ILM substructure and histochemistry suggest that the ILM lamina
rara externa, a region of the ILM likely to mediate vitreoretinal adhesion, is
rich in noncollagen glycoconjugates. To characterize the spatial distribution and
temporal expression of ILM glycoconjugates further, fetal and adult human retinas
were examined using lectin histochemistry. Eyes from early fetal (13-15 weeks of 
gestation), midfetal (17-20 weeks of gestation), late fetal (23-26 weeks of
gestation), full-term (38-41 weeks of gestation), early adult (17-20 yr of age), 
and late adult (57-84 yr of age) stages were examined. Although a number of
significant observations pertaining to the distribution and temporal expression
of ILM-associated glycoconjugates are described, two may have a significant
relationship to vitreoretinal adhesion. In contrast to laminin and fibronectin,
which are detectable throughout the retinal ILM at both young and older
adulthood, erythrina cristagalii (ECA), a lectin with high binding affinity for
galactose beta (1,3) N-acetyl-glucosamine, binds strongly to the ILM of young
eyes but does not bind to the ILM of eyes from older donors. In addition,
dolichos bifloris (DBA), a lectin with high binding affinity for
N-acetylgalactosamine, does not bind to the ILM at early fetal stages, but binds 
at the midfetal stage, a time which corresponds with the onset of tertiary
vitreous elaboration. More significantly, the DBA-binding glycoconjugate is
neural retina ILM specific; it is not present in the basal lamina of the ciliary 
epithelium. Based on the known oligosaccharide composition of nonocular forms of 
human laminin, fibronectin, and collagen type I, and on the distribution of these
molecules in the basal laminas of both the retina and ciliary epithelium, the
authors conclude that the molecule bound by DBA has not been identified
previously as a component of the ILM. Further characterization of ILM-associated 
molecules will be important to understand vitreoretinal adhesion and clinical
disorders where adhesion is anomalous.

PMID: 2055693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Hosp Pract (Off Ed). 1991 May 15;26(5):9-10.

Max Samter--rara avis.

Bukantz SC.

PMID: 2030121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Kidney Int. 1991 Apr;39(4):659-64.

Ultrastructure of glomerular basement membrane by quick-freeze and deep-etch
methods.

Takami H(1), Naramoto A, Shigematsu H, Ohno S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto,
Japan.

The glomerular basement membrane of rat kidneys were three-dimensionally observed
by quick-freeze and deep-etch replica methods at high resolution. The middle
layer (lamina densa) was composed of 6 to 10 nm fibrils which formed a meshwork
structure. The space between the fibrils had polygonal shape. The average long
dimension of the space between fibrils was 17 nm and the short one was 13 nm. At 
the outer layer (lamina rara externa), fibrils connected podocytes
perpendicularly with the meshwork of the middle layer. At the inner layer (lamina
rara interna), similar perpendicular fibrils also connected endothelial cells
with the meshwork of the middle layer. This is the first report to visualize the 
three-dimensional meshwork structure of the middle layer (the lamina densa) in
situ. The function of anchoring podocytes to the lamina densa was suggested in
the perpendicularly arranged fibrils of the outer layer. The quick-freeze and
deep-etch method is useful in analyzing filamentous ultrastructure in glomeruli, 
and will be applied to clarifying pathological ultrastructure in kidney diseases.

PMID: 2051723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Leukemia. 1991 Apr;5(4):288-92.

The retinoic acid alpha receptor gene is frequently disrupted in its 5' part in
Chinese patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Chen Z(1), Chen SJ, Tong JH, Zhu YJ, Huang ME, Wang WC, Wu Y, Sun GL, Wang ZY,
Larsen CJ, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shanghai Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Second Medical
University, China.

The t(15;17)(q22;q11-q21) translocation, a hallmark for acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL), has recently been shown to disrupt the retinoic acid-alpha
receptor (RARA) gene localized on band 17q21. Leukemic cell DNAs from 16 Chinese 
patients with APL were analysed by Southern blot hybridization with probes
covering the 5' and the 3' parts of the gene. In ten patients, the breakpoints
were concentrated within a 5.5 kb EcoRI fragment containing part of intron 1,
whereas no rearrangement was detected in the six remaining patients. Genomic
amplification of the RARA gene was observed in one case. When RNA was available
(six patients), abnormal-sized RARA gene transcripts were observed.
Interestingly, no rearranged transcript was found in cells from a patient during 
a 6-day treatment with all-trans retinoic acid, while bone marrow cells still
possessed the translocation.

PMID: 1851240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Nihon Jinzo Gakkai Shi. 1991 Jan;33(1):9-16.

Decreased anionic sites in different portions of the basement membrane in
aminonucleoside nephrosis.

Wada N(1), Ueda Y, Ono H, Iidaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Pathology, Dokkyo University School of Medicine, Tochigi,
Japan.

We induced aminonucleoside (AN) nephrosis in male Sprague-Dawley rats and
evaluated the decreases in negative charge in the peripheral and proximal
portions of the loop basement membrane and the basement membrane in the
paramesangial area. Following intravenous injection of polyethyleneimine (PEI),
the number of PEI granules per 0.1 micron 2 of the basement membrane, and those
per 1 micron length of the lamina rara externa (LRE) and lamina rara interna
(LRI) were counted in each portion under an electron microscope and compared with
those in the control group. In the rats with AN nephrosis, the number of PEI
granules per 0.1 micron 2 was significantly decreased in each portion of the
basement membrane. However, the degree of decrease was similar among the 3
portions. The ratio of the numbers of granules in the proximal and paramesangial 
portions to that in the peripheral portion (peripheral:proximal:paramesangial)
was 1:0.89:0.64 in the control group and 1:0.88:0.62 in the AN nephrosis group.
Similar results were obtained for the numbers of PEI granules per 1 micron length
of the LRE and LRI. These findings suggest that the negative charge is decreased 
in the loop basement membrane and paramesangial basement membrane in AN
nephrosis, but the degree of decrease appears to be uniform.

PMID: 2038138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Histochemistry. 1991;96(2):107-13.

Three-dimensional ultrastructure of anionic sites of the glomerular basement
membrane by a quick-freezing and deep-etching method using a cationic tracer.

Yoshimura A(1), Ohno S, Nakano K, Oniki H, Inui K, Ideura T, Koshikawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Showa University, Fujigaoka Hospital,
Yokohama, Japan.

The ultrastructure of anionic sites in the lamina rara externa (LRE) of rat
glomerular basement membrane (GBM) was studied in three dimensions by a
quick-freezing and deep-etching method using polyethyleneimine (PEI) as a
cationic tracer. Results were compared with those obtained with conventional
ultrathin sections examined by transmission electron microscopy. Examination with
the quick-freezing and deep-etching method was done without (group 1) or with
(group 2) contrasting/fixation with a phosphotungstic acid and glutaraldehyde
mixture and post-fixation with osmium tetroxide, which were necessary for
visualization of PEI particles by conventional ultrathin sections. Using the
quick-freezing and deep-etching method without following contrasting/fixation and
post-fixation (group 1), many PEI particles were observed to decorate around
fibrils, which radiated perpendicularly from the lamina densa to connect with the
podocyte cell membrane. The arrangement of PEI particles was not as regular as
that previously reported using conventional ultrathin sections. In contrast, the 
tissue that was studied with quick-freezing and deep-etching followed by
contrasting/fixation and post-fixation (group 2) showed a shrunken appearance.
The arrangement of PEI particles was regular (about 20 particles/1000 nm of LRE) 
as that previously observed using conventional ultrathin sections. However, the
number of PEI particles on the LRE was markedly decreased and interruption of
decorated fibrils was prominent, as compared with group 1. Ultrastructural
examination using conventional ultrathin sections with contrasting/fixation and
post-fixation (group 3) demonstrated PEI particles on the LRE in reasonable
amounts (18-21 particles/1000 nm of LRE) with fairly regular interspacing (45-65 
nm) as reported previously.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1917567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol. 1991;418(3):185-92.

Three-dimensional ultrastructure of glomerular injury in serum sickness nephritis
using the quick-freezing and deep-etching method.

Naramoto A(1), Ohno S, Nakazawa K, Takami H, Itoh N, Shigematsu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto,
Japan.

The three-dimensional ultrastructure of the glomerulus in serum sickness
nephritis has been investigated by the quick-freezing and deep-etching method.
Compact granular immune deposits were localized in filamentous networks in the
lamina densa and mesangial matrices. These constitutional fibrils with diameters 
of 8-15 nm, were directly attached to the immune deposits. The filamentous
networks became markedly loosened around the deposits. In podocytes, reticular
microfilaments with positive decoration by myosin subfragment 1 (S1) were
increased in flattened foot processes and directly attached to the cell
membranes. Fine filaments with diameters of 4-7 nm were undecorated by S1 and
connected with actin filaments as cross-bridges. Intermediate filaments were also
increased in the cell bodies and primary processes of podocytes. Connecting
fibrils in lamina rara externa were partially disrupted. The immune deposits were
primarily detected in the networks of lamina densa and actually destroyed the
size barrier composed of filamentous networks. Moreover, the mesangial deposits
also disorganized mesangial networks to probably alter mesangial flow through the
matrices. Increased actin filaments in foot processes seemingly reinforced the
cell membranes and the connecting fibrils in lamina rara externa, which prevented
the initial detachment of podocytes from the basement membrane.

PMID: 1900964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Eur J Basic Appl Histochem. 1991;35(1):15-36.

The glomerular filtration barrier of the kidney in seven vertebrates classes.
Comparative morphological and histochemical observations.

Decker B(1), Reale E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology and Electron Microscopy, Hannover Medical School,
FRG.

In the mammalian kidney, the glomerular filtration barrier (GFB) is mostly
composed of endothelial and epithelial cells with the glomerular basement
membrane interposed. In lower vertebrates, extensive regions of the GFB consist
of the endothelial and epithelial cells, each lying on its own basement membrane.
These two basement membranes border the mesangium, which contains mesangial cells
(surrounded by its own discontinuous basement membrane), microfibrils and
collagens (cross-striated fibrils, anchoring fibrils, and 5 nm interfibrillar
filaments). Occurrence and extension of these mesangial components decrease from 
fish to mammals. Anionic binding sites associated with the different structures
of the GFB of all animal species have been demonstrated by using dyes such as
Alcian blue (with or without addition of electrolytes), Ruthenium red or
Safranine O. The surface coat of endothelial and epithelial cells, the laminae
rarae (interna and externa) of the glomerular basement membrane, the laminae rara
and diffusa (wherever distinct endothelial and epithelial basement membranes
occurred) as well as the collagen fibrils show particles (with polycationic dyes)
or filaments (with monocationic dyes). The mesangial microfibrils are usually
well preserved and intensively stained.

PMID: 1863663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Pediatriia. 1991;(7):43-7.

[Morphology of the kidneys in children with primary nephrotic syndrome (lipoid
nephrosis) before and after hormone therapy, studied by biopsy (light and
electron microscopy)].

[Article in Russian]

Val'kovich EI.

Light and electron microscopies were employed to examine biopsy specimens from 15
children suffering from the primary nephrotic syndrome with minimal alterations
in renal bodies. The studies were carried out at the height of the disease and in
the stage of a clinical remission after prednisolone therapy. The author
describes the development of ultrastructural changes in the glomerular filter,
primarily of those in podocytes, under the conditions of highly selective
proteinuria as well as during hormonal therapy that favours reparative processes 
and discontinuation of protein "leakage". It is assumed that the anionic layer of
the glycocalyx of podocyte pedicles and l. rara ext. heparan sulfates of the
basal membrane may play a role in the origin of selective proteinuria.

PMID: 1754324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol Incl Mol Pathol. 1991;60(3):165-71.

Masking of anionic sites by deposits in lamina rara externa in immune complex
nephritis in rats.

Duan HJ(1), Nakazawa K, Ishigame H, Itoh N, Shigematsu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto,
Japan.

Alterations in glomerular basement membrane (GBM) anionic sites associated with
immune deposits (ID) were observed using polyethyleneimine (PEI) as a cationic
probe in serum sickness nephritis induced by egg albumin (EA). The anionic sites 
were fewer in number than in other GBM segments and were irregular in
distribution in most, but not all, of the segments of the GBM with ID on the
epithelial side of the lamina densa (LD). The disappearance of anionic sites was 
obvious in areas where the internal aspects of the lamina rara externa (LRE) of
the GBM were occupied by ID, even if the ID were very small. In contrast, the
disappearance of anionic sites was not evident, even though no change in anionic 
sites was found in some areas, where the ID had departed from the internal
aspects of the LRE and a pale band was seen between the ID and the LD. Further,
PEI aggregates, showing localization of anionic sites, were seen within the low
density ID, but no PEI aggregates were seen within the high density ID. The
results suggest that: 1) whether or not ID induce the disappearance of anionic
sites is independent of the size of the ID, but is dependent on the density of
and the place occupied by the ID, and 2) the ID seem to induce the disappearance 
of anionic sites by masking rather than destroying them.

PMID: 1679267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Pathologica. 1990 Nov-Dec;82(1082):627-36.

[Transplant glomerulopathy. Anatomohistopathologic and ultrastructural aspects].

[Article in Italian]

Sacchi G(1), Fiorentino M, Rodolfi A, Benetti A, Cannella G.

Author information: 
(1)II Servizio di anatomia ed istologia patologica degli Spedali Civili di
Brescia.

14 cases of transplant glomerulopathy have been observed in 254 specimen taken
from 152 renal allografted patients. Lesions have been studied at light,
immunofluorescence and ultrastructural level. Following morphological parameters 
have been evaluated by semiquantitative method: focal mesangial sclerosis,
mesangial matrix, mesangial cellularity, glomerular basement membrane thickening,
double contours and crescents. Intermediate and advanced stages prevailed with
the evidence of capillary aneurysms in 2 out 14 cases. Electron microscopy showed
thickening of the glomerular basement membrane with finely lamellar and electron 
lucent thickening of the lamina rara interna. Transplant glomerulopathy lesions
need differential diagnosis with thrombotic microangiopathy and can be considered
equivalent of chronic vascular rejection.

PMID: 2094835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Rinsho Hoshasen. 1990 Oct;35(11):1455-7.

[A case of tuberculous arthritis of shoulder].

[Article in Japanese]

Toyoda M(1), Harasawa A, Kohno A, Shigeta A, Shimoide M, Hijikata H, Tagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Tokyo Women's Medical College.

A rara case of tuberculous arthritis of right shoulder was reported. Plain X ray 
and CT showed bone destruction in humerus and glenoid process and soft tissue
swelling with calcification was also demonstrated. T2 weighted images showed
extension of abscess clearly. And extension to bone marrow was showed on CT and
T1 weighted MR images.

PMID: 2277433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Arch Histol Cytol. 1990 Oct;53(4):405-11.

Localization of pyroantimonate-precipitable calcium in the endolymphatic sac of
the tree frog, Hyla arborea japonica.

Kawamata S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical University, Japan.

The pyroantimonate technique and a new demineralization method were employed to
visualize pyroantimonate-precipitable calcium in the endolymphatic sac of the
tree frog. The precipitate was determined to contain calcium (Ca) by EGTA
extraction and X-ray microanalysis. The precipitate was mainly localized around
calcium carbonate (CaCO3) crystals when frogs were not loaded with calcium
chloride (CaCl2). When crystalline growth was accelerated by loading with CaCl2, 
the precipitate increased in amount, especially around the crystals and in the
basement membrane (lamina rara and reticular lamina). Various degrees of
precipitation were found in epithelial cells; however, neither epithelial
granules nor mitochondria seemed to have a significant amount of precipitate.
This study demonstrates that Ca ion accumulates around those crystals where a
dense material is located. The dense material probably has an affinity for the Ca
ion, and plays an important role in crystal formation. However, the transport
pathway for the Ca ion into the endolymphatic lumen is still obscure.

PMID: 2125230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Science. 1990 Sep 28;249(4976):1577-80.

Molecular analysis of acute promyelocytic leukemia breakpoint cluster region on
chromosome 17.

Borrow J(1), Goddard AD, Sheer D, Solomon E.

Author information: 
(1)Solomon, Somatic Cell Genetics Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund,
London, United Kingdom.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL; FAB M3) is characterized by a predominance of 
malignant promyelocytes that carry a reciprocal translocation between the long
arms of chromosomes 15 and 17, t(15;17) (q22;q11.2-q12). This translocation has
become diagnostic for APL, as it is present in almost 100 percent of cases. A Not
I linking clone was used to detect this translocation initially on pulsed-field
gel electrophoresis and subsequently with conventional Southern (DNA) analysis.
The breakpoints in ten APL cases examined were shown to cluster in a 12-kb region
of chromosome 17, containing two CpG-rich islands. The region is the first intron
of the retinoic acid receptor alpha gene (RARA).

PMID: 2218500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Pathol Res Pract. 1990 Aug;186(4):491-506.

Experimental ablation nephropathy. Fine structure, morphometry, cell membrane
epitopes, glomerular polyanion and effect of subsequent transplantation.

Rossmann P(1), Ríha I, Matousovic K, Bohdanecká M, Bukovský A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, Prague.

The subtotal (5/6) nephrectomy performed in 23 adult female rats induced severe
hypertrophy of residual parenchyma with interstitial fibrosis, tubular
dilatation, and focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSG). This ablation
nephropathy (AbN) caused proteinuria, progressive renal failure, and
hypertension. The extent of FSG was assessed by semiquantitative scoring. The
ultrastructure revealed widespread foot process fusion, many dense cytoplasmic
inclusions in podocytes, and degenerative changes or disruption of mesangium with
glomerular "microcysts". Numerous granular deposits of rat Ig were seen in the
glomeruli but a short praeterminal i.v. load by heat-aggregated human Ig did not 
alter the morphology of AbN and produced discrete and inconstant glomerular
deposits. Similarly an i.v. injection of protamine and heparin generated
protamine-heparin complexes seen in various layers of glomerular capillary wall, 
similar to those found previously in normal rats. AbN displayed a partial
irregular depletion of polyanion sites reactive with polyethylenimine in lamina
rara externa. A significant increase in both glomerular and interstitial Ia+
cells and a marked predominance of W3/25+ cells in the interstitial infiltrates
were documented by immunohistochemistry in the remnant kidneys. Both AbN and FSG 
could be largely corrected (or prevented?) by subsequent syngeneic renal
transplantation (TPL; 6 animals). On the other hand a severe AbN was found in two
post-ablation residues after unsuccessful TPL with graft necrosis or
sclerosis.--AbN has some analogies to various chronic human nephropathies (e.g.
FSG) and may explain their progression to the terminal failure. Degenerative and 
finally destructive mesangial lesion seems to be of prime importance in AbN.

PMID: 1701048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Clin Nephrol. 1990 Jul;34(1):9-16.

Portions of basement membrane with decreased negative charge in various
glomerulonephritis.

Wada N(1), Ueda Y, Iidaka K, Inage Z, Kikkawa Y, Kitagawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dokkyo University School of Medicine, Tochigi, Japan.

Comment in
    Clin Nephrol. 1991 Apr;35(4):183-4.

The decrease in negative charge was evaluated in different portions of the
basement membrane as well as the lamina rara externa (LRE) and lamina rara
interna (LRI). The subjects were nine patients [2 patients with focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis (FGS), 2 with membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN),
3 with IgA nephropathy, and 2 with Henoch-Schoenlein purpura nephritis (HSPN)]
and 2 patients with minor glomerular abnormalities and 1 with tubulo-interstitial
nephritis (TIN) as controls. Polyethyleneimine (PEI) was used as a cationic
probe. The basement membrane was divided into the peripheral portion (loop
basement membrane 7 microns or more from the anchor portion), proximal portion
(within 3 microns of the anchor portion), and the paramesangial portion in the
paramesangial basement membrane. In each portion, PEI granules per 1 micron of
the LRE and LRI were counted. Anionic sites were decreased in the patients with
FGS and MPGN, but the damage pattern differed between the two diseases. In the
patients with FGS, the decrease in anionic sites was most marked in the
peripheral portion with an even greater decrease in the LRI. In the patients with
MPGN, the decrease was uniform among the portions. On the other hand, no
significant difference was observed in any portion between the patients with IgA 
nephropathy or HSPN and the controls. The portions with decreased negative charge
varied among various glomerular diseases, suggesting different developmental
mechanisms.

PMID: 2387105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Nihon Jinzo Gakkai Shi. 1990 Jul;32(7):767-75.

[Effects of human Cu, Zn-superoxide dismutase in aminonucleoside
nephrosis--evaluation of the morphology and glomerular basement membrane anionic 
charge sites].

[Article in Japanese]

Higuchi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Toyama Medical and
Pharmaceutical University, Japan.

It was examined whether superoxide dismutase (SOD) had protective effects in
puromycin aminonucleoside nephrosis (PAN). Nephrotic rats were induced by a
single intraperitoneal injection of puromycin aminonucleoside (PA, 60 mg/kg).
Subcutaneous administration of SOD (30 mg/kg) was started the day before PA
injection and continued every 24 hours. Animals were sacrificed 10 days later to 
assess the morphology and glomerular basement membrane anionic charge sites
(CSs). GBM CSs were stained in vitro with polyethyleneimine (PEI) and studied by 
electron microscopic examination. The SOD-injected group had a significant
reduction of urinary protein excretion compared to the PA-treated group. Light
microscopy revealed that vast majority of glomeruli in PA-treated group had
segmental mesangial expansion and epithelial cell adhesions of the glomerular
tuft to Bowman's capsule. Contrasted to these changes in the PA group, glomeruli 
from SOD-treated group showed less severe morphologic changes. On electron
microscopy, the PA-treated rats exhibited marked glomerular epithelial loss of
foot processes, epithelial attenuation, cytoplasmic vacuolization and protein
reabsorption droplets. The SOD-treated animals demonstrated a lesser degree of
epithelial loss of foot processes with a few protein reabsorption droplets. There
was also a significant decrease in GBM lamina rara externa CSc stained with PEI
in PAN compared to the control. The SOD-treated rats had a significant increase
in GBM CSs compared to those of the PAN rats. SOD has protective effects in
urinary protein excretion, the morphology and GBM CSc in PAN, which indicate
indirect evidence that superoxide and/or its metabolites are responsible for
glomerular injury.

PMID: 2273594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi. 1990 Jul;65(4):377-83.

[Mechanism of reduction in proteinuria by cyclosporine A: effects on the
glomerular anionic sites].

[Article in Japanese]

Tanabe T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Hokkaido University School of
Medicine, Japan.

To consider the mechanism of reduction of proteinuria by cyclosporine A (CYA) in 
the patient with intractable nephrotic syndrome, the effect of CYA on proteinuria
and anionic sites (AS) of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) was studied in
puromycin aminonucleoside (PA) nephrotic rats. In addition the rats exogenously
given human recombinant interleukin-2 (hrIL-2) every day repeated the same
proteinuria were used. The PA nephrotic rats were made by single injection of PA 
150 mg/kg excrete of urinary protein as compared 10 mg/day of urinary protein in 
the controls. The increase of urinary protein in the PA rats was inhibited by
CYA10-20 mg/kg administrated orally from the day of PA injection for 15 days. To 
evaluate AS, the kidney were treated with a polyethyleneimine (PEI) staining
method and the deposits in the lamina rara externa (LRE) of the GBM were counted 
on the electron micrographs. On the 15th day, in the PA rats, AS decreased
greatly but were normal in the CYA-treated rats. On one hand, rats injected of hr
IL-2 2.5 X 10(5)U/rat intraperitoneally for 14 days showed slight proteinuria on 
the 14th day, and the proteinuria was also inhibited by oral administration of
CYA 25 mg/kg. As reduced in the rats treated with hrIL-2 as well as PA. The
findings indicate that the proteinuria in the PA nephrotic rats and rats treated 
with hrIL-2 might result from reduction of AS and that the improvement of
proteinuria in these rats by CYA might be due to the recovery of AS in the GBM.

PMID: 2227790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Am J Pathol. 1990 Jul;137(1):187-98.

Loss and rearrangement of glomerular basement membrane laminin during acute
nephrotoxic nephritis in the rat.

Leardkamolkarn V(1), Salant DJ, Abrahamson DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Alabama, Birmingham
35294.

Many earlier studies have shown that the intravenous injection into rats of sheep
antibodies against rat glomerular basement membrane (GBM) induces a rapid influx 
of neutrophils and proteinuria (nephrotoxic nephritis or NTN). The GBM antigens
recognized by nephrotoxic antibodies (NTAbs) have not been identified
conclusively. Our experiments presented here, however, showed that NTAbs did not 
significantly reduce binding of anti-laminin IgGs to laminin-coated enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) plates or to the GBM in vivo, indicating little
cross-reactivity between the NTAbs and laminin. To evaluate possible changes in
GBM architecture during acute stages of NTN, the ultrastructural distribution of 
laminin was determined by postfixation, postembedding immunogold labeling, and
compared between normal and nephritic rats. The density of immunoreactive GBM
laminin was significantly reduced in rats with acute NTN. In addition, conjugates
of anti-laminin IgG and horseradish peroxidase were intravenously injected into
rats that then received injections of NTAbs. Anti-laminin peroxidase conjugates
were also injected after administering NTAbs. In both cases, an overall decrease 
in anti-laminin peroxidase reaction product was observed as compared to normal
controls. The densest labeling was seen in the lamina rara interna, especially in
areas of endothelial cell detachment. Some immunoperoxidase reaction product was 
also bound to basal surfaces of detaching endothelial cells, demonstrating the
removal of at least some laminin from the GBM. A decrease in GBM binding of
intravenously injected anti-laminin IgG, both before and after injection of rats 
with NTAbs, was also confirmed by postembedding immunogold labeling. Furthermore,
morphometry showed that the GBM was significantly wider in nephritic rats than in
controls, indicating a redistribution of laminin over a greatly increased area.
These immunoultrastructural findings show, therefore, that GBM architecture is
altered in the early phase of NTN.

PMCID: PMC1877696
PMID: 2196815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Nippon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi. 1990 Apr;94(4):333-9.

[Experimental studies of retinal glial cell proliferation on retinal surface].

[Article in Japanese]

Kono T(1), Hurukawa H, Higashi M, Akiya S, Kohno T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Occupational and Environmental
Health, Japan.

Our previous reports described the formation processes of epiretinal membranes
composed of retinal glial cells in the experimental vitreous hemorrhage. This
report presents the pathological changes of retinal glial cells, inner limiting
membranes and vitreous body in the early stage of experimental vitreous
hemorrhage. Using an operating microscope, 0.3 ml of autologous whole blood was
injected through the pars plana into the vitreous cavity of albino rabbits. The
eyes were enucleated at 3, 7, 10, 14 and 28 days after injection. Three days
after injection, normal vitreous structure disappeared and vitreous fibers
condensed. Seven days after injection, red blood cells were found on the retinal 
surface. The inner limiting membrane, composed of lamina rara and lamina densa,
had a normal appearance. Where the red blood cell were present on the retinal
surface, the lamina rara of the inner limiting membrane became thin. Fourteen
days after injection, where glial cells showed upheaval, lamina rara disappeared 
and lamina densa became thin. Afterward, glial cells extruded their cytoplasmic
processes onto the retinal surface. Twenty-eight days after injection, the inner 
limiting membranes were normal in appearance except for the area of glial cells
penetrating the inner limiting membranes. The results suggested that, in vitreous
hemorrhage, glial cell proliferation onto the retinal surface is an active
reaction in order to engulf the debris of the red blood cells.

PMID: 2396585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Submicrosc Cytol Pathol. 1990 Jan;22(1):153-8.

Ultrastructural immunolocalization of laminin and fibronectin in human large
intestinal mucosa.

Malchiodi Albedi F(1), Cassano AM, Ciaralli F, Taruscio D, Giuliani A, Donelli G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Ultrastrutture, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italia.

The ultrastructural expression of laminin and fibronectin was studied in human
colonic mucosa with a pre-embedding immunoperoxidase technique. Both antigens
were present in epithelial basement membrane. The lamina densa was uniformly and 
homogeneously immunostained by both fibronectin and laminin, while the lamina
rara showed discrete, positive sites occasionally connecting the lamina densa
with the epithelial plasma membrane. In the lamina reticularis, fibronectin was
diffusely positive, while laminin showed a discontinuous positivity only in the
uppermost region in vicinity of the lamina densa. Collagen fibrils were regularly
decorated by fibronectin-positive material. Basement membranes in the capillary
wall showed a similar pattern of reactivity both with laminin and fibronectin.
These results point out that laminin as well as fibronectin are integral
components of intestinal mucosa basement membranes.

PMID: 2311099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 1990;69(3):259-64.

Primary melanoma of the cervix uteri, an avis rara? A review of the literature.

Vleugels MP(1), Brölmann HA, van Beek M.

Author information: 
(1)St Josephs Hospital, Eindhoven, The Netherlands.

A primary melanoma of the uterine cervix is presented. Diagnostic approaches and 
therapeutic procedures are discussed following a review of the literature.

PMID: 2220349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Lab Invest. 1989 Dec;61(6):650-60.

Glomerular epithelial detachment, not reduced charge density, correlates with
proteinuria in adriamycin and puromycin nephrosis.

Whiteside C(1), Prutis K, Cameron R, Thompson J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Canada.

To identify the structural change coincident with increased glomerular
permeability in both adriamycin (ADR) and puromycin-aminonucleoside (PAN)
nephrosis, we explored the temporal correlation between developing proteinuria,
the reduction in glomerular polyanions, and the detachment of epithelium from
glomerular basement membrane (GBM). Sprague-Dawley rats received a single
tail-vein injection of PAN (150 mg/kg), ADR (7.5 mg/kg) or saline.
Nephrotic-range proteinuria appeared between days 2 to 5 in the PAN-treated and
days 5 to 10 in the ADR-treated rats. The GBM heparan sulfate charge density and 
epithelial membrane sialic acid (SA) content were determined before, during and
after the rise in proteinuria. Polyethyleneimine was used to detect heparan
sulfate and the number staining of renal cortical slices was used to detect
heparin sulfate and the number of sites/microns GBM in the lamina rara externa
were counted on electron micrographs (magnification x60,000). Controls had a
regular distribution of polyethyleneimine 20.19 +/- 1.72 sites/microns (X + SD). 
In ADR rats, the polyethyleneimine density decreased by day 5, 18.61 +/- 1.79
sites/microns (p less than 0.05) which persisted to day 15, 17.38 +/- 1.27
sites/microns (p less than 0.02). PAN rats, by day 1, had significant reduction, 
14.94 +/- 1.47 sites/microns (p less than 0.05), which persisted to day 20. The
total membrane-bound SA content of isolated glomeruli was analyzed with a
modified Warren's method. The SA content in control glomeruli was 46.8 +/- 8.0
nmol/mg glomerular protein (X +/- SD). In ADR rats, there was significant
decrease in SA content to 84 +/- 3% of control (p less than 0.01) at day 15. In
PAN rats, by day 2, the SA content was decreased to 73 +/- 18% of control (p less
than 0.05). In both models, scanning and transmission electron microscopy
revealed epithelial foot process fusion, loss of slit diaphragms, and
vacuolization before increased proteinuria. Epithelial detachment from the GBM
and rupture of vacuoles occurred coincidently with rapid development of nephrotic
proteinuria in both models. In summary, reduced GBM heparan sulfate and
epithelial SA content do not correlate with the onset of altered glomerular
permeability, whereas epithelial detachment is coincident with the development of
massive proteinuria in both ADR and PAN nephrosis.

PMID: 2601299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Cell Biol. 1989 Dec;109(6 Pt 2):3477-91.

Selective immunoreactivities of kidney basement membranes to monoclonal
antibodies against laminin: localization of the end of the long arm and the short
arms to discrete microdomains.

Abrahamson DR(1), Irwin MH, St John PL, Perry EW, Accavitti MA, Heck LW, Couchman
JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Alabama, Birmingham
35294.

To examine the ultrastructural distribution of laminin within kidney basement
membranes, we prepared rat anti-mouse laminin mAbs to use in immunolocalization
experiments. Epitope domains for these mAbs were established by
immunoprecipitation, immunoblotting, affinity chromatography, and rotary shadow
EM. One mAb bound to the laminin A and B chains on blots and was located to a
site approximately 15 nm from the long arm-terminal globular domain as shown by
rotary shadowing. Conjugates of this long arm-specific mAb were coupled to
horseradish peroxidase (HRP) and intravenously injected into mice. Kidney
cortices were fixed for microscopy 3 h after injection. HRP reaction product was 
localized irregularly within the renal glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and
throughout mesangial matrices. In addition, this mAb bound in linear patterns
specifically to the laminae rarae of basement membranes of Bowman's capsule and
proximal tubule. This indicates the presence of the long arm immediately beneath 
epithelial cells in these sites. The laminae densae of these basement membranes
were negative by this protocol. In contrast, the lamina rara and densa of distal 
tubular basement membranes (TBM) were both heavily labeled with this mAb. A
different ultrastructural binding pattern was seen with eight other mAbs,
including two that mapped to different sites on the short arms by rotary
shadowing and five that blotted to a large pepsin-resistant laminin fragment
(P1). These latter mAbs bound weakly or not at all to GBM but all bound
throughout mesangial matrices. In contrast, discrete spots of HRP reaction
product were seen across all layers of Bowman's capsule BM and proximal TBM.
These same mAbs, however, bound densely across the full width of distal TBM. Our 
findings therefore show that separate strata of different basement membranes are 
variably immunoreactive to these laminin mAbs. The molecular orientation or
integration of laminin into the three dimensional BM meshwork therefore varies
with location. Alternatively, there may be a family of distinct laminin-like
molecules distributed within basement membranes.

PMCID: PMC2115970
PMID: 2480964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Wildl Dis. 1989 Oct;25(4):555-67.

Proposed field evaluation of a rabies recombinant vaccine for raccoons (Procyon
lotor): site selection, target species characteristics, and placebo baiting
trials.

Hanlon CL(1), Hayes DE, Hamir AN, Snyder DE, Jenkins S, Hable CP, Rupprecht CE.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104.

Prior to a limited field application of an orally-administered vaccinia-rabies
glycoprotein (V-RG) recombinant virus vaccine for wildlife, background data were 
obtained for the proposed site on Parramore Island, Virginia (USA). Mammalian
target and nontarget species, potentially at risk for exposure to vaccine were
inventoried. Placebo baiting trials with a fishmeal polymer bait resulted in high
bait disturbance (88 to 100%), primarily by raccoons (Procyon lotor), with
infrequent visitation and no evidence of bait consumption by deer (Odocoileus
virginianus), small mammals or avian species. Definitive bait acceptance rates by
raccoons (indicative of bait ingestion) were difficult to accurately determine
based exclusively on premolar and vibrissae samples collected antemortem from
live-trapped raccoons for tetracycline and rhodamine B biomarker analyses,
respectively. Bait acceptance rate was more accurately determined during a pilot 
baiting trial conducted on North Island, South Carolina, when mandibles
(postmortem samples) were examined for tetracycline incorporation. Parasitologic 
findings in raccoons on Parramore Island included Hepatozoan procyonis, Phagicola
angrense and Physaloptera rara and a variety of incidental microscopic lesions,
and provided baseline pathological data for comparison subsequent to V-RG vaccine
application. A population density estimate of one raccoon/2.7 ha was calculated
using mark-recapture data for comparison after vaccine deployment. Limited
reproductive data, including estimates of pregnancy rates by palpation, the
number of live kits/litter live-trapped with previously pregnant raccoons or
observed in the dens of radio-collared raccoons, was gathered to assess the
effect of proposed oral vaccination with V-RG vaccine. Home ranges were assessed 
by radio-telemetry of 15 raccoons; all radio-collared raccoons currently reside
on Parramore Island.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2810556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Acta Pathol Jpn. 1989 Sep;39(9):558-65.

Morphometric changes in glomerular anionic sites during aminonucleoside
nephrosis.

Washizawa K(1), Ishii K, Itoh N, Mori T, Akabane T, Shigematsu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto,
Japan.

Changes in glomerular anionic sites were examined morphometrically in nephrotic
rats receiving daily subcutaneous injections of puromycin aminonucleoside (PAN). 
The high-iron diamine-thiocarbohydrazide-silver proteinate method showed that
anionic sites composed of heparan sulfate proteoglycans formed a continuous band 
within the lamina rara externa of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) in
control rats. Only one day after the first injection of PAN, anionic site loss
was already detectable, preceding the morphological changes in the epithelial
cells. The number and size of the anionic sites decreased greatly between days 7 
and 10, when urinary protein excretion began to appear. The number of anionic
sites in the paramesangial regions (epithelial side of the mesangium) was
slightly more reduced than that in the capillary walls. These results suggested
that PAN directly injured the glomerular anionic sites and increased the
permeability of the glomerulus to macromolecules. However, there was no complete 
correlation between the number of lost anionic sites and the level of urinary
protein excretion. Thus protein excretion into the urinary space may be related
not only to the loss of subepithelial anionic sites but also to dysfunction of
the protein absorption mechanism in epithelial cells due to excessive permeation 
of macromolecules through the GBM.

PMID: 2596296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Nihon Jinzo Gakkai Shi. 1989 Sep;31(9):913-8.

[Studies on the mechanism of glomerular localization of immune complexes (2).
Localization of non-dissociable immune complexes on the subepithelial side of the
glomerular basement membrane].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamaguchi N, Koyama A, Kobayashi M, Narita M.

In order to investigate whether preformed (circulating) immune complexes (IC) can
localize in the subepithelial side of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM),
non-dissociable covalently cross-linked IC (cov. IC) composed of native ferritin 
(NF) and anti NF antibody (aNFab) were preformed in a 2 step reaction using the
bifunctional reagent, toluene-2,4-diisocyanate (TDI). Molecular weight of cov. IC
was about 58 x 10(4) dalton, which suggests that the cov. IC was composed of
Ag1Ab1 lattices. The GBM of mice given cov. IC intravenously showed that
deposition of cov. IC was not only in the lamina rara interna but also, with
time, in the lamina densa and lamina rara externa. The size of cov. IC and the
distribution in the GBM described above were similar to those we studied
previously using preformed dissociable NF and aNFab complexes in a 40-fold
antigen great excess. From these results, we concluded that preformed immune
complex in vitro can pass through the lamina densa as intact IC to give rise to
the subepithelial area without dissociation or reformation. That is, the
subepithelial IC deposits arise from the trapping of small-sized IC derived from 
the circulation.

PMID: 2585832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Nihon Jinzo Gakkai Shi. 1989 Sep;31(9):905-12.

[Studies on the mechanism of glomerular localization of immune complexes (1).
Localization of preformed native ferritin immune complexes on the glomerular
basement membrane in passive serum sickness nephritis of mice].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamaguchi N, Koyama A, Kobayashi M, Narita M.

Immune complex deposits found on the subepithelial side of the glomerular
basement membrane (GBM) are characteristic of membranous glomerulonephritis. In
order to clarify the mechanism of subepithelial immune complex deposition, we
investigated the manner of localization of preformed immune complexes (IC)
composed of native ferritin (NF) and anti NF antibody (aNFab) in a 40-fold
antigen great excess using the system of passive serum sickness nephritis of
mice. The following results were obtained. (1) The ferritin particles in the GBM 
of animals given NF alone, as controls, were mainly restricted to the lamina rara
interna (LRI) with very few penetrating the entire depth of the GBM. (2) In
animals given the IC, greater numbers of ferritin particles were seen, in
comparison with the control animals, not only in the lamina densa (LD) but also
in the lamina rara externa (LRE). (3) Immunoelectron microscopy (IEM)
demonstrated that each NF particle was accompanied by aNFab, which was found to
be peroxidase positive material, throughout the GBM. (4) On the grounds that ICs 
were prepared in Ag great excess, it is suggested that ICs seen in the GBM are
composed of a low avidity antibody with a low Ag/Ab ratio, probably Ag1Ab1. From 
these results, it is suggested that circulating ICs are necessary to give rise to
IC deposition on the GBM and that NF and aNFab exist together as ICs throughout
the GBM. We concluded that subepithelial IC deposits arise from the circulation, 
and that after GBM trapping, circulating small-sized IC can pass through the LD
to reach the subepithelial side of GBM.

PMID: 2585831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Okajimas Folia Anat Jpn. 1989 Aug;66(2-3):133-43.

Migration of simian virus 40 from the vascular system into the glomerular
mesangial region.

Nishimura T, Kawai N, Ichihara I.

The behavior of simian virus 40 (SV40) injected into the vascular system was
investigated in the rat glomerulus. The kidney was perfused via the abdominal
aorta with a serum-free culture medium for 5 min, with PBS solution containing
SV40 and then with the same medium for 15 min at 37 degrees C. In the glomeruli, 
SV40 particles were detected in the lumen of the capillaries, fenestrations of
endothelial cells and lamina rara interna of the glomerular basement membrane.
They were also found in the mesangial matrix and mesangial cells. Invaginations
of their membrane were observed on several surface areas where SV40 particles
were localized close to the surface. Similarly, when the particles were injected 
into the tail vein, they were detected in the lamina rara interna, the mesangial 
matrix, and in vacuoles of mesangial cells at 2 h after the injection. These
results indicate that SV40 particles migrate from the vascular system into the
mesangial matrix, and are then endocytosed in vivo by mesangial cells.

PMID: 2554229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Clin Sci (Lond). 1989 Jul;77(1):43-8.

Increase in proteinuria and reduction in number of anionic sites on the
glomerular basement membrane in rabbits by infusion of human nephrotic plasma in 
vivo.

Wilkinson AH(1), Gillespie C, Hartley B, Williams DG.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Unit, United Medical School, Guy's Hospital, London.

1. Intraortic suprarenal infusion in vivo of New Zealand White rabbits with
plasma from patients with the nephrotic syndrome reduced the number of anionic
sites labelled by the cationic polymer polyethyleneimine in the lamina rara
iterna to 14.0 +/- 2.7 per 1000 nm of lamina rara interna (mean +/- SD) compared 
with 18.7 +/- 2.1 (P less than 0.005) after infusion of plasma from normal
subjects. 2. Proteinuria increased in all nine animals infused with nephrotic
plasma and in two of seven infused with control plasma (P less than 0.01). The
mean increase in proteinuria in the animals infused with nephrotic plasma was 246
mg/l (P less than 0.05), whereas in those infused with control plasma there was
no increase. 3. We conclude that nephrotic plasma contains a factor(s) capable of
neutralizing the charge of these anionic sites and concomitantly increasing
proteinuria.

PMID: 2758761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Lab Invest. 1989 Apr;60(4):492-8.

Sequential localization of antibody to multiple regions of the glomerular
capillary wall in passive Heymann nephritis.

Rydel JJ(1), Schwartz MM, Singh AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rush Medical College, Chicago, Illinois.

Passive Heymann nephritis was produced in rats by injection of the multispecific 
anti-Fx1A antibody. At time points 1 hour, 1 day, 2 days, 3 days, and 4 days
groups of rats were sacrificed and their kidneys fixed by retrograde perfusion
with paraformaldehyde lysine periodate. The antibody was visualized by direct
immunofluorescence and by 125I-Protein-A electron microscopic autoradiography.
Localization of the antibody in the lamina rara interna, lamina densa, lamina
rara externa and the glomerular epithelial cell was determined by electron
microscopic autoradiography according to the method of Saltpeter, Fertuck, and
Saltpeter (Saltpeter MM, Fertuck MC, Saltpeter EE: J Cell Biol 72:161, 1977). At 
least 100 grains/kidney were analyzed. At one hour the antibody was localized in 
a linear, discontinuous pattern by immunofluorescent microscopy.
Ultrastructurally, the antibody was present in all regions of the capillary wall 
although predominantly in the lamina rara interna. At later time points the
immunofluorescence staining changed to the typical granular pattern with majority
of the grains localizing to the lamina rara externa and the cell body of the
glomerular epithelial cell. The importance of these observations is several-fold.
(a) It suggests the involvement of multiple antigens in the pathogenesis of
Heymann nephritis. (b) The initial reaction to the lamina rara interna may be
potentiating the eventual formation of deposits in the lamina rara externa by
locally permeabilizing the capillary wall and allowing passage to other
antibodies. (c) The immune complexes formed at the various sites in the capillary
may be getting shed and trapped in the lamina rara externa resulting in
coalescence and genesis of the nephritogenic electron-dense deposits.

PMID: 2651800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Rinsho Hoshasen. 1989 Mar;34(3):387-9.

[Retrograde gonadal venography in patient with bilateral varicocele; a rare
venous return via Santorini's plexus].

[Article in Japanese]

Yasumoto R, Asakawa M, Tanaka S, Tanaka Y, Tsuji K, Kawabe T, Inoue M.

A 12-year-old boy was referred to our clinic because of microscopic hematuria. At
out patient department, bilateral varicocele was found, but testes were within
normal limit. Urinalysis showed microscopic hematuria, but other laboratory data 
were normal. Excretion urography was normal. Retrograde gonadal venogram showed a
rara venous return via Santorini's plexus and lumbar veins. After
varicocelectomy, urinalysis improved. It seemed that this condition was a new
spermatic vein syndrome.

PMID: 2739092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Mod Pathol. 1989 Mar;2(2):117-24.

Anionic sites in the human kidney: ex vivo perfusion studies.

Mahan JD(1), Sisson-Ross SS, Vernier RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis.

Heparan sulfate-proteoglycan (HS-PG) anionic sites located in the glomerular
basement membrane (GBM) are thought to contribute to glomerular permselectivity
in man. The number and distribution of HS-PG anionic sites in the GBM and
mesangial matrix of seven normal human kidneys and three kidneys from children
with congenital nephrotic syndrome (CNS) were evaluated by ex vivo perfusion of
polyethyleneimine (PEI; Mr 40,000 to 60,000). In the normal kidneys lamina rara
externa (LRE) anionic sites (21.8 +/- 2.4 per 1000-nm actual GBM length) were
well labeled and similar to those obtained by immersion staining of fixed tissue 
with Mr 1200 PEI. Lamina rara interna (LRI) anionic site number (22.0 +/- 2.6 per
1000-nm GBM) and appearance were better demonstrated by PEI perfusion than by the
immersion technique. PEI perfusion also demonstrated regularly arranged (60 to
120 nm apart) mesangial matrix anionic sites (20- to 30-nm diameter) at 4.09 +/- 
0.59 x 10(3) sites per nm2 matrix. PEI perfusion of three kidneys from children
with CNS demonstrated decreased (16.3 +/- 1.9 per 1000-nm GBM) LRE anionic sites 
and normal LRI anionic sites (22.0 +/- 3.5 per 1000-nm GBM). Mesangial volume was
increased, and mesangial anionic sites were less frequent (3.24 +/- 0.42 x 10(3) 
per nm2 matrix) and irregular in size in the children with CNS.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2726724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Clin Nephrol. 1989 Feb;31(2):96-102.

Ultrastructural alterations of glomerular anionic sites in IgA nephropathy.

Okada K(1), Kawakami K, Yano I, Funai M, Kagami S, Kuroda Y, Oite T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Tokushima, Japan.

The ultrastructural alterations of glomerular anionic sites were studied in
biopsy specimens from 34 patients with IgA nephropathy using polyethyleneimine
(PEI). Prominent common findings in the glomeruli of the patients were few PEI
particles in electron dense deposits in the mesangial and subepithelial area and 
marked reduction in glomerular anionic sites covered with deposits. The anionic
sites of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and epithelial cell surface coat 
(ESC) appeared unaltered in the patients with hematuria and/or mild proteinuria. 
But in patients with proteinuria in the nephrotic range, focally discrete loss of
anionic sites in the lamina rara externa (LRE) was seen and the number of anionic
sites of the ESC were decreased with retraction of the foot processes. The
anionic sites of the lamina rara interna showed much less change in these
patients. Subepithelial deposits were often seen concomitantly with focal loss of
anionic sites in the LRE at the site of the deposits, but subendothelial deposits
had little influence on the anionic sites of the neighboring GBM. The anionic
sites of GBM that showed focal thinning with small GBM projections were
appreciably decreased in number, but those in split GBM were not decreased. These
results suggest that either loss of the negative charge on the glomerular
capillary wall associated with subepithelial immune deposition or morphological
changes of the GBM contribute to the progression of proteinuria in IgA
nephropathy.

PMID: 2920473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Nihon Jinzo Gakkai Shi. 1989 Feb;31(2):135-43.

Glomerular injury induced by antibodies against heparan sulfate proteoglycan
(HSPG) derived from PYS 2 cells.

Yoshida F, Matsuo S, Hiramatsu T, Okura T, Yuzawa Y, Watanabe Y, Sakamoto N,
Matsuo S.

Kidneys of Balb/c mice intravenously injected with rabbit antibodies to heparan
sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) derived from PYS-2 cells were studied for 14 weeks.
Antibodies were found to bind to the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) as early 
as 15 min after the injection. Binding of antibodies was observed over the whole 
thickness of the GBM. The lamina rara interna and foot process base appeared to
be more intensely stained. This pattern did not change throughout the
experiments. Mild inflammatory changes (infiltration of polymorphonuclear cells
and swelling of the glomerular endothelium) were seen at the initial stage
(approximately 1 day), and mesangial expansion followed (1-4 weeks). In mice pre-
and booster-immunized with normal rabbit IgG, a moderate autologous response was 
observed by immunofluorescence microscopy, but no significant inflammatory
changes were noted. At the late stage (6 weeks approximately), irregular GBM
thickening was observed. The thickening was due mainly to expansion of the lamina
rara externa. These findings suggest that the anti-HSPG antibodies caused mild
glomerulonephritis at the initial stage, and later caused thickening of the GBM
possibly by disturbing the assembly, production and degradation of GBM
components.

PMID: 2525633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Nihon Jinzo Gakkai Shi. 1989 Feb;31(2):125-34.

Heparan sulfate proteoglycan of murine glomerular basement membrane: relationship
between localization of the core protein and localization of fixed negative
charges.

Hiramatsu T, Matsuo S, Okura T, Yoshida F, Watanabe Y, Sakamoto N.

Antibodies to a 250,000 molecular weight heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) core
protein purified from PYS-2 cells were prepared in the rabbit. After absorption
with laminin, the anti-HSPG serum (AHSPGS) was specific for HSPG by enzyme-linked
immunoabsorbent assay (ELISA). Immunoelectron microscopy showed that AHSPGS
reacted with the mouse glomerular basement membrane (GBM) or, more precisely,
with three HSPG rich layers, i.e., (i) the lamina rara interna in a discrete or
interrupted-linear pattern, (ii) the interface between the GBM and the soles of
the foot processes, and (iii) the lamina rara externa in a finely discrete
pattern. The localization of HSPG in the GBM was very similar to that of the
fixed negative charges detected with polyethyleneimine (PEI). When mice were
treated with heparitinase, binding of PEI was seen only on the cell surface
including the foot process soles (ii) but not in the GBM (i and iii), while the
localization of HSPG core protein was unaltered. These results suggest that the
localization of the HSPG core protein was correlated with that of the fixed
negative charges in the GBM (i and iii). The foot process base (ii) seems to be a
complicated zone since the PEI binding in this area was less affected by
heparitinase treatment, while this area has been reported to have a lower sialic 
acid content than the foot process surface facing the urinary space.

PMID: 2525632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Adv Nephrol Necker Hosp. 1989;18:59-76.

Biochemistry of basement membranes.

Timpl R(1), Aumailley M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Connective Tissue Research, Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie,
Martinsried/Munich, Federal Republic of Germany.

Basement membranes are thin (20 to 300 nm) extracellular matrices with a
ubiquitous occurrence in the body. They consist mainly of collagenous and
noncollagenous glycoproteins, are formed early during embryonic development, and 
in mature tissues they compartmentalize various types of cells and tissue
structures. The close apposition to cells is the most remarkable feature of
basement membranes, which can either surround cells completely (muscle, fat,
nerve axons) or separate them from underlying stroma in a polarized fashion
(epithelium, endothelium). These cell contacts are mediated by cellular receptors
and specific matrix components and have profound effects on polarization,
differentiation, and proliferation of cells and on the control of their migratory
behavior. In addition, basement membranes represent barriers regulating
filtration of macromolecules and penetration by cells. The supramolecular
organization of basement membranes is still insufficiently known. In transmission
electron microscopy cross-sections show a two-layered morphology that includes an
electron dense (lamina densa) and an electron lucent (lamina rara) zone, the
latter being closer to the cells. Other specialized basement membranes such as
those in renal glomeruli appear more complex and contain two laminae rarae. Here,
presumably epithelial and invading endothelial cells each produce their own
basement membrane, which then fuse together to form the filtration units of the
glomerulus. Further structural and functional study of authentic basement
membranes has been limited because these membranes comprise only a small fraction
of tissues and most of their components are notoriously insoluble. Rodent tumors 
that produce large amounts of basement membrane material and the use of
recombinant DNA technology in the past decade have paved the way for a more
precise biochemical characterization of several basement membrane proteins. These
components include collagen type IV, the cell-binding protein laminin, several
proteoglycans, and other proteins. In the following pages we will briefly review 
the biochemical properties of the basement membranes and discuss their possible
functions and contributions to supramolecular structures. For more extensive
discussions, including certain biologic and pathologic aspects of basement
membrane function, we refer the reader to several recent reviews.

PMID: 2493724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Verh Dtsch Ges Pathol. 1989;73:13-23.

[Macromolecular basis of filtration and immune complex pathogenesis in the
glomerulus].

[Article in German]

Vogt A, Batsford S, Rohrbach R, Schmiedeke T, Stöckl F, Sugisaki Y.

Fractional clearance and ultrastructural studies produce results consistent with 
the idea that the glomerular filtration barrier is a heteroporous membrane. The
majority of the pores being small, excluding molecules like serum albumin and
larger moieties, while a low number of pores allow the passage of molecules as
big as dimeric ferritin, in very restricted quantities. Cationic macromolecules, 
of a size which should effectively exclude them from the filtration process,
readily gain access to all three layers of the GBM. Depending on charge (pI) and 
size they can in fact exhibit significant affinity for negatively charged
structures in both laminae rarae. In addition, polycations can mediate the
glomerular deposition of anionic macromolecules, for example DNA-fragments, by
diminishing charge repulsion. A prerequisite for the local formation of
glomerular immune complexes is that at least one of the reaction partners has an 
affinity for the GBM. Antigens bound to structures in the laminae rarae are
accessible for circulating antibody. Immune complexes formed with cationic
antigen in the lamina rara interna are transferred to the subepithelial region
with time. Antigen and antibody molecules can penetrate the lamina densa only in 
dissociated form. The persistence of glomerular immune complexes can be explained
by antigen-antibody lattice formation within the network of proteoglycan chains, 
followed by covalent binding between components of the complex and structures of 
the GBM.

PMID: 2482598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol Incl Mol Pathol. 1989;58(2):173-80.

Ultrastructural studies in passive in situ immune complex glomerulonephritis. A
rat model for membranous glomerulonephritis.

Sasaki M(1), Batsford S, Thaiss F, Oite T, Vogt A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Section, Red Cross Hospital, Osaka, Japan.

Morphologic studies were performed in a passive model of in situ immune complex
glomerulonephritis in rats. The formation and fate of subepithelial immune
complexes as well as the role of glomerular polyanion in the induction of disease
were examined. Unilateral in situ immune complex glomerulonephritis was induced
in rats by perfusion of cationised horse spleen ferritin (pI greater than 9.5)
(400 micrograms/rat) into the left kidney followed by systemic injection of 0.2
ml (= 400 micrograms precipitating antibody) of sheep anti-ferritin antiserum 2 h
later. This schedule induced glomerulonephritis with proteinuria (mean maximum
100 mg/24 h between the 5th and the 12th day). Rats were sacrificed at intervals 
between 1 h and 42 days after induction of glomerulonephritis, samples of renal
tissue were examined by light, immunofluorescence and electron microscopy
(including staining of anionic sites by polyethyleneimine). The lesion induced
closely resembled that of membranous glomerulonephritis in man as massive
subepithelial deposits were seen with very little cellular infiltration or
proliferation. The antigen (ferritin) deposits were initially located
subepithelially; from 2 weeks onwards intramembranous deposits in the thickened
basement membrane were present, the apparent translocation being due to excessive
newly synthesised basement membrane material which encloses the deposits. A loss 
of anionic sites in the lamina rara interna, lamina rara externa and on the
epithelial cell surface coat preceded the development of proteinuria.

PMID: 2482573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol Incl Mol Pathol. 1989;57(5):329-37.

Detection of cationic and non-cationic markers in the rat glomerulus by electron 
probe analysis.

Rossmann P(1), Ríha I, Starý V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, Praha-Krc.

Acidic glycans (glomerular polyanion substances) in the rat kidney were
visualized ultrastructurally by three cationic markers: colloidal iron, ruthenium
red, and polyethylenimine-phosphotungstic acid (PEI-PTA). Heavy metal atoms (Fe, 
Ru and W) were detected in ultrathin sections by energy-dispersive electron probe
microanalysis (EPMA). Characteristic peaks of the locally bound elements were
obtained in spectra derived from the dense structures seen by transmission
electron microscopy (TEM)--i.e. the glycocalyx of podocytes and/or the polyanion 
sites in the lamina rara externa of the glomerular basement membrane. Weaker
signals were emitted by some extraglomerular structures. This finding may reflect
a low concentration of glycans in structures lacking apparent density by TEM,
and/or incomplete specificity of the markers, partial dislocation of reactive
substances or the presence of an endogenous element (Fe). Experimental argyrosis 
was elicited by the peroral administration of silver nitrate. Dense Ag
precipitates were seen chiefly in the lamina densa and characteristic peaks of
silver were displayed in this site by EPMA, and was best demonstrated in
non-contrasted sections. A single i.v. injection of Ag proteinate failed to
produce glomerular pigmentation. The only dense granular product in tubular cells
yielded characteristic peaks of Fe (endogenous siderosomes) but EPMA excluded
detectable amounts of silver.

PMID: 2475968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Kidney Int. 1988 Dec;34(6):779-85.

Nonimmunological alterations of glomerular filtration by s-PAF in the rat kidney.

Schwertschlag US(1), Dennis VW, Tucker JA, Camussi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina.

Rat kidneys were isolated and perfused with a cell-free perfusion buffer
containing 4% albumin. Infusion of platelet activating factor (s-PAF) into the
isolated perfused kidney caused a dose-dependent fall in renal vascular
resistance (RVR): 12 +/- 6% at 10 nM s-PAF, 18 +/- 3% at 100 nM s-PAF and 20 +/- 
7% at 1 microM s-PAF. Glomerular filtration rate fell by 32 +/- 5% at 10 nM, 38
+/- 6% at 100 nM, and 52 +/- 10% at 1 microM. s-PAF (50 nM) increased urinary
protein excretion after 20 minutes. Because GFR fell to a greater extent than
RVR, possible changes in glomerular permeability after s-PAF treatment were
assessed morphologically using native ferritin. After s-PAF treatment (100 nM),
the number of ferritin particles/micron2 increased from 1.2 +/- 0.9 (control) to 
795 +/- 69 in the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and from 0.2 +/- 0.06
(control) to 98 +/- 29 in lamina rara externa (LRE). To quantitate changes in
fixed anionic charges, polyethylenimine (PEI) was quantitated morphologically in 
GBM. No significant change between s-PAF treated and untreated kidneys was seen. 
s-PAF did not alter the sialoglycoprotein pattern in the perfused kidney as
assessed by lysozyme staining. These results are in contrast to findings with
s-PAF in vivo where in addition to increased glomerular permeability, a reduction
of fixed anionic charges is seen.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 3210538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Kidney Int. 1988 Sep;34(3):333-45.

Determinants of immune complex-mediated glomerulonephritis.

Fries JW(1), Mendrick DL, Rennke HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

We have studied the influence of steric factors on the clinico-pathologic
expression of immune complex-mediated glomerular diseases, utilizing ferritin as 
an exogenous antigen. The tracer was planted in the left kidney either in the
subepithelial layer of the glomerular capillary wall or on the endothelium and
lamina rara interna. Subepithelial immune complex formation resulted in
non-inflammatory injury with heterologous and autologous proteinuric phases (115 
+/- 16 mg/24 hrs on day 2; 183 +/- 16 mg/24 hrs on day 9) lasting four to five
weeks. The glomerular filtration rate of the experimental left kidney was reduced
by 19% at day 3, and was increased by 20% at day 12 over right kidney values.
Immune complexes persisted for more than seven weeks in the lamina rara externa. 
In contrast, immune complex deposition on the endothelium and in the lamina rara 
interna led to acute transient anuria, with a 38% drop in glomerular filtration
rate at one hour, massive platelet accumulation, followed by a strong
inflammatory response. Proteinuria did not develop. Functional and structural
integrity was restored within 24 hours, with complete clearing of immune
deposits. We conclude that the distribution of exogenous antigens within the
capillary wall determines the structural and functional expression of
immune-mediated glomerular diseases.

PMID: 2971836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Am J Kidney Dis. 1988 Aug;12(2):138-46.

Regression of membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis type II (dense deposit
disease): observations in six children.

McEnery PT(1), McAdams AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH 45229.

Six children with membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis Type II (MPGN II-dense
deposit disease), who were followed an average of 14 years (3.5 to 22 years) and 
treated continuously with an alternate-day prednisone regimen, have been studied 
by successive renal biopsies over intervals of 2 to 14 years of disease. All have
shown significant reduction in mesangial proliferation and improvement of
capillary lumen patency. A change in position of the deposits, from the lamina
densa to the lamina rara interna, was demonstrated ultrastructurally in four of
the patients, accompanied by reduction in prevalence of deposit in three. This
loss of dense deposits, characterized as a process of "dropping off," was
complete in the free capillary walls of two of the patients.

PMID: 3400634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Submicrosc Cytol Pathol. 1988 Jul;20(3):549-56.

Ultrastructural localization of sulphate glycoconjugates in the human glomerular 
capillary wall using the high iron diamine method.

Barsotti P(1), Malchiodi Albedi F, Fabrizi E, Marinozzi V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biopatologia Umana, Università La Sapienza, Roma, Italia.

The distribution of fixed anionic sites within glomerular capillary walls has
been studied in man by applying two ultrastructural histochemical methods--the
high iron diamine and dialysed colloidal iron methods--to tissue chopper sections
and to isolated glomeruli obtained from surgical fragments of renal tissue. By
using the high iron diamine method we have been able to demonstrate that in man, 
too, there are sulphate (possibly heparan sulphate proteoglycan) sites
preferentially located in the lamina rara esterna of the basement membrane and in
the cell coat of the urinary surface of podocytes. Non-sulphate (high iron
diamine-negative, dialysed colloidal iron-positive) anionic sites have been
identified not only in the glycocalyx of the epithelial and endothelial cells but
also in the laminae rarae of the basement membranes, where they show a more
extensive distribution pattern than sulphate sites. The proposed methods seem
particularly suitable for the study of human renal tissue; they could, in fact,
provide useful information about the behaviour of the various anionic components 
of the glomerular capillary wall in pathological conditions.

PMID: 2972355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Cell Tissue Res. 1988 Jun;252(3):589-600.

Ultrastructure of the kidney of a South American caecilian, Typhlonectes
compressicaudus (Amphibia, Gymnophiona). I. Renal corpuscle, neck segment,
proximal tubule and intermediate segment.

Sakai T(1), Billo R, Nobiling R, Gorgas K, Kriz W.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomisches Institut, Universität Heidelberg, Federal Republic of Germany.

The ultrastructure of the renal corpuscle, the neck segment, the proximal tubule 
and the intermediate segment of the kidney of a South American caecilian,
Typhlonectes compressicaudus (Amphibia, Gymnophiona) was examined by means of
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and
freeze-fracture technique. The glomerular filter apparatus consists of the
podocyte epithelium, a distinct basement membrane, a subendothelial space and the
capillary endothelium. Emanating from the podocyte cell body, several long
primary processes encircle neighboring capillaries. The short slender foot
processes originating from the primary processes interdigitate with those from
other primary processes, thereby forming the meandering filtration slit. Thick
bundles of microfilaments are found in the primary processes, but absent in the
foot processes. The basement membrane consists of a lamina rara externa and a
rather thin lamina densa (50 nm thickness). The wide subendothelial space
contains abundant microfibrils, a few collagen fibrils and many thin processes of
mesangial cells. The endothelium is flat and fenestrated (compared to mammals
displaying relatively few fenestrations); some of the fenestrations are bridged
by a diaphragm. The glomerular mesangium is made up of the mesangial cells and a 
prominent mesangial matrix containing microfibrils and collagen fibrils. The
cells of the neck and intermediate segments display numerous cilia with their
microtubules arranged in the typical 9 + 2 pattern. The basal bodies of the cilia
are attached to thick filaments with a clear crossbanding pattern of 65 nm
periodicity. The proximal tubule is composed of cells typical for this segment
(PT cells) and light cells lacking a brush border (bald-headed cells). The PT
cells measure 10-25 micron in height and 15-30 micron in width and do not
interdigitate at their lateral borders with each other. Their basolateral cell
membrane is amplified by many folds projecting into lateral intercellular spaces 
and into basal recesses. The brush border is scarce and composed of loosely
arranged short microvilli.

PMID: 3396057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Ultrastruct Pathol. 1988 Mar-Apr;12(2):185-94.

An ultrastructural study of the membranoproliferative variant of transplant
glomerulopathy.

Zhang PF(1), Rao KV, Anderson WR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis.

In this study we analyzed the ultrastructural features of the
membranoproliferative variant of transplant glomerulopathy in 6 patients from a
group of 64 renal transplant recipients who had evidenced graft dysfunction and
histological diagnosis of chronic allograft rejection. The principle changes
observed by electron microscopy were thickening of glomerular basement membranes 
by polymorphous changes that included widening of the lamina rara interna by an
electron lucent material resembling plasma constituents, replication of lamina
densa-like material, and inclusion of microfilaments, membranous profiles, and
other cellular remnants. Proliferation of endothelial cells was a prominent
finding, suggesting that a reparative endothelial response to injury may be
significant to the pathogenesis of this form of transplant glomerulopathy.

PMID: 3284123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Pediatr. 1988 Feb;112(2):284-90.

Plasma infusion for hemolytic-uremic syndrome in children: results of a
multicenter controlled trial.

Rizzoni G(1), Claris-Appiani A, Edefonti A, Facchin P, Franchini F, Gusmano R,
Imbasciati E, Pavanello L, Perfumo F, Remuzzi G.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Department, University of Padova, Italy.

The results of a controlled trial to ascertain the usefulness of plasma infusion 
for the treatment of hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) are reported. Criteria for
admission were (1) observation within 8 days from first symptoms, (2) dialysis
treatment required, and (3) no special treatments and no more than 25 ml blood/kg
previously received. Children were subdivided according to age (less than or more
than 3 years) and then randomly assigned to treatment with plasma or symptomatic 
therapy. Thirty-two children ranging in age from 4 months to 6 years entered this
study; 17 received plasma (P+ group) and 15 only symptomatic therapy (P- group). 
The mean follow-up period was 16 months in both groups. Surgical renal biopsy was
performed 29 to 49 days after onset in 11 P+ and 11 P- children, and 33
histologic findings were semiquantitatively evaluated. No death occurred in
either group. No differences were found in blood pressure, proteinuria, or
hematuria at the end of the follow-up period; in no case were severe arteriolar
lesions found. There were no significant differences for the scores of the
individual histologic measurements; on electron microscopy, no vascular changes
were observed in seven children of the P+ group, whereas in five of seven of the 
P- group, thickening of the lamina rara interna and arteriolar damage were
present. The ability of plasma to stimulate prostacyclin (PGI2) production,
measured as its stable derivative 6-keto-PGF1 alpha, was within the normal range 
for all patients. In our patients with predominant glomerular involvement who
were treated in a very early phase of HUS, infusions of plasma did not
significantly influence the short- and medium-term clinical outcome and were not 
effective in severe HUS when given later in the course of the disease. A longer
follow-up is needed to ascertain whether the presence of endothelial damage,
demonstrated by electron microscopy in children who were not given plasma, is of 
clinical relevance.

PMID: 3276865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Ultrastruct Pathol. 1988 Jan-Feb;12(1):17-26.

Ultrastructural changes of glomerular basement membrane in IgA nephritis:
relationship to hematuria.

Taguchi T(1), von Bassewitz DB, Grundmann E, Takebayashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Gerhard-Domagk-Institut für Pathologie, Westfälischen Wilhelsm-Universität
Münster, Federal Republic of Germany.

Ultrastructural changes in the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) of 415 samples 
from 344 patients with IgA nephritis, were examined for potential relationship to
hematuria. The GBM showed various alteration: splitting, thinning, membranolysis 
with swelling of the lamina rara externa and interna, forming of small
projections, and rupture. These lesions were present in 48% of IgA nephritis and 
in 16% of the controls. In the IgA nephritis group, the patients with
hemispherical mesangial dense deposits had the highest rate (60%) of capillary
wall abnormalities. Such lesions were more frequent in patients biopsied during
severe hematuria (80%) than in those biopsied without hematuria (33%), (p less
than 0.01). It is assumed that the ultrastructural abnormalities of GBM may
contribute to the clinical evidence of severe hematuria.

PMID: 3354074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Wildl Dis. 1988 Jan;24(1):180-3.

Hematology, intestinal parasites, and selected disease antibodies from a
population of bobcats (Felis rufus) in central Arkansas.

Heidt GA(1), Rucker RA, Kennedy ML, Baeyens ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Arkansas, Little Rock 72204.

Eight bobcats with adjoining or overlapping home ranges were examined.
Hematological values were within previously reported ranges. Six bobcats
demonstrated antibody titers to Toxoplasma gondii. Isospora spp., Taenia
taeniaeformis, Spirometra mansoides, Physoloptera rara, Toxocara cati,
Strongyloides spp., Trichurus spp., Capillaria spp., and Ancyclostoma spp. were
found also in the animals examined. The mean number of parasite species per host 
was 4.1. All bobcats tested negative for serum antibodies to Rocky Mountain
spotted fever (Rickettsia rickettsii). Two bobcats had titers less than or equal 
to 1:20 for tularemia (Francisiella tularensis), and two were positive for
leptospirosis (Leptospira spp.).

PMID: 3352091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Cell Tissue Res. 1988 Jan;251(1):171-81.

Binding of intravenously injected antibodies against laminin to developing and
mature endocrine glands.

Leardkamolkarn V(1), Abrahamson DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Alabama at Birmingham
35294.

To determine whether circulating antibodies against laminin can bind in vivo to
basement membranes within endocrine glands, affinity-purified sheep or rabbit
anti-laminin IgG was intravenously injected into rats. One to five hours after
injection, anti-laminin IgG was bound to all basement membranes of adrenal and
anterior pituitary glands of mature as well as 2-day-old newborn rats as shown by
immunofluorescence microscopy. After the injection of anti-laminin conjugated
directly to horseradish peroxidase (HRP), HRP reaction product was also present
throughout adrenal and pituitary basement membranes in mature and immature glands
1-5 h post-injection. Ultrathin Lowicryl sections from rats that received
unconjugated rabbit anti-laminin IgG 1 h prior to fixation with paraformaldehyde 
were labeled directly with anti-rabbit IgG-colloidal gold. In these cases, gold
also bound specifically over the lamina densa and lamina rara. When adrenal or
pituitary glands from mature rats were examined by immunofluorescence 1 week
after the injection of sheep anti-laminin IgG, the patterns and amounts of bound 
sheep IgG were indistinguishable from those observed 1 h after injection. In
contrast, significantly less fluorescence was present in glands from 7-day-old
rat pups that had received anti-laminin IgG 5 days earlier. In addition, when
anti-laminin IgG-HRP was injected into newborns and glands were fixed 5 days
later, lengths of labeled endothelial and epithelial basement membranes were
often interspersed with unlabeled lengths in zones of cellular proliferation in
the outer adrenal cortex and throughout the pituitary gland. These results
indicated that unlabeled basement membranes in these regions were probably
assembled after the injection of anti-laminin IgG, which would also explain
diminished labeling of basement membranes in these animals. Despite the continued
presence of heterologous anti-laminin IgG within endocrine basement membranes,
however, rat IgG, rat C3, inflammatory cells, or histologic abnormalities were
observed in neither newborn nor adult glands under the conditions examined here. 
Sections from rats injected with control IgG or control IgG-HRP were entirely
negative by immunofluorescence, immunoperoxidase, and immunogold techniques. We
therefore conclude that (1) apparently large amounts of circulating anti-laminin 
IgG can bind to adrenal and pituitary basement membranes, and (2) at least some
of these basement membranes are assembled during development by progressive
splicing of newly synthesized matrix into that already present.

PMID: 3342435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 1988;245(5):266-72.

The basement membrane and associated structures in the murine endolymphatic sac.

Takumida M(1), Bagger-Sjöbäck D, Rask-Andersen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Karolinska Institute, Karolinska Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden.

The ultrastructure of the basement membrane of the murine endolymphatic sac was
studied under various experimental conditions in labyrinthectomized and
ethacrynic acid-treated animals and was compared with normal anatomy. The
basement membrane was clearly visualized after staining with ruthenium red or
dialyzed iron. The basement membrane of the murine sac consists of two different 
layers: the lamina rara and the lamina densa. It demarcates the border between
the epithelial cells and the subepithelial connective tissue. Our findings
suggest that the basement membrane acts as a physical support to the epithelium
in the endolymphatic sac. The basement membrane also shows a dynamic capacity to 
form a new basement membrane, with the result that the lateral intercellular
space between contiguous epithelial cells may be integrated with the
subepithelial space. This system is believed to act as a macromolecular and bulk 
water transport system. In the subepithelial space, collagen, reticular and
elastic fibrils are found having a close relationship to the basement membrane.
The elastic fibres are presumed to play a role in the pressure-regulating
mechanism in the endolymphatic sac.

PMID: 3245797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Kidney Int. 1987 Nov;32(5):691-9.

The enhancement of aminonucleoside nephrosis by the co-administration of
protamine.

Saito T(1), Sumithran E, Glasgow EF, Atkins RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Prince Henry's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.

An experimental model of focal segmental glomerular sclerosis (FSGS) was
developed in rats by the combined administration of puromycin-aminonucleoside
(AMNS) and protamine sulfate (PS). Male Sprague-Dawley rats, uninephrectomized
three weeks before, received daily injections of subcutaneous AMNS (1 mg/100 g
body wt) and intravenous PS (2 separated doses of 2.5 mg/100 g body wt) for four 
days. The series of injections were repeated another three times at 10 day
intervals. The animals were sacrificed on days 24, 52, and 80. They developed
nephrotic syndrome and finally renal failure. The time-course curve of creatinine
clearance dropped and showed significant difference (P less than 0.01) from that 
of each control group, such as, AMNS alone, PS alone or saline injected. Their
glomeruli showed changes of progressive FSGS. The ultrastructural studies in the 
initial stage revealed significant lack of particles of perfused ruthenium red on
the lamina rara externa and marked changes in epithelial cell cytoplasm.
Therefore, it is suggested that the administration of PS enhances the toxicity of
AMNS on the glomerulus and readily produces progressive FSGS in rats resulting in
the end-stage renal disease.

PMID: 3323599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Pathol. 1987 Oct;153(2):189-93.

Immune complex-induced defects in glomerular basement membrane charge can be
"repaired" despite continuing glomerular disease.

Furness PN(1), Turner DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospital, Nottingham, U.K.

There have been conflicting reports over whether or not glomerular immune complex
deposits cause proteinuria by neutralizing the glomerular basement membrane
anionic charge. We investigated whether the reported discrepancies could arise as
a result of repair of the charge layer, in the face of continuing antigen
deposition, and how rapidly this repair could be effected. We used a chronic
serum sickness model of glomerulonephritis which consistently produces a
nephrotic syndrome stable over 8 weeks. Charge distribution was demonstrated by
the polyethyleneimine (PEI) method. Subepithelial electron dense deposits were
associated with defects in the charge layer of the lamina rara externa at 2 and 4
weeks, but at 8 weeks many of the deposits had become surrounded by a new charge 
layer. This finding is of relevance to the interpretation of similar studies on
human material.

PMID: 2961858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Parasitol. 1987 Aug;73(4):762-8.

Helminths of the raccoon (Procyon lotor) in western Kentucky.

Cole RA, Shoop WL.

Seventy raccoons (Procyon lotor) from western Kentucky were examined for
helminths from December 1985 through May 1986. Twenty-three species of helminths 
were collected including 10 species of Trematoda (Brachylaima virginiana,
Euryhelmis squamula, Eurytrema procyonis, Fibricola cratera, Gyrosoma singulare, 
Maritreminoides nettae, Mesostephanus appendiculatoides, Metagonimoides
oregonensis, Paragonimus kellicotti, Pharyngostomoides procyonis), 2 species of
Cestoda (Atriotaenia procyonis, Mesocestoides variabilis), 10 species of Nematoda
(Arthrocephalus lotoris, Baylisascaris procyonis, Capillaria putorii, C. plica,
Crenosoma goblei, Dracunculus insignis, Gnathostoma procyonis, Molineus barbatus,
Physaloptera rara, Trichinella spiralis), and 1 species of Acanthocephala
(Macracanthorhynchus ingens). A mean of 6.4 (3-11) helminth species per host was 
recorded. Fibricola cratera, Atriotaenia procyonis, Mesocestoides variabilis,
Arthrocephalus lotoris, Capillaria plica, Dracunculus insignis, Molineus
barbatus, and Physaloptera rara were ubiquitous parasites of the raccoon, whereas
specific nidi were observed for Eurytrema procyonis, Gyrosoma singulare,
Paragonimus kellicotti, Baylisascaris procyonis, Trichinella spiralis, and
Macracanthorhyncus ingens. With an overall prevalence of 10% or higher, 15 of the
23 helminth species were considered common parasites of the raccoon in western
Kentucky. When the 10% prevalence rate was applied within geographical quadrants 
to correct for the presence of nidi it was found that 18 of the 23 helminth
species were common and 5 were regarded as rare parasites of the raccoon. Two
species of nematodes, T. spiralis and B. procyonis, displayed a markedly higher
prevalence in male raccoons.

PMID: 3625429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Cell Tissue Res. 1987 Aug;249(2):437-42.

Glomerular ultrastructure of the trout, Salmo gairdneri: effects of angiotensin
II and adaptation to seawater.

Gray CJ, Brown JA.

The effect of angiotensin infusion on the glomerular ultrastructure of
freshwater- and seawater-adapted rainbow trout. Salmo gairdneri, has been
examined by scanning and transmission electron microscopy. Adaptation of trout to
seawater resulted in epithelial podocyte flattening, primary process broadening
and apparent loss of foot processes in almost all glomeruli, features which were 
uncommon in freshwater-adapted trout. Similar changes were induced by infusion of
freshwater-adapted animals with angiotensin, suggesting that the
renin-angiotensin system plays a role in the modification of glomerular
epithelial ultrastructure. Adaptation of trout to seawater also reduced
glomerular diameter, but infusion of freshwater-adapted animals with angiotensin 
did not mirror this effect. Infusion of angiotensin into seawater-adapted animals
increased the overall thickness of glomerular basement membrane by increasing the
lamina rara interna and lamina densa. This did not occur when freshwater-adapted 
fish were either infused with angiotensin or adapted to seawater. These findings 
suggest that other humoral systems are involved in the control of glomerular
diameter and basement membrane thickness as part of an integrated response to
increased environmental salinity.

PMID: 3621307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Am J Anat. 1987 Jun;179(2):169-74.

Passive Heymann nephritis induced by rabbit antiserum to membrane antigens
isolated from rat visceral yolk-sac microvilli.

Leung CC, Cheewatrakoolpong B, O'Mara T, Black M.

Passive Heymann nephritis (PHN) is an animal model of immune-complex-induced
renal disease resembling human membranous glomerulonephritis. It was induced in
rats by injecting rabbit antiserum directed against glycoprotein antigens
isolated from rat embryonic visceral yolk-sac microvilli (VYS-MV). The
glycoprotein antigens were isolated by extracting the VYS-MV with detergent
Nonidet P-40 followed by gel filtration in Sephacryl S-300 and finally by lectin 
affinity chromatography with Ricinus communis agglutinin I. In vitro
immunofluorescent localization studies demonstrated that the nephritogenic
antibodies were localized along the apical region of the visceral yolk-sac
endodermal cells and the brush border of the proximal tubular cells of the
kidney. Rats injected with a single dose of the antiserum manifested proteinuria.
Indirect immunofluorescent studies showed that the injected rabbit IgG was
localized in vivo along the capillary walls of the glomerulus in a granular
fashion. Electron microscopic examination of the same kidney glomeruli revealed
numerous electron-dense deposits along the lamina rara externa of the glomerular 
basement membrane. Fusion of the epithelial foot processes was also present.
These findings represent the typical immunopathological characteristics of
Heymann nephritis. Furthermore, with the aid of Ouchterlony analysis, the
antiserum against the isolated VYS antigens exhibited an immunoprecipitin band
which was in common with that formed by the antiserum against the homogeneous
nephritogenic antigen (gp330) of renal brush border origin. Thus, the
nephritogenic antigens which have been found to be associated with the brush
border of the renal proximal tubules may also be present or cross-reacted in the 
microvilli of the rat embryonic visceral yolk-sac.

PMID: 3303894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Gastroenterol Jpn. 1987 Jun;22(3):354-69.

Ultrastructural localization of type IV collagen, laminin and prolyl hydroxylase 
in biliary epithelial cells of rat liver following ligation of the common bile
duct.

Miyabayashi C, Kojima T, Inoue K, Sasaki H, Muragaki Y, Ooshima A.

Type IV collagen and laminin are major components of basement membrane (BM),
whereas prolyl hydroxylase (PH) is a key enzyme in the hydroxylation of proline
to hydroxyproline in collagen synthesis. In order to elucidate the exact
mechanism of the formation of BM, immune electron microscopic observation of type
IV collagen, laminin and PH was made in rat liver with marked proliferation of
bile ducts following ligation of the common bile duct. Extracellular localization
of type IV collagen was found in the BM of bile ducts and blood vessels and in
the space of Disse in both normal rat liver and the liver of rats undergoing
operation. Type IV collagen was localized in lamina rara and lamina densa.
Laminin was codistributed with type IV collagen in BM but rarely in the space of 
Disse even in the liver of rats undergoing operation. Immunostaining of laminin
was diffusely spread in lamina densa, but sparsely in lamina rara. Though no
reaction products of type IV collagen and laminin were detected in the cytoplasm 
of normal biliary epithelial cells, they were found in rough endoplasmic
reticulum (rER) and the vesicles close to the basal surfaces of the plasma
membrane of the proliferating biliary epithelial cells. No evident localization
of these components in Golgi apparatus was found. PH was found in rER of the
biliary epithelial cells, hepatocytes, endothelial cells of vessels, fibroblasts 
and perisinusoidal cells except for Kupffer cells in normal rat liver. More
intense and diffuse staining of PH was observed in rER in the proliferating
biliary epithelial cells of the liver of rats undergoing operation in
concomitance with the evident localization of type IV collagen in this organelle.
These findings suggest that the major components of BM, such as type IV collagen 
and laminin in the proliferating biliary epithelial cells, are produced in rER
and secreted by vesicles to the basal extracellular spaces, thus forming new BM
in these circumstances.

PMID: 3040511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Pathol Res Pract. 1987 Apr;182(2):188-94.

Ultrastructural alterations in the sialic acid distribution in minimal change
disease and membranous glomerulonephritis.

Quatacker J, Praet M, Matthys E.

Kidney biopsy specimens from patients with minimal change disease and membranous 
glomerulonephritis were embedded in glycolmethacrylate and stained with
phosphotungstic acid (PTA) at low pH. Biopsy specimens from patients without
proteinuria served as a control. The PTA staining at low pH on glycolmethacrylate
sections was used to study the changes in the sialic acid content of the lamina
rara externa of the glomerular basement membrane. This method also gives a clear 
picture of the changes occurring at the epithelial cell coat and these
alterations have implications on the distribution of the negative charges. In
minimal change disease no alterations could be observed in the sialic acid
content of the lamina rara externa. But the luminal epithelial cell coat showed
obvious changes in conjunction with extensive foot process widening. In
membranous glomerulonephritis with heavy deposits the staining of the lamina rara
externa became almost completely negative and the foot process architecture was
strongly affected. Obvious defects at the luminal epithelial cell coat, as
observed in minimal change disease, were also found regularly. The alterations at
the epithelial cell coat are tentatively related to the selective proteinuria
reported in minimal change disease. In addition the non-selective proteinuria
observed in non-minimal glomerulopathies, may find its origin in the absence of
sialic acid molecules from the lamina rara externa.

PMID: 3601794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Parasitol. 1987 Apr;73(2):327-32.

Helminth parasites of the coyote (Canis latrans) in Tennessee.

Van den Bussche RA, Kennedy ML, Wilhelm WE.

From 1980 to 1984, 267 coyotes (Canis latrans) from Tennessee were examined for
helminth parasites. Hearts were examined for the presence of Dirofilaria immitis,
diaphragms for Trichinella spiralis, and digestive tracts for other helminths.
Six species were found including 5 nematodes (D. immitis, Physaloptera rara,
Trichuris vulpis, Ancylostoma caninum, and Toxascaris leonina) and 1 cestode
(Taenia pisiformis). Univariate and multivariate statistical techniques were used
to assess parasite prevalence and intensity. For prevalence data, a matrix of
correlation among characters was computed, and the first 3 principal components
were extracted from the original distance matrix. These accounted for 93.7% of
the variation in the character set. Three-dimensional projections of localities
showed spatial variability on each component. Significant relationships were
found between principal component I and longitude, component II and latitude and 
mean January temperature, and component III and mean July precipitation and mean 
January actual evapotranspiration. For intensity data, no spatial variability was
determined.

PMID: 3585628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Kidney Int. 1987 Mar;31(3):710-7.

Size restriction in the glomerular capillary wall: importance of lamina densa.

Batsford SR, Rohrbach R, Vogt A.

Cationized monomeric, dimeric and oligomeric ferritins (pI maxima 9.3 to 9.6)
were used to study size restriction in the rat glomerular capillary wall. Monomer
and dimer ferritins were able to penetrate the lamina densa; trimer and larger
aggregates could not, even though they were able to enter the lamina rara
interna. This demonstrates that the lamina densa is a size restrictive barrier,
cationic molecules with a Stokes-Einstein radius exceeding a value between 6 to
12 nm are excluded. Monomeric and dimeric cationic ferritins were handled
differently in the lamina rara externa; monomer accumulated perferentially
immediately below the slit membrane whereas dimer was found within the inner
regions of the rara externa, nearer to the lamina densa.

PMID: 3553702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Am J Anat. 1987 Feb;178(2):116-25.

Maturation of myocardial capillaries in the fetal and neonatal rat: an
ultrastructural study with a morphometric analysis of the vesicle populations.

Porter GA, Bankston PW.

The ultrastructural morphology of the cellular and extracellular components of
the developing myocardial capillary wall--from the 16-day-gestation fetus of the 
rat to the 21-day neonate--was examined. A morphometric analysis of plasmalemmal 
vesicles and of coated vesicles and pits of capillary endothelial cells was
performed during the same developmental period. As the lateral extensions of the 
capillary endothelial cells change from irregular to regular in their thickness
during development, there is an increase in the number of plasmalemmal vesicles
and a progression from clusters of plasmalemmal vesicles to a uniform
distribution in the endothelial cell. The ratio of vesicles which are open to the
luminal front, which are "free" in the cytoplasm, or which are open to the
abluminal front of the endothelial cell was consistent throughout development.
The numerical density of plasmalemmal vesicles demonstrates a gradual and
significant increase. In contrast, the numbers of coated vesicles and pits are
variable within a very narrow range, and no pattern of increase or decrease is
discernible during development. Similarly, there is no change in interendothelial
cell junctions, which consist of occluding and primitive adhesive junctional
types, during development. The lamina densa of the basal lamina gradually
develops from discontinuous, patchy densities along the abluminal surface of the 
endothelial cells to a continuous and distinct layer by 21 days gestation. The
presence of the proteoglycan species in the developing basal lamina was assessed 
with the cationic dye ruthenium red (RR), and the appearance of RR-marked
proteoglycans was found to parallel the appearance of lamina densa material.
found to parallel the appearance of lamina densa material. The RR sites appear
discontinuously in patches; and later, the RR sites appear in a continuous and
regular planar lattice in the lamina rara interna and externa at 21 days
gestation. A complete array of RR-stainable anionic sites outside a continuous
lamina densa near birth indicates that the basal laminae of developing
capillaries in the heart are morphologically, and in part biochemically, mature
by the end of the first neonatal week. Our results show that the endothelial
cells and the subtending basal lamina of myocardial capillaries gradually mature 
morphologically during the final days of gestation and the first neonatal
week.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 3578075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1987 Jan 9;896(1):57-63.

The mobility of concanavalin A receptors and surface immunoglobulins on rat
hepatocyte plasma membranes.

Lustyik G, Kitani K, Ohta M.

Lateral mobilities of lectin receptors and surface immunoglobulins were measured 
in plasma membranes of hepatocytes prepared by smearing small pieces of rat liver
tissue and then using the fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP)
technique. Smears were treated with various doses of fluorescein isothiocyanate
(FITC) conjugated concanavalin A (ConA), succinylated ConA (SConA), wheat germ
agglutinin (WGA), and soybean agglutinin (SBA), as well as with rabbit anti-rat
IgG (RARa/IgG) and goat anti-rat IgM(Fc) (GARa/IgM(Fc] antisera. 10 micrograms/ml
ConA and SConA concentrations and a 55 X dilution of the GARa/IgM(Fc) antiserum
were found to be suitable for measuring the lateral mobilities dependent on age. 
Diffusion constant and mobile fractions of receptor complexes were measured in
different age groups of female Fisher rats (from 1 to 26 month-old). The FRAP
measurements revealed that at least two major receptor sites can be distinguished
in cell membranes of compact tissue (similar to the cultured and isolated cells),
forming a mobile and an immobile fraction. The mobile fractions of both the
lectin receptors and the surface immunoglobulins tended to decrease with age,
while the age differences of the diffusion constants were not statistically
significant. The observed alterations could be due to the covalent crosslinking
of the mobile receptors to immobile patches and/or to the retardation of free
diffusion by the cytoskeleton, dependent on age.

PMID: 3098295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Appl Pathol. 1987;5(2):82-7.

Transplant glomerulopathy.

Briner J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Zürich, Switzerland.

Transplant glomerulopathy is the most common glomerular lesion noted in
long-standing renal allografts and isografts. Morphologic examination of 328
specimens taken from 177 patients because of decreasing function revealed
transplant glomerulopathy in 55, rejection glomerulonephritis in 39, de novo
glomerulonephritis in 20, and recurrent glomerulonephritis in 9 patients. The
most important microscopic finding is a finely lamellar thickening of the
glomerular basement membrane. Endothelial swelling and mesangial proliferation
are minor. Immunofluorescence is weekly positive and electron-dense deposits are 
missing. There is, however, subendothelial electron-lucent thickening of the
lamina rara interna comparable to the lesions seen in thrombotic microangiopathy.
Transplant glomerulopathy can be superimposed on other glomerular transplant
lesions and is typically associated with chronic rejection; in fact it can been
considered to be the glomerular equivalent of chronic vascular rejection.

PMID: 3307849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Histochemistry. 1987;87(1):59-64.

Methodological dependence in the ultrastructural immunolocalization of laminin in
tubular basement membranes of the mouse kidney.

Herken R, Manshausen B, Fussek M, Bonatz G.

The ultrastructural localization of the basement membrane glycoprotein laminin
was investigated in basement membranes of proximal tubules of the mouse kidney.
The localization of laminin was determined using two different immunoperoxidase
and one immunogold preembedding technique and one immunogold postembedding
technique on unfixed and formaldehyde fixed tissue. Strong differences in the
immunolocalization for laminin were found in the lamina densa of the tubular
basement membrane using different techniques. After preembedding immunostaining
for laminin using IgG--PO as secondary antibody, a positive reaction for the
lamina densa was found in the formaldehyde fixed as well as in the unfixed
kidney. After preembedding immunostaining for laminin using Protein-A--PO,
staining of the 1. densa was seen in the unfixed, but not in the fixed kidney. It
was striking that no clear immunoreaction in the 1. densa of the tubular basement
membrane was seen in either the fixed or unfixed tissue after preembedding
immunostaining for laminin using protein A-gold. With a direct postembedding
immunogold technique laminin was localized only in the 1. fibroreticularis and
the 1. rara but not in the 1. densa of basement membranes of proximal tubules of 
the unfixed and the fixed kidney.

PMID: 3301752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Acta Histochem Suppl. 1987;34:107-8.

Decrease in the sialoglycoprotein content of the glomerular basement membrane in 
experimental nephrosis.

Quatacker J.

Phosphotungstic acid at low pH on glycolmethacrylate sections allows the
detection of sialic acid groups in the lamina rara externa of the glomerular
basement membrane. This staining procedure was used to study the alterations in
puromycin aminonucleoside nephrosis and adriamycin nephrosis. In both model
systems defects were detected in the sialic acid content of the lamina rara
externa and the epithelial cell coat was also affected. The possible role of
sialic acid in glomerular filtration is discussed.

PMID: 3107051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol. 1987;411(1):79-85.

Quantitation of anionic sites in glomerular capillary basement membranes of
Samoyed dogs with hereditary glomerulopathy.

Thorner PS, Jansen B, Liang J, Baumal R, Valli V.

Samoyed hereditary glomerulopathy (SHG) is an X-linked dominant disease
characterized by proteinuria and renal failure in affected male dogs. Electron
microscopic examination of glomerular capillary basement membranes (GCBM) shows
widespread multilaminar splitting of the lamina densa, identical to that in
Alport's syndrome. Anionic sites in GCBM of three affected males and five
unaffected dogs were labeled using polyethyleneimine to determine whether
proteinuria was associated with an alteration in their number. No significant
differences were noted in the number of anionic sites in the lamina rara externa,
whereas small but statistically significant increases were seen in the number of 
sites in the lamina rara interna of affected males. In the lamina densa, affected
males showed a striking increase in anionic sites, particularly in regions of
GCBM which were split. Thus, although proteinuria in some glomerular diseases has
been attributed to a reduction in anionic sites in GCBM, this was not so in SHG.

PMID: 2437692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Anat Rec. 1986 Dec;216(4):534-43.

Distribution of intravenously injected cationized ferritin within developing
glomerular basement membranes of newborn rat kidneys.

Abrahamson DR, Perry EW.

To label heparan sulfate proteoglycans and other strong anions within glomerular 
basement membranes (GBM) during assembly, cationized ferritin (CF), with a narrow
isoelectric range of 7.7 to 8.2, was intravenously injected into newborn rats.
Kidneys were then fixed and processed for electron microscopy at intervals
ranging from 1 to 72 h after CF injection. One hour after injection, CF bound
extensively to the lamina rara interna and externa of developing GBM and
mesangial matrix and to tubular basement membranes (TBM). In double basement
membranes of early stage glomeruli, large amounts of CF were also seen in central
areas between the endothelial and epithelial basement membranes. In
maturing-stage glomeruli, CF bound throughout interior regions of GBM outpockets 
projecting into the epithelial side of capillary walls as well as to the laminae 
rarae. Because in adult rats CF binds only to the laminae rarae, the abundant
anionic sites seen here in newborns between double basement membranes and within 
GBM outpocket interiors may be subsequently neutralized or removed during the GBM
assembly process. In addition to basement membranes, CF was also located
intracellularly within endocytic vesicles and lysosomes of glomerular
endothelial, mesangial, and epithelial cells 1 h postinjection. CF was also
present in similar structures within the tubular epithelium. In contrast to these
findings, CF was gradually lost from developing GBM 5, 15, and 24 h after
injection and was essentially cleared from all GBM, mesangial matrices, and TBM
after 48 h. Large CF aggregates were progressively accumulated within mesangial
lysosomes, however. The transient binding of CF to GBM anionic sites seen here
was most likely due to its endocytic removal by developing glomerular
endothelial, mesangial, and epithelial cells. Anions in the circulation probably 
also competed effectively with the GBM and TBM for bound CF.

PMID: 3800001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Am J Pathol. 1986 Nov;125(2):393-401.

Glomerular basement membrane anionic charge site changes early in aminonucleoside
nephrosis.

Mahan JD, Sisson-Ross S, Vernier RL.

Alterations of glomerular basement membrane (GBM) anionic (charge sites, CSs) in 
the development of proteinuria in a model of idiopathic nephrotic syndrome in man
(puromycin aminonucleoside nephrotic syndrome [PAN] in the rat) were assessed
quantitatively and sequentially early after disease induction. GBM CSs (known to 
consist mainly of heparan sulfate-rich proteoglycans) were stained in vivo and,
in a separate group of animals by an in vitro method, with the cationic marker
polyethyleneimine (PEI) studied by electron microscopic examination. Four hours
after administration of PAN, there was a significant decrease in GBM lamina rara 
externa CSs: 18 +/- 0.7 versus 22.0 +/- 2.2 per 1000 nm GBM in controls by PEI
injection and 17.2 +/- 2.7 versus 21.1 +/- 1.6 per 1000 nm GBM in controls by PEI
in vitro staining. This CS alteration coincided with changes in glomerular
epithelial cell morphologic characteristics (increased cytoplasmic organelles and
rough endoplasmic reticulum) and preceded the detection of foot process
broadening (at 24 hours) and increased urinary albuminuria (suggested at 12-24
hours, statistically significant at 36-48 hours). These results suggest that GBM 
CS-heparan sulfate proteoglycan alterations consisting of either decreased number
and/or less anionic charge occur early in PAN and support a role for glomerular
epithelial cell maintenance of GBM CS for normal glomerular function.

PMCID: PMC1888254
PMID: 3789094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Am J Pathol. 1986 Sep;124(3):384-91.

Laminin production by human endometrial stromal cells relates to the cyclic and
pathologic state of the endometrium.

Faber M, Wewer UM, Berthelsen JG, Liotta LA, Albrechtsen R.

The cyclic changes in the presence of the basement membrane glycoprotein laminin 
in endometrial stromal cells was studied by immunohistochemistry. The
interstitial matrix around the stromal cells of the proliferative phase of the
normal menstrual cycle was unreactive with antibodies to laminin. However,
commencing with the secretory phase, stromal cells accumulated distinct
cytoplasmic and pericellular laminin-immunoreactive material. The maximal amount 
of stromal cell-associated laminin was observed in predecidual cells of the late 
secretory phase. Thus, laminin immunostaining discriminates stromal cells of the 
proliferative phase (being "negative") from those in the secretory phase (being
"positive"). Sixty-six cases of endometrial hyperplasia and adenocarcinomas were 
also stained with antibodies to laminin. Sixty-nine percent of biopsies of cystic
hyperplasia and 30% of adenomatous hyperplasia contained laminin-positive stromal
cells. Ultrastructural examination of stromal cells in cystic hyperplasia
revealed the presence of pericellular basement membrane-like material, focally
arranged into typical lamina rara and lamina densa. In contrast, stromal cells in
the atypical adenomatous hyperplasia and adenocarcinomas did not react with
antibody to laminin. The expression of laminin receptor in the stromal cells
codistributed with laminin. Basement membranes of the surface epithelium, the
glandular epithelium, and the vessels stained strongly with antibodies to
laminin. In preneoplastic and neoplastic tissues, laminin immunostaining revealed
discontinuous and defective basement membranes. In poorly differentiated
carcinomas only sparse amounts of laminin-positive basement membrane were
observed; these tumors, in contrast, exhibited cytoplasmic laminin and also
significant immunoreaction with antibodies to laminin receptor.

PMCID: PMC1888352
PMID: 2945438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Clin Nephrol. 1986 Jul;26(1):7-14.

Ultrastructural alterations of glomerular anionic sites in idiopathic membranous 
glomerulonephritis.

Okada K, Kawakami K, Miyao M, Oite T.

The relation of ultrastructural alterations of glomerular anionic sites to
morphological changes of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) was studied in
biopsy specimens from patients with idiopathic membranous glomerulonephritis
(MGN) using polyethyleneimine (PEI) as a cationic probe. The subepithelial
deposits did not fix PEI, and only a very few anionic sites were found between
subepithelial deposits and adjacent epithelial cells. Thus, anionic sites of the 
lamina rara externa (LRE) were markedly decreased in number and interrupted by
subepithelial deposits in the earlier stages (stage I and II). As the deposits
were incorporated into the GBM in the later stage (stage III), the anionic sites 
of the LRE were restored on the epithelial cell surface coat (ESC) covering the
deposits, but foot process effacement persisted during the course of the disease.
The anionic sites of the lamina rara interna (LRI) appeared much less altered in 
all stages of MGN. These findings suggest that subepithelial deposition of immune
reactants is associated with focal loss and disorganization of anionic sites on
the GBM, resulting in a defect of glomerular-barrier function.

PMID: 3731551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Lab Invest. 1986 Jul;55(1):56-62.

Localization of cationic proteins derived from platelets and polymorphonuclear
neutrophils and local loss of anionic sites in glomeruli of rabbits with
experimentally-induced acute serum sickness.

Camussi G, Tetta C, Meroni M, Torri-Tarelli L, Roffinello C, Alberton A,
Deregibus C, Sessa A.

The localization of cationic proteins (CP) derived from platelets and from
polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN) in glomeruli of 42 rabbits injected i.v. with
a large amount of bovine serum albumin, was investigated in sequential biopsies
by immunofluorescence, using goat-anti-platelet CP and anti-PMN CP sera. Platelet
CP deposits became detectable within 7 to 8 days after the i.v. injection of
bovine serum albumin, before or coincident with the onset of proteinuria. The
intensity and the extent of linear and segmental deposits of platelet CP along
the glomerular capillary walls reached a peak at day 9 to 10, when proteinuria
was maximal. The anti PMN-CP serum stained the cytoplasm of the few PMN present
in glomeruli and only occasionally at day 11 and 12 identified focal deposits of 
PMN-CP along the glomerular capillary walls. The kinetic study of glomerular
immune deposits showed that the first appearance of immune deposits in antigen
excess was preceded by, or was concomitant, with the detection of platelet-CP in 
glomeruli. In the later stages of serum sickness, the immune deposits showed a
progressive increase in rabbit IgG and C3. The glomerular polyanions were studied
by light microscopy, using the colloidal iron technique, and by electron
microscopy using polyethyleneimine as a cationic probe. The glomerular deposits
of platelet-CP were associated with a reduction of colloidal iron staining, which
was maximal 9 to 11 days after the i.v. injection of bovine serum albumin. At day
15, colloidal iron staining was almost completely restored. At day 9 in rabbits
with acute serum sickness the anionic sites of glomerular basement membrane
evidenced by polyethyleneimine, were segmentally decreased, mainly in the lamina 
rara interna. In rabbit studied at day 15 the anionic sites were decreased only
at the base of the subepithelial electron dense deposits (humps). These results
suggest that in rabbits with experimentally-induced acute serum sickness, during 
the early stages of glomerular immune deposit formation endogenous CP, released
mainly from platelets, bind to glomerular capillary walls and possibly contribute
to the neutralization of glomerular polyanions.

PMID: 3724064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Histochem Cytochem. 1986 Jul;34(7):847-53.

Post-embedding colloidal gold immunolocalization of laminin to the lamina rara
interna, lamina densa, and lamina rara externa of renal glomerular basement
membranes.

Abrahamson DR.

Ultrastructural distribution of laminin within renal glomerular (GBM) and tubular
basement membranes (TBM) was investigated using post-embedding immunolocalization
with colloidal gold. Rat kidneys were fixed with 4% formaldehyde and embedded at 
4 degrees C in Lowicryl K4M medium. Thin sections were then sequentially treated 
with affinity-purified rabbit anti-laminin IgG and anti-rabbit IgG conjugated to 
10 nm diameter colloidal gold. Gold bound specifically to the GBM and TBM with
particle densities of 690/micron2 and 731/micron2, respectively. In the GBM, the 
number of gold particles bound/micron2 of lamina densa greater than lamina rara
externa greater than lamina rara interna. Closely similar binding patterns were
found when kidneys were fixed with 0.5% glutaraldehyde plus 3% formaldehyde and
embedded at 60 degrees C in L.R. White resin, but slightly less gold bound to
sections overall than that seen with formaldehyde alone and Lowicryl. Taken
together, these results illustrate that anti-laminin IgG, whether applied to
fixed sections in vitro or introduced in vivo, bound to the lamina rara interna, 
lamina densa, and lamina rara externa of the GBM and throughout the TBM.

PMID: 3519749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Acta Pathol Jpn. 1986 Jun;36(6):827-38.

Altered glomerular localization of heparan sulfate proteoglycan in experimental
nephritides.

Uchida M, Shibata N, Katoh M, Shigematsu H.

The distribution of heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HS-PG) was examined electron
microscopically by the high iron diamine (HID) method in puromycin
aminonucleoside (PAN) nephrosis, accelerated Masugi nephritis (NTN), and serum
sickness nephritis induced by bovine serum albumin (BSA nephritis) in the rat. In
PAN nephrosis rats, no change was observed in the distribution of HS-PG in the
lamina rara externa (LRE) of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) throughout
the experiment. In NTN rats, however, the loss of HS-PG was observed, and it was 
associated with subepithelial electron dense deposits formed possibly by serum
sickness mechanism, but not with inflammatory cell infiltration. In BAS
nephritis, immune deposits were seen in mesangial, subendothelial,
intramembranous and subepithelial areas. The deposits in the former three areas
seemed to have little reciprocity with the loss of HS-PG and proteinuria. Urinary
protein increased in accordance with the development of subepithelial deposits
and the loss of HS-PG in the area of the deposits in the LRE. These results
indicate that HS-PG could be preserved even in marked proteinuric states in
morphologically intact basement membrane, but altered and lost distribution of
HS-PG associated with subepithelial immune deposits could in turn result in the
development of proteinuria.

PMID: 2945356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Exp Med. 1986 May 1;163(5):1064-84.

Antibodies to basement membrane heparan sulfate proteoglycans bind to the laminae
rarae of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and induce subepithelial GBM
thickening.

Miettinen A, Stow JL, Mentone S, Farquhar MG.

Antibodies specific for the core protein of basement membrane HSPG (Mr = 130,000)
were administered to rats by intravenous injection, and the pathologic
consequences on the kidney were determined at 3 min to 2 mo postinjection.
Controls were given antibodies against gp330 (the pathogenic antigen of Heymann
nephritis) or normal rabbit IgG. The injected anti-HSPG(GBM) IgG disappeared
rapidly (by 1 d) from the circulation. The urinary excretion of albumin increased
in a dose-dependent manner during the first 4 d, was increased 10-fold at 1-2 mo,
but remained moderate (mean = 12 mg/24 h). By immunofluorescence the
anti-HSPG(GBM) was seen to bind rapidly (by 3 min) to all glomerular capillaries,
and by immunoperoxidase staining the anti-HSPG was seen to bind exclusively to
the laminae rarae of the GBM where it remained during the entire 2-mo observation
period. C3 was detected in glomeruli immediately after the injection (3 min),
where it bound exclusively to the lamina rara interna; the amount of C3 bound
increased up to 2 h but decreased rapidly thereafter, and was not detectable
after 4 d. Mononuclear and PMN leukocytes accumulated in glomerular capillaries, 
adhered to the capillary wall, and extended pseudopodia through the endothelial
fenestrae to contact in the LRI of the GBM where the immune deposits and C3 were 
located. At 1 wk postinjection, staining for C3 reappeared in the glomeruli of
some of the rats, and by this time most of the rats, including controls injected 
with normal rabbit IgG, had circulating anti-rabbit IgG (by ELISA) and linear
deposits of rat IgG along the GBM (by immunofluorescence). Beginning at 9 d,
there was progressive subepithelial thickening of the GBM which in some places
was two to three times its normal width. This thickening was due to the laying
down of a new layer of basement membrane-like material on the epithelial side of 
the GBM, which gradually displaced the old basement membrane layers toward the
endothelium. The results show that the core proteins of this population of
basement membrane HSPG (Mr = 130,000), which are ubiquitous components of
basement membranes, are exposed to the circulation and can bind anti-HSPG(GBM)
IgG in the laminae rarae of the GBM. Binding of these antibodies to the GBM leads
to changes (C3 deposition, leukocyte adherence, moderate proteinuria, GBM
thickening) considered typical of the acute phase of anti-GBM glomerulonephritis.
Antibody binding interferes with the normal turnover of the GBM, presumably by
affecting the biosynthesis and/or degradation of basement membrane components.

PMCID: PMC2188093
PMID: 2939168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Ultrastruct Mol Struct Res. 1986 Feb;94(2):149-60.

Novel extracellular matrix and microtubule cables associated with pseudopodia of 
Astrammina rara, a carnivorous Antarctic foraminifer.

Bowser SS, DeLaca TE, Rieder CL.

Astrammina rara is a benthic foraminiferan protozoan which uses an extensive
network of fine, branching, and anastomosing pseudopodia to capture and digest
metazoans up to 12 mm long. During such predation the pseudopodia appear
remarkably elastic and tensile. Electron microscopy has revealed a novel
extracellular matrix of thin branching fibers associated with A. rara's
pseudopodia, which are otherwise typical in appearance. These fibers are
structurally associated with the pseudopodial glycocalyx. Cytoplasmic
microtubules are often found in close juxtaposition to the plasma membrane and
overlying extracellular fibers. In the main pseudopodial trunks bundles of 30-300
microtubules are surrounded by a lightly staining matrix and linked by occasional
bridges. The microtubules follow straight trajectories in distal filopodia, but
in pseudopodial trunks they appear to coil around one another to form cables.
These microtubular cables and extracellular fibers are novel features of A.
rara's pseudopodia and may provide the structural basis for their tensile
strength.

PMID: 3782928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Clin Invest. 1986 Jan;77(1):142-56.

Nephritogenicity of antibodies to proteoglycans of the glomerular basement
membrane--I.

Makino H, Gibbons JT, Reddy MK, Kanwar YS.

We investigated nephritogenic potential of antibodies to heparan
sulfate-proteoglycan of glomerular basement membrane. Glomeruli were isolated,
basement membranes were prepared, proteoglycans extracted, and purified core
protein was obtained. We immunized rabbits with the core protein, IgG fraction
prepared from the antisera and specificity of the antibody determined. A single
immunoprecipitin line in agar diffusion plate and a single band (approximately
18,000 mol wt) on the immunoblot autoradiograms were visualized. The antibody
showed precise reactivity with the glomerular basement membranes. The clearance
studies indicated that approximately 75% of the radioiodinated antibody
disappeared from circulation within 1 h and 1-2% bound to the kidney. For
nephritogenicity experiments, the antibody was intravenously administered into
rats and we examined their kidneys at 1 h to 24 d later. A linear
immunofluorescence of glomerular basement membranes was observed with rabbit IgG 
at all times while that of C3 until the 10th day. Early morphologic changes
included glomerular infiltration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes with focal
exfoliation of endothelium. The leukocytic infiltration subsided by the third day
and was followed by progressive thickening of basement membranes, focal mesangial
cell proliferation, increase in mesangial matrix, and accumulation of monocytes. 
Focal knob-like thickening of glomerular basement membrane was observed from the 
15th day onward. Regularly-spaced electrondense deposits were seen in the lamina 
rara interna and externa of glomerular basement membranes and persisted
throughout the investigatory period. No significant proteinuria was observed at
any stage of the experiment. These findings suggest that the antibodies to the
basement membrane heparan sulfate-proteoglycan are nephrotoxic but possess weak
nephritogenic potential.

PMCID: PMC423320
PMID: 2935558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol Incl Mol Pathol. 1986;50(3):237-47.

Alterations in the sialic acid content of the rat glomerular filter in
aminonucleoside nephrosis.

Quatacker J.

A daily injection protocol with puromycin aminonucleoside (PAN) causes loss of
sialic acid from the glomerular filter. These changes have been studied
previously by colloidal iron staining, but we have recently shown that
phosphotungstic acid (PTA) at low pH allows the demonstration of sialic acid
groups in the glomerular basement membrane in ultrathin sections of
glycolmethacrylate(GMA)-embedded rat kidney. With this technique the slit
diaphragm is seen as a continuation of the luminal cell coat and the method also 
gives an idea of the sialic acid distribution at the podocyte plasma membrane.
The availability of this method made it possible to reevaluate the results
obtained earlier in aminonucleoside (PAN) nephrosis indicating a decrease in the 
sialic acid content of the glomerulus. Although there are changes in the
epithelial architecture, the ultrastructural appearances of the basement membrane
are only slightly altered in PAN nephrosis. Detachment of epithelial cells was
variable in different animals. Seven days after the first injection of PAN,
staining with PTA revealed local defects in the lamina rara externa which later
became more extensive. In PAN-treated animals the luminal cell coat showed
reduced staining and large areas of the plasma membrane were completely devoid of
a cell coat. These changes coincided with the onset of heavy proteinuria. The
results indicate that both the basement membrane and the epithelial plasma
membrane are affected in PAN nephrosis, as revealed by decreased staining for
sialic acid-containing molecules in the basement membrane and by changes in the
epithelial cell coat. The defects in the cell coat material point to functional
alterations at the level of the slit pores and it is suggested that the decrease 
in sialic acid content of the lamina rara externa may be partly responsible for
defects in the size-selective filtration barrier in PAN nephrosis.

PMID: 2870576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Am J Pathol. 1985 Dec;121(3):474-85.

Glomerular anionic site distribution in nonproteinuric rats. A computer-assisted 
morphometric analysis.

Pilia PA, Swain RP, Williams AV, Loadholt CB, Ainsworth SK.

The cationic ultrastructural tracer polyethyleneimine (PEI: pI approximately
equal to 11.0), binds electrophysically to uniformly spaced discrete
electron-dense anionic sites present in the laminae rarae of the rat glomerular
basement membrane (GBM), mesangial reflections of the GBM, Bowman's capsule, and 
tubular basement membranes when administered intravenously. Computer-assisted
morphometric analysis of glomerular anionic sites reveals that the maximum
concentration of stainable lamina rara externa (lre) sites (21/10,000 A GBM)
occurs 60 minutes after PEI injection with a site-site interspacing of 460 A.
Lamina rara interna (lri) sites similarly demonstrate a maximum concentration
(20/10,000 A GBM) at 60 minutes with a periodicity of 497 A. The concentration
and distribution of anionic sites within the lri was irregular in pattern and
markedly decreased in number, while the lre possesses an electrical field that is
highly regular at all time intervals analyzed (15, 30, 60, 120, 180, 240, and 300
minutes). Immersion and perfusion of renal tissue with PEI reveals additional
heavy staining of the epithelial and endothelial cell sialoprotein coatings. PEI 
appears to bind to glomerular anionic sites reversibly: ie, between 60 and 180
minutes the concentration of stained sites decreases. At 300 minutes, the
interspacing once again approaches the 60-minute concentration. This suggests a
dynamic turnover or dissociation followed by a reassociation of glomerular
negatively charged PEI binding sites. In contrast, morphometric analysis of
anionic sites stained with lysozyme and protamine sulfate reveals interspacings
of 642 A and 585 A, respectively; in addition, these tracers produce major
glomerular ultrastructural alterations and induce transient proteinuria. PEI does
not induce proteinuria in rats, nor does it produce glomerular morphologic
alterations when ten times the tracer dosage is administered intravenously. These
findings indicate that the choice of ultrastructural charge tracer, the method of
administering the tracer, and the time selected for analysis of tissue after
administration of tracer significantly influences results. Morphometric analysis 
of the distribution of glomerular anionic sites in nonproteinuric rats provides a
method of evaluating quantitative alterations of the glomerular charge barrier in
renal disease models.

PMCID: PMC1887925
PMID: 4073220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Lab Invest. 1985 Oct;53(4):413-20.

Ultrastructural localization of glycocalyx domains in human kidney podocytes
using the lectin-gold technique.

Kunz A, Brown D, Vassalli JD, Kontturi M, Kumpulainen T, Orci L.

The lectin-gold technique was used to reveal Helix pomatia lectin (HPL)-binding
sites in human kidney glomeruli. HPL-binding sites were associated mainly with
podocyte foot process bases, and extended over the lamina rara externa of the
glomerular basement membrane. In addition, kidneys from blood group A1 donors
showed labeling of capillary endothelial cells and erythrocytes. After
neuraminidase digestion of the sections prior to incubation with HPL-gold
complexes, HPL-binding sites appeared on previously negative regions of the
glomerulus. This increase in labeling was particularly striking at the level of
the podocyte-free surface (adjacent to the urinary space) in all kidneys, and on 
capillary endothelial cells from donors of blood groups other than A1. These
results demonstrate the existence of two distinct glycocalyx domains in human
kidney podocytes, and show the application of the lectin-gold technique for the
high resolution, ultrastructural detection and quantification of lectin-binding
sites in human material.

PMID: 4046556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Cell Biol Int Rep. 1985 Oct;9(10):901-10.

Rapid intracellular motility and dynamic membrane events in an Antarctic
foraminifer.

Bowser SS, DeLaca TE.

Some properties of cytoplasmic transport in a cold-adapted (Antarctic) organism
are reported for the first time. Phase-contrast light microscopy of Astrammina
rara, an arenaceous foraminiferan protozoan, reveals that the saltatory transport
of cytoplasmic granules in reticulopods occurs bidirectionally and at rates up to
7.5-micron/s. Extracellularly attached latex microspheres are rapidly
translocated on the reticulopodial surface, thus demonstrating membrane fluidity 
at low (-1.8 degrees C) ambient temperatures. Rapid extension/withdrawal and
branching/fusing of pseudopodia further illustrate dynamic plasma membrane
activity at subzero temperatures. Immunofluorescence microscopy with an antibody 
monospecific for tubulin shows that these pseudopods contain microtubules. The
motility of this cold-adapted foraminifer therefore appears fully comparable to
the motility of allogromiid foraminifers from temperate waters.

PMID: 3905019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Immunol. 1985 Oct;135(4):2409-16.

Antibody-induced redistribution of Heymann antigen on the surface of cultured
glomerular visceral epithelial cells: possible role in the pathogenesis of
Heymann glomerulonephritis.

Camussi G, Brentjens JR, Noble B, Kerjaschki D, Malavasi F, Roholt OA, Farquhar
MG, Andres G.

In this study we analyze the ability of antibodies that produce passive Heymann
glomerulonephritis to induce antigen redistribution on the surface of cultured
glomerular visceral epithelial cells (GEC). Polyclonal antibodies produced by
immunization with membrane vesicles prepared from proximal tubule brush borders
(BB) and polyclonal (rabbit) and monoclonal (mouse) antibodies to a membrane
glycoprotein (gp 330) purified from epithelial cells of rat proximal tubule were 
used. The study by immunofluorescence of GEC kept at 4 degrees C or fixed with
paraformaldehyde showed that the three antibody preparations reacted with the
plasma membrane in a punctate pattern known to be due to staining of coated pits 
or coated vesicles on the cell surface. At 37 degrees C and, at a slower rate, at
22 degrees C, the two polyclonal antibodies induced a rapid clustering of
antigen-antibody complexes on the nonadherent surface of living cultured GEC with
subsequent formation of patches and caps and, after prolonged incubation, with
temporary disappearance of Heymann antigen from the cell surface, so-called
antigenic modulation. Antigen redistribution and modulation were inhibited by
sodium azide, indicating that these processes are energy dependent. Monovalent
Fab fragments of antibodies to BB vesicles did not alter the distribution of
Heymann antigen unless they were subsequently cross-linked. Monoclonal anti-gp330
induced a modest degree of antigen redistribution, which was increased by
subsequent cross-linking. Exposure of glomerular epithelial cells to cytochalasin
B, colchicine, or ionophore A23187 prevented or altered antigen redistribution at
37 degrees C. Furthermore, the antibody-induced antigen redistribution was
associated with changes in distribution of cytoplasmic actin, myosin, and
tubulin, indicating that it is related to the contractile activity GEC. LEW rats,
given i.v. injection of IgG directed against BB membrane vesicles, developed
passive Heymann glomerulonephritis (i.e., immune deposits in the lamina rara
externa of the glomerular basement membrane). In contrast, the glomeruli of rats 
exposed for longer periods to larger amounts of Fab fragments of the same
antibodies failed to develop immune deposits. These studies show that the
antibodies to the nephritogenic antigen of Heymann glomerulonephritis may induce 
a redistribution of immune complexes (IC) in the membrane of glomerular
epithelial cells that is similar to that produced by other plasma membrane
antigen-ligand interactions.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 3875653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Klin Wochenschr. 1985 Sep 16;63(18):835-49.

[Biophysicochemical structures of the glomerular filter].

[Article in German]

Langer KH.

The ultrastructural and the biophysical and biochemical qualities of glomerular
permeability to protein molecules are reviewed. With regard to differently
located immune deposition in human glomerulonephritis, description and discussion
are addressed in a fixed order of layers: 1. endothelial-subendothelial, i.e. the
endothelial cells with fenestrate and the lamina rara interna of the basement
membrane (bm), 2. membranous, i.e. the lamina densa of the bm, 3.
subepithelial-epithelial, i.e. the lamina rara externa of the bm and the
podocytes with food processes and slit diaphragms. It is emphasized that the 3
layers act as gradually (coarse to fine) filter barriers. On the basis of well
known structural peculiarities, in the last 10 years experimental studies
revealed that the meshwork of type IV collagen and the negatively charged heparan
sulfate-proteoglycans - "the glomerular polyanion" - are integrated in sieving of
protein molecules. These components are differently located in the stratified
cellular and extracellular layers of the glomerular filter and their combined
action is the basis of a size, charge and configuration depended filtration of
macromolecules. In this way the passage of the mostly negative charge blood
proteins, especially albumin, is prevented under normal conditions.

PMID: 4057915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Kidney Int. 1985 Aug;28(2):146-52.

Preferential transport of non-enzymatically glucosylated ferritin across the
kidney glomerulus.

Williams SK, Siegal RK.

We have examined the significance of carbohydrate structure to the
transglomerular passage of proteins. Carbohydrate-free (non-glycosylated)
ferritin, prepared by Concanavalin-A-sepharose affinity chromatography, was
perfused into rat kidneys, and was observed to be restricted from transglomerular
transport and to accumulate within the lamina rara interna of the glomerular
basement membrane. Visibility of the laminar structure of the glomerular basement
membrane was enhanced following perfusion fixation containing tannic acid,
permitting the observation of charge dense regions within the basement membrane. 
Non-enzymatically glucosylated ferritin was not restricted by the lamina rara
interna and was observed to penetrate the lamina densa and lamina rara externa.
Glucosylated ferritin was observed to be sequestered also by epithelial pinocytic
vesicles and to be accumulated within multivesicular bodies. Quantitative
measurements using fluorescently labelled ferritins indicated the preferential
clearance of glucosylated ferritin from the plasma and preferential appearance of
glucosylated ferritin in the urine. The differential transport of glucosylated
ferritin was not due to the formation of a cationic protein, as isoelectric
focusing established that glucosylation of ferritin results in a more anionic
protein. These studies suggest that glucosylation of anionic proteins results in 
their increased transglomerular permeability. This increased protein permeability
could contribute to the proteinuria observed in diabetic microangiopathy.

PMID: 3834226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 1985 Jul 19;97(14):581-8.

[Cellular pathology of Heyman nephritis: monoclonal antibodies against the
pathogenic antigen Gp 330].

[Article in German]

Kerjaschki D.

Heymann nephritis is an experimental auto-immune glomerulonephritis, closely
resembling human epimembranous nephritis, which is induced by identified antigens
in the brush border membranes of kidney proximal tubules. The hallmark of the
disease is the accumulation of immune deposits in a granular pattern in the
lamina rara externa of the glomerular basement membrane. We have established that
a large membrane glycoprotein with an apparent molecular weight of 330 kDal (pg
330) is the pathogenic antigen. By means of immunohistochemistry, using mono- and
polyclonal anti-pg 330 IgG we found that gp 330 is present in the cell membranes 
of glomerular epithelial cells and that it is concentrated there in coated pits
(specialized areas off the cell membrane which play a key role in receptor
mediated endocytosis for ligands such as insulin and others). On the basis of
these findings we propose the following mechanism of formation of an immune
deposit: (1) "In-situ" formation of immune complexes of gp 330 and anti-gp 330
IgG; (2) shedding of the immune complexes into the basement membrane and (3)
crosslinking of the immune complexes into the basement membrane. This scheme
could be a general mechanism by which immune deposits are formed also in various 
other auto-immune diseases.

PMID: 3901534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Anat Rec. 1985 Jul;212(3):223-31.

Dose-dependent movement of cationic molecules across the glomerular wall.

Andrews PM, Bates SB.

Different concentrations of the polycation polyethyleneimine (PEI) were
administered by single intravenous injections or by constant vascular perfusion
to the kidneys of Sprague-Dawley rats. At a fixed time interval after
administration of PEI, the kidneys were fixed and the distribution of PEI in the 
glomerular wall was evaluated by electron microscopy. At the lower concentrations
(e.g., 0.005%), PEI bound only to the glomerular endothelial glycocalyx and
preferentially to microvillous projections on this endothelium. At higher
concentrations (e.g., 0.05%), PEI also bound to discrete anionic sites in the
lamina rara interna (LRI) but was rarely seen in the lamina rara externa (LRE).
As the concentration of PEI was further increased (e.g., 0.5%), PEI moved deeper 
into the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and bound extensively to discrete
anionic sites in the lamina rara externa. Although anionic sites in the LRI and
LRE appeared nearly saturated following infusion of 0.5% PEI, this cationic
molecule was rarely seen to cross filtration slits and pass into the urinary
space. At still higher concentrations (e.g., 2%), however, PEI moved freely
across the filtration slits, bound extensively to the glomerular epithelial
glycocalyx, and induced a narrowing of the filtration slits. When PEI was
mechanically perfused through the kidney vasculature for 3 minutes, PEI binding
to the epithelial glycocalyx caused very extensive adherence of adjacent podocyte
processes and the narrowing and loss of filtration slits. Also in these latter
samples, discrete anionic sites in the LRE were no longer apparent and a dense
band of PEI was seen under the foot processes.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 4061876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Kidney Int. 1985 Jun;27(6):938-50.

Influence of antigen distribution on the mediation of immunological glomerular
injury.

Salant DJ, Adler S, Darby C, Capparell NJ, Groggel GC, Feintzeig ID, Rennke HG,
Dittmer JE.

To determine if the site of immune reaction could influence the mediation and
morphological expression of glomerular injury in experimental anti-glomerular
basement membrane (anti-GBM) nephritis and membranous nephropathy, we studied the
events that followed the in situ reaction of rat antibody with antigen planted in
either the GBM (especially the lamina rara interna) or in the subepithelial space
(SE). Non-nephritogenic amounts of noncomplement-fixing sheep anti-GBM or
anti-tubular brushborder antibody were injected into separate groups of rats to
plant sheep IgG in the GBM and SE, respectively. Kidneys containing sheep IgG
were then transplanted into naive recipients that were passively immunized with
rat anti-sheep IgG. There was marked proteinuria after 2 days (antigen in GBM:
226 +/- 50.7; antigen in SE: 69 +/- 50.7 mg/24 hr) that was abrogated by prior
depletion of complement in both groups (antigen in GBM: 10.2 +/- 1.7; antigen in 
SE: 14.3 +/- 8.7 mg/24 hr). When antigen was planted in SE, inflammatory-cell
depletion with either anti-neutrophil (PMN) serum or lethal irradiation had no
effect on proteinuria. In contrast, anti-PMN abolished proteinuria (12.0 +/- 5.6 
mg/24 hr) and irradiation reduced it by 60% when antigen was in GBM. Glomeruli of
kidneys with antigen in GBM were significantly larger and more hypercellular than
those with antigen in SE after transplantation into immunized recipients.
Endothelial cell injury and adherence of inflammatory cells to denuded GBM were
prominent in the former (antigen in GBM), while glomeruli with antigen in SE
showed only subepithelial deposits, adjacent slit-diaphragm displacement, and
epithelial cell foot-process effacement. Thus, the reaction of antigen and
antibody in glomeruli produced complement-mediated injury which was
cell-independent when complex formation occurred on the outer aspect of the GBM
but was cell-dependent when the same reagents reacted more proximally to the
circulation. We therefore conclude that antigen distribution can critically
influence the mediation and morphologic expression of immune glomerular injury
and may, in part, account for variations in the clinical and histological
manifestations of antibody-induced glomerular disease in humans.

PMID: 3894765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Histochem Cytochem. 1985 Jun;33(6):611-4.

Localization and quantitation of anionic charge sites in fetal and neonatal
alveolar basement membranes.

Ferrara TB, Sisson SP, Vernier RL.

A method utilizing biopsy sized samples of lung for anionic charge site
localization in alveolar and capillary basement membranes in human tissue is
discussed. Tissue fixed in either paraformaldehyde-lysine-periodate or 1%
paraformaldehyde with 0.05% glutaraldehyde, cut into 30 mu sections, and
incubated with the cationic probe, polyethyleneimine, was processed for electron 
microscopic analysis using standard techniques. Anionic charge sites were
identified and regularly distributed in increments of approximately 40-50 nm in
the lamina rara externa of the alveolar basement membrane, with lesser amounts
found in the lamina rara interna and lamina densa. Anionic charge sites were also
demonstrated in the interstitial portion of the capillary basement membrane and
on cell surfaces. These methods can be used to more broadly define the
localization of anionic charge sites in human lung tissue in both normal and
pathologic states.

PMID: 3158699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Parasitol. 1985 Apr;71(2):227-34.

Helminth species diversity and biology in the bobcat, Lynx rufus (Schreber), from
Nebraska.

Tiekotter KL.

Cestodes of 4 species and nematodes of 9 species were collected from 75 bobcats, 
Lynx rufus (Schreber), in Nebraska from 1977 to 1979. Of these 75, 11 were
trapped from 6 border counties in 3 border states: South Dakota, 7 carcasses/3
counties; Kansas, 3/2; and Wyoming, 1/1. Helminths recovered included:
Mesocestoides corti Hoeppli, 1925 (15% prevalence), Taenia rileyi Loewen, 1929
(67%), Taenia pisiformis (Bloch, 1780) Gmelin, 1790 (27%), Taenia macrocystis
(Diesing, 1850) Lühe, 1910 (19%), Physaloptera praeputialis von Linstow, 1889
(55%), Physaloptera rara Hall and Wigdor, 1918 (32%), Toxascaris leonina (von
Linstow, 1902) Leiper, 1907 (31%), Toxocara cati (Schrank, 1780) (39%),
Ancylostoma tubaeforme (Zeder, 1800) von Linstow, 1885 (5%), Pterygodermatites
(Multipectines) cahirensis (Jägerskiöld, 1909) Quentin, 1969 (1%), Vogeloides
felis (Vogel, 1928) Davtian, 1933 (7%), Cylicospirura felineus (Chandler, 1925)
Sandground, 1932 (12%), and Capillaria aerophila (Creplin, 1839) (4%). One bobcat
was not infected; 74 had 1 to 7 species (means = 3). Simpson's index for helminth
species was moderately low (0.12), indicating a relatively diverse helminth
fauna. Mean levels of infection between prominent species pairs and within each
species were compared with bobcat sex and age differences using Student's t-test.
Mean intensity of Physaloptera praeputialis was significantly (P less than 0.01) 
greater than that of Toxocara cati; mean intensity of Mesocestoides corti was
significantly (P less than 0.01) greater than that of all other prominent
species. No significant intensity differences were indicated among bobcat sex and
age categories. G-tests computed for prevalence of prominent species with bobcat 
age indicated no significance.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 3998960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Pathol. 1985 Mar;145(3):213-27.

The glomerular ultrastructural distribution of immunoglobulin G in
hyperalbuminaemic (protein-overload) proteinuria.

Howie AJ, Bliss DJ, Brewer DB.

Female Munich-Wistar rats were given intraperitoneal injections either of bovine 
serum albumin to induce proteinuria or of water as a control. Their kidneys were 
fixed in situ. An ultrastructural technique was used to demonstrate IgG
antiperoxidase antibodies either injected from a heterologous species or
autologous, induced by immunization with horseradish peroxidase. Photometry of
electron micrographic negative was used to determine the distribution of
antiperoxidase antibodies. In glomeruli of control animals IgG was present in the
basement membrane. There were three sites at which the passage of IgG across the 
basement membrane was hindered: between blood plasma and the lamina rara interna,
between the lamina densa and the lamina rara externa, and between the lamina rara
externa and the urinary space. Glomeruli of proteinuric animals were variable in 
appearance, some showing little structural damage and others showing marked
changes with loss of epithelial foot processes and accumulation of vacuoles and
protein droplets in epithelial cells. Both types of glomeruli contained IgG in
the urinary space. The distribution of IgG in the basement membrane of both types
was similar. Compared with control animals there was less IgG in the basement
membrane and IgG was distributed uniformly across the basement membrane. The
proteinuria in hyperalbuminaemia (protein-overload) is associated with a diffuse 
change in the barrier function of the glomerular basement membrane to IgG which
is, at least in the initial stages, not related to structural changes in
glomerular epithelial cells.

PMID: 3884757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Acta Anat (Basel). 1985;123(2):77-81.

Ultrastructure of the neural basal lamina in loop-tail mice.

Wilson DB.

Ultrastructural features of the neural basal lamina were studied by means of the 
tannic acid and ruthenium red techniques in normal and abnormal dysraphic
loop-tail mice at 9-11 days of gestation. With ruthenium red, the configuration
of the neural basal lamina is similar in both normal and abnormal embryos at 9-11
days. However, differences were detected in the abnormal 9-day embryos processed 
with tannic acid, as compared with normal littermates. These include
irregularities in the lamina rara externa, as well as differences in the staining
pattern of the neuroepithelial cell plasma membrane. By 11 days of gestation, the
lamina rara externa of the normal embryos shows features similar to those
observed in the 9-day abnormal embryos.

PMID: 4061028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol Incl Mol Pathol. 1985;48(2):107-18.

Ultramicroscopic localization of cationized antigen in the glomerular basement
membrane in the course of active, in situ immune complex glomerulonephritis.

Oite T, Shimizu F, Suzuki Y, Vogt A.

The sequence of antigen localization and the interaction of immune deposits with 
the anionic sites of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) were investigated in 
an active model of in situ immune complex glomerulonephritis using a cationized
ferritin. Three weeks after immunization with native horse spleen ferritin, the
left kidneys of rats were perfused with 500 micrograms of cationized ferritin
through the left renal artery. One h after renal perfusion, most of ferritin
particles localized subendothelially, corresponding to the anionic sites of the
lamina rara interna. In the glomerular capillary loops, infiltrating
polymorphonuclear leukocytes and monocytes were seen. Some of these monocytes
were in direct contact with immune complexes containing ferritin aggregates
associated with anionic sites of the lamina rara interna. At 24 h, numerous
ferritin aggregates were present subepithelially, preferentially beneath the slit
membrane. The subepithelial location of ferritin did not always correspond to the
anionic sites of the lamina rara externa. From days 3 to 7, there was remarkable 
endocapillary cell proliferation in some loops and pronounced effacement of
epithelial foot processes. Focal detachment of epithelium from the GBM was
observed occasionally. From days 14 to 28, most of ferritin aggregates were
located intramembranously and subepithelially. Membranous transformation has
already begun around the subepithelial deposits. This morphological study
provides insight into the fate of immune deposits and injury to the GBM in the
glomerulonephritis.

PMID: 2859686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Craniofac Genet Dev Biol. 1985;5(4):363-71.

Histochemical analysis of the neural basal lamina in the hindbrain region of
exencephalic mutant mice.

Wilson DB.

The neural basal lamina in hindbrain regions of exencephalic loop-tail (Lp/Lp)
mice and of their normal (+/+; Lp/+) littermates was analyzed histochemically at 
the electron microscopic level by means of enzyme digestion and alcian blue
staining with critical electrolyte concentrations (CEC) of MgCl2. At 9 days of
gestation, the normal and abnormal embryos showed a similar pattern of alcian
blue staining with a CEC of 0.00 M or 0.05 M MgCl2. However, with a CEC of 0.30 M
MgCl2, the basal lamina in the abnormals stained more prominently, particularly
the lamina rara externa, suggesting the presence of more sulfated
glycosaminoglycans (GAG) in the abnormals. Moreover, predigestion of the tissues 
with Streptomyces hyaluronidase, which removes hyaluronic acid (HA), indicated
that the abnormal basal lamina contained relatively less HA than in the normal
embryos. By 10 days of gestation the normal basal lamina contained relatively
more sulfated GAG and less HA and was thus more similar in appearance to that in 
the abnormal embryos. This apparently premature shift from HA predominance to
sulfated GAG predominance in the abnormal basal lamina may be of significance in 
the etiology of dysraphism in this mutant.

PMID: 2416770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Cell Sci. 1984 Dec;72:163-72.

Anchoring filaments of the amphibian epidermal-dermal junction traverse the basal
lamina entirely from the plasma membrane of hemidesmosomes to the dermis.

Ellison J, Garrod DR.

An electron microscopical study of the epidermal-dermal junction in the axolotl
and adult Rana pipiens has been carried out. This shows that filaments of about
12nm in diameter, known as anchoring filaments, pass from the hemidesmosomes at
the base of the epidermal cells across the basal lamina to the dermis. There they
may unite to form broader fibres, known as anchoring fibrils, or may simply form 
bundles. In the axolotl, particularly, the anchoring fibrils or bundles of
anchoring filaments, enmesh with the collagen fibres of the dermis. Removal of
epidermal cells with EDTA results in separation along a plane in the lamina rara 
of the basal lamina, i.e. between the plasma membrane of the cells and the lamina
densa. The anchoring filaments remain inserted into the lamina densa.
Hemidesmosomal plaques are no longer visible in regions of the plasma membrane
that have been separated from the basal lamina by EDTA, and no evidence was found
that plaques are engulfed by the cells. It is proposed that the
hemidesmosome-anchoring filament system provides a structural link between the
collagenous filament system of the dermis and the intracellular cytokeratin
filament system of the epidermis, which, in turn, is linked between cells by
desmosomes.

PMID: 6335885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Microvasc Res. 1984 Nov;28(3):352-67.

Partial chemical characterization of the anionic sites in the basal lamina of
fenestrated capillaries.

Simionescu M, Simionescu N, Palade GE.

The distribution of anionic sites in the basal laminae of the blood capillaries
of the murine pancreas was studied in specimens fixed in ruthenium red
(RR)-glutaraldehyde mixtures. The sites appeared as discrete, small (6 to 18 nm) 
particles distributed throughout the three laminae but concentrated primarily in 
the lamina rara externa, in which--spaced 80-100 nm apart--they formed a planar, 
partially ordered lattice comparable to that revealed by cationized ferritin in
previous studies (M. Simionescu, N. Simionescu, and G. E. Palade, 1982, J. Cell
Biol. 95, 425-434). The chemical nature of the anionic sites was explored by
incubating fresh tissue specimens in solutions of selected enzymes before
fixation in RR-glutaraldehyde mixtures. Pronase P and papain removed completely
the anionic sites and left behind an extensively degraded and disorganized basal 
lamina. Trypsin caused the removal of anionic sites only, did not degrade the
rest of the basal lamina, but detached it completely from the endothelium.
Chondroitinase ABC reduced slightly the size and the surface density of
RR-stainable particles, and detached focally the rest of the basal lamina from
the endothelium and pericytes. Crude heparinase caused a nearly complete removal 
of anionic sites, and pure heparitinase gave comparable but less extensive
results. Similar effects were recorded on the basal laminae of smooth muscle
fibers and pancreatic acini and ducts. The results indicate that the anionic
sites of all basal laminae examined are contributed primarily by heparin sulfate 
proteoglycans and trace amounts of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans.

PMID: 6521660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Parasitol. 1984 Oct;70(5):735-46.

Population dynamics across selected habitat variables of the helminth community
in coyotes, Canis latrans, from south Texas.

Pence DB, Windberg LA.

The effects of selected intrinsic variables operating on host subpopulations and 
of extrinsic variables across the collective host population on the distributions
of 10 common helminth species from coyotes in south Texas were compared. The
intrinsic variables of host sex and presence and severity of sarcoptic mange had 
little effect on the distributions of most helminth species. The combined
influences of (1) seasonal changes across the collective host population and (2) 
host subpopulations delineated by age were responsible for the overdispersed
distributions of Oncicola canis, Physaloptera rara, and Protospirura numidica.
Overdispersion in Ancylostoma caninum, Alaria marcianae, and Spirocerca lupi
populations resulted almost exclusively from the heterogeneity of factors
contributing to their rates of establishment, survival, and reproduction as
generated across host age subpopulations. Aggregated abundances of A. caninum and
A. marcianae occurred in young hosts, but were cumulative in older animals
infected with S. lupi. The hypothesis that heterogeneity within the host
population, rather than across the collective host population, is the main factor
generating overdispersion in natural populations was confirmed for only 3 of 10
helminth species (A. caninum, A. marcianae, and S. lupi). The effects of
extrinsic factors operating across the collective host population appeared to be 
equal to, or in some instances of greater importance than, these forces operating
over host subpopulations in determining the dispersion patterns of some helminth 
species (O. canis, P. rara, and P. numidica). The distributions of Taenia
pisiformis, Mesocestoides lineatus, Oslerus osleri, and Toxascaris leonina were
not affected, or only minimally influenced, by these intrinsic or extrinsic
variables. The effects of these habitat variables on dispersion patterns are
highly correlated with the life cycle and mode of transmission of the respective 
helminth species.

PMID: 6512639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Histochem Cytochem. 1984 Aug;32(8):827-33.

Differences in basement membrane-associated microdomains of type I and type II
pneumocytes in the rat and rabbit lung.

Sannes PL.

The basement membrane-associated microdomains of type I pneumocytes in rat and
rabbit pulmonary alveoli were found to be uniquely different from those of type
II pneumocytes in the specific distribution of cytochemically detectable sulfate 
esters as demonstrated with the high iron diamine (HID) technique at the electron
microscopic level. Aldehyde-fixed frozen or Vibratome sections of neonatal and
adult lungs were treated with a mixture of the meta and para isomers of
N,N-dimethyl-phenylenediamine-HCl in the presence of ferric chloride, which at
low pH (1.0) has been previously shown to be highly specific for sulfate esters
of glycosaminoglycans and glycoproteins. Reaction product was subsequently
enhanced with a thiocarbohydrazide-silver proteinate, postembedding sequence for 
electron microscopy. Samples of lung parenchyma treated in this fashion were
observed to have discrete, electron-dense silver grains associated with the
various microanatomical components of pulmonary basement membranes. In the region
of the alveolar basement membrane, the lamina rara externa associated with type I
cells was observed to contain an abundance of regularly disposed, cytochemically 
detectable sulfate esters, while the lamina densa and lamina rara interna were
diffusely and sparsely reactive by comparison. Quantitatively, 62% of all
reactive sites found in the basement membrane region of type I cells were
localized in the lamina rara externa. By contrast, the lamina rara externa of
type II cells had less than half as many reactive foci indicative of sulfate
esters as the same region of type I cell basement membranes. HID-reactive sulfate
esters were found evenly distributed within the laminae associated with the
basement membrane of type II cells. This cytochemically detectable difference in 
the sulfate ester composition of basement membrane-associated sulfate ester
composition of basement membrane-associated microdomains of type I compared with 
that of type II pneumocytes may be highly significant when considering known
patterns of epithelial renewal in pulmonary alveoli. Since type II cells are
known to divide and either remain type II cells or differentiate into type I
cells, regional differences in the molecular composition of the alveolar basement
membranes and their associated structures may be key determinants of
cell-specific processes of cytodifferentiation in the pulmonary alveolus.

PMID: 6747274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Cell Biol. 1984 Aug;99(2):692-8.

Basal lamina formation by cultured microvascular endothelial cells.

Kramer RH, Bensch KG, Davison PM, Karasek MA.

The production of a basal lamina by microvascular endothelial cells (MEC)
cultured on various substrata was examined. MEC were isolated from human dermis
and plated on plastic dishes coated with fibronectin, or cell-free extracellular 
matrices elaborated by fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells, corneal endothelial
cells, or PF HR9 endodermal cells. Examination of cultures by electron microscopy
at selected intervals after plating revealed that on most substrates the MEC
produced an extracellular matrix at the basal surface that was discontinuous,
multilayered, and polymorphous. Immunocytochemical studies demonstrated that the 
MEC synthesize and deposit both type IV collagen and laminin into the
subendothelial matrix. When cultured on matrices produced by the PF HR9
endodermal cells MEC deposit a subendothelial matrix that was present as a
uniform sheet which usually exhibited lamina rara- and lamina densa-like regions.
The results indicate that under the appropriate conditions, human MEC elaborate a
basal lamina-like matrix that is ultrastructurally similar to basal lamina formed
in vivo, which suggests that this experimental system may be a useful model for
studies of basal lamina formation and metabolism.

PMCID: PMC2113288
PMID: 6746743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Cell Differ. 1984 Aug;14(3):189-95.

Incomplete fusion of the epithelial and endothelial basement membranes in
interspecies hybrid glomeruli.

Sariola H.

Avascular, undifferentiated mouse kidneys transplanted onto quail chorioallantoic
membrane differentiate and become vascularized by quail vessels. The glomeruli
which form under these conditions consist of mouse podocytes and quail
endothelial cells. Immunohistochemistry has shown that the glomerular basement
membrane (GBM) has a dual origin, as integral basement membrane components are
produced by both podocytes and endothelial cells. In electron microscopy this GBM
is composed of two partially separated layers, an epithelial and an endothelial
basal lamina which both have a lamina densa and a lamina rara. These two basal
laminas are partially fused, but there are large areas where this fusion does not
occur. In some places of incomplete fusion, fibrillar extracellular material is
seen between and beneath the GBM. It is concluded that basement membrane
components derived from the different species can interact partially, but the
fusion is incomplete. The abnormal assembly of the epithelial and the endothelial
basal laminas might be due to molecular differences between the components
produced by the two cell lineages. In spite of the incomplete fusion, the system 
used serves as a good model-system to study basement membrane formation, since
the cells organize in a histiotypic fashion and form true vascularized glomeruli.

PMID: 6488323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Nurse Pract. 1984 Jul;9(7):38-43.

Health care in Africa.

Brown MS.

This is the third and last article reporting professional exchange tours between 
American nurses and nurses of other countries. In this article, the health care
system of Kenya is discussed and comparisons made between this system and our
own. Out of this comparison come several insights into our own way of doing
things and possibilities for improving them. "Health Care in the Soviet Union"
appeared in the April 1984 issue of The Nurse Practitioner. "Health Care in
China" appeared in the May 1984 issue of the journal.

PIP: Insights gained by a group of American maternal and child helath (MCH) care 
nurses during a 1983 exchange tour to Kenya, sponsored by Professional Seminar
Counsultants, are decribed. Kenya is a poor, predominantly rural country. The
annual population growth rate is 4.1%, and 60% of the population is under the age
of 16. The government's annual per capita health expenditure is only US$4, there 
is little emphasis on pediatrics as a speciality, and the linguistic diversity of
the population complicates the delivery of health care services. As a result of
these factors, the MCH care system in Kenya differed markedly from the systems
observed in previous exchange tours to China and the USSR. Kenya's population is 
served by a variety of government, private, and missionary hospitals and by
government health centers. The health centers are staffed by 2 nurses and 2
assistants who provide maternity, family planning, and immunization services. The
staff also diagnoses and treats common illnesses. Service are provided free for
patients under the age of 16, and minimal fees are collected from older patients.
The largest hospital in the country is the 1600 bed, Joma Kenyatta National
hospital which employs 900 nurses and serves as a refereal hospital for
complicated cases and as a teaching and research center. 42% of the hospital
staff nurses are registered nurses and 58% are enrolled nurses. Disease patterns 
in Kenya and the US are markedly different. In Kenya, infectious diseases are
more common than chronic diseases, and amony children the major causes of death
are starvation, measles, whooping cough, malaria, tubercluosis, and diarrhea.
Marasmus and protein calorie deficiency are the 2 major types of childhood
malnutrition found in Kenya. Nurses frequently provide health education services 
and even teach mothers how to grow nutritious foods for their children. Rh
incompatibility is rare in Kenya, but ABO incompatibility is common. Othr common 
diseases, raraly found in temperate climates, include Burkitt's lymphoma,
leprosy, and tropical ataxic neuropathies. The visiting nurses were at 1st
shocked by some of the practices and customs they observed; however, as they
learned more about the rationall behind these practices, shock gave way to
appreciation. Children's wards lacked playthings, the walls were devoid of
pictures, and the rooms were sparsely furnished. The lack of material items,
however, was more than compensated for by the rich stimuli provided family
members and friends, who not only visited the chilren, but performed a variety of
nursing tasks. The family centered approach also provided a sense of security for
the patients. A Masai paramedic explained how the custom of polygamy ensures
adherence to the 2-year postpartum sexual taboo which, in turn, facilitates
prolonged breast feeding. The nurses also became acquainted with the social value
of adolescent circumcision rites. These rites are illegal but still performed in 
many rural areas. The rites are physically painful, but they provide a mechanism 
for easing the transition from adolescent to adult status. The rites help young
people assume measningful roles in the society and provide them with clearly
specified identities. As a result, adolescent suicide is rara among the rural
villagers.
PMID: 6462542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Lab Invest. 1984 Jun;50(6):636-44.

Glomerular localization of preformed immune complexes prepared with anionic
antibodies or with cationic antigens.

Gauthier VJ, Striker GE, Mannik M.

The glomerular basement membrane presents a highly anionic surface to
circulation. The effects of anionic antibody and cationic antigen in preformed
immune complexes prepared at 5-fold antigen excess were investigated in separate 
experiments in mice. Anionized antibodies (isoelectric point 4 to 6) to human
serum albumin were prepared by acetylation and immune complexes produced in
vitro. Blood clearance kinetics and glomerular immunofluorescence patterns of
these immune complexes were not affected by anionization . Electron microscopy
revealed mesangial deposits, indicating that the deposition of immune complexes
in the mesangium occurs with highly anionic immune complexes. Cationic human
serum albumin (AgED, isoelectric point 7.5 to 9.0) alone or as performed immune
complexes ( AgEDAb ) showed rapid blood clearance (less than 1% remaining by 18
hours) and localized in renal glomeruli by immunofluorescence microscopy. AgED
injected alone was present in glomeruli at 1 minute after injection but was
absent at 12 hours. After injection of AgEDAb , both antigen and antibodies were 
present in glomeruli from 1 minute through 72 hours by immunofluorescence
microscopy. Electron-dense deposits were seen at the anionic sites in the lamina 
rara interna and lamina rara externa at 1 minute and 1 hour after injection of
AgED and AgEDAb containing free AgED. After AgEDAb injection electron-dense
deposits were evident at 12 to 48 hours in the mesangium and in the
subendothelial area, especially adjacent to the mesangium. By 72 hours after
AgEDAb injections mesangial deposits predominated, although small subepithelial
deposits were also present. An inflammatory reaction was noted in the glomeruli
after administration of AgEDAb . Thus, preformed immune complexes containing
cationized antigen show glomerular deposition, primarily in the subendothelial
and mesangial regions and at later time points also in the subepithelial area.

PMID: 6374284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Am J Anat. 1984 Apr;169(4):463-81.

Fine structure of the glomerular basement membrane and immunolocalization of five
basement membrane components to the lamina densa (basal lamina) and its
extensions in both glomeruli and tubules of the rat kidney.

Laurie GW, Leblond CP, Inoue S, Martin GR, Chung A.

Electron microscopic immunostaining was used to examine the localization of type 
IV collagen, laminin, entactin , heparan sulfate proteoglycan, and fibronectin
within the basement membranes of the rat kidney. In preliminary experiments,
various methods of processing formaldehyde-fixed kidney were compared using
antilaminin antiserum and the indirect immunoperoxidase method. Little or no
laminin immunostaining of the glomerular basement membrane was present in
sections unless they had been frozen-thawed; and even in this case, the
immunostaining was light in comparison to that of basement membranes in adjacent 
tubules. However, when frozen-thawed sections were treated with 0.5% sodium
borohydride, immunostaining was then as strong in glomerular as in tubular
basement membranes. Accordingly, this treatment was applied to frozen-thawed
sections before immunostaining for any of the substances under study.
Immunostaining of the glomerular basement membrane for each of the five
substances was fairly uniform throughout the lamina densa (also called basal
lamina), but uneven in the lamina lucida interna and externa (also called lamina 
rara interna and externa) in which stained bands extended from the lamina densa. 
Similarly in the basement membranes of tubules, immunostaining for the five
substances was localized to the lamina densa and bands extending into the lamina 
lucida. When the ultrastructure of the glomerular basement membrane was examined,
three structures were found: (1) a network of 4-nm-thick "cords," which seems to 
be the main component; the cords are closely packed in the lamina densa and more 
loosely arranged in the lamina lucida interna and externa; (2) straight, hollow
7-10-nm-thick structures referred to as " basotubules "; and (3) 3.5-nm elements 
composed of minute paired rods, referred to as "double pegs." The distribution of
the cords, but not that of the other two structures, was related to the
immunostaining pattern. It is concluded that (1) to fully reveal the antigenicity
of the glomerular basement membrane, frozen-thawed sections must be treated with 
sodium borohydride prior to immunostaining, possibly because this basement
membrane is more compact than the others; and (2) in both glomerular and tubular 
basement membranes, type IV collagen, laminin, entactin , heparan sulfate
proteoglycan and fibronectin are colocalized in the lamina densa and its
extensions to the laminae lucidae . Since the distribution of the cords
corresponds to that of immunostaining, it is likely that the five substances are 
present within the cords.

PMID: 6375342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Histochem Cytochem. 1984 Mar;32(3):289-98.

The ultrastructural localization of two basement membrane components: entactin
and laminin in rat tissues.

Martinez-Hernandez A, Chung AE.

The localization of two noncollagenous components of basement membranes, laminin 
and entactin, was determined in rat kidney, muscle, and small intestine using
electron immunohistochemistry. In the renal glomerulus anti-laminin antibodies
reacted with the basement membrane of peripheral capillary loops and with
mesangial matrix. In the peripheral capillary loop laminin was preferentially
distributed in both laminae rarae. This was in contrast to anti-entactin that
localized in peripheral capillary loops but not in mesangial matrix. Even in the 
peripheral capillary loops it had a different distribution than laminin. Entactin
was found predominantly in the lamina rara interna. In renal tubular basement
membranes both antibodies localized throughout the full thickness of the basement
membranes, with laminin having a preferential distribution in the lamina rara,
whereas entactin was more evenly distributed. In the basement membrane of the
duodenal mucosa entactin localized in the lamina densa, whereas laminin was
present in both laminae. In skeletal muscle both antibodies had similar
localization in all basement membranes. These results demonstrate that entactin
is an intrinsic component of basement membranes. They also demonstrate that
basement membranes from different tissues have subtle variations in content
and/or assembly of the different components. It is likely that these variations
may be reflected in different functional properties.

PMID: 6198358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Cell Tissue Res. 1984;235(3):491-6.

The anionic barrier system in the mesonephric renal glomerulus of the arctic
lamprey, Entosphenus japonicus (Martens) (Cyclostomata).

Tsujii T, Naito I, Ukita S, Ono T, Seno S.

To examine the selective permeability of the nephrons of lower vertebrates, the
permeability of the glomerulus in the kidney of an arctic lamprey, Entosphenus
japonicus (Martens), to native anionic ferritin or cationized ferritin was
studied by observing the distribution of ionized anionic groups in renal tissues.
The cationized ferritin molecules injected into the dorsal aorta penetrated
rapidly into the glomerular basement membrane layer through fenestrae present in 
the capillary endothelium and were subsequently excreted into the urinary spaces 
via the interstices between foot processes of the visceral epithelial cells.
Native anionic ferritin, on the other hand, passed only minimally through the
capillary wall. Cytochemical staining of fixed tissue or perfusion of the kidney 
in situ with cationic cacodylate-iron colloid revealed that the ionized anionic
groups of acid mucopolysaccharides were distributed on both the luminal and
abluminal surfaces of endothelial cells, and in the thick fibrous lamina rara
interna of the glomerular basement membrane; they were especially dense on the
surfaces of visceral epithelial cells and their foot processes. These results
suggest that the mesonephric glomerulus of the arctic lamprey possesses a
functionally well developed anionic barrier system comparable to that of the
mammalian metanephric glomerulus.

PMID: 6713480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Laryngoscope. 1984 Jan;94(1):96-101.

Adenocarcinoma of the sublingual gland: case report and 50 year review of the
literature.

Nishijima W, Tokita N, Takooda S, Tsuchiya S, Watanabe I.

Primary adenocarcinoma arising in the sublingual gland is extremely rara,
accounting for six cases reported in extensive survey of the literature for the
period of 1930 to 1981. A case of adenocarcinoma of the sublingual gland is
documented, demonstrating a highly malignant nature of the disease. This neoplasm
possesses particular therapeutic problems owing to the relative lack of symptoms 
and the delay of initial medical observation after the onset of symptoms.

PMID: 6690882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Tissue Cell. 1984;16(4):627-34.

The ultrastructure of the renal corpuscle of a lizard.

Gabri MS, Butler RD.

The few and small renal corpuscles of the lizard Podarcis (= Lacerta) taurica are
composed of a tuft of three to four capillaries (glomerulus), Bowman's capsule
and mesangium. The thin interdigitated capillary endothelial cells are, in most
regions, in contact with the mesangium. In some regions, however, they rest on a 
bilaminate basement membrane with an electron-dense lamina densa and a less dense
lamina rara. Bowman's capsule is composed of visceral and parietal layers. The
epithelial cells (podocytes) of the visceral layer bear trabeculae connected to
pedicels with microvilli. The pedicels rest on a bilaminate basement membrane
which in some regions has a double-layered densa with connecting bands.
Generally, this basement membrane is thicker than that of the capillary
endothelial cells. The mesangium is composed mostly of irregular satellite cells 
with large nuclei and cytoplasmic processes, but also has smaller cells with
kidney-shaped nuclei and cytoplasmic processes containing microfilaments. The
mesangium cells are embedded in a collagenous matrix which extends to invade the 
area between the epithelial basement membrane and the capillary endothelium.
These observations are discussed in relation to the structure and function of
vertebrate renal corpuscles with special reference to the mesangium.

PMID: 6484943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Ren Physiol. 1984;7(4):218-26.

Suppression of proteinuria by dipyridamole in rats with aminonucleoside
nephropathy.

Nagase M, Kumagai H, Honda N.

Nephrosis was induced by single injections of puromycin of aminonucleoside to
rats which were divided into two groups; the experimental group receiving
dipyridamole in addition to aminonucleoside and the control group receiving
aminonucleoside alone. 24-hour urinary albumin increased in rats of both groups
after aminonucleoside injections. However, the experimental rats excreted
significantly less albumin than controls. On the contrary, there was no
significant difference in urinary IgG between the two groups. The stainings of
anionic sites of glomerular basement membrane using ruthenium red revealed the
reduction of anionic charge in the glomerular basement membrane of both groups,
but the decrease of anionic charge was suppressed in lamina rara interna of the
experimental rats. Considering the role of charge barrier in the glomerular
basement membrane, it is concluded that the maintenance of anionic charge in
experimental rats is causally related to the suppressed excretion of albumin.

PMID: 6473895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Ciba Found Symp. 1984;108:6-24.

The ultrastructural organization and architecture of basement membranes.

Madri JA, Pratt BM, Yurchenco PD, Furthmayr H.

Basement membranes are ubiquitous complex, multicomponent structures having
diverse functions. They are morphologically distinct and exhibit specific
structural details including the lamina rara and lamina densa. In addition, the
interstitial stroma abutting the lamina densa has a unique organization. While
the composition of basement membranes is still incompletely known, several
components have been identified, including collagen types IV and V, laminin and
heparan sulphate proteoglycan. High resolution immunoelectron microscopic studies
have allowed the development of various models of the organization and
architecture of the basement membrane, suggesting specific localizations of the
various collagen types and specific domains of the collagen molecules, laminin
and other components. In addition, high resolution metal shadow casting
techniques have allowed the development of molecular models of specific
components of the basement membrane and methods of studying the domain structure 
and interactions of these components.

PMID: 6394240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Histochemistry. 1984;81(3):243-6.

Preservation of fixed anionic sites in the GBM in the acute proteinuric phase of 
cationic antigen mediated in-situ immune complex glomerulonephritis in the rat.

Suzuki Y, Maruyama Y, Arakawa M, Oite T.

Cationic antigens have been observed to bind with the negatively charged
glomerular basement membrane (GBM). Using the cationic reagent polyethyleneimine 
(PEI), the distribution of glomerular anionic sites was evaluated
ultrastructurally in the early stage (2 h-day 7) of cationic antigen mediated
in-situ immune complex formation type glomerulonephritis (GN) in the rat. Renal
perfusion via the renal artery with 100 micrograms of cationized human IgG(pI
greater than 9.5), followed by the i.v. injection of specific antibodies, led to 
an initial increase in urinary albumin excretion, subsequent massive globulinuria
and the formation of numerous subepithelial deposits on day 7. The most striking 
alteration in glomerular anionic sites was observed on the epithelial cell
surface coat; the PEI deposition on the epithelial cell surface was almost
identical to that in control glomeruli at 2 and 4 h after the induction of GN;
thereafter, on day 7, a broad loss of anionic sites was observed on flattened
epithelial foot processes. In contrast, fixed anionic sites of the laminae rarae 
of the GBM showed no apparent alterations in the distribution and number from 2 h
to day 7 and did not disappear even in the lamina rara externa adjacent to
subepithelial deposits. These findings not only show that fixed anionic sites of 
the GBM, in contrast to the rapid decrease in those of the epithelial cell
surface, are not completely neutralized or destroyed even in GN, in which
cationic antigen participates in the in-situ formation of GBM-deposits.(ABSTRACT 
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 6238922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. N Engl J Med. 1983 Oct 27;309(17):1001-9.

Heparan sulfate--rich anionic sites in the human glomerular basement membrane.
Decreased concentration in congenital nephrotic syndrome.

Vernier RL, Klein DJ, Sisson SP, Mahan JD, Oegema TR, Brown DM.

Recent work suggests that the normal barrier to penetration of the renal
glomerular basement membrane by anionic plasma proteins may depend in part on the
existence of negatively charged sites within the membrane. We describe an in
vitro cytochemical method for the quantitative demonstration of anionic sites in 
the normal human glomerular basement membrane. In five normal subjects, ranging
in age from 10 days to 57 years, the sites were distributed at regular intervals 
in the lamina rara externa, with a frequency of 23.8 +/- 6.8 sites per 1000-nm
length of membrane. A similar distribution was observed in the basement membranes
from three normal human fetuses. Ex vivo perfusion of one cadaver kidney revealed
a similar distribution of anionic sites. The number of anionic sites in the
glomerular basement membranes of five patients with the congenital nephrotic
syndrome was reduced to 8.9 +/- 3.7 (P less than 0.001). Prior incubation of
sections of normal kidney in purified heparinase resulted in a marked reduction
in the number of anionic sites. We conclude that congenital nephrosis results
from failure of heparan sulfate--rich anionic sites to develop in the lamina rara
externa of the glomerular basement membrane.

PMID: 6225948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Lab Invest. 1983 Oct;49(4):445-52.

Alterations in glomerular anionic sites in autologous immune complex nephritis.

Schneeberger EE, Stavrakis G, McCarthy K.

In the present study in Munich-Wistar rats during the initial stages of
autologous immune complex nephritis (protein excretion 3 to 50 mg/24 hours) we
examined the sequential changes in binding of cationized ferritin to anionic
sites, as well as alterations in staining with colloidal iron of podocyte
membrane sialoglycoprotein and correlated these with changes in glomerular
basement membrane permeability to native ferritin. The results are compared with 
those obtained from rats with advanced autologous immune complex nephritis
(protein excretion 100 to 350 mg/24 hours) and with normal control rats. The
formation of the smallest detectable immune complex deposits was associated with 
a concomitant decrease in binding of cationized ferritin to anionic sites in the 
lamina rara externa in the area of the deposits. This was accompanied by a
diminution in staining by colloidal iron of the epithelial cell coat overlying
the deposits. The staining of the remainder of the epithelial cell glycocalyx,
however, remained unaltered even in the presence of severe proteinuria.
Alterations in the permeability of the glomerular basement membrane to native
ferritin could not be documented until protein excretion exceeded 10 mg/24 hours.
The gradual loss of staining of the epithelial cell glycocalyx adjacent to immune
complexes supports the concept that, as immune complexes are formed in situ by
the interaction of antibodies with a glycoprotein present on the epithelial cell 
surface, they are shed and gradually accumulate in the lamina rara externa.
Furthermore, as the immune complex deposits enlarge they destroy and/or mask the 
heparan sulfate anionic sites in the lamina rara externa resulting in a decreased
number of anionic binding sites for cationized ferritin.

PMID: 6620983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Microvasc Res. 1983 Jul;26(1):36-48.

A survey of the binding of polycationic ferritin in several fenestrated capillary
beds: indication of heterogeneity in the luminal glycocalyx of fenestral
diaphragms.

Bankston PW, Milici AJ.

Polycationic ferritin (PCF) was injected into umbilical veins of 17- and
21-day-gestation rats and saphenous veins of young, male, adult Sprague-Dawley
rats and allowed to circulate for 1 min or less followed by excision of tissues
and immersion fixation. Fetal liver, intestine, and kidney, as well as adult
liver, intestine, pancreas, kidney, adrenal cortex, bone marrow, and pituitary
were examined. Nearly all fenestral diaphragms, but no subendothelial structures,
were labeled with a tuft of particles in fetal intestine, adult intestine,
pancreas, pituitary, and renal peritubular capillaries. A fraction of the
diaphragms covering fenestrae in the thyroid, adrenal cortex, and fetal kidney
glomerulus, but none in the bone marrow and fetal liver, had associated PCF. In
these tissues some diaphragms appeared to be permeable to PCF, because tufts were
observed immediately beneath unlabeled fenestral diaphragms either in the basal
lamina (fetal kidney, adult thyroid, and adrenal cortex) or on other
subendothelial structures (fetal liver, adult bone marrow). Also periodic
concentrations of PCF were observed in the lamina rara interna of the adult
glomerular basement membrane. PCF binding to the fenestral diaphragms and the
basal lamina in the adult intestine and the renal glomerulus, respectively, have 
been reported by Simionescu et al. ((1981a) J. Cell. Biol. 90, 605-613) and
Kanwar and Farquhar ((1979) J. Cell. Biol. 81, 137-153) as indicating
accumulations of anionic material. In this study we have demonstrated not only
high-specificity binding of PCF to fenestral diaphragms in capillaries of organs 
other than intestine and pancreas, but also considerable variation of PCF
stainability of fenestral diaphragms in other organs.

PMID: 6888286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Histochem Cytochem. 1983 Jul;31(7):945-51.

Resolution and limitations of the immunoperoxidase procedure in the localization 
of extracellular matrix antigens.

Courtoy PJ, Picton DH, Farquhar MG.

A double labeling system was used to test the resolution of the indirect
immunoperoxidase procedure in the localization of extracellular matrix
components. A recognizable antigen, cationized ferritin, was first implanted at
specific anionic sites (approximately 60 nm periodicity) in the lamina rara
interna and externa of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and subsequently
localized by immunoperoxidase. The coincidence between the location of reaction
product and the ferritin clusters was assessed. When the amount of immunoadsorbed
peroxidase and time of exposure to the 3,3'-diaminobenzidine (DAB)-containing
medium were limited, discrete deposits of reaction product were observed around
individual ferritin clusters. When immunolabeling was increased, the whole GBM
was stained, and DAB staining was also found along the endothelial plasmalemma
and the epithelial plasmalemma at the base of the foot processes at some distance
(greater than 100 nm) from the ferritin clusters in the laminae rarae. These
findings indicate that oxidized DAB reaction product can diffuse over long
distances and be reabsorbed onto cell membranes. Even under limited incubation
conditions some diffusion of DAB reaction product was encountered. The value and 
limitations of the DAB-peroxidase procedures are discussed.

PMID: 6304184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Exp Med. 1983 Jun 1;157(6):1885-905.

Localization of the membrane attack complex (MAC) in experimental immune complex 
glomerulonephritis.

Koffler D, Biesecker G, Noble B, Andres GA, Martinez-Hernandez A.

The role of the membrane attack complex (MAC) as a mediator of renal tissue
injury was evaluated in rats affected by bovine serum albumin (BSA)-induced
immune complex glomerulonephritis. Immunofluorescence studies revealed concurrent
deposits of IgG, BSA, C3, and the MAC along glomerular capillary walls, although 
the MAC manifested a more restricted distribution than that observed for immune
complexes. Immunoelectron microscopic techniques were utilized to demonstrate
immune complexes, C3, and the MAC within dense deposits in the subepithelial
aspect of the basement membrane. Visceral epithelial foot processes were fused in
areas overlying large dense deposits and exhibited intense staining for the MAC, 
lesser reactivity for C3 but IgG was absent from the foot process membranes.
Smaller granular deposits of immune complexes, C3, and the MAC were observed in
the subendothelial region of the lamina rara interna and the lamina densa. Immune
complexes may activate the classical complement pathway causing diffuse injury to
the glomerular basement membrane (GBM), allowing subepithelial accumulation of
complexes. These observations implicate the MAC as a mediator of GBM and
juxtaposed podocyte membrane injury, thereby contributing to disruption of the
glomerular filtration barrier. IgG and C3 were demonstrated within
tubulointerstitial regions on the surface of collagen fibers in close proximity
to the tubular basement membrane (TBM) of proximal convoluted tubules. Within the
TBM, C3 localization was prominent with diminished reactivity for the MAC, but
IgG was not detectable. The demonstration of C3 and scant MAC deposits in the TBM
of nonimmunized control rats without evidence of interstitial IgG and C3 deposits
suggests that both nonimmune and immune processes play a role in the pathogenesis
of extraglomerular lesions. Evidence derived from these morphologic studies
indicates that the MAC is associated with injury to the GBM, foot process
membranes of visceral epithelium, and the TBM. Further experiments designed to
selectively enhance or inhibit the deposition of MAC and assess consequent renal 
dysfunction are required to substantiate hypotheses concerning the in vivo
membranolytic potential of the MAC in experimental immune complex
glomerulonephritis.

PMCID: PMC2187033
PMID: 6343549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Am J Pathol. 1983 Feb;110(2):170-81.

The effect of charge on the renal distribution of ferritin.

Cohen S, Vernier RL, Michael AF.

The effect of charge on the tissue distribution of ferritin was evaluated in rats
following intravenous administration of 3 monomeric species preparatively
separated by molecular sieve chromatography from aggregated ferritin and having
the same molecular weight but differing only in electrostatic charge: native
ferritin, with a isoelectric point (pI) of 4.5 (NF); cationized ferritin, with a 
pI of 6.4-7.4 (CF 7.0); and cationized ferritin, with a pI of 8.25-8.75 (CF 8.5).
At varying time intervals (30 minutes to 72 hours) after the administration of
these ferritins in a dose of 10 mg/100 g, the levels in the blood were
determined, the tissue (kidney, liver, spleen) distribution semiquantitatively
evaluated by immunofluorescence (IF), and electron microscopic examination (EM)
of the kidney carried out. The following results were obtained: 1) The plasma
levels of CF (8.5) and CF (7.0) were significantly higher than NF after 6 hours. 
NF was not detected after 24 hours, whereas CF continued to circulate at 72
hours. 2) There was a striking decrease in the uptake of CF (7.0) and CF (8.5),
when compared with NF, by Kupffer cells and splenic phagocytes in the red pulp at
all time periods. 3) In the glomerulus, NF was found primarily in the mesangium
and gradually disappeared over a period of 72 hours, whereas CF was present in
greater amounts and persisted for longer periods of time in the mesangium and in 
the peripheral capillary wall. By electron microscopy, CF (8.5) could be seen in 
th lamina rara and within the mesangium in small aggregates aligned parallel to
mesangial cell processes, whereas NF and CF (7.0) were distributed homogeneously 
throughout the mesangial matrix. 4) NF, but not CF, was also observed surrounding
blood vessels and in interstitial phagocytes. These in vivo studies demonstrate
that the electrostatic charge of ferritin affects its uptake in vivo by
components of the mononuclear phagocytic system (MPS). The persistence and
distribution of CF in glomeruli is a consequence of higher blood levels
associated with impaired phagocytic uptake as well as charge-related binding to
sites within the glomeruli.

PMCID: PMC1916140
PMID: 6824064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Cell Tissue Res. 1983;234(2):271-7.

The seasonal distribution of anionic binding sites in the basement membrane of
the kidney glomerulus of the winter flounder Pseudopleuronectes americanus.

Boyd RB, DeVries AL.

The blood of the winter flounder, Pseudopleuronectes americanus, contains small
(3000-8000 daltons) anionic peptides (pI less than 5) with antifreeze properties.
They are present only in the winter and are retained in the circulatory system
even though inulin and polyethylene glycol, of comparable molecular size, are
filtered by the glomerular kidney. Electron micrographs of flounder-kidney
glomeruli revealed that their structure is similar to that of mammals and that
cationized ferritin binds at regular 60 nm intervals in the lamina rara interna
of the basement membrane as it does in mammals. The binding of cationized
ferritin, in conjunction with the previous observation that cationized antifreeze
peptides exhibit a marked increase in renal clearance, suggests that an anionic
repulsion barrier within the glomerular basement membrane of the winter flounder 
is responsible for the conservation of the anionic antifreeze peptide molecules
found in their blood during the winter. This barrier also appears to be present
in summer specimens of the flounder which lack the antifreeze peptide.

PMID: 6640623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol Incl Mol Pathol. 1983;44(2):209-22.

Alteration of glomerular anionic sites by the development of subepithelial
deposits in experimental glomerulonephritis in the rat.

Suzuki Y, Maesawa A, Matsui K, Oite T, Koda Y, Arakawa M.

Using highly cationic polyethleneimine, alteration of glomerular anionic sites
were evaluated ultrastructurally in two types of rat glomerulonephritis (GN);
chronic serum sickness GN and heterologous (passive) or autologous (active)
Heymann's GN. Daily i.v. injections of egg white lysozyme in physiologic saline
into presensitized rats led to the formation of numerous mesangial and
subepithelial deposits. In the non-proteinuric period in which immune deposits
were localized predominantly in the mesangium, anionic sites of the laminae rarae
and the epithelial cell coat were clearly observed. In the subsequent proteinuric
period in which numerous subepithelial deposits were superimposed, a broad loss
of anionic sites in the epithelial cell coat was seen. Splitting and focal loss
of anionic sites on the lamina rara externa adjacent to the subepithelial
deposits were commonly observed both in passive and active Heymann's GN and in
lysozyme GN. These findings indicate that the subepithelial deposits are closely 
involved in the development of proteinuria by injuring the anionic sites,
especially those on lamina rare externa of the glomerular basement membrane.

PMID: 6139911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Cell Biol. 1982 Nov;95(2 Pt 1):425-34.

Preferential distribution of anionic sites on the basement membrane and the
abluminal aspect of the endothelium in fenestrated capillaries.

Simionescu M, Simionescu N, Palade GE.

Cationized ferritin (CF) was injected interstitially to study the distribution of
anionic sites on the basement membrane and abluminal aspect of the endothelium in
the fenestrated capillaries of the mouse pancreas and intestinal mucosa.
Extensive, but uneven removal of the basement membrane was obtained by
collagenase perfusion of the vasculature before CF labeling. In the absence of
collagenase treatment, CF label was essentially restricted to the lamina rara
externa of the basement membrane and occurred in clusters distributed in a
relatively ordered planar lattice. After collagenase digestion, labeling of the
lamina rara interna and of the abluminal aspect of the endothelium became
possible. In the lamina rara interna, the CF label occurred in clusters with a
distribution comparable to that found in the lamina rara externa. On the
abluminal aspect of the endothelium, the plasmalemma proper was extensively,
though variably, labeled. Coated pits were heavily labeled, whereas the membranes
and stomatal diaphragms of plasmalemmal vesicles and transendothelial channels
remained free of CF decoration. In contradistinction with the heavy labeling of
their luminal aspects, the abluminal surface of the fenestral diaphragms were
free of any CF decoration. Pronase treatment removed all anionic sites detectable
by CF binding. The findings establish the existence of differentiated
microdomains on the abluminal aspect of the endothelial plasmalemma and suggest
that the capillary wall selects permeant macromolecules according to charge, in
addition to size.

PMCID: PMC2112948
PMID: 6815207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Tijdschr Kindergeneeskd. 1982 Oct;50(5):121-30.

[The basal membrane of the kidney].

[Article in Dutch]

Monnens LA.

The glomerular basement membrane consists of the lamina densa and two laminae
rarae. The glomerular basement membrane (GBM) functions as both the size and the 
charge barrier to filtration of macromolecules. Several substances have been
localized in the GBM: collagen type IV, V, laminin, entactin, fibronectin,
amyloid P and proteoglycans. Anionic sites are present on the epithelial and
endothelial cell surface (the cell coat or glycocalyx) due to the presence of
sialic acid. The negative charges in the GBM concentrate in the lamina rara
interna and lamina rara externa. This anionic charge is in large part caused by
heparansulphate. Congenital abnormalities of the biochemical composition are
expected in the congenital nephrotic syndrome, in minimal change nephropathy, in 
Alport's syndrome, in Laurence-Moon-Biedl syndrome and in nail-patella syndrome. 
The main function of the tubular basement membrane (TBM) is to provide support to
the epithelium. The chemical composition of TBM differs from the composition of
GBM. Some forms of polycystic disease can perhaps be explained by an abnormal
chemical composition of TBM.

PMID: 6760458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Cell Biol. 1982 Oct;95(1):340-4.

Localization of type IV collagen, laminin, heparan sulfate proteoglycan, and
fibronectin to the basal lamina of basement membranes.

Laurie GW, Leblond CP, Martin GR.

Electron microscopic immunostaining of rat duodenum and incisor tooth was used to
examine the location of four known components of the basement-membrane region:
type IV collagen, laminin, heparan sulfate proteoglycan, and fibronectin.
Antibodies or antisera against these substances were localized by direct or
indirect peroxidase methods on 60-microns thick slices of formaldehyde-fixed
tissues. In the basement-membrane region of the duodenal epithelium, enamel-organ
epithelium, and blood-vessel endothelium, immunostaining for all four components 
was observed in the basal lamina (also called lamina densa). The bulk of the
lamina lucida (rara) was unstained, but it was traversed by narrow projections of
the basal lamina that were immunostained for all four components. In the
subbasement-membrane fibrous elements or reticular lamina, immunostaining was
confined to occasional "bridges" extending from the epithelial basal-lamina to
that of adjacent capillaries. The joint presence of type IV collagen, laminin,
heparan sulfate proteoglycan, and fibronectin in the basal lamina indicates that 
these substances do not occur in separate layers but are integrated into a common
structure.

PMCID: PMC2112347
PMID: 6216257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Am J Clin Pathol. 1982 Sep;78(3):377-80.

IgA pseudo-linear deposits in glomerular basement membranes in dermatitis
herpetiformis.

Bartoli E, Bosincu L, Costanzi G, Denti S, Olmeo NA, Soggia G.

An 18-year-old-woman, with dermatitis herpetiformis, acute glomerulonephritis,
malabsorption and villous atrophy due to massive infiltration of IgA producing
plasma cells was studied. By light microscopy, her renal biopsy specimen showed
heavy immunofluorescence for IgA, a mixed proliferative and membranous lesion
with occasional crescents and focal sclerosis. Electron microscopic examination
revealed three main lesions: (1) swelling and bleb formation in endothelial
cells, (2) extensive fusion of foot processes of podocytes, and (3) a dense
quasi-linear, continuous deposition of immune complexes, encompassing several
loops; they were characteristically located within the basement membrane at the
boundary between the lamina densa and the lamina rara interna. At occasional
points where the immune complexes had reached the outer aspects of the basement
membrane, there was damage to the podocyte cytoplasm. This electron microscopic
aspect supports the interpretation that these immune complexes, although
non-complement fixing, exhibit a high damaging potential, leading to relentless
disease progression.

PMID: 7051809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Kidney Int. 1982 Jul;22(1):8-12.

Impairment of glomerular clearance of macroaggregates in immune complex
glomerulonephritis.

Sharon Z, Schwartz MM, Pauli BU, Lewis EJ.

Autologous immune complex glomerulonephritis (AICGN, Heymann nephritis) in rats
is characterized by the accumulation of immune deposits in a subepithelial
location. Protamine-heparin aggregates with similar localization are normally
cleared by glomerular epithelial cell endocytosis. The kinetics of
protamine-heparin aggregate clearance from the lamina rara externa of the
glomerular basement membrane in rats with AICGN were investigated. In the early
stages of AICGN, the baseline numerical density of protamine-heparin aggregates
at sites of immune deposit accumulation was 37.8 +/- 8.4 (mean +/- SEM)
aggregates per 100 mu, significantly lower than the 71 +/- 6.9 aggregates per 100
mu in the normal appearing, immune deposit free, zone of the glomerular basement 
membrane (P less than 0.05). The aggregates localizing along the normal appearing
parts of the lamina rara externa disappeared according to first order kinetics,
similar to their clearance in normal animals. The numerical density after 3 hr in
this zone of the membrane was 21.7% +/- 3.5 of the baseline at 5 min. By
contrast, at sites of immune deposit accumulation, the aggregates were not
cleared and actually accumulated to 160.9% +/- 12.4 of the baseline at 3 hr. It
is proposed that there is impaired epithelial cell endocytic function in early
AICGN, which could contribute to the perpetuation of the immune-deposit mediated 
lesion.

PMID: 6214656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Histochem Cytochem. 1982 May;30(5):451-8.

Lectin-peroxidase conjugate reactivity in normal human kidney.

Faraggiana T, Malchiodi F, Prado A, Churg J.

The carbohydrate histochemistry of normal human kidney has been investigated by
the use of four peroxidase-labeled lectins at the light and electron microscopic 
level. The results show that the lectin of Lotus tetragonolobus, specific for
l-fucose, binds exclusively to the proximal convoluted tubules of the nephron.
While peanut and soybean lectins, specific for D-galactose and
N-acetyl-D-galactosamine, respectively, are confirmed to the collecting ducts,
wheat germ lectin, specific for sialic acid and N-acetyl-D-glucosamine, stains
several parenchymal structures, including the glomerular capillary wall,
particularly its podocyte cell coat. Sialidase digestion reveals strong binding
sites for peanut and soybean lectin in the glomeruli. At the ultrastructural
level most of the binding is shown to be on the podocyte surface and within the
lamina rara externa of the basement membrane. The technique represents a
potentially very useful tool for the study of various pathological states in the 
kidney.

PMID: 7077075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Kidney Int. 1982 Apr;21(4):565-74.

Altered glomerular permeability as a result of focal detachment of the visceral
epithelium.

Kanwar YS, Rosenzweig LJ.

Changes in the permeability of the glomerular capillary wall (GCW) to native
ferritin (NF), following detachment of the visceral epithelium from the
glomerular basement membrane (GBM) were investigated. Detachment was induced by
either perfusing kidneys with highly purified neuraminidase or by the induction
of nephrosis through administration of puromycin aminonucleoside (PAN). Both
experimental treatments resulted in marked glomerular ultrastructural changes
which were characterized by focal detachment of the visceral epithelium from the 
GBM, replacement of the normal pattern of interdigitating foot processes with
flattened expanses of continuous epithelium at certain areas of the GCW, and a
generalized loss of sialic acid-rich epithelial cell cost in areas where the
epithelium was detached as well as where it remained adherent. These changes were
more frequent and prominent in the paramesangial regions of the glomeruli. When
experimentally treated kidneys were perfused with NF, the tracer leaked into the 
urinary spaces in those areas of the GBM where the epithelium was detached. By
contrast, in those areas of the GCW where the epithelium remained adherent, the
tracer localized within the GBM mainly at the level of the lamina rara interna
(LRI), and none of it appeared in the urinary spaces. Nephrotic and neuraminidase
control kidneys were ultrastructurally normal, NF localizing mainly in the inner 
layers of the GBM. These data are consistent with the idea that the firm
attachment of the epithelial foot processes to the GBM plays a vital role in
determining the permselectivity properties of the GCW to plasma macromolecules.

PMID: 7098274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Am J Pathol. 1982 Apr;107(1):79-91.

The Goodpasture-like syndrome in mice induced by intravenous injections of
anti-type IV collagen and anti-laminin antibody.

Yaar M, Foidart JM, Brown KS, Rennard SI, Martin GR, Liotta L.

Laminin and Type IV collagen are both components of basement membrane. Antibodies
to these two proteins, when injected into mice, were found to accumulate in all
basement membranes examined, but at highest levels in kidney, liver, and spleen. 
An acute respiratory distress syndrome was noted shortly after injection. A
transient segmental proliferative glomerulonephritis was observed both in the
heterologous (early) and autologous (late) phase. The glomerular basement
membrane of mice injected with anti-Type IV collagen antibodies was observed to
be thickened and to contain dense deposits in the lamina rara externa and lamina 
rara interna.

PMCID: PMC1915986
PMID: 6978076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Pathol. 1982 Feb;136(2):133-47.

Ultrastructure of the non-sclerotic glomeruli in childhood nephrotic syndrome.

Yoshikawa N, Cameron AH, White RH.

An electron-microscopic (EM) study of the non-sclerotic glomeruli was made in 96 
children with the nephrotic syndrome in whom light microscopy had shown minimal
change, focal global glomerulosclerosis or segmental glomerulosclerosis. EM
showed a variety of alterations. Foot process fusion, duplication and crenation
of the lamina densa, and granular and lucent expansion of lamina rara interna
were noted in almost all patients in all three groups. Localised ulceration of
the podocytes was noted in some patients in each group. There was no difference
in the mean thickness of the glomerular basal lamina but there was an increase
with age in minimal change. Curious extracellular curved striated bodies,
clusters of electron-dense, round microparticles and microfilaments were found in
all three, but most frequently in segmental glomerular sclerosis. Electron-dense 
deposits were seen in all but one of the patients with segmental glomerular
sclerosis and usually involved the capillary wall. They were seen in one third of
those with minimal change and focal glomerular sclerosis but rarely in the
capillary wall. There were no specific features which distinguished segmental
glomerular sclerosis although the various types of deposits were more extensive
and more frequent than in minimal change and focal glomerular sclerosis. These
observations are consistent with common pathogenetic factors operating at
different intensities in segmental glomerular sclerosis, focal glomerular
sclerosis and minimal change.

PMID: 7199568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Pathol. 1982 Feb;136(2):95-109.

The uptake of cationised ferritin and its subsequent redistribution by
gallbladder epithelium in vivo.

Hopwood D, Milne G, Wood RA.

Cationised ferritin was injected into the gallbladders of guinea pigs at
operation and its subsequent fate studied with an electron microscope over a
24-hr period. The apical cell membrane of the epithelium was tagged and showed
patching. The cationised ferritin was internalised into small vesicles, some
derived from coated pits, within 5 min. Other vesicles were found at the same
time near the lateral cellular membrane. Cationised ferritin was found in
lysosomes and in residual bodies in large quantities and occasionally in
multivesicular bodies and vesicles near the Golgi apparatus. Clumps of
(cationised) ferritin appeared in the lateral intercellular space, 2 hr after
exposure, increasing in number with time up to 5 hr. Similar clumps also were
found between the basal cell membrane and the lamina rara interna of the basement
membrane in a fairly regular pattern. By 5 hr the marker was beginning to pass
through the basement membrane. The process was largely complete by 10 hr.
Twenty-four hours after injection of cationised ferritin, virtually no marker was
found in either the epithelium or underlying connective tissue.

PMID: 7062165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Clin Invest. 1982 Feb;69(2):451-61.

Induction of membranous nephropathy in rabbits by administration of an exogenous 
cationic antigen.

Border WA, Ward HJ, Kamil ES, Cohen AH.

We examined the role of antigenic electrical charge as a determinant of
glomerular immune complex localization in the rabbit. Serum sickness nephritis
was induced in groups of New Zealand white rabbits by daily 25-mg intravenous
injections of bovine serum albumin (BSA) chemically modified to be cationic (pI >
9.5) or more anionic (pI, 3.5-4.6); an additional group received unmodified
native BSA (pI, 4.5-5.1). Factors known to influence immune complex localization,
e.g., molecular size of the administered antigen and resulting circulating immune
complexes, immunogenicity, and disappearance time from the circulation were
examined and found to be similar for both anionic and cationic BSA. Charge
modification did increase the nonimmune clearance of cationic and anionic BSA
compared with native BSA. Injected cationic BSA was shown in paired label
experiments to bind directly to glomeruli compared with native BSA. The renal
lesion produced by cationic BSA was markedly different from that found in rabbits
given anionic or native BSA. Animals receiving cationic BSA uniformly developed
generalized diffuse granular capillary wall deposits of IgG, C3, and BSA detected
after 2 wk of injections and increasing until death at 6 wk. Qualitatively
similar deposits were produced by the administration of low doses of cationic BSA
of only 1 or 10 mg/d. In contrast, the injection of both anionic and native BSA
resulted in mesangial deposits at 2 and 4 wk with capillary wall deposits
appearing by 6 wk. Ultrastructural examination of animals receiving cationic BSA 
revealed pure, extensive formation of dense deposits along the lamina rara
externa of the glomerular basement membrane whereas such deposits were absent or 
rare in animals injected with the anionic or native BSA. Albuminuria was
significantly greater at 6 wk in the groups receiving cationic BSA with a mean of
280 mg/24 h compared with 53 mg/24 h in the combined groups injected with anionic
or native BSA. Blood urea nitrogen values were similar in all groups at 2 and 4
wk but higher in the animals receiving cationic BSA at 6 wk. These experiments
describe the reproducible induction of epimembranous immune deposits by
administration of an exogenous cationic antigen. They suggest that antigenic
charge can play an important role in the pathogenesis of membranous nephropathy
by permitting direct glomerular binding of an antigen and predisposing to in situ
immune complex formation.

PMCID: PMC370995
PMID: 7056856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Cell Biol. 1981 Nov;91(2 Pt 1):427-37.

Structural features of alveolar wall basement membrane in the adult rat lung.

Vaccaro CA, Brody JS.

The ultrastructural characteristics of alveolar (ABM) and capillary (CBM)
basement membranes in the adult rat lung have been defined using tannic acid
fixation, ruthenium red staining, or incubation in guanidine HCl. ABM is dense
and amorphous, has 3- to 5-nm filaments in the lamina rara externa (facing the
alveolus) that run between the lamina densa and the basal cell surface of the
epithelium, has an orderly array of ruthenium red-positive anionic sites that
appear predominantly (79%) on the lamina rara externa, and has discontinuities
beneath alveolar type II cells but not type I cells that allow penetration of
type II cytoplasmic processes into the interstitium of the alveolar wall. The CBM
is fibrillar and less compact than ABM, has no lamina rara filaments, and has one
fifth the number of ruthenium red-positive anionic sites of ABM that appear
predominantly (64%) overlying the lamina densa. Incubation of lung tissue with
Flavobacterium heparinum enzyme or with chondroitinase has shown that ABM anionic
sites represent heparan sulfate proteoglycans, whereas CBM anionic sites contain 
this and other sulfated proteoglycans. The CBM fuses in a local fashion with ABM,
compartmentalizing the alveolar wall into a thick and thin side and establishing 
a thin, single, basement-membrane gas-exchange surface between alveolar air, and 
capillary blood. The potential implications of ABM and CBM ultrastructure for
permeability, cell differentiation, and repair and morphogenesis of the lung are 
discussed.

PMCID: PMC2111956
PMID: 7198126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Histochem Cytochem. 1981 Nov;29(11):1237-42.

Studies on the localization of the glycoprotein GP-2 within the renal glomerulus 
in vivo and in cultured kidney cell strains in vitro.

Oberley TD, Chung AE, Murphy-Ullrich JE, Mosher DF.

Positive staining for the glycoprotein GP-2 was demonstrated in the kidney
glomerulus by use of the indirect peroxidase-labeled antibody technique. At the
ultrastructural level, heaviest staining for GP-2 was demonstrated along the
lamina rara externa and lamina rara interna of the glomerular and tubular
basement membranes, demonstrating definite molecular organization for structures 
which appear amorphous even at the electron microscopic level. However, GP-2 was 
also present in the lamina densa of the glomerular basement membrane, but not of 
the tubular basement membrane. The staining for GP-2 is in contrast to the
predominantly mesangial staining for fibronectin. Using the indirect
immunoperoxidase techniques for kidney cells cultured in vitro, it was
demonstrated that cell surfaces of specific subpopulations of glomerular cells
stained heavily for both fibronectin and GP-2, while renal medullary cells did
not stain at all using specific antiserum to these molecules. GP-2 was present
extracellularly and showed moderate staining in glomerular cell culture, while
fibronectin showed heavy staining in this location.

PMID: 7033360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Am J Pathol. 1981 Nov;105(2):114-20.

Decreased anionic groups and increased permeability precedes deposition of immune
complexes in the glomerular capillary wall.

Melnick GF, Ladoulis CT, Cavallo T.

To verify whether an increase in glomerular permeability precedes the deposition 
of immune complexes in the capillary wall, the following were studied in mice
with lupus nephritis: 1) urinary proteins; 2) glomerular transfer of IgG,
albumin, and anionic ferritin (AF) (isoelectric point, 4.2-4.6); and 3) anionic
groups of the capillary wall as detected by binding of cationized ferritin (CF)
(isoelectric point, 7.5-8.6). The glomeruli were investigated by
immunofluorescence, immunoelectron, and transmission electron-microscopic
studies. Urinary proteins were quantitated and characterized by electrophoresis. 
When mice were 5 months of age, (the time at which pathologic proteinuria was
first detected), immune deposits were few and were confined to the mesangium.
Although AF molecules were largely retained at the level of the lamina rara
interna, focal leakage of albumin and IgG was detected across capillary walls
that were not found to contain immune deposits. Focal and irregular loss of
anionic groups, reflected by decreased binding of CF molecules, occurred in the
laminae rarae of the basement membrane. Foot processes of glomeruli incubated
with CF showed no loss of polyanion. We conclude that the increase in glomerular 
permeability that precedes deposition of immune complexes is due, in part, to
focal loss of anionic groups of the basement membrane.

PMCID: PMC1903882
PMID: 6457533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Am J Anat. 1981 Oct;162(2):89-106.

Cationized ferritin binding to anionic surfaces in normal and aminonucleoside
nephrotic kidneys.

Andrews PM.

The distribution and effects of polycationized ferritin (PCF) bound ot anionic
sites on living plasmalemmas and basal laminae of normal and puromycin
aminonucleoside nephrotic (PAN) kidneys were studied using an in vitro model
system. Immersion of normal glomeruli in physiological saline solutions
containing low concentrations of PCF (0.01 to 0.1 mg/ml) for 10 seconds results
in preferential binding of PCF to microvillous projections on the glomerular
epithelium (i.e., podocytes). Exposure to higher concentrations of PCF (1.0
mg/ml) for 10 seconds results in several layers of PCF distributed evenly over
the urinary aspect of epithelial podocytes. In these short treatment times, the
thin slit diaphragms which span the filtration slits appear to be impermeable to 
PCF. Within several minutes after PCF treatment, ferritin is found within
caveolae on the surface of epithelial podocytes and within numerous pinosomes and
larger endocytic vesicles within these cells. Longer treatment with PCF results
in the narrowing of filtration slit spaces and the formation of junctions between
adjacent podocyte foot processes. Occurringg coincident with these structural
changes is a gradual accumulation of PCF in regular patches along the lamina rara
externa (LRE) of the glomerular basement membrane. Loss of foot processes and
accumulation of PCF in the LRE are prevented by treatment with either
cytochalasin B (25 micro g/ml), D (2 micro g/ml) or incubation at low
temperatures (0-4 degrees C). When PCF-coated glomeruli are incubated in PCF-free
media, the ferritin coat is shed form the free surfaces within 1/2 to 1 hour
except at the tips and sides of microvillous projections. Pretreatment of normal 
glomeruli with neuraminidase or protamine sulfate results in a dramatic reduction
in the binding of PCF to the glomerular epithelial free surface. Treatment of PAN
glomeruli with PCF often results in patchlike distributions of PCF over the
glomerular epithelial free surface. High concentrations of PCF (1.0 mg/ml) bind
preferentially to microvillous projections on the parietal epithelial luminal
surface and in distinct patchlike patterns along the basal laminae of parietal
and tubular epithelial cells.

PMID: 7304471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Wildl Dis. 1981 Oct;17(4):547-54.

Endoparasites and selected infectious agents in bobcats (Felis rufus) from West
Virginia and Georgia.

Watson TG, Nettles VF, Davidson WR.

A total of 143 bobcats (Felis rufus) from West Virginia and 10 bobcats from
Georgia was examined for parasites and selected infectious agents. A total of 31 
species of parasites was recovered including 1 protozoan, 1 trematode, 4
cestodes, 1 acanthocephalan and 24 nematodes. Results indicate bobcats are
important definitive hosts for Sarcocystis sp. and Toxoplasma gondii. Thirteen
species (Paragonimus kellicotti, Spirometra mansonoides, Taenia macrocystis, T.
rileyi, Capillaria putorii, Toxascaris leonina, Toxocara mystax, Ancylostoma
braziliense, A. tubaeforme, Oslerus rostratus, Molineus barbatus, Physaloptera
rara, and Troglostrongylus wilsoni) were considered common components of the
helminth fauna of southeastern bobcats. Host age and/or host density had
significant relationships (P less than or equal to 0.05) to the prevalences of
infection of some parasites. Salmonella spp. were isolated from six bobcats, and 
Yersinia enterocolitica was isolated from a single bobcat. Bobcat populations
studied did not have overt clinical parasitism or disease during the fall and
winter.

PMID: 6802988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Lab Invest. 1981 Jun;44(6):502-6.

Evidence of glomerular epithelial cell endocytosis in vitro.

Schwartz MM, Sharon Z, Bidani AK, Pauli BU, Lewis EJ.

The disappearance rate of protamine-heparin aggregates (PHA) from the lamina rara
externa of the glomerular basement membrane was determined in vitro to better
characterize the clearance mechanism. Sprague-Dawley rats were injected
intravenously with protamine, followed by a neutralizing dose of heparin, and the
glomeruli were isolated and incubated in Dulbecco's tissue culture medium. After 
obtaining a baseline sample, aliquots were taken every 10 minutes for an hour.
The samples were processed for electron microscopy, and the numerical density of 
PHA in the lamina rara externa was determined using a computerized morphometric
technique. Disappearance curves for PHA were constructed by expressing the
numerical density at each point as a percentage of the baseline value and
plotting the logarithm against time. At 37 degree C., the disappearance of PHA
was rapid (t 1/2 = 24 minutes), followed first order kinetics (R2 = 0.9948), and 
was almost complete by 1 hour. The epithelial cells took up PHA by an endocytic
process. Significant inhibition of PHA disappearance was achieved when the
glomeruli were incubated at 4 degree C. and with 10(-3) M NaF. These data
indicate that PHA disappearance is an energy-dependent cell function, and it was 
concluded that glomerular epithelial cell endocytosis is the principal mechanism 
of PHA clearance.

PMID: 7230736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Kidney Int. 1981 May;19(5):663-77.

Immunoenzymatic study of the protein pathway through the glomerular barrier in
rat glomerulonephritides.

Bariety J, Bellon B, Sapin C, Kuhn J, Druet P, Hinglais N, Giraud JP, Belair MF, 
Paing M, Laliberte F.

Circulating anti-horseradish peroxidase (HRP) IgG antibodies were used in the rat
to study the glomerular leakage of proteins in glomerulonephritis (GN) induced by
aminonucleoside (AN) and in glomerulonephritis induced by mercuric chloride to
produce anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM) antibodies. In ANGN, autologous
albumin and fibrinogen were also detected by immunoperoxidase techniques. In both
types of GN, the proteins studied were observed in the glomerular urinary space
and proximal tubular cells. No channels were visible in the lamina densa. No
accumulation of proteins was seen under the epithelial slits that were not
closed. In ANGN, accumulation of proteins was observed in the subepithelial space
where the podocytes act as a barrier (closed slits, subepithelial blind pockets, 
areas covered by broad sheets of cytoplasm), but no accumulation was seen in the 
lamina rara externa under normal or enlarged slits and areas of large epithelial 
cytoplasm detachment. Statistical analysis showed that in ANGN, at the time of
maximal proteinuria, the number of "micropinocytotic" vesicles in the
GBM-embedded part of podocytes was not increased as compared with controls. Such 
vesicles were not labeled. We conclude that in both types of GN, the permeability
of the GBM is diffusely increased and that the plasma proteins pass into the
urinary space via an extracellular pathway.

PMID: 6457201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Am J Pathol. 1981 Jan;102(1):99-107.

Ultrastructural assessment by colloidal iron of the distribution and localization
of anionic sites in human glomerulonephritides.

Hirsch HZ, Ainsworth SK, Spicer SS, Kurtz EH, Brissie RM.

The distribution of anionic sites within glomerular basement membranes from
patients with different glomerulonephritides was examined by the dialyzed
colloidal iron (DI) staining technique. The correlation of ultrastructural
findings with glomerular disease, renal function, and degree of proteinuria
revealed three alterations: 1) speckled DI staining in the lamina densa of
patients with decreasing renal function and a proteinuria of greater than 1 g/24 
hours; 2) an apparent staining disparity and diminution of DI at the lateral
borders of swollen and retracted foot processes with inclination of the foot
processes in the direction of the more weakly staining lateral border; and 3)
heavy DI reaction on the apical of free surfaces of fused foot processes. Human
subjects with a proteinuria of more than 1 g/24 hours display optimal labeling of
the endothelial fenestrae, endothelial cell coat, lamina rara interna, and lamina
rara externa. The staining observed may be explained either on the basis of
direct DI interaction with diffusing plasma proteins secondary to a decrease in
the transglomerular charge barrier consequential to a loss of intrinsic anionic
sites or on the basis of "unmasking" of anionic moieties within the glomerular
basement membrane. Regardless of the mechanism involved, the present study
indicates that a threshold proteinuria of 1 g/24 hours is needed to effect
staining in the lamina densa.

PMCID: PMC1903437
PMID: 7468763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Ren Physiol. 1981;4(2-3):121-30.

Glycosaminoglycans of the glomerular basement membrane in normal and nephrotic
states.

Kanwar YS, Rosenzweig LJ, Kerjaschki DI.

Alterations in the permeability of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) towards
native ferritin (NF) and iodinated albumin (125I-BSA) following removal of the
major glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) of the GBM, heparan sulfate (HS) and hyaluronic
acid (HA), were assessed utilizing the techniques of routine electron microscopy 
and autoradiography, respectively. Kidneys were incubated with heparinase (to
degrade the GAGs of the GBM) and subsequently perfused with either NF or
125I-BSA. Control kidneys, which were not treated with heparinase, showed a low
permeability to both tracers, with NF being confined to the lamina rara interna
and 125I-BSA exhibiting a low level of passage into the urinary spaces (as
indicated by a low density of autoradiographic grains over the urinary spaces).
After heparinase treatment there was an increase in the permeability of the GBM
such that both NF and 125I-BSA passed through the GBM in larger quantities and
entered the urinary spaces. Perfusion of cationized ferritin (CF) into control
kidneys revealed this probe to bind to the HS-rich anionic sites present within
the GBM. Treatment with heparinase resulted in an abolition of the CF binding
thereby indicating that the sites are composed mainly of HS and that HS plays a
key role in establishing the permeability properties of the GBM. The changes in
the pattern of distribution and density of the anionic sites of the GBM following
induction of nephrosis was also studied. Animals were rendered nephrotic by
subcutaneous injections of an aminonucleoside of puromycin and their kidneys
subsequently perfused with either CF or cationized cytochrome c. No difference in
either the pattern of distribution on density of the anionic sites in the GBM of 
nephrotic kidneys was observed when compared to nonnephrotic controls; thus
indicating that the proteinuria associated with aminonucleoside nephrosis might
be due to changes in components of the glomerular capillary wall other than the
anionic sites.

PMID: 7302362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1981 Jan;30(1):84-91.

Dirofilariasis. IV. Glomerulonephropathy induced by Dirofilaria immitis
infection.

Aikawa M, Abramowsky C, Powers KG, Furrow R.

The kidneys of dogs chronically infected with Dirofilaria immitis were studied by
light, electron, and immunofluorescent microscopy. The glomeruli of dogs with
high microfilaremia showed a moderately increased mesangium and thickened
glomerular basement membrane. There was a deposition of electron-dense particles 
which were continuously distributed in the lamina rara interna and lamina densa
of the glomerular basement membrane. Immunofluorescent microscopy showed intense 
IgG deposits in a uniform linear pattern along the glomerular basement membrane. 
This linear deposition of IgG appeared to correspond to continuous distribution
of electron-dense particles in the basement membrane. Microfilariae present in
the glomerular capillary lumens were connected with the capillary endothelial
cells by narrow cytoplasmic bands. The interaction of the worm's internal
substances with the glomerular capillaries through these cytoplasmic bands may
deposit worm antigen on the glomerular capillary wall before antigen-antibody
interaction takes place. These findings suggest that the glomerulopathy seen in
dogs infected with D. immitis is caused by the in situ formation of immune
complexes in the glomerular basement membrane.

PMID: 6452068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Ren Physiol. 1981;4(2-3):137-44.

Glomerular basement membrane: lamina rara, lamina densa.

Martinez-Hernandez A, Marsh CA, Horn JF, Munoz E.

Electron immunohistochemical and histochemical studies of glomerular and tubular 
basement membranes were undertaken to elucidate the relationship between lamina
rara and lamina densa. Our results indicate that the lamina rara is not a
fixation artifact and it has common antigenic determinants with lamina densa
(type IV collagen antigens). Therefore, lamina rara has to be considered an
integral component of basement membranes, and biochemical preparations containing
only lamina densa should not be considered representative of the whole basement
membrane.

PMID: 6171021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cell Tissue Res. 1981;220(3):589-97.

Ruthenium rad staining and tannic acid fixation of dental basement membrane.

Meyer JM, Staubli A, Ruch JV.

Ruthenium red staining and tannic acid fixation were used to analyse the fine
structure of embryonic mouse dental basement membrane in intact first mandibular 
molars or in EDTA-isolated dental papillae. Preameloblasts are separated from
extracellular matrix proper by a basal lamina that contains regularly arranged
proteoglycan granules of about 10 nm in diameter. This distribution pattern is
particularly evident in the inner and outer lamina rara of the basal lamina
associated with EDTA-isolated dental papillae. The plasmalemma of preameloblasts 
demonstrates electron dense plaques on the inner leaflet. Ruthenium red positive 
granules (50 nm in diameter) coat nonstriated and striated fibrils of the matrix.
Hyaluronidase treatment digested the ruthenium red positive granules. Tannic acid
fixation allowed the demonstration of filaments within the lamina rara interna,
connecting the lamina densa with plasmalemma of preameloblasts. These
observations are discussed in the context of the terminal differentiation of
odontoblasts.

PMID: 6170451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Exp Med. 1980 Nov 1;152(5):1162-74.

Amyloid P-component is a constituent of normal human glomerular basement
membrane.

Dyck RF, Lockwood CM, Kershaw M, McHugh N, Duance VC, Baltz ML, Pepys MB.

Glomerular and other vascular basement membranes were found to contain an antigen
that was immunochemically indistinguishable from serum amyloid P-component. There
was no immunological cross-reactivity between antisera to serum amyloid
P-component and to collagen types I, III, IV, or V. The amyloid P-component
antigen was confined to the endothelial aspect, the lamina rara interna, of
glomerular basement membrane. It could not be eluted by high-ionic-strength
saline, EDTA, dithiothreitol, or either polar or nonpolar detergents, but was
released into solution when isolated glomerular basement membrane was digested by
highly purified bacterial collagenase. Most of these P-component molecules and
their constituent polypeptide chains were of higher molecular weight and lower
isoelectric point than serum amyloid P-component. These findings indicate that,
as well as being a normal plasma protein and a universal constituent of amyloid
deposits, P-component is also a normal matrix glycoprotein of basement membrane
in which it is covalently linked to collagen and/or other matrix proteins. This
may be relevant both to the pathogenesis of amyloidosis and to other aspects of
physiology and pathology of basement membranes.

PMCID: PMC2186010
PMID: 7000964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Cell Biol. 1980 Aug;86(2):682-7.

Ultrastructural localization of fibronectin and laminin in the basement membranes
of the murine kidney.

Madri JA, Roll FJ, Furthmayr H, Foidart JM.

Affinity-purified rabbit antibodies specific for two large noncollagenous
gycoproteins--laminin and fibronectin--were used to study the distribution of
these proteins in normal murine kidneys. Immunofluorescence staining of
conventional frozen sections demonstrates fibronectin within mesangial areas of
the glomerulus. Laminin is also found in mesangial areas. However, it also
appears to be distributed in typical basement membranelike patterns on glomerular
and tubular basement membranes and Bowman's capsule. At the ultrastructural
level, by labeling 600-800-A thick frozen sections with a three-stage procedure
consisting of specific antibodies, biotinyl sheep anti-rabbit IgG, and
avidin-ferritin conjugates, fibronectin is present ony in the mesangial matrix
and is specifically localized to areas immediately surrounding mesangial cell
processes. Laminin, on the other hand, is found uniformly distributed throughout 
tubular basement membranes, the mesangial matrix, and Bowman's capsule. In
glomerular basement membranes, laminin labeling is restricted to the lamina rara 
interna and adjacent regions of the lamina densa.

PMCID: PMC2111490
PMID: 6995470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Cell Biol. 1980 Aug;86(2):688-93.

Increased permeability of the glomerular basement membrane to ferritin after
removal of glycosaminoglycans (heparan sulfate) by enzyme digestion.

Kanwar YS, Linker A, Farquhar MG.

Glomerular basement membranes (GBM's) were subjected to digestion in situ with
glycosaminoglycan-degrading enzymes to assess the effect of removing
glycosaminoglycans (GAG) on the permeability of the GBM to native ferritin (NF). 
Kidneys were digested by perfusion with enzyme solutions followed by perfusion
with NF. In controls treated with buffer alone, NF was seen in high concentration
in the capillary lumina, but the tracer did not penetrate to any extent beyond
the lamina rara interna (LRI) of the GBM, and litte or no NF reached the urinary 
spaces. Findings in kidneys perfused with Streptomyces hyaluronidase (removes
hyaluronic acid) and chondroitinase-ABC (removes hyaluronic acid, chondroitin 4- 
and 6-sulfates, and dermatan sulfate, but not heparan sulfate) were the same as
in controls. In kidneys digested with heparinase (which removes most GAG
including heparan sulfate), NF penetrated the GBM in large amounts and reached
the urinary spaces. Increased numbers of tracer molecules were found in the
lamina densa (LD) and lamina rara externa (LRE) of the GBM. In control kidneys
perfused with cationized ferritin (CF), CF bound to heparan-sulfate rich sites
demonstrated previously in the laminae rarae; however, no CF binding was seen in 
heparinase-digested GBM's, confirming that the sites had been removed by the
enzyme treatment. The results demonstrated that removal of heparan sulfate (but
not other GAG) leads to a dramatic increase in the permeability of the GBM to NF.

PMCID: PMC2111494
PMID: 6447156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Histopathology. 1980 Jul;4(4):351-67.

Ultrastructure of transplant glomerulopathy.

Hsu HC, Suzuki Y, Churg J, Grishman E.

Thirty-one specimens of tissue were obtained from 15 renal allografts 3-96 months
after transplantation and studied by light, electron and in some cases also by
immunofluorescence microscopy. All patients had a degree of renal insufficiency
and almost all had proteinuria and moderate hypertension; nephrotic syndrome was 
present in one and hematuria in two. On histological examination one patient
showed cellular proliferation suggestive of glomerulonephritis (recurrent or de
novo) and another patient had numerous crescents. The most frequent glomerular
lesion was widening of the lamina rara interna with subendothelial accumulation
of finely granular material, formation of new subendothelial basement membrane
and deposition of microfibrils and fine filaments. The mesangial changes were
mainly those of mesangiolysis and mesangial sclerosis with deposition of
mesangial matrix and microfibrils, but little cellular proliferation. Fragmented 
red blood cells were seen in nearly half of the patients. In another seven
patients the lesion resembled focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. This
combination of changes termed transplant glomerulopathy leads to diffuse
glomerular sclerosis. Arterial intimal thickening and occasionally also
thrombosis produced ischaemic changes in the kidney and in the glomeruli and
contributed significantly to the process of transplant rejection.

PMID: 7000658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Histochem Cytochem. 1980 May;28(5):441-52.

Methods for immunoelectron microscopy: Localization of antigens in rat kidney.

Sisson SP, Vernier RL.

This study evaluated a variety of fixatives and methods of tissue preparation for
application of the direct peroxidase-labeled antibody technique to rat kidney
specimens. Tissue ultrastructure was most satisfactorily preserved and the
antigens studied (rabbit IgG, human IgG, and rat Tamm-Horsfall protein (THP) were
adequately preserved after brief fixation with 1% glutaraldehyde (15 min), a
mixture of paraformaldehyde (1%) and glutaraldehyde (0.05%), or a
paraformaldehyde, lysine, periodate fixative. Glycerol substitution was
considered an important step which minimized ice crystal artifacts. Freezing and 
thawing were essential steps that facilitated adequate penetration of labeled
antibody to specific antigenic sites. The distribution of injected rabbit IgG
(anti-rat glumorular basement membrane (GBM) antibody) was predominately on the
lamina rara interna and externa of the GBM. Injected aggregated human IgG was
found primarily within the spaces between glomerular mesangial cells. Rabbit
anti-rat THP was localized primarily on the infolding membranes of cells of the
ascending thick limb of Henle. We suggest that the methods described may have
wide application.

PMID: 6991591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cell Tissue Res. 1980;206(1):1-20.

Changes in glomerular structure after sexual maturation and seawater adaptation
in males of the euryhaline teleost Gasterosteus aculeatus L.

de Ruiter AJ.

In sexually mature male sticklebacks, the renal tubular cells are transformed
from ion reabsorbing to mucus secreting cells and in these fish concomitant
changes take place in the glomeruli. The present study compares glomerular
structure of immature males in fresh water (controls) to those of mature males in
fresh water and to immature male sticklebacks in seawater. Glomerular structure
is markedly altered in the latter two groups and the changes are similar to a
large extent. In these two groups the renal capsules and glomeruli are smaller
and the lumina of the glomerular capillaries decrease in diameter, while the
number and size of the endothelial fenestrations are reduced. Mesangial cells
proliferate and the mesangial matrix greatly expands in both the centrolobular
region and the subendothelial space around the capillaries. The secretory
activity of the podocytes is enhanced and is responsible for the observed
increase in thickness of the outer layer of the basal lamina, the lamina rara
externa. The area covered by the filtration slit membranes is reduced, probably
as a consequence of fusion of the pedicels of the podocytes. The permeability
characteristics of the glomerular filtration barrier for macromolecules, as
studied with ferritin injections, remain unaltered. However, the observed
differences point to a reduction of the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) during
maturation in male sticklebacks, as well as during adaptation of sticklebacks to 
seawater. This conclusion is in line with physiological evidence.

PMID: 7357588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Lab Invest. 1980 Jan;42(1):59-64.

Glomerular permeability: focal loss of anionic sites in glomeruli of proteinuric 
mice with lupus nephritis.

Kelley VE, Cavallo T.

The charge-based barrier of the glomerular capillary filter was investigated in
normal mice and in mice with immune complex lupus nephritis. Cationized ferritin 
(CF), pI 7.7 To 8.5, was used as a molecular probe of fixed anionic sites. Mice
with various degrees of proteinuria and severity of glomerulonephritis were
systemically injected with CF and their glomeruli studied ultrastructurally
employing morphometric methods. A decreased and erratic localization of CF was
observed in the lamina rara externa, in the intervening basement membrane between
immune deposits, and in basement membrane projections, areas previously shown to 
be abnormally permeably to a large anionic protein. In small numbers, CF
molecules were found in residual epithelial slits and in the urinary space. In
normal mice, CF regularly labeled the laminae rarae of the glomerular basement
membrane and the slit pore area but not leak into the urinary space. Such
differences in CF localization in capillary loops of proteinuric and normal mice 
were confirmed by morphometric estimate of particle counts. Focal areas of
increased permeability to anionic protein are deficient of and/or exhibit a
disorderly redistribution of fixed anionic sites.

PMID: 6444331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Kidney Int. 1979 Oct;16(4):497-504.

Glomerular microfibrils in renal disease: a comparative electron microscopic
study.

Hsu HC, Churg J.

Microfibrils are a common component of connective tissue that have been described
only rarely in the renal glomerulus. Structurally, microfibrils are fibrotubules 
with an average diameter of 12 nm, a lucid core, and a dark periphery. High
resolution electron microscopy, including stereo microscopy performed on renal
biopsy tissues, demonstrated the presence of microfibrils under the endothelium
of the capillary walls and in the mesangium in several glomerular diseases. These
diseases were characterized by widening of lamina rara interna or separation of
the endothelium from the basement membrane, among them transplant glomerulopathy,
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (including a case associated with Marfan
syndrome), preeclamptic toxemia, and less frequently hemolytic-uremic syndrome
and malignant hypertension. The number of microfibrils generally correlated with 
the degree of subendothelial widening.

PMID: 548595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Cell Biol. 1979 Apr;81(1):137-53.

Anionic sites in the glomerular basement membrane. In vivo and in vitro
localization to the laminae rarae by cationic probes.

Kanwar YS, Farquhar MG.

Cationized ferritin (CF) of narrow pI range (7.3-7.5) and the basic dye ruthenium
red (RR) have been used as cationic probes to partially characterize anionic
sites previously demonstrated in the glomerular basement membrane (GBM). When CF 
was given i.v. to normal rats and the left kidney was fixed by perfusion 15 min
thereafter, clusters of CF molecules were found throughout the lamina rara
interna (LRI), lamina rara externa (LRE), and mesangial matrix distributed at
regular (approximately 60 nm) intervals. When kidneys were perfused with aldehyde
fixative containing RR, small (20 nm) RR-stained particles were seen in the same 
locations distributed with the same 60 nm repeating pattern, forming a
quasiregular, lattice-like arrangement. Fine (approximately 3 nm) filaments
connected the sites and extended between them and the membranes of adjoining
endothelial and epithelial cells. When CF was given i.v. followed by perfusion
with RR in situ, both probes localized to the same sites. CF remained firmly
bound after prolonged perfusion with 0.1-0.2 M KCl or NaCl. It was displaced by
perfusion with buffers of high ionic strength (0.4-0.5 M KCl) or pH (less than
3.0 or greater than 10.0). CF also bound (clustered at approximately 60 nm
intervals) to isolated GBM's, and binding was lost when such isolated GBM's were 
treated with buffers of high ionic strength or pH. These experiments demonstrate 
the existence of a quasi-regular, lattice-like network of anionic sites in the
LRI and LRE and the mesangial matrix. The sites are demonstrable in vivo (by CF
binding), in fixed kidneys (by RR staining), and in isolated GBM's (by CF
binding). The results obtained with CF show that the binding of CF (and probably 
also RR) to the laminae rarae is electrostatic in nature since it is displaced by
treatment with buffers of high ionic strength or pH. With RR the sites resemble
in morphology and staining properties the proteoglycan particles found in
connective tissue matrices and in association with basement membranes in several 
other locations.

PMCID: PMC2111521
PMID: 90048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1978 Oct 15;173(8):995-7.

Gastrointestinal helminths in dogs from a humane shelter in Indiana.

Kazacos KR.

Between January 1975 and August 1976, the alimentary tracts of 104 euthanatized
dogs from a humane shelter in Tippecanoe County, Indiana, were examined to
determine the prevalence of gastrointestinal helminths. The survey was restricted
to dogs greater than 1 year old. Their average age was estimated at approximately
2 years. Parasitism was detected in 86.5% of the dogs examined. Ancylostoma
caninum was found most often (58.7%), followed by Trichuris vulpis (51.9%),
Taenia sp (31.7%), Toxocara canis (18.3%), Dipylidium caninum (16.3%), Toxascaris
leonina (8.7%), and Physaloptera rara (3.8%). Monospecific infections were found 
in 22.1% of the dogs, whereas concurrent infections with 2 or more species were
found in 64.4% of the dogs. Most commonly encountered were dogs infected with 2
species of parasites (39.4%), of which hookworms plus whipworms were found most
often (32.7%). Male dogs had a higher percentage of multiple infections than did 
female dogs.

PMID: 721684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Clin Exp Immunol. 1978 Sep;33(3):463-73.

Autoimmune glomerulotubular nephropathy in mice.

Bolton WK, Benton FR, Sturgill BC.

We produced an autoimmune glomerulotubular nephropathy in Swiss-Webster mice
using human glomerular antigen in Freund's complete adjuvant. The disease is
associated with circulating antibody to both mouse and human glomerular basement 
membranes (GBM) and tubular basement membranes (TBM). All mouse IgG subgroups are
deposited initially in a linear pattern along the GBM and TBM. IgG deposition
remains linear, while that of the other subgroups assumes a granular GBM pattern 
with continued linear TBM deposits. Despite tissue deposition of antibody capable
of C-3 fixation, no C-3 is found in vivo along the GMB or TBM, nor is there C-3
fixation in vitro. This appears to be related to spatial limitations of IgG
molecule attachment to basement membranes. A unique ultrastructural lesion of the
GMB developed, characterized by periodic expansions of the lamina rara externa to
form a beaded pattern. Eluate of nephritic kidneys contained all subgroups of
IgG, but mainly IgG1 fixed in vitro to mouse kidney and in vivo when injected
intravenously into normal mice. Fixation of other IgG subgroups in vivo may have 
resulted from antibody formation to abnormally formed GBM, thereby accounting for
the peculiar ultrastructural findings and tissue fixation characteristics of the 
eluted immunoglobulin. Abnormal proteinuria without glycosuria or lysozymuria
developed in test animals as compared to controls. Our model is similar in
certain aspects to previously described models of Stebley nephritis, but differs 
because of the total involvement of TBMs, unique ultrastructural lesions, and
dissimilarity to other reports of this model in mice.

PMCID: PMC1537451
PMID: 367649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Chir (Paris). 1978 Aug-Sep;115(8-9):453-6.

[Ileal and appendicular endometriosis (author's transl)].

[Article in French]

Thorbeck RV.

A bibliographical review it's been made on the base of a double rara localization
of endometriosis: ileal and appendicular, marking the diagnostic difficulties
found appendicular, marking the diagnostic-difficulties found before and after
surgery, emphasizing the interest of the histological integrity and motivity of
intestinal mucosa.

PMID: 721916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nephron. 1978;22(1-3):91-6.

Endocytosis: a property of the glomerular visceral epithelial cell.

Lewis EJ, Schwartz MM, Pauli BU, Sharon Z.

The sequential intravenous injections of protamine and heparin into rats results 
in the deposition of protamine-heparin aggregates along the lamina rara externa
of the glomerular basement membrane. Morphologic studies indicate that these
foreign aggregates are removed from the glomerular basement membrane by virtue of
phagocytic activity by the glomerular visceral epithelial cells. We have studied 
the disappearance rate of protamine-heparin aggregates from the glomerular
basement membrane in animals given a single dose of these compounds and in
animals receiving chronic administration. The disappearance rate was measured
utilizing a computerized morphometric technique to determine the numerical
density of protamine-heparin aggregates per 100 micrometer glomerular basement
membrane in sequential biopsy specimens taken from 15 to 600 min post-injection. 
The disappearance rate described a linear function in both acute and chronic
animals, with a half-disappearance time of approximately 120 min. Disappearance
of the aggregates appeared to be due to epithelial cell phagocytosis. This model 
provides a method of studying this function in the intact glomerulus in both
normal and disease states.

PMID: 745642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Pediatrics. 1977 Apr;59(4):513-25.

The clinical, biochemical, and familial presentation of type V
hyperlipoproteinemia in childhood.

Kwiterovich PO Jr, Farah JR, Brown WV, Bachorik PS, Baylin SB, Neill CA.

Primary type V hyperlipoproteinemia was identified in two preadolescent children.
The propositus (kindred N) was a 10-year-old girl with severely creamy plasma,
lipemia retinalis, hypertriglyceridemia (triglyceridelevel, 6,800 mg/100 ml), and
ypercholesterolemia (cholesterol level, 490 mg/100 ml). Her parents and an
8-year-old sister all had endogenous hypertriglyceridemia (type IV
hyperlipoproteinemia). In kindred A, an 11-year-old boy had triglyceride levels
as high as 1,100 mg/100 ml and recurrent abdominal pain. His father had type V
hyperlipoproteinemia; his mother was normal. All three of his older teenage
siblings had type IV hyperlipoproteinemia. The enzymatic activities of
lipoprotein lipase (LPL), hepatic triglyceride lipase (HTL), and histaminase (H) 
were studied in postheparin plasma. The LPL level was low in the children and
both parents in kindred N. LPL level in kindred A was normal, except for one
child with type IV hyperlipoproteinemia. HTL level was normal to above normal in 
both kindreds. Most patients had a normal H level, but one parent (kindred N) had
no preheparin H and very low levels of postheparin H. There was a strong
correlation (r = 0.58, significant at less than 1% level) between release of LPL 
and H but not between HTL and H (r= 0.22). The mean (+/- 1 S.D.) levels of the
enzymes were as follows: LPL, 2.8 +/- 0.7 micronmol/ml/hr in kindred N and 5.4
+/- 2.2 micronmol/ml/hr in kindred A; H, 13.4 +/- 6.8 units/ml in kindred N and
22.0 +/- 11.9 units/ml in kindred A; and HTL, 18.0 +/- 7.1 micronmol/ml/hr in
kindred N and 14.9 +/- 6.3 micronmol/ml/hr in kindred A. The enzymatic activities
of kindreds N and A were significantly different for LPL (P less than .001) and H
(.025 less than P less than .05) but not for HTL. All but one child had at least 
one high insulin level, which was accompanied by hyperglycemia in two children.
The hypertriglyceridemia in all but one child was ameliorated on therapeutic
diets. These data suggest that the genetic basis of the hypertriglyceridemia in
these two families is different and that hyperchylomicronemia in childhood is not
confined to the rara type I hyperliporproteinemia.

PMID: 191790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1976 May;73(5):1646-50.

Distribution of annionic sites in glomerular basement membranes: their possible
role in filtration and attachment.

Caulfield JP, Farquhar MG.

Lysozyme (pI = II) has been used to identify anionic sites in the glomerular
capillary wall. A solution of 1-3% lysozyme was perfused into the left kidney at 
varying rates. After perfusion, the kidney was fixed in situ and processed for
electron microscopy. Lysozyme was seen as an electron-dense deposit which was not
present when succinylated lysozyme (pI = 4.5) or myoglobin (pI = 6.9) was
perfused instead of native lysozyme. First, the epithelial cell plasma membrane
was outlined by a 300-400 A electron-dense layer. Second, there were discrete
dense deposits in the subepithelial portions (lamina rara externa) of the
basement membrane which, in normal sections, extended from the epithelial cell
membrane to the lamina densa and, in grazing section, formed a continuous
reticular pattern.

PMCID: PMC430356
PMID: 1064037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Lab Invest. 1976 Apr;34(4):415-27.

Glomerular permeability to proteins. Effects of hemodynamic factors on the
distribution of endogenous immunoglobulin G and exogenous catalase in the rat
glomerulus.

Ryan GB, Hein SJ, Karnovsky MJ.

The distribution of endogenous immunoglobulin G (IgG) and exogenous catalase was 
delineated in the rat glomerulus under normal and abnormal hemodynamic
conditions. IgG was identified by an ultrastructural immunoperoxidase technique
using antirat IgG Fab fragments conjugated to horseradish peroxidase; catalase
was identified by a cytochemical reaction. When superficial glomeruli in
anesthetized Munich-Wistar rats were rapidly fixed in situ by dripping
glutaraldehyde onto the renal surface, IgG and catalase were largely confined to 
the glomerular capillary lumen, with only small amounts in the lamina rara
interna immediately beneath the endothelial fenestrae, and none deeper in the
basement membrane (GBM) or in the urinary space. If cortical tissue was subjected
to routine immersion fixation, or if fixation was performed in situ after
ligation of the renal artery, IgG and catalase were found throughout the GBM but 
not in the urinary space. If fixation was performed in situ after ligation of the
renal artery and vein (or artery, vein, and ureter), IgG and catalase were found 
in the GBM and in the urinary space. If blood flow was restored for 10 minutes
after 5 minutes of occlusion of the renal artery and vein, the distribution of
IgG and catalase returned to that seen during good blood flow, i.e. neither
showed significant penetration beyond the endothelial layer. Thus, as was found
previously for albumin, glomerular barrier function for IgG and catalase depends 
upon the maintenance of normal blood flow conditions. We propose that such
conditions impose functional restrictions may be mediated by molecular sieving
phenomena during normal ultrafiltration across the GBM, perhaps in association
with concentration-polarization or charge effects or both. The epithelial slit
pores may significantly modulate solute flux across the GBM by controlling the
over-all rate of hydrodynamic flow during ultrafiltration.

PMID: 1263444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Pathology. 1976 Apr;8(2):117-26.

Experimental autoimmune glomerulonephritis in the rat. II. A histopathological
and fine structural study.

McCausland IP, Herdson PB, Gavin JB.

Human glomerular basement membrane (GBM) emulsified in Freund's complete adjuvant
was injected into 16 Holtzman rats. Eleven (69%) of them subsequently developed
glomerulonephritis. This disease was characterized by glomerular changes which
included focal lobular hypercellularity due to localized hyperplasia of
intracapillary (mesangial or endothelial) cells which often obstructed glomerular
capillaries. Later, affected lobules showed necrosis of intracapillary cells, and
capillary lumina were filled with homogeneous eosinophilic material. An
immunoperoxidase technique revealed autologous anti-GBM antibody in all 3 layers 
of the GBM and in some regions it was present in greater amount in the lamina
rara interna and externa than in the lamina densa. Experimental auto-immune
glomerulonephritis in the rat is thus characterized morphologically by a focal
proliferative glomerulonephritis which proceeds to focal glumerulosclerosis.

PMID: 972770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Lab Invest. 1976 Jan;34(1):43-59.

Alterations of the glomerular epithelium in acute aminonucleoside nephrosis.
Evidence for formation of occluding junctions and epithelial cell detachment.

Caulfield JP, Reid JJ, Farquhar MG.

The visceral glomerular epithelium of rats made nephrotic by daily injections of 
puromycin aminonucleoside was examined from the time of onset of proteinuria (day
6) to the time when many animals die (day 15) in order to establish the
chronology of the pathologic alterations which occur during the course of the
disease. In addition, the structure of the residual epithelial slits was examined
using special fixatives and freeze-fracture. Changes seen early in the disease (7
to 9 days) are: (1) a reduction in the number of foot processes and filtration
slits; (2) occurrence of occluding junctions in many of the residual slits
coupled with displacement of the slit diaphragms; (3) thinning of the dense
central portion of the basement membrane (lamina densa) with a corresponding
widening of the space (lamina rara externa) between it and the epithelium; (4)
heightened epithelial pinocytosis with increased numbers of protein absorption
droplets or lysosomes. In freeze-fracture preparations the occluding junctions
were seen to be limited in extent and made up of only a few strands, indicating
they are incomplete and represent occluding maculae or fasciae rather than
zonulae. Later on in the disease (10 to 15 days) no further changes in the number
or arrangement of slits is evident, but other alterations occur: (1) denuded
regions of basement membrane are seen where there is initially partial and
eventually complete detachment of the epithelium from the basement membrane; (2) 
increasing numbers of large vacuoles or phagosomes and decreasing numbers of
fully condensed lysosomes are present; and (3) basement membrane-like material is
seen in the spaces between the partially detached epithelium and basement
membrane. The new findings in this study are: (1) the clarification of early
(reversible) versus late (probably irreversible) changes in the glomerular
epithelium in a acute aminonucleoside nephrosis; (2) delineation of the structure
of the residual epithelial slits; (3) the description of progressive loosening of
the attachment between the epithelium and the basement membrane leading to focal 
or complete epithelial cell detachment; (4) the presentation of evidence
indicating that exhaustion of the lysosomal system of the glomerular epithelium
(in protein absorption and concentration) occurs late in the disease. The
available evidence is summarized and indicates that the glomerular basement
membrane, the main glomerular filter, is defective in aminonucleoside nephrosis
and allows increased protein leakage. However, it seems likely that the main site
of action of aminonucleoside is on the epithelium leading to the production of
defective basement membrane.

PMID: 1246124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Invest Urol. 1976 Jan;13(4):321-4.

A brief note on the ultrastructure of renal glomeruli in acutely hyperuricemic
rats.

Mwasi LM, Waisman J, Bluestone R, Klinenberg JR.

Male Wistar rats fed 2 per cent oxonic acid plus 3 per cent uric acid for 3 weeks
developed hyperuricemia and an extraordinary uricosuria. The kidneys had gross
abnormalities similar to those seen in humans with gouty nephropathy. The
cortical surfaces were granular and the kidneys had uric acid and urate deposits 
in the intratubular and intestitial spaces of the medullary region. Both
histologic and ultrastructural studies of the glomeruli failed to disclose any
unusual morphologic changes. Glomerular cells were normal and glomerular basement
membranes maintained the granular structure of the lamina densa with a clear
demarcation between the lamina rara externa and lamina rara interna. These
morphologic findings suggest that in acutely hyperuricemic rats with a lesion
comparable to hyperuricemic tubular blockade, there is no associated glomerular
alteration.

PMID: 1245397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Kidney Int. 1976 Jan;9(1):36-45.

Distribution of endogenous albumin in the rat glomerulus: role of hemodynamic
factors in glomerular barrier function.

Ryan GB, Karnovsky MJ.

Using an ultrastructural immunoperoxidase technique, the distribution of
endogenous albumin in the rat glomerulus was delineated under normal and abnormal
hemodynamic conditions. Superficial glomeruli in anesthetized Munich-Wistar rats 
were rapidly fixed in situ by applying glutaraldehyde to the renal surface. Fixed
tissue slices were treated with anti-rat albumin Fab fragments conjugated to
horseradish peroxidase (HRP), and were then subjected to the Graham-Karnovsky
ultrastructural peroxidase localization procedure. During normal blood flow,
dense reaction product specific for albumin was largely confined to the
glomerular capillary lumen and endothelial fenestrae, with only small amounts
detectable in the lamina rara interna, and none deeper in the basement membrane
(GBM) or in the urinary space. If cortical tissue was subjected to routine
immersion fixation, or if fixation was performed in situ after ligation of the
renal artery, reaction product was detected throughout the GBM and in the urinary
space. If fixation was performed in situ after ligation of the renal artery and
vein (or artery, vein and ureter), reaction product was found in the GBM and, in 
very large amounts, in the urinary space. If blood flow was restored for ten
minutes after five minutes of renal pedicle (artery and vein) occlusion, the
distribution of albumin returned to normal. Thus, glomerular barrier function
depends upon the maintenance of normal blood flow conditions.

PMID: 940256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Res Exp Med (Berl). 1975 Sep 24;165(3):191-7.

[Method for the isolation of human glomerular basement membrane (author's
transl)].

[Article in German]

Nagano M, Kawamura M, Kawanishi M, Suzuki A.

In order to obtain pure glomerular basement membrane for chemical analysis, we
could develop the following method. The isolated glomeruli are treated with a
0.08% polyoxyethylene-sorbitaine-monooleate for 3-5 minutes and they are
homogenized in this detergent. The homogenate obtained is placed in a sucrose
gradient with the specific density between 1021 to 1081. After standing for 30
minutes in a refrigator, the homogenate was separated into three layers. The
uppermost layer contained fragmented cell debris, the second layer was consisted 
of the endothelial and epithelial cells. In the third layer, which was clearly
separated from upper two layers by the translucent zone, the basement membrane
were found. The position of the third layer is different in normal and
pathological glomeruli, and the width of the layer is very narrow. According to
this method only a very little contamination with other glomerular cell fraction 
is observed. The application of the 0.08% polyoxyethylene-sorbitane-monooleate
did not induce any appreciable change in the structure of basement membrane,
because carbohydrate composition and sialic acid content of this preparation were
essentially identical with the data reported by several authors who prepared
basement membrane by ultrasonic method. Electron microscope also revealed that
the isolated glomerular basement membrane preserved lamina densa completely
attached with partly stripped lamina rara interna and externa. Our method to
break glomeruli is inexpensive and less time-consuming than the breakage with
ultrasonic vibration. Isolation procudure with density gradient is obviously
superior to the simple centrifugation or settling method adopted by others.

PMID: 1162182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Exp Med. 1975 Jul 1;142(1):61-83.

The permeability of glomerular capillaries of aminonuceoside nephrotic rats to
graded dextrans.

Caulfield JP, Farquhar MG.

Graded dextrans were used as tracers to study glomerular permeability in
nephrotic rats. Two narrow range fractions were used, one which was approximately
the same size as albumin (62,000 mol wt) and one which was considerably larger
(125,000 mol wt). Nephrosis was induced with daily injections of an
aminonucleoside of puromycin, and the animals examined after 7 days, when
proteinuria is minimal, or after 10 days, when proteinuria has almost reached a
maximum. At both stages and with both dextran fractions the following results
were obtained: (a) dextran was retained for up to 3 h (the longest interval
studied) in the plasma at high concentration; (b) there was a sharp drop in the
concentration of tracer between the inner, looser portions of the basement
membrane (lamina rara interna) and its outer denser portions (lamina densa), (c) 
accumulation of dextran was seen in the mesangial areas with time; and (d) no
accumulation of dextran was seen in the slits at any time. These results are the 
same as those reported earlier in normal animals, and they demonstrate that in
nephrotics the basement membrane still behaves as the main filtration barrier
retaining most of the plasma proteins. Certain differences from the findings in
normals were also noted in that increased amounts of the tracer were present on
the epithelial side of the basement membrane: (a) in the urinary spaces; (b) in
the subepithelial portions of the basement membrane; and (c) within lysosomes
(protein absorption droplets) in the epithelial cytoplasm. In addition areas of
thinning of the dense portions of the basement membrane (lamina densa) were seen 
which were accompanied by a corresponding widening of the less dense,
subendothelial and subepithelial layers (lamina rara interna and externa,
respectively). The presence of increased quantities of dextran on the epithelial 
side of the basement membrane indicates that the filter, i.e. the basement
membrane, is leaky and allows increased passage of dextrans and therefore plasma 
proteins.

PMCID: PMC2189882
PMID: 1151287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Lab Invest. 1975 Feb;32(2):235-42.

Experimental glomerulonephritis in the rat induced by antibodies directed against
tubular antigens. I. The natural history: a histologic and immunohistologic study
at the light microscopic and the ultrastructural level.

Feenstra K, van den Lee R, Greben HA, Arends A, Hoedemaeker PJ.

A new form of experimental immune complex glomerulonephritis is described which
is induced by one single injection of heterologous antibody directed against
antigens present in the brush border of the proximal tubules of the rat kidney.
In this model, antigen-antibody complexes are deposited as early as 3 hours after
injection of the heterologous antiserum. The first localization of these
complexes is seen in the dense layer of the glomerular basement membrane. Later, 
they move up to the lamina rara externa and stay there for at least 3 months.
This model is easily reproducible and offers possibilities for studying the
effects of medication on the deposition of immune complexes.

PMID: 1113514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Contrib Nephrol. 1975;1:96-102.

Early lesions of the nephron in paraproteinemia.

Thiele J, Kühn K.

Electron microscopy of renal biopsies in eight patients with paraproteinemia (six
multiple myeloma, one Waldenström's disease, one idiopathic paraproteinemia) and 
without impairment of renal function demonstrates an increase of mesangial matrix
and thickening of the lamina rara interna of the basement membrane in the
glomerulus by fibrillar material without periodicity. These lesions are thought
to exhibit precursors of amyloid deposits. The proximal tubules show signs of
increased cellular activity probably because of handling an increased protein
load. In the basement membranes there are proteins with a fibrillar structure and
definite periodicity. These are suggested to be consistent with large aggregates 
of immunoglobulin fragments.

PMID: 1235097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. N Y State J Med. 1971 Apr 15;71(8):865-71.

Rara avis.

Bruno MS, Ober WB.

PMID: 5279355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Wildl Dis. 1970 Apr;6(2):89-93.

Development of third-stage Physaloptera larvae from Crotalus viridis rafinesque, 
1818 in cats with notes on pathology of the larvae in the reptile. (Nematoda,
Spiruroidea).

Widmer EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, School of Public Health, Loma Linda
University, Loma Linda, California 92354, USA.

The prairie rattlesnake, Crotalus viridis, was found to be commonly infected with
third-stage Physaloptera larvae. A total of 112 larvae were fed to 3 laboratory
raised cats. Adult worms recovered 42 and 59 days postinfection were identified
as P. rara. Observations were made on the pathology of the larvae in the snake.

PMID: 16512014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Ann Med Nav (Roma). 1966 May-Jun;71(3):393-406.

[Criteria and present value of "rara medicatio"].

[Article in Italian]

Cozza F.

PMID: 5974102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Biophys Biochem Cytol. 1955 Nov 25;1(6):551-66.

The fine structure of the renal glomerulus of the mouse.

YAMADA E.

Sections of mouse renal glomerulus fixed by perfusion with buffered osmium
tetroxide solution have been studied with the electron microscope. Four
components are recognized in the mouse glomerulus: epithelium, basement membrane,
endothelium, and intercapillary cell. The three cellular components all display
in their cytoplasm mitochondria, Golgi bodies, endoplasmic reticulum, and
uncharacterized vesicles. The concepts of Hall, of Pease, and of Rhodin regarding
the glomerular filtration surface are confirmed. The epithelial cells are
characterized by intricate, branching, interdigitating ridge-like processes or
pedicels, the summits of which press against the urinary surface of the basement 
membrane, covering the glomerular capillary tuft almost completely except for
narrow spaces about 200 to 300 A wide between the processes. These spaces are
termed the epithelial filtration slits, and are bridged by a very delicate
gossamer-like membrane about 30 A thick,-the filtration slit membrane. The
basement membrane is interposed everywhere between epithelial processes and
endothelium, and between epithelial and intercapillary cells. The basement
membrane of the filtration surface of the glomerular capillary has smooth
surfaces and is about 800 A thick. It consists of three layers-a thick central
lamina densa, appearing to have a very delicate felt-like structure, flanked on
each side by thinner lamina rara externa and lamina rara interna. This membrane
continues to the intercapillary space and makes a complicated sponge-work of
varying thickness in which the intercapillary cells are enmeshed. The endothelial
cells are of moderate thickness in the nuclear region, but send out thin
sheet-like extensions over the filtration surface. These extensions are about 300
to 400 A thick and are characterized by numerous round endothelial filtration
pores about 500 to 1000 A in diameter. The intercapillary tissue or mesangium is 
composed of the network of the basement membrane and the intercapillary cells.
The intercapillary cells, with characteristic fine fibrillar cytoplasm, make
contact with epithelial and endothelial cells and are enmeshed within the network
of the basement membrane. Rounded processes of intercapillary cells penetrate
into the endothelial cell through the basement membrane, and may even perforate
entirely through the endothelium. Such processes are called (after Zimmermann)
the intracapillary colliculi. In the endothelial cytoplasm close to the
intracapillary colliculi are many dense endothelial juxtacollicular vesicles and 
caveolae. The cell boundaries of the endothelial cell resemble terminal bars.
Some physiological speculations relating to glomerular structure are advanced.
The description of Zimmermann (54), based on a light microscope study, is
confirmed in many respects.

PMCID: PMC2223831
PMID: 13278366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


