
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 25;10(6):e0131760. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131760.
eCollection 2015.

Decreased Expression of CoREST1 and CoREST2 Together with LSD1 and HDAC1/2 during
Neuronal Differentiation.

Sáez JE(1), Gómez AV(1), Barrios ÁP(1), Parada GE(1), Galdames L(1), González
M(1), Andrés ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, 
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(7):e0133555.

CoREST (CoREST1, rcor1) transcriptional corepressor together with the histone
demethylase LSD1 (KDM1A) and the histone deacetylases HDAC1/2 form
LSD1-CoREST-HDAC (LCH) transcriptional complexes to regulate gene expression.
CoREST1 belong to a family that also comprises CoREST2 (rcor2) and CoREST3
(rcor3). CoREST1 represses the expression of neuronal genes during neuronal
differentiation. However, the role of paralogs CoREST2 and CoREST3 in this
process is just starting to emerge. Here, we report the expression of all CoRESTs
and partners LSD1 and HDAC1/2 in two models of neuronal differentiation:
Nerve-Growth-Factor (NGF)-induced neuronal phenotype of PC12 cells, and in vitro 
maturation of embryonic rat cortical neurons. In both models, a concomitant and
gradual decrease of LSD1, HDAC1, HDAC2, CoREST1, and CoREST2, but not CoREST3 was
observed. As required by the study, full-length rat rcor1 gene was identified
using in silico analysis of available rat genome. The work was also complemented 
by the analysis of rat RNA-seq databases. The analysis showed that all CoRESTs,
including the identified four splicing variants of rat CoREST3, display a wide
expression in adult tissues. Moreover, the analysis of RNA-seq databases showed
that CoREST2 displays a higher expression than CoREST1 and CoREST3 in the mature 
brain. Immunofluorescent assays and immunoblots of adult rat brain showed that
all CoRESTs are present in both glia and neurons. Regarding functional
partnership, CoREST2 and CoREST3 interact with all LSD1 splicing variants. In
conclusion, neuronal differentiation is accompanied by decreased expression of
all core components of LCH complexes, but not CoREST3. The combination of the
differential transcriptional repressor capacity of LCH complexes and variable
protein levels of its different components should result in a finely tuned gene
expression during neuronal differentiation and in the adult brain.

PMCID: PMC4482511
PMID: 26111147  [PubMed - in process]


2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jun 3;111(22):8071-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1404292111. Epub 2014 May 19.

Antagonistic actions of Rcor proteins regulate LSD1 activity and cellular
differentiation.

Upadhyay G(1), Chowdhury AH(1), Vaidyanathan B(2), Kim D(1), Saleque S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, City College of New York and Graduate Center of City
University of New York, New York, NY 10031; and. (2)Immunology and Microbial
Pathogenesis Program, Weill-Cornell Medical School and Sloan Kettering Institute,
New York, NY 10021. (3)Department of Biology, City College of New York and
Graduate Center of City University of New York, New York, NY 10031; and
ssaleque@ccny.cuny.edu.

Lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) demethylates nucleosomal histone H3 lysine 4
(H3K4) residues in collaboration with the corepressor CoREST/REST corepressor 1
(Rcor1) and regulates cell fates by epigenetically repressing gene targets. The
balanced regulation of this demethylase, if any, is however unknown. We now
demonstrate the actions of two other Rcor paralogs, Rcor2 and Rcor3, in
regulating LSD1 enzymatic activity and biological function in hematopoietic
cells. All three Rcor proteins interact with LSD1 and with the
erythro-megakaryocytic transcription factor growth factor independence (Gfi)1b;
however, whereas Rcor2, like Rcor1, facilitates LSD1-mediated nucleosomal
demethylation, Rcor3 competitively inhibits this process. Appending the SANT2
domain of Rcor1 to Rcor3 confers the ability to facilitate LSD1-mediated
demethylation on the chimeric Rcor protein. Consistent with their biochemical
activities, endogenous Rcor1, Rcor2, and LSD1 promote differentiation, whereas
Rcor3 opposes these processes. Recruitment of Rcor3 to cognate gene targets by
Gfi1b and LSD1 leads to inhibition of H3K4 demethylation of chromatin and
transcriptional derepression of these loci. Remarkably, profound alterations in
Rcor1/3 levels during erythroid versus megakaryocytic differentiation potentiate 
antagonistic outcomes. In mature erythroid cells, a strong upsurge in Rcor3 and a
sharp decline in Rcor1 levels counteract LSD1/Rcor1/2-mediated differentiation.
In contrast, the opposite changes in Rcor1/3 levels in megakaryocytes favor
differentiation and likely maintain homeostasis between these lineages. Overall, 
our results identify Rcor3 as a natural inhibitor of LSD1 and highlight a dual
mechanism of regulating the enzymatic activity and restraining the epigenetic
impact of this robust demethylase during hematopoietic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4050576
PMID: 24843136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jul;34(14):2760-70.

Differential properties of transcriptional complexes formed by the CoREST family.

Barrios ÁP, Gómez AV, Sáez JE, Ciossani G, Toffolo E, Battaglioli E, Mattevi A,
Andrés ME.

Mammalian genomes harbor three CoREST genes. rcor1 encodes CoREST (CoREST1), and 
the paralogues rcor2 and rcor3 encode CoREST2 and CoREST3, respectively. Here, we
describe specific properties of transcriptional complexes formed by CoREST
proteins with the histone demethylase LSD1/KDM1A and histone deacetylases 1 and 2
(HDAC1/2) and the finding that all three CoRESTs are expressed in the adult rat
brain. CoRESTs interact equally strongly with LSD1/KDM1A. Structural analysis
shows that the overall conformation of CoREST3 is similar to that of CoREST1
complexed with LSD1/KDM1A. Nonetheless, transcriptional repressive capacity of
CoREST3 is lower than that of CoREST1, which correlates with the observation that
CoREST3 leads to a reduced LSD1/KDM1A catalytic efficiency. Also, CoREST2 shows a
lower transcriptional repression than CoREST1, which is resistant to HDAC
inhibitors. CoREST2 displays lower interaction with HDAC1/2, which is barely
present in LSD1/KDM1A-CoREST2 complexes. A nonconserved leucine in the first SANT
domain of CoREST2 severely weakens its association with HDAC1/2. Furthermore,
CoREST2 mutants with increased HDAC1/2 interaction and those without HDAC1/2
interaction exhibit equivalent transcriptional repression capacities, indicating 
that CoREST2 represses in an HDAC-independent manner. In conclusion, differences 
among CoREST proteins are instrumental in the modulation of protein-protein
interactions and catalytic activities of LSD1/KDM1A-CoREST-HDAC complexes,
fine-tuning gene expression regulation.

PMCID: PMC4097654
PMID: 24820421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2011 Aug;32(8):1019-24. doi: 10.1038/aps.2011.49. Epub 2011
Jul 18.

Involvement of REST corepressor 3 in prognosis of human hepatitis B.

Xue JH(1), Zheng M, Xu XW, Wu SS, Chen Z, Chen F.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, the
First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China.

AIM: To examine the potential correlation between serum REST corepressor 3
(RCOR3) level and the outcome of patients with hepatitis B.
METHODS: Concanavalin A (ConA)-induced mouse hepatitis model was used. The mRNA
level of RCOR3 in mouse liver was measured using GeneChip array and real-time
PCR. One hundred seventy-seven patients with hepatitis B and 34 healthy
individuals were categorized into six groups including mild chronic hepatitis,
moderate chronic hepatitis B, severe hepatitis B (SHB), cirrhosis, hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) and healthy control. Serum levels of human RCOR3 were measured
using ELISA.
RESULTS: In the mouse hepatitis model, the mRNA level of RCOR3 in liver was
reduced early after exposure to ConA, then increased after 6 h of exposure. There
was no significant difference in the serum RCOR3 level between the mild chronic
hepatitis B and the control groups. The serum RCOR3 level was significantly
increased in the moderate chronic hepatitis B group, but significantly reduced in
SHB, cirrhosis and HCC groups, as compared with the control group. Moreover, the 
serum RCOR3 levels in SHB, cirrhosis and liver cancer patients were significantly
lower than those in the patients with moderate chronic hepatitis B and with mild 
chronic hepatitis B. Rank correlation analysis revealed a significant correlation
between serum RCOR3 level and total bilirubin (r=-0.305, P<0.01). There was no
significant correlation between RCOR3 on one hand, and alanine transaminase
(r=0.014, P>0.05) or aspartate transaminase (r=-0.079, P>0.05) on the other hand.
CONCLUSION: Serum RCOR3 level may reflect the degree of liver damage, which might
be a potential biomarker for the outcome of patients with hepatitis B.

PMCID: PMC4002525
PMID: 21765449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


