
1. NeuroRehabilitation. 2016 Feb 18;38(2):129-46. doi: 10.3233/NRE-161303.

Thorax and pelvis kinematics during walking, a comparison between children with
and without cerebral palsy: A systematic review.

Swinnen E(1,)(2), Goten LV(1), De Koster B(1), Degelaen M(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Rehabilitation Research (RERE), Brussel, Belgium. 
(2)Erasmus University College, Knowledge Centre Brussels Integrated Care (BIC),
Brussel, Belgium. (3)Rehabilitation Hospital Inkendaal, Vlezenbeek
(St.-Pieters-Leeuw), Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Dysfunctional postural control and pathological thorax and pelvis
motions are often observed in children with cerebral palsy (CP) and can be
considered as an indicator of diminished dynamic stability.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to identify the differences between children
with CP and typically developing children in three-dimensional thorax and pelvis 
kinematics during walking.
METHODS: Three electronic databases were searched by using different combinations
of keywords. The methodological quality of the studies was assessed by two
researchers with the Strobe quality checklist.
RESULTS: Ten studies (methodological quality: 32% to 74%) with in total 259
children with CP and 220 typically developing children (mean age: 7.6 to 13.6
year) were included. Compared to typically developing children, children with
bilateral CP showed an increased range of motion of the thorax, pelvis and spine 
during walking. The results of the children with unilateral CP were less clear.
CONCLUSION: In general, children with bilateral CP showed larger movement
amplitudes of the trunk compared to children without CP. This increase in
movement amplitudes could influence the dynamic stability of the body during
walking. In children with unilateral CP, the results were less obvious and
further research on this topic is required.

PMID: 26923354  [PubMed - in process]


2. Int J Cardiol. 2016 Feb 1;204:115-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.11.127. Epub
2015 Nov 22.

Genome-wide rare copy number variations contribute to genetic risk for
transposition of the great arteries.

Costain G(1), Lionel AC(2), Ogura L(3), Marshall CR(4), Scherer SW(2),
Silversides CK(5), Bassett AS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Research Program, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Medical Genetics Residency Training Program, University
of Toronto, and Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for
Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)The Centre for Applied Genomics and
Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada; McLaughlin Centre and Department of Molecular Genetics,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Clinical Genetics Research
Program, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)The
Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (5)The Toronto Congenital
Cardiac Centre for Adults & Division of Cardiology in the Department of Medicine,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address:
candice.silversides@uhn.ca. (6)Clinical Genetics Research Program, Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; The Toronto Congenital
Cardiac Centre for Adults & Division of Cardiology in the Department of Medicine,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Psychiatry,
Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada; The Dalglish Family Hearts and Minds Clinic for 22q11.2 Deletion
Syndrome, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of
Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Campbell Family
Mental Health Research Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: anne.bassett@utoronto.ca.

BACKGROUND: Transposition of the great arteries (TGA) is an uncommon but severe
congenital heart malformation of unknown etiology. Rare copy number variations
(CNVs) have been implicated in other, more common conotruncal heart defects like 
tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), but there are as yet no CNV studies dedicated to TGA.
METHODS: Using high-resolution genome-wide microarrays and rigorous methods, we
investigated CNVs in a group of prospectively recruited adults with TGA (n=101)
from a single center. We compared rare CNV burden to well-matched cohorts of
controls and TOF cases, adjudicating rarity using 10,113 independent
population-based controls and excluding all subjects with 22q11.2 deletions. We
identified candidate genes for TGA based on rare CNVs that overlapped the same
gene in unrelated individuals, and pre-existing evidence suggesting a role in
cardiac development.
RESULTS: The TGA group was significantly enriched for large rare CNVs (2.3-fold
increase, p=0.04) relative to controls, to a degree comparable with the TOF
group. Extra-cardiac features were not reliable predictors of rare CNV burden.
Smaller rare CNVs helped to narrow critical regions for conotruncal defects at
chromosomes 10q26 and 13q13. Established and novel candidate susceptibility genes
identified included ACKR3, IFT57, ITGB8, KL, NF1, NKX1-2, RERE, SLC8A1, SOX18,
and ULK1.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate a genome-wide role for rare CNVs in genetic
risk for TGA. The findings provide further support for a genetically-related
spectrum of congenital heart disease that includes TGA and TOF.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26655555  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Bodyw Mov Ther. 2015 Oct;19(4):759-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jbmt.2015.06.008. Epub
2015 Jul 2.

Compliance of patients wearing an orthotic device or orthopedic shoes: A
systematic review.

Swinnen E(1), Kerckhofs E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Faculty of Physical Education and Physiotherapy,
Rehabilitation Research (RERE), Brussels, Belgium; Center for Neurosciences,
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium; Erasmus University College
Brussel, Knowledge Centre Brussels Integrated Care (BIC), Brussels, Belgium.
Electronic address: eswinnen@vub.ac.be. (2)Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Faculty of
Physical Education and Physiotherapy, Rehabilitation Research (RERE), Brussels,
Belgium; Center for Neurosciences, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Alongside the positive effects of use of orthotic devices for the
lower extremities (ODLE) and orthopedic shoes, complaints and criticism by users 
possibly lead to non-compliance.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose is to determine the compliance of patients wearing an ODLE
or orthopedic shoes and to describe the main reasons for using and not using.
METHODS: Different online databases were searched for articles about patients'
compliance with regard to an ODLE or orthopedic shoes. A methodological quality
control was conducted.
RESULTS: Ten studies (1576 patients) were included. The data revealed between 6
and 80% not users. Several reasons for not using the orthotic device were
described (e.g. pain, discomfort and cosmetically unacceptable).
CONCLUSIONS: The high percentage of patients who are not wearing the prescribed
orthotic devices leads to a high financial loss for society and a waste of
therapeutic effort. These results should be taken into account during the design,
construction and selection process of orthotic devices.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26592234  [PubMed - in process]


4. Genome Res. 2016 Jan;26(1):119-29. doi: 10.1101/gr.188649.114. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

RNA sequencing of Sleeping Beauty transposon-induced tumors detects
transposon-RNA fusions in forward genetic cancer screens.

Temiz NA(1), Moriarity BS(2), Wolf NK(3), Riordan JD(4), Dupuy AJ(4), Largaespada
DA(5), Sarver AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, 
USA; (2)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
55455, USA; Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA; Brain Tumor Program, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA; Department of Pediatrics,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA; (3)Masonic Cancer
Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA; Department of
Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota 55455, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA; (4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA; (5)Masonic Cancer Center,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA; Department of
Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota 55455, USA; Brain Tumor Program, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota 55455, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA; Center for Genome Engineering, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Forward genetic screens using Sleeping Beauty (SB)-mobilized T2/Onc transposons
have been used to identify common insertion sites (CISs) associated with tumor
formation. Recurrent sites of transposon insertion are commonly identified using 
ligation-mediated PCR (LM-PCR). Here, we use RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data to
directly identify transcriptional events mediated by T2/Onc. Surprisingly, the
majority (~80%) of LM-PCR identified junction fragments do not lead to observable
changes in RNA transcripts. However, in CIS regions, direct transcriptional
effects of transposon insertions are observed. We developed an automated method
to systematically identify T2/Onc-genome RNA fusion sequences in RNA-seq data.
RNA fusion-based CISs were identified corresponding to both DNA-based CISs
(Cdkn2a, Mycl1, Nf2, Pten, Sema6d, and Rere) and additional regions strongly
associated with cancer that were not observed by LM-PCR (Myc, Akt1, Pth, Csf1r,
Fgfr2, Wisp1, Map3k5, and Map4k3). In addition to calculating recurrent CISs, we 
also present complementary methods to identify potential driver events via
determination of strongly supported fusions and fusions with large transcript
level changes in the absence of multitumor recurrence. These methods
independently identify CIS regions and also point to cancer-associated genes like
Braf. We anticipate RNA-seq analyses of tumors from forward genetic screens will 
become an efficient tool to identify causal events.

© 2016 Temiz et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4691744 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26553456  [PubMed - in process]


5. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Sep 9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.186. [Epub ahead of print]

Novel genetic causes for cerebral visual impairment.

Bosch DG(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Boonstra FN(2,)(4), de Leeuw N(1), Pfundt R(1), Nillesen
WM(1), de Ligt J(1,)(3,)(5), Gilissen C(1,)(3), Jhangiani S(6), Lupski
JR(6,)(7,)(8,)(9), Cremers FP(1,)(3), de Vries BB(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. (2)Bartiméus Institute for the Visually Impaired, Zeist, The
Netherlands. (3)Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Cognitive
Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (5)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW,
University Medical Centre Utrecht, CancerGenomics.nl, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. 
(7)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. (8)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA. (9)Department
of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Cerebral visual impairment (CVI) is a major cause of low vision in children due
to impairment in projection and/or interpretation of the visual input in the
brain. Although acquired causes for CVI are well known, genetic causes underlying
CVI are largely unidentified. DNAs of 25 patients with CVI and intellectual
disability, but without acquired (eg, perinatal) damage, were investigated by
whole-exome sequencing. The data were analyzed for de novo, autosomal-recessive, 
and X-linked variants, and subsequently classified into known, candidate, or
unlikely to be associated with CVI. This classification was based on the Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man database, literature reports, variant
characteristics, and functional relevance of the gene. After classification,
variants in four genes known to be associated with CVI (AHDC1, NGLY1, NR2F1,
PGAP1) in 5 patients (20%) were identified, establishing a conclusive genetic
diagnosis for CVI. In addition, in 11 patients (44%) with CVI, variants in one or
more candidate genes were identified (ACP6, AMOT, ARHGEF10L, ATP6V1A, DCAF6,
DLG4, GABRB2, GRIN1, GRIN2B, KCNQ3, KCTD19, RERE, SLC1A1, SLC25A16, SLC35A2,
SOX5, UFSP2, UHMK1, ZFP30). Our findings show that diverse genetic causes
underlie CVI, some of which will provide insight into the biology underlying this
disease process.European Journal of Human Genetics advance online publication, 9 
September 2015; doi:10.1038/ejhg.2015.186.

PMID: 26350515  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Appl Clin Genet. 2015 Aug 27;8:189-200. doi: 10.2147/TACG.S65698. eCollection
2015.

1p36 deletion syndrome: an update.

Jordan VK(1), Zaveri HP(2), Scott DA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Physiology and
Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA ; Department of
Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Deletions of chromosome 1p36 affect approximately 1 in 5,000 newborns and are the
most common terminal deletions in humans. Medical problems commonly caused by
terminal deletions of 1p36 include developmental delay, intellectual disability, 
seizures, vision problems, hearing loss, short stature, distinctive facial
features, brain anomalies, orofacial clefting, congenital heart defects,
cardiomyopathy, and renal anomalies. Although 1p36 deletion syndrome is
considered clinically recognizable, there is significant phenotypic variation
among affected individuals. This variation is due, at least in part, to the
genetic heterogeneity seen in 1p36 deletions which include terminal and
interstitial deletions of varying lengths located throughout the 30 Mb of DNA
that comprise chromosome 1p36. Array-based copy number variant analysis can
easily identify genomic regions of 1p36 that are deleted in an affected
individual. However, predicting the phenotype of an individual based solely on
the location and extent of their 1p36 deletion remains a challenge since most of 
the genes that contribute to 1p36-related phenotypes have yet to be identified.
In addition, haploinsufficiency of more than one gene may contribute to some
phenotypes. In this article, we review recent successes in the effort to map and 
identify the genes and genomic regions that contribute to specific 1p36-related
phenotypes. In particular, we highlight evidence implicating MMP23B, GABRD, SKI, 
PRDM16, KCNAB2, RERE, UBE4B, CASZ1, PDPN, SPEN, ECE1, HSPG2, and LUZP1 in various
1p36 deletion phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC4555966
PMID: 26345236  [PubMed]


7. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2015 Oct;86(4):821-8. doi: 10.1111/cbdd.12557. Epub 2015 Apr 
1.

Screening Feature Genes of Venous Thromboembolism with DNA Microarray.

Zhou T(1), Zhang Y(2), Wu P(1), Sun Q(1), Guo Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Second Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong Province, 250033, 
China. (2)Affiliated Hospital of Shandong Traditional Chinese Medicine
University, Jinan, Shandong Province, 250014, China.

We aimed to explore the potential genes or pathways related to venous
thromboembolism (VTE) and expected our findings could contribute to the
development of new target drugs for VTE. The gene expression profile of GSE19151 
was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. The bioinformatics
methods were applied to screen the feature genes and pathways related with VTE. A
total of 115 DEGs were identified, including 25 downregulated genes and 90
upregulated genes. Function enrichment analysis showed that upregulated genes of 
VTE were mainly enriched in ribosome and translation-related pathways, while
downregulated genes were mainly enriched in cytoskeletal protein binding and
non-membrane-bounded organelle-related pathways. MCL1, TP53, and RERE were three 
outstanding genes involved in the interaction network. The most significant
pathways enriched by module genes were ribosome and oxidative phosphorylation.
Moreover, all the products of the 18 genes enriched in ribosome (hsa03010) were
ribosomal proteins. Ribosome, translation, actin binding, and
non-membrane-bounded organelle pathways were closely related to the development
of VTE. Moreover, MCL1, TP53, and RERE might play key roles in the process of
VTE.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 25777263  [PubMed - in process]


8. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 May;100(5):E799-807. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-4352.
Epub 2015 Feb 26.

A genetic risk score for thyroid peroxidase antibodies associates with clinical
thyroid disease in community-based populations.

Schultheiss UT(1), Teumer A, Medici M, Li Y, Daya N, Chaker L, Homuth G,
Uitterlinden AG, Nauck M, Hofman A, Selvin E, Völzke H, Peeters RP, Köttgen A.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division (U.T.S., Y.L., A.K.), Department of Medicine IV, Medical
Center, University of Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg, Germany; Department of Internal
Medicine and Rotterdam Thyroid Center (M.M., L.C., A.G.U., R.P.P.) and Department
of Epidemiology (L.C., A.H.), Erasmus Medical Center, 3015 GE Rotterdam, The
Netherlands; Institute for Community Medicine (A.T., H.V.), Interfaculty
Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics (G.H.), and Institute of Clinical 
Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine (M.N.), University Medicine Greifswald, 17475
Greifswald, Germany; and Department of Epidemiology (N.D., E.S., A.K.), Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21205.

CONTEXT: Antibodies against thyroid peroxidase (TPOAbs) are detected in 90% of
all patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis, the most common cause of hypothyroidism.
Hypothyroidism is associated with a range of adverse outcomes. The current
knowledge of its genetic underpinnings is limited.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to identify novel genetic variants
associated with TPOAb concentrations and positivity using genome-wide association
data and to characterize their association with thyroid function and disease.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: We studied European ancestry participants of 3
independent prospective population-based studies: Atherosclerosis Risk In
Communities study (n = 7524), Study of Health in Pomerania (n = 3803), and Study 
of Health in Pomerania-TREND (n = 887).
EXPOSURE: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), individually and combined into 
a genetic risk score (GRS), were examined.
MAIN OUTCOMES: The main outcomes were TPOAb concentrations and positivity,
thyroid hormone concentrations (TSH, free T4), and clinical thyroid diseases
(subclinical and overt hypothyroidism and goiter).
RESULTS: Significantly associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (P < 5 ·
10(-8)) mapped into 4 genomic regions not previously implicated for TPOAbs (RERE,
extended HLA region) and into 5 previously described loci. A higher Genetic Risk 
Score (GRS) based on these 9 SNPs showed strong and graded associations with
higher TPOAb, TSH, and lower free T4 concentrations (P < .001). Compared with
individuals in the lowest GRS quartile, those in the highest quartile had
1.80-fold higher odds of subclinical hypothyroidism (95% confidence interval,
1.27-2.55) and 1.89-fold higher odds of overt hypothyroidism (95% confidence
interval, 1.24-2.87).
CONCLUSION: The identification of 4 novel genetic loci associated with TPOAb
concentrations and positivity gives further insight into the genetic
underpinnings of hypothyroidism. A GRS showed strong and graded associations with
markers of thyroid function and disease in independent population-based studies.

PMCID: PMC4422885 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25719932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2015 Mar;30(3):254-9. doi:
10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2015.01.006. Epub 2015 Jan 30.

Robot-assisted walking with the Lokomat: the influence of different levels of
guidance force on thorax and pelvis kinematics.

Swinnen E(1), Baeyens JP(2), Knaepen K(3), Michielsen M(4), Clijsen R(5), Beckwée
D(6), Kerckhofs E(7).

Author information: 
(1)Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Faculty of Physical Education and Physiotherapy,
Rehabilitation Research (RERE), Brussels, Belgium; Center for Neurosciences,
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address:
eswinnen@vub.ac.be. (2)Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Faculty of Physical Education 
and Physiotherapy, Biometry and Biomechanics (BIOM), Brussels, Belgium;
University College Physiotherapy Thim van der Laan, Landquart, Switzerland.
(3)Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Faculty of Physical Education and Physiotherapy,
Menselijke Fysiologie (MFYS), Brussels, Belgium. (4)Jessa Hospital,
Rehabilitation Center Sint-Ursula, Herk-de-Stad, Belgium. (5)University College
Physiotherapy Thim van der Laan, Landquart, Switzerland. (6)Vrije Universiteit
Brussel, Faculty of Physical Education and Physiotherapy, Rehabilitation Research
(RERE), Brussels, Belgium. (7)Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Faculty of Physical
Education and Physiotherapy, Rehabilitation Research (RERE), Brussels, Belgium;
Center for Neurosciences, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Little attention has been devoted to the thorax and pelvis movements 
during gait. The aim of this study is to compare differences in the thorax and
pelvis kinematics during unassisted walking on a treadmill and during walking
with robot assistance (Lokomat-system (Hocoma, Volketswil, Switzerland)).
METHODS: 18 healthy persons walked on a treadmill with and without the Lokomat
system at 2kmph. Three different conditions of guidance force (30%, 60% and 100%)
were used during robot-assisted treadmill walking (30% body weight support). The 
maximal movement amplitudes of the thorax and pelvis were measured (Polhemus
Liberty (Polhemus, Colchester, Vermont, USA) (240/16)). A repeated measurement
ANOVA was conducted.
FINDINGS: Robot-assisted treadmill walking with different levels of guidance
force showed significantly smaller maximal movement amplitudes for thorax and
pelvis, compared to treadmill walking. Only the antero-posterior tilting of the
pelvis was significantly increased during robot-assisted treadmill walking
compared to treadmill walking. No significant changes of kinematic parameters
were found between the different levels of guidance force.
INTERPRETATION: With regard to the thorax and pelvis movements, robot-assisted
treadmill walking is significantly different compared to treadmill walking. It
can be concluded that when using robot assistance, the thorax is stimulated in a 
different way than during walking without robot assistance, influencing the
balance training during gait.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25662678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. NeuroRehabilitation. 2015;36(1):81-91. doi: 10.3233/NRE-141195.

Body weight support during robot-assisted walking: influence on the trunk and
pelvis kinematics.

Swinnen E(1), Baeyens JP(2), Hens G(3), Knaepen K(4), Beckwée D(5), Michielsen
M(6), Clijsen R(7), Kerckhofs E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Faculty of Physical Education and Physiotherapy,
Rehabilitation Research (RERE), Brussels, Belgium Center for Neurosciences, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. (2)Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Faculty
of Physical Education and Physiotherapy, Biometry and Biomechanics (BIOM),
Brussels, Belgium University College Physiotherapy Thim van der Laan, Landquart, 
Switzerland. (3)Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Faculty of Physical Education and
Physiotherapy, Rehabilitation Research (RERE), Brussels, Belgium Vrije
Universiteit Brussel, Faculty of Physical Education and Physiotherapy, Biometry
and Biomechanics (BIOM), Brussels, Belgium. (4)Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Faculty of Physical Education and Physiotherapy, Menselijke fysiologie (MFYS),
Brussels, Belgium. (5)Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Faculty of Physical Education
and Physiotherapy, Rehabilitation Research (RERE), Brussels, Belgium. (6)Jessa
Hospital, Rehabilitation Center Sint-Ursula, Herk-de-Stad, Belgium. (7)University
College Physiotherapy Thim van der Laan, Landquart, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Efficacy studies concerning robot assisted gait rehabilitation showed
limited clinical benefits. A changed kinematic pattern might be responsible for
this. Little is known about the kinematics of the trunk and pelvis during robot
assisted treadmill walking (RATW).
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess the trunk and pelvis kinematics of
healthy subjects during RATW, with different amounts of body weight support (BWS)
compared to regular treadmill walking (TW).
METHOD: Eighteen healthy participants walked on a treadmill, while kinematics
were registered by an electromagnetic tracking device. Hereafter, the kinematics 
of pelvis and trunk were registered during RATW (guidance force 30%) with 0%, 30%
and 50% BWS.
RESULTS: Compared to TW, RATW showed a decrease in the following trunk movements:
axial rotation, anteroposterior flexion, lateral and anteroposterior translation.
Besides, a decrease in lateral tilting and all translation of the pelvis was
found when comparing RATW with TW. Furthermore, the anteroposterior tilting of
the pelvis increased during RATW.
CONCLUSION: In general, there was a decrease in trunk and pelvis movement
amplitude during RATW compared with regular TW. Though, it is not known if these 
changes are responsible for the limited efficacy of robot assisted gait
rehabilitation. Further research is indicated.

PMID: 25547772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Brain Dev. 2015 May;37(5):515-26. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2014.08.002. Epub 2014 
Aug 27.

Microarray analysis of 50 patients reveals the critical chromosomal regions
responsible for 1p36 deletion syndrome-related complications.

Shimada S(1), Shimojima K(2), Okamoto N(3), Sangu N(4), Hirasawa K(5), Matsuo
M(6), Ikeuchi M(7), Shimakawa S(8), Shimizu K(9), Mizuno S(10), Kubota M(11),
Adachi M(12), Saito Y(13), Tomiwa K(14), Haginoya K(15), Numabe H(16), Kako
Y(17), Hayashi A(18), Sakamoto H(19), Hiraki Y(20), Minami K(21), Takemoto K(22),
Watanabe K(23), Miura K(24), Chiyonobu T(25), Kumada T(26), Imai K(27), Maegaki
Y(28), Nagata S(5), Kosaki K(29), Izumi T(7), Nagai T(30), Yamamoto T(31).

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo Women's Medical University Institute for Integrated Medical Sciences,
Tokyo, Japan; Department of Pediatrics, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, 
Japan. (2)Tokyo Women's Medical University Institute for Integrated Medical
Sciences, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Medical Center
and Research Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Izumi, Japan. (4)Tokyo
Women's Medical University Institute for Integrated Medical Sciences, Tokyo,
Japan; Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Medicine, Tokyo
Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Tokyo
Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Institute of Medical Genetics, Tokyo
Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of Pediatrics and Child
Neurology, Oita University Faculty of Medicine, Oita, Japan. (8)Department of
Pediatrics, Osaka Medical College, Takatsuki, Japan. (9)Division of Medical
Genetics, Saitama Children's Medical Center, Saitama, Japan. (10)Department of
Pediatrics, Central Hospital, Aichi Human Service Center, Kasugai, Japan.
(11)Division of Neurology, National Center for Child Health and Development,
Tokyo, Japan. (12)Department of Pediatrics, Kakogawa Hospital Organization,
Kakogawa West-City Hospital, Kakogawa, Japan. (13)Department of Child Neurology, 
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan. (14)Department of
Pediatrics, Medical Center for Children, Osaka City General Hospital, Osaka,
Japan. (15)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Takuto Rehabilitation Center for
Children, Sendai, Japan. (16)Department of Genetic Counseling, Graduate School of
Humanities and Sciences, Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan. (17)Department of
Pediatrics, Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (18)Department of 
Neonatology, Japanese Red Cross Kyoto Daiichi Hospital, Kyoto, Japan.
(19)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka Red Cross Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(20)Hiroshima Municipal Center for Child Health and Development, Hiroshima,
Japan. (21)Department of Pediatrics, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama,
Japan. (22)Osaka Developmental Rehabilitation Center, Osaka, Japan.
(23)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization Kokura Medical
Center, Kitakyushu, Japan. (24)Developmental Disability Medicine, Nagoya
University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. (25)Department of
Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (26)Department of Pediatrics, Shiga Medical Center for
Children, Moriyama, Japan. (27)National Epilepsy Center, Shizuoka Institute of
Epilepsy and Neurological Disorders, Shizuoka, Japan. (28)Division of Child
Neurology, Tottori University School of Medicine, Yonago, Japan. (29)Center for
Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(30)Department of Pediatrics, Dokkyo Medical University Koshigaya Hospital,
Saitama, Japan. (31)Tokyo Women's Medical University Institute for Integrated
Medical Sciences, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address:
yamamoto.toshiyuki@twmu.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVE: Monosomy 1p36 syndrome is the most commonly observed subtelomeric
deletion syndrome. Patients with this syndrome typically have common clinical
features, such as intellectual disability, epilepsy, and characteristic
craniofacial features.
METHOD: In cooperation with academic societies, we analyzed the genomic copy
number aberrations using chromosomal microarray testing. Finally, the
genotype-phenotype correlation among them was examined.
RESULTS: We obtained clinical information of 86 patients who had been diagnosed
with chromosomal deletions in the 1p36 region. Among them, blood samples were
obtained from 50 patients (15 males and 35 females). The precise deletion regions
were successfully genotyped. There were variable deletion patterns: pure terminal
deletions in 38 patients (76%), including three cases of mosaicism; unbalanced
translocations in seven (14%); and interstitial deletions in five (10%).
Craniofacial/skeletal features, neurodevelopmental impairments, and cardiac
anomalies were commonly observed in patients, with correlation to deletion sizes.
CONCLUSION: The genotype-phenotype correlation analysis narrowed the region
responsible for distinctive craniofacial features and intellectual disability
into 1.8-2.1 and 1.8-2.2 Mb region, respectively. Patients with deletions larger 
than 6.2 Mb showed no ambulation, indicating that severe neurodevelopmental
prognosis may be modified by haploinsufficiencies of KCNAB2 and CHD5, located at 
6.2 Mb away from the telomere. Although the genotype-phenotype correlation for
the cardiac abnormalities is unclear, PRDM16, PRKCZ, and RERE may be related to
this complication. Our study also revealed that female patients who acquired
ambulatory ability were likely to be at risk for obesity.

Copyright © 2014 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25172301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Development. 2014 Aug;141(15):2972-7. doi: 10.1242/dev.112367.

Retinoic acid controls body axis extension by directly repressing Fgf8
transcription.

Kumar S(1), Duester G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Development, Aging, and Regeneration Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (2)Development, Aging, and Regeneration
Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
duester@sanfordburnham.org.

Retinoic acid (RA) generated in the mesoderm of vertebrate embryos controls body 
axis extension by downregulating Fgf8 expression in cells exiting the caudal
progenitor zone. RA activates transcription by binding to nuclear RA receptors
(RARs) at RA response elements (RAREs), but it is unknown whether RA can directly
repress transcription. Here, we analyzed a conserved RARE upstream of Fgf8 that
binds RAR isoforms in mouse embryos. Transgenic embryos carrying Fgf8 fused to
lacZ exhibited expression similar to caudal Fgf8, but deletion of the RARE
resulted in ectopic trunk expression extending into somites and neuroectoderm.
Epigenetic analysis using chromatin immunoprecipitation of trunk tissues from
E8.25 wild-type and Raldh2(-/-) embryos lacking RA synthesis revealed
RA-dependent recruitment of the repressive histone marker H3K27me3 and polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) near the Fgf8 RARE. The co-regulator RERE, the loss
of which results in ectopic Fgf8 expression and somite defects, was recruited
near the RARb RARE by RA, but was released from the Fgf8 RARE by RA. Our findings
demonstrate that RA directly represses Fgf8 through a RARE-mediated mechanism
that promotes repressive chromatin, thus providing valuable insight into the
mechanism of RA-FGF antagonism during progenitor cell differentiation.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197666
PMID: 25053430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Disabil Rehabil Assist Technol. 2015 May;10(3):252-7. doi:
10.3109/17483107.2014.888487. Epub 2014 Feb 11.

Walking with robot assistance: the influence of body weight support on the trunk 
and pelvis kinematics.

Swinnen E(1), Baeyens JP, Knaepen K, Michielsen M, Hens G, Clijsen R, Goossens M,
Buyl R, Meeusen R, Kerckhofs E.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Physical Education and Physiotherapy, Rehabilitation Research
(RERE), Vrije Universiteit Brussel , Brussels , Belgium .

PURPOSE: The goal was to assess in healthy participants the three-dimensional
kinematics of the pelvis and the trunk during robot-assisted treadmill walking
(RATW) at 0%, 30% and 50% body weight support (BWS), compared with treadmill
walking (TW).
METHODS: 18 healthy participants walked (2<U+2009>kmph) on a treadmill with and without 
robot assistance (Lokomat; 60% guidance force; 0%, 30% and 50% BWS). After an
acclimatisation period (four minutes), trunk and pelvis kinematics were
registered in each condition (Polhemus Liberty [240<U+2009>Hz]). The results were
analysed using a repeated measures analysis of variance with Bonferroni
correction, with the level of suspension as within-subject factor.
RESULTS: During RATW with BWS, there were significantly (1) smaller
antero-posterior and lateral translations of the trunk and the pelvis; (2)
smaller antero-posterior flexion and axial rotation of the trunk; (3) larger
lateral flexion of the trunk; and (4) larger antero-posterior tilting of the
pelvis compared with TW.
CONCLUSIONS: There are significant differences in trunk and pelvis kinematics in 
healthy persons during TW with and without robot assistance. These data are
relevant in gait rehabilitation, relating to normal balance regulation.
Additional research is recommended to further assess the influence of robot
assistance on human gait.
IMPLICATIONS FOR REHABILITATION: The trunk and pelvis moves in a different way
during walking with robot assistance. The data suggest that the change in
movement is due to the robot device and the harness of the suspension system more
than due to the level of suspension itself.

PMID: 24512196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 23;9(1):e87518. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087518. eCollection
2014.

Mouse model reveals the role of RERE in cerebellar foliation and the migration
and maturation of Purkinje cells.

Kim BJ(1), Scott DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America. (2)Department of Molecular and Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America ; 
Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Nuclear receptors and their coregulators play a critical role in brain
development by regulating the spatiotemporal expression of their target genes.
The arginine-glutamic acid dipeptide repeats gene (Rere) encodes a nuclear
receptor coregulator previously known as Atrophin 2. In the developing
cerebellum, RERE is expressed in the molecular layer, the Purkinje cell layer and
the granule cell layer but not in granule cell precursors. To study RERE's role
in cerebellar development, we used RERE-deficient embryos bearing a null allele
(om) and a hypomorphic allele (eyes3) of Rere (Rere(om/eyes3)). In contrast to
wild-type embryos, formation of the principal fissures in these RERE-deficient
embryos was delayed and the proliferative activity of granule cell precursors
(GCPs) was reduced at E18.5. This reduction in proliferation was accompanied by a
decrease in the expression of sonic hedgehog (SHH), which is secreted from
Purkinje cells and is required for normal GCP proliferation. The maturation and
migration of Purkinje cells in Rere(om/eyes3) embryos was also delayed with
decreased numbers of post-migratory Purkinje cells in the cerebellum. During the 
postnatal period, RERE depletion caused incomplete division of lobules I/II and
III due to truncated development of the precentral fissure in the cerebellar
vermis, abnormal development of lobule crus I and lobule crus II in the
cerebellar hemispheres due to attenuation of the intercrural fissure, and
decreased levels of Purkinje cell dendritic branching. We conclude that
RERE-deficiency leads to delayed development of the principal fissures and
delayed maturation and migration of Purkinje cells during prenatal cerebellar
development and abnormal cerebellar foliation and Purkinje cell maturation during
postnatal cerebellar development.

PMCID: PMC3900724
PMID: 24466353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 15;9(1):e85600. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085600. eCollection
2014.

Identification of critical regions and candidate genes for cardiovascular
malformations and cardiomyopathy associated with deletions of chromosome 1p36.

Zaveri HP(1), Beck TF(1), Hernández-García A(1), Shelly KE(1), Montgomery T(2),
van Haeringen A(3), Anderlid BM(4), Patel C(5), Goel H(6), Houge G(7), Morrow
BE(8), Cheung SW(1), Lalani SR(1), Scott DA(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America. (2)Institute of Genetic Medicine,
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. (3)Department of
Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Clinical Genetic Department, Karolinska University Hospital and Institution of
Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Birmingham Women's Hospital, Birmingham,
United Kingdom. (6)Faculty of Health and Medicine, University of Newcastle,
Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia. (7)Center for Medical Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. (8)Department 
of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States 
of America. (9)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Department of Molecular
Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United
States of America.

Cardiovascular malformations and cardiomyopathy are among the most common
phenotypes caused by deletions of chromosome 1p36 which affect approximately 1 in
5000 newborns. Although these cardiac-related abnormalities are a significant
source of morbidity and mortality associated with 1p36 deletions, most of the
individual genes that contribute to these conditions have yet to be identified.
In this paper, we use a combination of clinical and molecular cytogenetic data to
define five critical regions for cardiovascular malformations and two critical
regions for cardiomyopathy on chromosome 1p36. Positional candidate genes which
may contribute to the development of cardiovascular malformations associated with
1p36 deletions include DVL1, SKI, RERE, PDPN, SPEN, CLCNKA, ECE1, HSPG2, LUZP1,
and WASF2. Similarly, haploinsufficiency of PRDM16-a gene which was recently
shown to be sufficient to cause the left ventricular noncompaction-SKI, PRKCZ,
RERE, UBE4B and MASP2 may contribute to the development of cardiomyopathy. When
treating individuals with 1p36 deletions, or providing prognostic information to 
their families, physicians should take into account that 1p36 deletions which
overlie these cardiac critical regions may portend to cardiovascular
complications. Since several of these cardiac critical regions contain more than 
one positional candidate gene-and large terminal and interstitial 1p36 deletions 
often overlap more than one cardiac critical region-it is likely that
haploinsufficiency of two or more genes contributes to the cardiac phenotypes
associated with many 1p36 deletions.

PMCID: PMC3893250
PMID: 24454898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57460. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057460. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

An allelic series of mice reveals a role for RERE in the development of multiple 
organs affected in chromosome 1p36 deletions.

Kim BJ(1), Zaveri HP, Shchelochkov OA, Yu Z, Hernández-García A, Seymour ML,
Oghalai JS, Pereira FA, Stockton DW, Justice MJ, Lee B, Scott DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Individuals with terminal and interstitial deletions of chromosome 1p36 have a
spectrum of defects that includes eye anomalies, postnatal growth deficiency,
structural brain anomalies, seizures, cognitive impairment, delayed motor
development, behavior problems, hearing loss, cardiovascular malformations,
cardiomyopathy, and renal anomalies. The proximal 1p36 genes that contribute to
these defects have not been clearly delineated. The arginine-glutamic acid
dipeptide (RE) repeats gene (RERE) is located in this region and encodes a
nuclear receptor coregulator that plays a critical role in embryonic development 
as a positive regulator of retinoic acid signaling. Rere-null mice die of cardiac
failure between E9.5 and E11.5. This limits their usefulness in studying the role
of RERE in the latter stages of development and into adulthood. To overcome this 
limitation, we created an allelic series of RERE-deficient mice using an
Rere-null allele, om, and a novel hypomorphic Rere allele, eyes3 (c.578T>C,
p.Val193Ala), which we identified in an N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU)-based screen 
for autosomal recessive phenotypes. Analyses of these mice revealed
microphthalmia, postnatal growth deficiency, brain hypoplasia, decreased numbers 
of neuronal nuclear antigen (NeuN)-positive hippocampal neurons, hearing loss,
cardiovascular malformations-aortic arch anomalies, double outlet right
ventricle, and transposition of the great arteries, and perimembranous
ventricular septal defects-spontaneous development of cardiac fibrosis and renal 
agenesis. These findings suggest that RERE plays a critical role in the
development and function of multiple organs including the eye, brain, inner ear, 
heart and kidney. It follows that haploinsufficiency of RERE may contribute-alone
or in conjunction with other genetic, environmental, or stochastic factors-to the
development of many of the phenotypes seen in individuals with terminal and
interstitial deletions that include the proximal region of chromosome 1p36.

PMCID: PMC3581587
PMID: 23451234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Blood. 2013 Feb 21;121(8):e50-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-05-424846. Epub 2013 Jan
3.

Circulating CD34(+) progenitor cell frequency is associated with clinical and
genetic factors.

Cohen KS(1), Cheng S, Larson MG, Cupples LA, McCabe EL, Wang YA, Ngwa JS, Martin 
RP, Klein RJ, Hashmi B, Ge Y, O'Donnell CJ, Vasan RS, Shaw SY, Wang TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. kcohen@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu

Circulating blood CD34(+) cells consist of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells,
angiogenic cells, and endothelial cells. In addition to their clinical use in
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, CD34(+) cells may also promote
therapeutic neovascularization. Therefore, understanding the factors that
influence circulating CD34(+) cell frequency has wide implications for vascular
biology in addition to stem cell transplantation. In the present study, we
examined the clinical and genetic characteristics associated with circulating
CD34(+) cell frequency in a large, community-based sample of 1786 Framingham
Heart Study participants.Among subjects without cardiovascular disease (n =
1595), CD34(+) frequency was inversely related to older age, female sex, and
smoking. CD34(+) frequency was positively related to weight, serum total
cholesterol, and statin therapy. Clinical covariates accounted for 6.3% of
CD34(+) variability. CD34(+) frequency was highly heritable (h(2) = 54%; P <
.0001). Genome-wide association analysis of CD34(+) frequency identified
suggestive associations at several loci, including OR4C12 (chromosome 11; P = 6.7
× 10(-7)) and ENO1 and RERE (chromosome 1; P = 8.8 × 10(-7)). CD34(+) cell
frequency is reduced in older subjects and is influenced by environmental factors
including smoking and statin use. CD34(+) frequency is highly heritable. The
results of the present study have implications for therapies that use CD34(+)
cell populations and support efforts to better understand the genetic mechanisms 
that underlie CD34(+) frequency.

PMCID: PMC3578962
PMID: 23287867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Ophthalmology. 2012 Sep;119(9):1819-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2012.02.044. Epub
2012 May 12.

Association between genetic variants associated with vertical cup-to-disc ratio
and phenotypic features of primary open-angle glaucoma.

Mabuchi F(1), Sakurada Y, Kashiwagi K, Yamagata Z, Iijima H, Tsukahara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Yamanashi,
Yamanashi, Japan. fmabuchi@yamanashi.ac.jp

PURPOSE: To assess the association between the genetic variants associated with
the optic nerve vertical cup-to-disc ratio (VCDR) and the phenotypic features in 
patients with primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG), including normal-tension
glaucoma (NTG) and high-tension glaucoma (HTG).
DESIGN: Case-control study.
PARTICIPANTS AND CONTROLS: Japanese patients with NTG (n = 213) and HTG (n = 212)
and 191 control subjects without glaucoma.
METHODS: DNA samples were genotyped for 7 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
associated with VCDR: rs1063192 (near gene: CDKN2B), rs10483727 (SIX1),
rs17146964 (SCYL1), rs1547014 (CHEK2), rs1900004 (ATOH7), rs1926320 (DCLK1), and 
rs12015126 (RERE).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The VCDR was compared between genotypes, and allele
frequency differences were compared between NTG or HTG subjects and control
subjects. Demographic and clinical features were compared between alleles in
patients with NTG or HTG.
RESULTS: There were significant VCDR differences (P = 0.0077 and P = 0.019)
between the genotypes for rs1063192 (CDKN2B) and rs1547014 (CHEK2), respectively.
There were significant differences in the rs1063192 (CDKN2B) and rs1900004
(ATOH7) allele frequencies between the NTG subjects and control subjects (P =
0.0023 and P = 0.028, respectively) and a significant difference (P = 0.013) in
the rs1547014 (CHEK2) allele frequencies between the HTG subjects and control
subjects. Ages at diagnosis were significantly different in the NTG subjects with
and without the rs10483727 (SIX1) C allele (P = 0.017) or the rs1926320 (DCLK1) T
allele (P = 0.040). Likewise, the age at diagnosis was significantly different (P
= 0.037) in the HTG subjects with and without the rs12025126 (RERE) T allele.
There were no significant associations between the maximum intraocular pressure
(IOP) and 7 genotyped SNP alleles in patients with NTG or HTG.
CONCLUSIONS: The rs1063192 (CDKN2B) and rs1900004 (ATOH7) seem to be
non-IOP-related genetic risk factors for NTG, and the rs1547014 (CHEK2) is a
genetic risk factor for HTG. Although the rs10483727 (SIX1), rs1926320 (DCLK1),
or rs12025126 (RERE) alone may not be sufficient for the development of POAG, the
association of these SNPs with a phenotypic feature in patients with NTG or HTG
suggests that these loci contribute to the pathogenesis of POAG.

Copyright © 2012 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22584021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Nutr. 2012 May;142(5):832-40. doi: 10.3945/jn.111.147660. Epub 2012 Mar 28.

Resistant starches protect against colonic DNA damage and alter microbiota and
gene expression in rats fed a Western diet.

Conlon MA(1), Kerr CA, McSweeney CS, Dunne RA, Shaw JM, Kang S, Bird AR, Morell
MK, Lockett TJ, Molloy PL, Regina A, Toden S, Clarke JM, Topping DL.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Preventative Health, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Resistant starch (RS), fed as high amylose maize starch (HAMS) or butyrylated
HAMS (HAMSB), opposes dietary protein-induced colonocyte DNA damage in rats. In
this study, rats were fed Western-type diets moderate in fat (19%) and protein
(20%) containing digestible starches [low amylose maize starch (LAMS) or low
amylose whole wheat (LAW)] or RS [HAMS, HAMSB, or a whole high amylose wheat
(HAW) generated by RNA interference] for 11 wk (n = 10/group). A control diet
included 7% fat, 13% protein, and LAMS. Colonocyte DNA single-strand breaks (SSB)
were significantly higher (by 70%) in rats fed the Western diet containing LAMS
relative to controls. Dietary HAW, HAMS, and HAMSB opposed this effect while
raising digesta levels of SCFA and lowering ammonia and phenol levels. SSB
correlated inversely with total large bowel SCFA, including colonic butyrate
concentration (R(2) = 0.40; P = 0.009), and positively with colonic ammonia
concentration (R(2) = 0.40; P = 0.014). Analysis of gut microbiota populations
using a phylogenetic microarray revealed profiles that fell into 3 distinct
groups: control and LAMS; HAMS and HAMSB; and LAW and HAW. The expression of
colonic genes associated with the maintenance of genomic integrity (notably Mdm2,
Top1, Msh3, Ung, Rere, Cebpa, Gmnn, and Parg) was altered and varied with RS
source. HAW is as effective as HAMS and HAMSB in opposing diet-induced colonic
DNA damage in rats, but their effects on the large bowel microbiota and
colonocyte gene expression differ, possibly due to the presence of other fiber
components in HAW.

PMCID: PMC3327741
PMID: 22457395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 May 15;21(10):2157-65. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds031. Epub 2012 Feb
10.

MicroRNA-22 is induced by vitamin D and contributes to its antiproliferative,
antimigratory and gene regulatory effects in colon cancer cells.

Alvarez-Díaz S(1), Valle N, Ferrer-Mayorga G, Lombardía L, Herrera M, Domínguez
O, Segura MF, Bonilla F, Hernando E, Muñoz A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (CSIC-UAM), E-28029
Madrid, Spain. salvarez@iib.uam.es

Vitamin D deficiency is associated with the high risk of colon cancer and a
variety of other diseases. The active vitamin D metabolite 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D(3) (1,25(OH)(2)D(3)) regulates gene transcription via its nuclear receptor
(VDR), and posttranscriptional regulatory mechanisms of gene expression have also
been proposed. We have identified microRNA-22 (miR-22) and several other miRNA
species as 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) targets in human colon cancer cells. Remarkably,
miR-22 is induced by 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) in a time-, dose- and VDR-dependent manner. 
In SW480-ADH and HCT116 cells, miR-22 loss-of-function by transfection of a
miR-22 inhibitor suppresses the antiproliferative effect of 1,25(OH)(2)D(3).
Additionally, miR-22 inhibition increases cell migration per se and decreases the
antimigratory effect of 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) in both cell types. In silico analysis
shows a significant overlap between genes suppressed by 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) and
miR-22 putative target genes. Consistently, miR-22 inhibition abrogates the
1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-mediated suppression of NELL2, OGN, HNRPH1, RERE and NFAT5 genes.
In 39 out of 50 (78%) human colon cancer patients, miR-22 expression was found
lower in the tumour than in the matched normal tissue and correlated directly
with that of VDR. Our results indicate that miR-22 is induced by 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) 
in human colon cancer cells and it may contribute to its antitumour action
against this neoplasia.

PMID: 22328083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Med Genet. 2011 Dec;48(12):802-9. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2011-100436. Epub 2011
Nov 5.

Linkage and association analyses of glaucoma related traits in a large pedigree
from a Dutch genetically isolated population.

Axenovich T(1), Zorkoltseva I, Belonogova N, van Koolwijk LM, Borodin P,
Kirichenko A, Babenko V, Ramdas WD, Amin N, Despriet DD, Vingerling JR, Lemij HG,
Oostra BA, Klaver CC, Aulchenko Y, van Duijn CM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology & Genetics, Lavrentiev Avenue 10, Novosibirsk 630090,
Russian Federation. aks@bionet.nsc.ru

Erratum in
    J Med Genet. 2012 Mar;49(3):220. van Koolwijk, Leonike [corrected to van
Koolwijk, Leonike M E]; Ramdas, Wishal [corrected to Ramdas, Wishal D]; Despriet,
Dominiec [corrected to Despriet, Dominiec D G];Vingerling, Johannes [corrected to
Vingerling, Johannes R]; Lemij, Hans [corrected to Lemij, Hans G]; Klaver,
Caroline [corrected to Klaver, Caroline C W];Aulchenko, Yurii [corrected to
Aulchenko, Yurii S]; van Duijn, Cornelia [corrected to van Duijn, Cornelia M].

BACKGROUND: Despite extensive research on the genetic determinants of glaucoma,
the genes identified to date explain only a small proportion of cases in the
general population.
METHODS: Genome-wide linkage and association analyses of quantitative traits
related to glaucoma were performed: intraocular pressure, size and morphology of 
the optic disc (individual and combined by method of principal components) and
thickness of the retinal nerve fibre layer (RNFL), in a large pedigree from a
genetically isolated Dutch population.
RESULTS: For the size of the optic disc, the study demonstrated a significant
linkage signal (logarithm of odds (LOD)=3.6) at the LRP1B region on chromosome
2q21.2-q22.2 and significant association (p=8.95×10(-12)) with the previously
reported CDC7/TGFBR3 locus at 1p22. For parameters describing morphology of the
optic disc, the study obtained significant linkage signal (LOD=4.6) at regions
SIRPA and RNF24/PANK2 at 20p13 (false discovery rate (FDR) based q value <0.05)
and genome-wide significant association (p=2.38×10(-9)) with a common variant in 
the RERE gene at 1p36. Suggestive linkage and association signals indicated loci 
for morphology of the optic disc at 2q31-q33 (IGFBP2 locus) and for RNFL
thickness at 3p22.2 (DCLK3 locus) and 14q22-q23 (SIX1 locus).
CONCLUSION: This study identified new linkage regions at 20p13 (SIRPA and
RNF24/PANK2 loci) and 2q33-q34 (IGFBP2 locus) for parameters describing
morphology of the optic disc. The results of the study also suggested common
genetic control of these parameters and RNFL thickness by SIX1 and doublecotin
family genes. Finally, association signals for the recently reported RERE and
LRP1B loci and the well known CDC7, TGFBR3, and ATOH7 loci were replicated.

PMID: 22058429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Otolaryngol Pol. 2011 Jan-Feb;65(1):62-5. doi: 10.1016/S0030-6657(11)70630-8.

[Intracranial mucocele of the frontal sinus].

[Article in Polish]

Babinski D(1), Skorek A, Stankiewicz C, Wasilewski W, Kloc W.

Author information: 
(1)Katedra i Klinika Chorób Uszu, Nosa, Gardla i Krtani, Gdanski Uniwersytet
Medyczny kierownik. ptol@gumed.edu.pl

We discuss a case of 49-year-old man admitted to our Department with headache and
tumor of frontal region since 3 months. We report clinical features and imaging
data of mucocele of frontal sinus that penetrates into cranial cavity. The
mucocele had damaged anterior and posterior walls of frontal sinus with
intracranial penetration. There was intact dura of anterior fosse. External
approach with coronal incision was performed, mucocele was evacuated and mucosa
was removed. Then frontal sinus was cranialized with reconstruction of anterior
wall and finally wide nasal drainage was performed. Intracranial mucocele of the 
frontal sinus is rere evidence. The key difficulties may be related to dura
preservation and reconstruction of anterior wall of frontal sinus.

PMID: 21574499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Chem Theory Comput. 2010 Oct 12;6(10):3113-21. doi: 10.1021/ct100338v.

Relativistic Effects on Metal-Metal Bonding: Comparison of the Performance of ECP
and Scalar DKH Description on the Picture of Metal-Metal Bonding in Re2Cl8(2.).

Ponec R(1), Bucinský L(1), Gatti C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Process Fundamentals, Academy of Sciences of the Czech
Republic v.v.i., Prague 6, Suchdol 2, 165 02 Czech Republic, Institute of
Physical Chemistry and Chemical Physics, Slovak University of Technology in
Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia, and Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie Molecolari
del CNR (CNR-ISTM) e Dipartimento di Chimica Fisica ed Elettrochimica, Università
di Milano, Via Golgi 19, I-20133, Milano, Italy.

This paper reports a systematic comparison of the performance of alternative
methods of including relativistic effects on the nature of metal-metal bonding in
the Re2Cl8(2-) anion. The comparison involved the description using a scalar
relativistic Douglas-Kroll-Hess (DKH2) Hamiltonian with all-electron basis sets
and the relativistic effective core potential (ECP) basis sets. The impact of the
above methods on the picture of the bonding was analyzed using the so-called
domain averaged Fermi holes (DAFH). Besides comparing the impact on the picture
of the bonding of the two above methods, the focus was also put on the systematic
comparison of the "exact" AIM generalized form of DAFH analysis with the
approximate Mulliken-like approach used in an earlier DAFH study of ReRe bonding.
It has been shown that in contrast to descriptions using ECP basis sets where the
differences in the picture of the bonding emerging from the approximate and
"exact" DAFH analysis are only marginal, the approximate DAFH approach has been
found to dramatically fail in the case of all-electron basis sets required for
the description in terms of the Douglas-Kroll-Hess (DKH2) Hamiltonian.

PMID: 26616773  [PubMed]


24. J Bone Miner Metab. 2011 Jan;29(1):80-7. doi: 10.1007/s00774-010-0195-y. Epub
2010 Jul 6.

Bone mineral density is linked to 1p36 and 7p15-13 in a southern Chinese
population.

Li HY(1), Kung WC, Huang QY.

Author information: 
(1)Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong
Kong, China.

Genome-wide linkage scans have identified a number of quantitative trait loci
(QTLs) affecting bone mineral density (BMD), mainly in the Caucasian population. 
In this study, we aim to determine whether seven well-replicated QTLs also
contribute to BMD variation in the southern Han Chinese population. Thirty-three 
microsatellite markers in the proximity of seven QTLs were genotyped in 1,459
subjects from 306 families ascertained through a proband with BMD Z-score equal
to or less than -1.3 at either the lumbar spine or hip. Regression-based
multipoint linkage analysis was performed. In the entire study population, good
linkage evidence of total hip BMD to 7p14 [maximum log of odds (LOD) score
(MLS) = 2.75; nominal P = 0.0002] and 1p36 (MLS = 1.6, P = 0.003) was revealed.
In the subgroup analysis of 1,166 female subjects, MLS of 3.42, 2.65, 2.42, and
1.54 were obtained on 7p12 for total hip, lumbar spine, trochanter, and femoral
neck BMD, respectively. A suggestive linkage signal was achieved at 7p14-15 with 
a MLS of 3.38 and 3.15 for trochanter and total hip BMD in the 678 premenopausal 
women, and at 7p12 for femoral neck and total hip BMD with MLS of 2.22 and 3.04
in postmenopausal women. Subgroup analysis of premenopausal women also provided
additional evidence of suggestive linkage of total hip BMD to 1p36, with a MLS of
2.84 at 17.07 cM. Thus, linkage of BMD to 1p36 and 7p15-13 is confirmed in
southern Chinese. Computational prioritization strategy and published genome-wide
association studies suggested RERE and SFRP4 as two promising candidate genes in 
which variants responsible for the linkage signal may be identified by follow-up 
gene-wide association studies.

PMID: 20607328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. N Engl J Med. 2010 May 6;362(18):1686-97. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0908547. Epub 2010
Apr 21.

Variant of TYR and autoimmunity susceptibility loci in generalized vitiligo.

Jin Y(1), Birlea SA, Fain PR, Gowan K, Riccardi SL, Holland PJ, Mailloux CM,
Sufit AJ, Hutton SM, Amadi-Myers A, Bennett DC, Wallace MR, McCormack WT, Kemp
EH, Gawkrodger DJ, Weetman AP, Picardo M, Leone G, Taïeb A, Jouary T, Ezzedine K,
van Geel N, Lambert J, Overbeck A, Spritz RA.

Author information: 
(1)Human Medical Genetics Program, School of Medicine, University of Colorado,
P.O. Box 6511, Mailstop 8300, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

BACKGROUND: Generalized vitiligo is an autoimmune disease characterized by
melanocyte loss, which results in patchy depigmentation of skin and hair, and is 
associated with an elevated risk of other autoimmune diseases.
METHODS: To identify generalized vitiligo susceptibility loci, we conducted a
genomewide association study. We genotyped 579,146 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 1514 patients with generalized vitiligo who were of
European-derived white (CEU) ancestry and compared the genotypes with publicly
available control genotypes from 2813 CEU persons. We then tested 50 SNPs in two 
replication sets, one comprising 677 independent CEU patients and 1106 CEU
controls and the other comprising 183 CEU simplex trios with generalized vitiligo
and 332 CEU multiplex families.
RESULTS: We detected significant associations between generalized vitiligo and
SNPs at several loci previously associated with other autoimmune diseases. These 
included genes encoding major-histocompatibility-complex class I molecules
(P=9.05x10(-23)) and class II molecules (P=4.50x10(-34)), PTPN22 (P=1.31x10(-7)),
LPP (P=1.01x10(-11)), IL2RA (P=2.78x10(-9)), UBASH3A (P=1.26x10(-9)), and C1QTNF6
(P=2.21x10(-16)). We also detected associations between generalized vitiligo and 
SNPs in two additional immune-related loci, RERE (P=7.07x10(-15)) and GZMB
(P=3.44x10(-8)), and in a locus containing TYR (P=1.60x10(-18)), encoding
tyrosinase.
CONCLUSIONS: We observed associations between generalized vitiligo and markers
implicating multiple genes, some associated with other autoimmune diseases and
one (TYR) that may mediate target-cell specificity and indicate a mutually
exclusive relationship between susceptibility to vitiligo and susceptibility to
melanoma.

2010 Massachusetts Medical Society

PMCID: PMC2891985
PMID: 20410501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Apr 9;394(3):780-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.03.069. Epub 2010 Mar 15.

Genetic modification of the inner ear lateral semicircular canal phenotype of the
Bmp4 haplo-insufficient mouse.

Vervoort R(1), Ceulemans H, Van Aerschot L, D'Hooge R, David G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Glycobiology and Developmental Genetics, Flanders Institute for 
Biotechnology (VIB) and Department of Human Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit
Leuven, Herestraat 49 bus 602, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium. ribvervoort@hotmail.com

In the mouse, development of the lateral semicircular canal of the inner ear is
sensitive to Bmp4 heterozygosity. In the C57BL6 background 30% of the
heterozygotes display circling behavior, 66% have a specific defect in the
vestibular part of the inner ear, namely the constriction, interruption or
absence of the lateral semicircular canal. Only mice having both ears affected
display circling behavior. In the (C57BL6xCBA)N1 background, the penetrance of
the canal phenotype is greatly reduced, and bilateral lateral canal defect is not
sufficient to induce circling. We found association of the canal phenotype with
the genotype of markers on chromosome 14 and 4, co-localizing with Ecs and Eclb
identified in the Ecl mouse with similar lateral canal defects. Candidate genes
to contain the causal mutation are Bmp4 on chromosome 14, and Rere on chromosome 
4.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20233579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Nature. 2010 Feb 18;463(7283):953-7. doi: 10.1038/nature08763.

Rere controls retinoic acid signalling and somite bilateral symmetry.

Vilhais-Neto GC(1), Maruhashi M, Smith KT, Vasseur-Cognet M, Peterson AS, Workman
JL, Pourquié O.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Missouri 64110, USA.

One of the most notable features of the vertebrate body plan organization is its 
bilateral symmetry, evident at the level of vertebrae and skeletal muscles. Here 
we show that a mutation in Rere (also known as atrophin2) leads to the formation 
of asymmetrical somites in mouse embryos, similar to embryos deprived of retinoic
acid. Furthermore, we also demonstrate that Rere controls retinoic acid
signalling, which is required to maintain somite symmetry by interacting with
Fgf8 in the left-right signalling pathway. Rere forms a complex with Nr2f2, p300 
(also known as Ep300) and a retinoic acid receptor, which is recruited to the
retinoic acid regulatory element of retinoic acid targets, such as the Rarb
promoter. Furthermore, the knockdown of Nr2f2 and/or Rere decreases retinoic acid
signalling, suggesting that this complex is required to promote transcriptional
activation of retinoic acid targets. The asymmetrical expression of Nr2f2 in the 
presomitic mesoderm overlaps with the asymmetry of the retinoic acid signalling
response, supporting its implication in the control of somitic symmetry.
Misregulation of this mechanism could be involved in symmetry defects of the
human spine, such as those observed in patients with scoliosis.

PMID: 20164929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Nucl Recept Signal. 2008;6:e009. doi: 10.1621/nrs.06009. Epub 2008 Oct 31.

Atrophin proteins: an overview of a new class of nuclear receptor corepressors.

Wang L(1), Tsai CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA.

The normal development and physiological functions of multicellular organisms are
regulated by complex gene transcriptional networks that include myriad
transcription factors, their associating coregulators, and multiple
chromatin-modifying factors. Aberrant gene transcriptional regulation resulting
from mutations among these elements often leads to developmental defects and
diseases. This review article concentrates on the Atrophin family proteins,
including vertebrate Atrophin-1 (ATN1), vertebrate arginine-glutamic acid
dipeptide repeats protein (RERE), and Drosophila Atrophin (Atro), which we
recently identified as nuclear receptor corepressors. Disruption of
Atrophin-mediated pathways causes multiple developmental defects in mouse,
zebrafish, and Drosophila, while an aberrant form of ATN1 and altered expression 
levels of RERE are associated with neurodegenerative disease and cancer in
humans, respectively. We here provide an overview of current knowledge about
these Atrophin proteins. We hope that this information on Atrophin proteins may
help stimulate fresh ideas about how this newly identified class of nuclear
receptor corepressors aids specific nuclear receptors and other transcriptional
factors in regulating gene transcription, manifesting physiological effects, and 
causing diseases.

PMCID: PMC2586093
PMID: 19043594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Hum Mutat. 2009 Mar;30(3):342-51. doi: 10.1002/humu.20858.

Mutations in NR2E3 can cause dominant or recessive retinal degenerations in the
same family.

Escher P(1), Gouras P, Roduit R, Tiab L, Bolay S, Delarive T, Chen S, Tsai CC,
Hayashi M, Zernant J, Merriam JE, Mermod N, Allikmets R, Munier FL, Schorderet
DF.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Ophtalmologie, Sion, Switzerland.

NR2E3, a photoreceptor-specific nuclear receptor (PNR), represses cone-specific
genes and activates several rod-specific genes. In humans, mutations in NR2E3
have been associated with the recessively-inherited enhanced short-wavelength
sensitive S-cone syndrome (ESCS) and, recently, with autosomal dominant (ad)
retinitis pigmentosa (RP) (adRP). In the present work, we describe two additional
families affected by adRP that carry a heterozygous c.166G>A (p.G56R) mutation in
the NR2E3 gene. Functional analysis determined the dominant negative activity of 
the p.G56R mutant protein as the molecular mechanism of adRP. Interestingly, in
one pedigree, the most common causal variant for ESCS (p.R311Q) cosegregated with
the adRP-linked p.G56R mutation, and the compound heterozygotes exhibited an
ESCS-like phenotype, which in 1 of the 2 cases was strikingly "milder" than the
patients carrying the p.G56R mutation alone. Impaired repression of cone-specific
genes by the corepressors atrophin-1 (dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy
[DRPLA] gene product) and atrophin-2 (arginine-glutamic acid dipeptide repeat
[RERE] protein) appeared to be a molecular mechanism mediating the beneficial
effect of the p.R311Q mutation. Finally, the functional dominance of the p.R311Q 
variant to the p.G56R mutation is discussed.

2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3658139
PMID: 19006237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Inorg Chem. 2008 Aug 4;47(15):6779-90. doi: 10.1021/ic800403p. Epub 2008 Jul 2.

Unsaturated binuclear cyclopentadienylrhenium carbonyl derivatives: metal-metal
multiple bonds and agostic hydrogen atoms.

Xu B(1), Li QS, Xie Y, King RB, Schaefer HF 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Physics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing
100081, PR China.

The cyclopentadienylrhenium carbonyls Cp 2Re 2(CO) n (Cp = eta (5)-C 5H 5; n = 5,
4, 3, 2) have been studied by density functional theory. The global minima for
the Cp 2Re 2(CO) n ( n = 5, 4, 3, 2) derivatives are predicted to be the singly
bridged structure Cp 2Re 2(CO) 4(mu-CO) with a formal Re-Re single bond; the
doubly semibridged structure Cp 2Re 2(CO) 4 with a formal ReRe double bond; the
triply bridged structure Cp 2Re 2(mu-CO) 3 with a formal ReRe triple bond; and
the doubly bridged structure Cp 2Re 2(mu-CO) 2, respectively. The first three of 
these predicted structures have been realized experimentally in the stable
compounds (eta (5)-C 5H 5) 2Re 2(CO) 4(mu-CO), (eta (5)-Me 5C 5) 2Re 2(CO) 4 and 
(eta (5)-Me 5C 5) 2Re 2(mu-CO) 3. In addition, structures of the type Cp
2Re-Re(CO) n with both rings bonded only to one metal and unknown in manganese
chemistry are also found for rhenium but at energies significantly above the
global minima. The unsaturated Cp 2Re-Re(CO) n structures ( n = 4, 3, 2) have
agostic Cp hydrogen atoms forming C-H-Re bridges to the unsaturated Re(CO) n
group with a Re-H distance as short as 2.04 A.

PMID: 18597417  [PubMed]


31. Osteoporos Int. 2009 Feb;20(2):341-6. doi: 10.1007/s00198-008-0668-1. Epub 2008
Jul 3.

High resolution linkage and linkage disequilibrium analyses of chromosome 1p36
SNPs identify new positional candidate genes for low bone mineral density.

Zhang H(1), Sol-Church K, Rydbeck H, Stabley D, Spotila LD, Devoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA
19104-4399, USA.

A quantitative trait locus (QTL) for BMD maps to chromosome 1p36. We have
analyzed a high density SNP panel from this region for linkage and association to
BMD in 39 osteoporosis pedigrees. Our results support the presence of genes
controlling BMD on 1p36 and indicate new candidates for further
analyses.INTRODUCTION: Low BMD is one of the major risk factors for osteoporosis.
Following a genome scan in a sample of Caucasian families recruited through
probands with low BMD, a region on 1p36 near marker D1S214 received support as a 
QTL for BMD from linkage (maximum lod-score = 2.87) and linkage disequilibrium
(LD) analysis (p < 0.01).
METHODS: To better characterize the genetic risk factors for low BMD located in
this genomic region, we have genotyped the same group of families for 1095 SNPs
located across 11 Mb on 1p36. Linkage and LD analyses have been performed using
the variance component approach.
RESULTS: Multivariate linkage analysis indicated two QTLs for femoral neck BMD,
lumbar spine BMD and trochanter BMD simultaneously on 1p36, with maximum
lod-scores of 4.37 at 12 cM and 3.59 at 22 cM. LD analysis identified several
SNPs potentially associated with BMD, including the RERE gene SNP rs11121179 (p =
0.000005 for lumbar spine BMD). Other candidate genes include G1P2, SSU72 and
CCDC27 (each containing 1 SNP with p < 0.001 for at least one BMD trait).
CONCLUSIONS: This study supports the presence in 1p36 of QTLs affecting BMD at
multiple skeletal sites. Replication of our results in other independent cohorts 
is warranted.

PMID: 18597038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. EMBO Rep. 2008 Jun;9(6):555-62. doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.67. Epub 2008 May 2.

Atrophin recruits HDAC1/2 and G9a to modify histone H3K9 and to determine cell
fates.

Wang L(1), Charroux B, Kerridge S, Tsai CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, 675 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Atrophin family proteins, including the vertebrate arginine-glutamic acid
dipeptide repeats protein (RERE) and Drosophila Atrophin (Atro), constitute a new
class of nuclear receptor corepressors. Both RERE and Atro share the ELM2 (EGL-27
and MTA1 homology 2) and SANT (SWI3/ADA2/N-CoR/TFIII-B) domains, which are also
present in other important transcriptional cofactors. Here, we report that the
SANT domain in RERE binds to the histone methyltransferase G9a, and that both the
ELM2 and SANT domains orchestrate molecular events that lead to a stable
methylation of histone H3-lysine 9. We establish the physiological relevance of
these interactions among Atrophin, G9a, and histone deacetylases 1 and 2 in
Drosophila by showing that these proteins localize to overlapping chromosomal
loci, and act together to suppress wing vein and melanotic-mass formation. This
study not only shows a new function of the SANT domain and establishes its
connection with the ELM2 domain, but also implies that a similar strategy is used
by other ELM2-SANT proteins to repress gene transcription and to exert biological
effects.

PMCID: PMC2427389
PMID: 18451879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Dev Dyn. 2007 Jul;236(7):1891-904.

REREa/Atrophin-2 interacts with histone deacetylase and Fgf8 signaling to
regulate multiple processes of zebrafish development.

Plaster N(1), Sonntag C, Schilling TF, Hammerschmidt M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology, Freiburg, Germany. nplaster@uci.edu

Erratum in
    Dev Dyn. 2007 Oct;236(10):2971.

The transcriptional regulator RERE/Atrophin-2 (RERE) is required for the normal
patterning of the early vertebrate embryo, including the central nervous system, 
pharyngeal arches, and limbs. Consistent with a role as a transcriptional
corepressor, RERE binds histone deacetylase 1 and 2 (HDAC1/2), and orphan nuclear
receptors such as Tlx. Here, we identify the zebrafish babyface (bab) as a mutant
in rerea and show that it interacts genetically with fibroblast growth factor 8
(fgf8). We suggest that this finding is largely due to its interactions with
HDAC, because genetic or pharmacological disruptions of HDAC phenocopy many
features of the bab mutant. Furthermore, removing the functions of either REREa
or HDAC synergizes with loss of Fgf8 function to disrupt posterior mesoderm
formation during somitogenesis, midbrain-hindbrain boundary maintenance, and
pharyngeal cartilage development. Together, these results reveal novel in vivo
roles for REREa in HDAC-mediated regulation of Fgf signaling. We present a model 
for RERE-dependent patterning in which tissue-specific transcriptional
repression, by means of an REREa-HDAC complex, modulates growth factor signaling 
during embryogenesis.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17576618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Biol Chem. 2007 Feb 16;282(7):5037-44. Epub 2006 Dec 6.

Functional architecture of atrophins.

Shen Y(1), Lee G, Choe Y, Zoltewicz JS, Peterson AS.

Author information: 
(1)Gallo Center and the Department of Neurology, University of California at San 
Francisco, Emeryville, California 94608, USA.

Vertebrate genomes harbor two Atrophin genes, Atrophin-1 (Atn1) and Atrophin-2
(Atn2). The Atn1 locus produces a single polypeptide, whereas two different
protein products are expressed from the Atn2 (also known as Rere) locus. A long, 
or full-length, form contains an amino-terminal MTA-2-homologous domain followed 
by an Atrophin-1-related domain. A short form, expressed via an internal
promoter, consists solely of the Atrophin domain. Atrophin-1 can be
co-immunoprecipitated along with Atrophin-2, suggesting that the Atrophins
ordinarily function together. Mutations that disrupt the expression of the long
form of Atrophin-2 disrupt early embryonic development. To determine the
requirement for Atrophin-1 during development we generated a null allele.
Somewhat surprisingly we found that Atrophin-1 function is dispensable. To gain a
better understanding of the requirement for Atrophin function during development,
an analysis of the functional domains of the three different gene products was
carried out. Taken together, these data suggest that Atrophins function as
bifunctional transcriptional regulators. The long form of Atrophin-2 has a
transcriptional repression activity that is not found in the other Atrophin
polypeptides and that is required for normal embryogenesis. Atrophin-1 and the
short form of Atrophin-2, on the other hand, can act as potent and evolutionarily
conserved transcriptional activators.

PMID: 17150957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2007 Jan;46(1):45-52.

Neuroblastoma tumors with favorable and unfavorable outcomes: Significant
differences in mRNA expression of genes mapped at 1p36.2.

Fransson S(1), Martinsson T, Ejeskär K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska
University Hospital-East, S-416 85 Gothenburg, Sweden.
susanne.fransson@clingen.gu.se

The distal part of 1p is frequently deleted in aggressive neuroblastoma, and the 
region is believed to harbor one or more tumor suppressor genes relevant to tumor
development. To analyze differences among neuroblastoma tumors, an expression
profile was established for the genes mapped within a previously described
shortest region of overlap of deletions at 1p36.2. The gene expression levels
were quantified by TaqMan real-time (RT)-PCR for 30 transcripts using 55 primary 
neuroblastoma tumors. Here we report on a significant decrease in gene expression
of the genes RERE, PIK3CD, LZIC, PGD, and PEX14 and an increase of SLC2A5 when
comparing tumors of favorable biology to Stage 4 neuroblastomas. When comparing
1p-deleted tumors of all stages to tumors with an intact 1p, a significant
difference at gene-by-gene level in TNFRSF9, RERE, PIK3CD, CLSTN1, CTNNBIP1, and 
CASZ1 was detected. A complete loss of expression could not be seen for any
single gene analyzed. Several of the genes with diminished expression in
unfavorable or 1p-deleted tumors have functions that could contribute to tumor
development. It is also possible that a combination of lowly expressed genes at
1p, rather than one single classical tumor suppressor gene, causes the
unfavorable outcome associated with 1p-deletion in neuroblastoma.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17044048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Indian J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2004 Oct;56(4):306-8. doi:
10.1007/BF02974397.

Actinomycosis of the parotid gland.

Dubey A(1), Murthy JG, Banerjee PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of E.N.T. and Head & Neck Surgery, JLN Hospital & Research Centre, 
4-Anand Nagar Utai Road, Durg-491001 Durg (CG.) Bhilai (CG.), India.

- Actinomycosis is a slowly progressive infection caused by anaerobic bacteria
with relatively decreasing incidence now-a-days. The Parotid gland is a quite
rere site to be involved in cervico-facial actinomycosis as compared to the other
sites in the face & neck region. We report a successfully managed case of
Actinomycosis involving the parotid gland.

PMCID: PMC3451152
PMID: 23120106  [PubMed]


37. Hepatology. 2003 Sep;38(3):577-88.

Novel differential gene expression in human cirrhosis detected by suppression
subtractive hybridization.

Shackel NA(1), McGuinness PH, Abbott CA, Gorrell MD, McCaughan GW.

Author information: 
(1)A.W. Morrow Gastroenterology and Liver Centre, Centenary Institute of Cancer
Medicine and Cell Biology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia.

Pathogenic molecular pathways in cirrhotic liver diseases such as hepatitis C
virus (HCV), autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) and primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) are
poorly characterized. Differentially expressed genes are often important in
disease pathogenesis. Suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH) is a
genome-wide approach that enriches for differentially expressed mRNA transcripts.
We aimed to make novel observations of differential gene expression in cirrhosis 
using SSH combined with quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR). Liver transcriptomes in HCV cirrhosis, AIH cirrhosis,
PBC, and nondiseased liver tissue were examined by SSH. Resulting complementary
DNA (cDNA) clones were rescreened for differential expression by dot-blot
hybridization and then sequenced. Selected gene expression was quantified by
real-time RT-PCR. Following SSH, 694 clones were rescreened for differential gene
expression, of which 145 were sequenced and found to derive from 89 different
genes. Seven clones were homologous only with expressed sequence tag (EST)
sequences encoding genes having no known function. Up-regulated expression of
four genes was confirmed by real-time RT-PCR: transmembrane 4 superfamily member 
3 (tetraspanin CO-029) in all forms of cirrhosis, hedgehog interacting protein
(HIP) in AIH cirrhosis and chitinase 3-like-1 (HC gp-39 or ykl-40) and
arginine-glutamic acid repeat (RERE) in HCV cirrhosis. RERE gene polymorphisms
and splice variants were observed in all tissues examined. Tetraspanin CO-029
up-regulation was primarily localized to bile ductular cells. In conclusion,
novel observations of differential gene expression in human cirrhosis were made
using SSH as the primary discovery tool. In particular, further studies of the
RERE gene and its products in HCV associated liver disease are warranted.

PMID: 12939584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Development. 2002 Mar;129(5):1119-29.

Grunge, related to human Atrophin-like proteins, has multiple functions in
Drosophila development.

Erkner A(1), Roure A, Charroux B, Delaage M, Holway N, Coré N, Vola C, Angelats
C, Pagès F, Fasano L, Kerridge S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique et Physiologie du Développement, UMR 9943
C.N.R.S.-Université, I.B.D.M. CNRS-INSERM-Université de la Méditerranée, Campus
de Luminy Case 907, F-13288 Marseille, Cedex 09, France.

We have carried out a genetic screen designed to isolate regulators of teashirt
expression. One of these regulators is the Grunge gene, which encodes a protein
with motifs found in human arginine-glutamic acid dipeptide repeat,
Metastasis-associated-like and Atrophin-1 proteins. Grunge is the only
Atrophin-like protein in Drosophila, whereas several exist in humans. We provide 
evidence that Grunge is required for the proper regulation of teashirt but also
has multiple activities in fly development. First, Grunge is crucial for correct 
segmentation during embryogenesis via a failure in the repression of at least
four segmentation genes known to regulate teashirt. Second, Grunge acts
positively to regulate teashirt expression in proximoventral parts of the leg.
Grunge has other regulatory functions in the leg, including the patterning of
ventral parts along the entire proximodistal axis and the proper spacing of
bristles in all regions.

PMID: 11874908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cell Growth Differ. 2001 Apr;12(4):201-10.

Human RERE is localized to nuclear promyelocytic leukemia oncogenic domains and
enhances apoptosis.

Waerner T(1), Gardellin P, Pfizenmaier K, Weith A, Kraut N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma KG, 88397 Biberach,
Germany.

RE repeats encoded (RERE) was identified recently as a protein with high homology
to the atrophin-1 protein, which appears to be causal in the hereditary
neurodegenerative disorder termed dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA)
caused by an abnormal glutamine expansion. We have independently identified RERE 
in a search for genes localized to the translocation breakpoint region at
chromosome 1p36.2 in the neuroblastoma cell line NGP. Here we show that
neuroblastoma tumor cell lines display reduced abundance of RERE transcripts.
Furthermore, we detected RERE protein mainly in the nucleus, where it colocalizes
with the promyelocytic leukemia protein in promyelocytic leukemia oncogenic
domains (PODs). Overexpression of RERE recruits a fraction of the proapoptotic
protein BAX to PODS: This observation correlates with RERE-induced apoptosis,
which occurs in a caspase-dependent manner. These results identify RERE as a
novel component of PODs and suggest an important role of RERE in the control of
cell survival.

PMID: 11331249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Kyobu Geka. 2001 Jan;54(1):77-9.

[A case of a left atrial primary malignant fibrous histiocytoma].

[Article in Japanese]

Uchikawa S(1), Nakajima M, Hirayama T, Misumi H, Shimokawa Y, Kamio T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Saiseikai Kumamoto Hospital, Kumamoto,
Japan.

Primary malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH) of the heart is very rere. We report
a case of a primary intracardiac MFH. A 50-year-old woman underwent an operation 
for congestive heart failure due to left atrial (LA) tumor. Cardiac
echocardiogram showed the tumor attached to the septal wall and posterior wall of
LA. We extendedly resected the tumor with septal and partially posterior wall and
reconstructed there with pericardial substitute. Pathological diagnosis was MFH. 
Although she did well postoperatively, cardiac echocardiogram showed a recurrent 
tumor in the LA at 10 days after operation. She developed respiratory failure,
and chest and abdominal CT demonstrated metabolism to the lung, liver and bladder
at post operative 47 days. At 77 days after operation, she expired. The prognosis
of MFH is poor despite surgery. We recommend extended surgery, if the LA tumor
had wide base attached to the septal or posterior wall.

PMID: 11197913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 May 22;9(9):1433-42.

Protein binding of a DRPLA family through arginine-glutamic acid dipeptide
repeats is enhanced by extended polyglutamine.

Yanagisawa H(1), Bundo M, Miyashita T, Okamura-Oho Y, Tadokoro K, Tokunaga K,
Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)National Children's Medical Research Center, Setagaya, Tokyo 154-8509 Japan.

Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA) is one of the hereditary
neurodegenerative disorders caused by expansion of CAG/glutamine repeats. To
investigate the normal function of the DRPLA gene and the pathogenic mechanism of
neuron death in specific areas of the brain, we isolated and analyzed a gene that
shares a notable motif with DRPLA, arginine-glutamic acid (RE) dipeptide repeats.
The gene isolated, designated RERE, has an open reading frame of 1566 amino
acids, of which the C-terminal portion has 67% homology to DRPLA, whereas the
N-terminal portion is distinctive. RERE also contains arginine-aspartic acid (RD)
dipeptide repeats and putative nuclear localization signal sequences, but no
polyglutamine tracts. RERE is expressed at a low level in most tissues examined. 
Immunoprecipitation and in vitro binding assays demonstrate that the DRPLA and
RERE proteins bind each other, for which one of the RE repeats has a primary
role, and extended polyglutamine enhances the binding. With engineered constructs
fused with a tag, the RERE protein localized predominantly in the nucleus.
Moreover, when RERE is overexpressed, the distribution of endogenous DRPLA
protein alters from the diffused to the speckled pattern in the nucleus so as to 
co-localize with RERE. More RERE protein is recruited into nuclear aggregates of 
the DRPLA protein with extended polyglutamine than into those of pure
polyglutamine. These results reveal a function for the DRPLA protein in the
nucleus and the RE repeat in the protein-protein interaction.

PMID: 10814707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1993 Jun;41(3):163-6.

Third-time coronary artery revascularization.

Watanabe G(1), Haverich A, Speier R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Hannover Medical School,
Germany.

Eighteen patients underwent a third coronary artery revascularization (rere-CABG)
between 1983 and 1991. The factors necessitating rere-CABG were graft failure in 
83% of the patients and progression of native coronary atherosclerosis in 17%.
Mean interval between the second and third operation was 49.1 months. Median
sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) were used in 12 patients, a left
thoracotomy approach was used in 6 (with CPB in 3 patients and without CPB in 3).
The mean revascularization rate was 2.2 (grafts/patient). The internal thoracic
artery was employed in 12 patients and the right gastroepiploic artery was used
in one. Operative mortality was 11.1% (2 deaths). Non-fatal perioperative
myocardial infarction, reexploration for bleeding, and respiratory failure
occurred in one patient each. There were no other serious complications.
Long-term follow-up was obtained in 15 of the 16 survivors. Four patients had
recurrence of angina pectoris, and one late death due to myocardial infarction
occurred. The myocardial event-free rate was 75% at 3.4 years. This experience
indicates that a third coronary revascularization can be justified: operative
approach and choice of graft material have to be individualized, but adequate
long-term results can be obtained.

PMID: 8367868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. EMBO J. 1992 Jan;11(1):167-75.

Transcriptional regulation of the c-jun gene by retinoic acid and E1A during
differentiation of F9 cells.

Kitabayashi I(1), Kawakami Z, Chiu R, Ozawa K, Matsuoka T, Toyoshima S, Umesono
K, Evans RM, Gachelin G, Yokoyama K.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
(RIKEN), Ibaraki, Japan.

Differentiation of mouse F9 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells can be induced by
exposure to retinoic acid (RA) or by expression of adenovirus E1A. The
transcription of the c-jun gene is stimulated by either RA or E1A. We report here
that both RA and E1A strongly induce the expression of chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) from c-jun promoter/CAT reporter construct (c-jun/CAT),
which is stably integrated into F9 cells, in a manner that is independent of both
copy number and integration locus. The induction of c-jun/CAT expression is
observed in undifferentiated F9 cells, but not in differentiated F9 cells,
adenovirus-infected F9 cells or HeLa cells. Deletion analysis of the promoter
region of the c-jun gene indicates that the sequence elements required for the
RA- and E1A-mediated induction are identical and they have been defined as a
region of 145 bp between -190 and -46 of the 5' flanking region of c-jun. This RA
and E1A response element (RERE) contains five variants of the motif CGCGGTGACGNT.
The upstream two motifs are adjacent and extend in opposite directions, creating 
an imperfect palindrome. The downstream four motifs are located at 35 or 36 bp
intervals in the same orientation. Substitution and insertion analysis indicates 
that these motifs and their regular intervals are important for the activity of
the RERE.

PMCID: PMC556437
PMID: 1310930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Hered. 1981 Mar-Apr;72(2):131-2.

Rex mutant in the Norway rat.

Robinson R.

A new rex or curly coat mutant in the Norway rat is reported. The vibrissae are
bent, the coat is shorter than normal and has a harsh texture. The condition is
due to a dominant gene designated rex (symbol Re). The coat of the homozygote
(ReRe) is more severely affected than the heterozygote (Re+) and displays a
transient baldness at about five weeks of age. Careful comparison suggests that
Re is probably distinct from the four rexoid mutants previously described in the 
Norway rat.

PMID: 7276514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Kokyu To Junkan. 1978 May;26(5):421-7.

[Rere-expansion pulmonary edema after drainage of spontaneous pneumothorax. A
review of the literature and a clinical study on pulmonary blood flow of
re-expanded lung by perfusion scans (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamazaki S, Ogawa JI, Koide S, Kawada S, Shotsu A.

PMID: 663428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1977 Jan;36(1):140-56.

Electron microscopic observations of the mechanisms of terminal club formation in
transected spinal cord axons.

Kao CC, Chang LW, Bloodworth JM Jr.

Following transection of spinal cords, axoplasmic flow occurred in the axons both
proximal and distal to the transection. In the proximal axonal stump, the
direction of flow was proximo-distal whereas in the distal axonal stump the
direction of flow was disto-proximal. Thus the flows in transected axons were all
directed toward the point of transection. Electron microscopic observation of the
spinal cord tissue bordering at the cut ends of spinal cord stumps showed various
structural changes in the axons and myelin sheaths of the transected fibers near 
the cut ends which interfered with the axoplasmic flow leading to the formation
of the terminal clubs. Five prototypes of changes in axons and myelin sheaths
near the cut ends of fibers are described and the mechanism of terminal club
formation is discussed. It seemed that the terminal clubs within the transected
spinal cord stumps rere of the axoplasmic flow toward the cut ends of the fibers,
and (2) interference by structural changes which developed within individual
fibers consequent to spinal cord injury.

PMID: 64594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


