
1. J Ovarian Res. 2016 Mar 15;9(1):15. doi: 10.1186/s13048-016-0225-z.

Changes in gene expression of histone modification enzymes in rat granulosa cells
undergoing luteinization during ovulation.

Maekawa R(1), Lee L(1), Okada M(1), Asada H(1), Shinagawa M(1), Tamura I(1), Sato
S(1), Tamura H(1), Sugino N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Minamikogushi 1-1-1, Ube, 755-8505, Japan. (2)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine,
Minamikogushi 1-1-1, Ube, 755-8505, Japan. sugino@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The ovulatory LH surge rapidly alters the expression of
steroidogenesis-related genes such as steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
(StAR) in granulosa cells (GCs) undergoing luteinization. We recently reported
that histone modifications contribute to these changes. Histone modifications are
regulated by a variety of histone modification enzymes. This study investigated
the changes in gene expression of histone modification enzymes in rat GCs
undergoing luteinization after the induction of ovulation. The extracellular
regulated kinase (ERK)-1/2 is a mediator in the intracellular signaling pathway
stimulated by the ovulatory LH surge and regulates the expression of a number of 
genes in GCs. We further investigated whether ERK-1/2 is involved in the
regulation of the histone modification at the StAR promoter region in GCs
undergoing luteinization.
RESULTS: GCs were obtained from rats treated with equine chorionic gonadotropin
(CG) before (0 h) and after human (h) CG injection. The expressions of 84 genes
regulating histone modifications or DNA methylation were measured using a PCR
array. Five genes (HDAC4, HDAC10, EZH2, SETDB2, and CIITA) were identified as
histone acetylation- or histone methylation-related genes, and were significantly
altered after hCG injection. None of the genes were related to DNA methylation.
mRNA levels of EZH2, SETDB2, HDAC4, and HDAC10 decreased and CIITA mRNA levels
increased 4 or 12 h after hCG injection. GCs isolated after eCG injection were
incubated with hCG for 4 h to induce luteinization. StAR mRNA levels were
significantly increased by hCG accompanied by the increase in H3K4me3 of the StAR
promoter region. StAR mRNA expression was inhibited by the ERK inhibitor with the
significant decrease of H3K4me3. These results suggest that hCG increases StAR
gene expression through the ERK-1/2-mediated signaling which is also associated
with histone modification of the promoter region.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene expressions of histone modification enzymes change in GCs
undergoing luteinization after ovulation induction. This change may play
important roles in regulating the expression of various genes during the early
stage of luteinization, which may be critical for the subsequent corpus luteum
formation.

PMCID: PMC4793631
PMID: 26979106  [PubMed - in process]


2. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Dec 28;11(12):e1005338. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005338.
eCollection 2015.

Type I Interferon Induced Epigenetic Regulation of Macrophages Suppresses Innate 
and Adaptive Immunity in Acute Respiratory Viral Infection.

Kroetz DN(1), Allen RM(1), Schaller MA(1), Cavallaro C(1), Ito T(2), Kunkel
SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United
States of America. (2)Department of Immunology, Nara Medical University, Nara,
Japan.

Influenza A virus (IAV) is an airborne pathogen that causes significant morbidity
and mortality each year. Macrophages (M<U+03D5>) are the first immune population to
encounter IAV virions in the lungs and are required to control infection. In the 
present study, we explored the mechanism by which cytokine signaling regulates
the phenotype and function of M<U+03D5> via epigenetic modification of chromatin. We
have found that type I interferon (IFN-I) potently upregulates the lysine
methyltransferase Setdb2 in murine and human M<U+03D5>, and in turn Setdb2 regulates
M<U+03D5>-mediated immunity in response to IAV. The induction of Setdb2 by IFN-I was
significantly impaired upon inhibition of the JAK-STAT signaling cascade, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed that both STAT1 and interferon regulatory 
factor 7 bind upstream of the transcription start site to induce expression. The 
generation of Setdb2LacZ reporter mice revealed that IAV infection results in
systemic upregulation of Setdb2 in myeloid cells. In the lungs, alveolar M<U+03D5>
expressed the highest level of Setdb2, with greater than 70% lacZ positive on day
4 post-infection. Silencing Setdb2 activity in M<U+03D5> in vivo enhanced survival in
lethal IAV infection. Enhanced host protection correlated with an amplified
antiviral response and less obstruction to the airways. By tri-methylating H3K9, 
Setdb2 silenced the transcription of Mx1 and Isg15, antiviral effectors that
inhibit IAV replication. Accordingly, a reduced viral load in knockout mice on
day 8 post-infection was linked to elevated Isg15 and Mx1 transcript in the
lungs. In addition, Setdb2 suppressed the expression of a large number of other
genes with proinflammatory or immunomodulatory function. This included Ccl2, a
chemokine that signals through CCR2 to regulate monocyte recruitment to
infectious sites. Consistently, knockout mice produced more CCL2 upon IAV
infection and this correlated with a 2-fold increase in the number of
inflammatory monocytes and alveolar M<U+03D5> in the lungs. Finally, Setdb2 expression
by M<U+03D5> suppressed IL-2, IL-10, and IFN-<U+03B3> production by CD4+ T cells in vitro, as
well as proliferation in IAV-infected lungs. Collectively, these findings
identify Setdb2 as a novel regulator of the immune system in acute respiratory
viral infection.

PMCID: PMC4692439
PMID: 26709698  [PubMed - in process]


3. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Dec 8;14(4):16169-77. doi: 10.4238/2015.December.8.6.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms associated with growth traits in Jinghai yellow
chickens.

Abdalhag MA(1), Zhang T(1), Fan QC(1), Zhang XQ(1), Zhang GX(1), Wang JY(1), Wei 
Y(1), Wang YJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou,
Jiangsu, China. (2)Jiangsu Jinghai Poultry Group Co., Ltd., Nantong, Jiangsu,
China.

Body weight is one of the most important economic traits in the poultry industry.
In the present study, a custom SNP Beadchip was used to analyze the association
between those 15 SNPs and 12 growth traits of Jinghai yellow chickens, and other 
important genetic parameters were also calculated and analyzed. The results
indicated that nine of the 15 SNPs were associated with growth traits in Jinghai 
yellow chickens (P < 0.05), and the identified SNPs were also in linkage
disequilibrium. Five of the nine identified SNPs were mainly associated with all 
of the growth traits, which indicated that those five SNPs might have significant
influence on Jinghai yellow chicken growth traits. Polymorphism information
content (PIC) analyses indicated that five of the nine SNPs exhibited moderate
polymorphism (0.25 < PIC < 0.5), which reflected intermediate genetic diversity. 
Six candidate genes surrounding the significant SNPs were obtained and subjected 
to Gene Ontology annotation analyses and pathway analyses. The functions of six
important candidate genes (SETDB2, ATP7B, INTS6, KPNA3, DLEU7, and FOXO1A) were
discussed. The present study provided basic data for marker-assisted selection in
Jinghai yellow chickens.

PMID: 26662409  [PubMed - in process]


4. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Nov 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Left-Right Axis Differentiation and Functional Lateralization: a Haplotype in the
Methyltransferase Encoding Gene SETDB2 Might Mediate Handedness in Healthy
Adults.

Ocklenburg S(1), Arning L(2), Gerding WM(2), Hengstler JG(3), Epplen JT(2,)(4),
Güntürkün O(5), Beste C(6), Akkad DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Biopsychology, Department of Psychology, 
Ruhr-University, 44780, Bochum, Germany. sebastian.ocklenburg@rub.de.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Ruhr-University, 44780, Bochum, Germany.
(3)Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors (IfADo),
44139, Dortmund, Germany. (4)Faculty of Health, University Witten-Herdecke,
58448, Witten, Germany. (5)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Biopsychology,
Department of Psychology, Ruhr-University, 44780, Bochum, Germany. (6)Cognitive
Neurophysiology, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Faculty of
Medicine of the TU Dresden, 01309, Dresden, Germany.

Handedness is a multifactorial trait, and genes contributing to the
differentiation of the left-right axis during embryogenesis have been identified 
as a major gene group associated with this trait. The methyltransferase SETDB2
(SET domain, bifurcated 2) has been shown to regulate structural left-right
asymmetry in the vertebrate central nervous system by suppressing fgf8
expression. Here, we investigated the relation of genetic variation in SETDB2-and
its paralogue SETDB1-with different handedness phenotypes in 950 healthy adult
participants. We identified a haplotype on SETDB2 for which homozygous
individuals showed a significantly lower lateralization quotient for handedness
than the rest of the cohort after correction for multiple comparisons. Moreover, 
direction of handedness was significantly associated with genetic variation in
this haplotype. This effect was mainly, but not exclusively, driven by the
sequence variation rs4942830, as individuals homozygous for the A allele of this 
single nucleotide polymorphism had a significantly lower lateralization quotient 
than individuals with at least one T allele. These findings further confirm a
role of genetic pathways relevant for structural left-right axis differentiation 
for functional lateralization. Moreover, as the protein encoded by SETDB2
regulates gene expression epigenetically by histone H3 methylation, our findings 
highlight the importance of investigating the role of epigenetic modulations of
gene expression in relation to handedness.

PMID: 26572639  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Canine Genet Epidemiol. 2015 Apr 18;2:5. doi: 10.1186/s40575-015-0018-5.
eCollection 2015.

Homozygosity mapping and sequencing identify two genes that might contribute to
pointing behavior in hunting dogs.

Akkad DA(1), Gerding WM(1), Gasser RB(2), Epplen JT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics, Ruhr University Bochum, Universitaetsstrasse 150, Bochum,
44801 Germany. (2)Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University
of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010 Australia. (3)Human Genetics, Ruhr
University Bochum, Universitaetsstrasse 150, Bochum, 44801 Germany ; Faculty of
Health, University Witten-Herdecke, Alfred-Herrhausen-Strasse 50, Witten, 58448
Germany.

BACKGROUND: The domestic dog represents an important model for studying the
genetics of behavior. In spite of technological advances in genomics and
phenomics, the genetic basis of most specific canine behaviors is largely
unknown. Some breeds of hunting dogs exhibit a behavioral trait called "pointing"
(a prolonged halt of movement to indicate the position of a game animal). Here,
the genomes of pointing dogs (Large Munsterlander and Weimaraner) were compared
with those of behaviorally distinct herding dogs (Berger des Pyrenées and
Schapendoes). We assumed (i) that these four dog breeds initially represented
inbred populations and (ii) that selective breeding for pointing behavior
promotes an enrichment of the genetic trait in a homozygous state.
RESULTS: The homozygosity mapping of 52 dogs (13 of each of the four breeds)
followed by subsequent interval resequencing identified fixed genetic differences
on chromosome 22 between pointers and herding dogs. In addition, we identified
one non-synonomous variation in each of the coding genes SETDB2 and CYSLTR2 that 
might have a functional consequence. Genetic analysis of additional hunting and
non-hunting dogs revealed consistent homozygosity for these two variations in six
of seven pointing breeds.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the present findings, we propose that, together with other 
genetic, training and/or environmental factors, the nucleotide and associated
amino acid variations identified in genes SETDB2 and CYSLTR2 contribute to
pointing behavior.

PMCID: PMC4579392
PMID: 26401333  [PubMed]


6. Genes Immun. 2015 Oct;16(7):488-94. doi: 10.1038/gene.2015.36. Epub 2015 Sep 17.

A functional AT/G polymorphism in the 5'-untranslated region of SETDB2 in the IgE
locus on human chromosome 13q14.

Holt RJ(1), Vandiedonck C(1), Willis-Owen SA(2), Knight JC(1), Cookson WO(2),
Moffatt MF(2), Zhang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Molecular Genomics and Genetics Group, National Heart and Lung Institute,
Imperial College London, London, UK.

The immunoglobulin E (IgE)-associated locus on human chromosome 13q14 influencing
asthma-related traits contains the genes PHF11 and SETDB2. SETDB2 is located in
the same linkage disequilibrium region as PHF11 and polymorphisms within SETDB2
have been shown to associate with total serum IgE levels. In this report, we
sequenced the 15 exons of SETDB2 and identified a single previously ungenotyped
mutation (AT/G, rs386770867) in the 5'-untranslated region of the gene. The
polymorphism was found to be significantly associated with serum IgE levels in
our asthma cohort (P=0.0012). Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that
the transcription factor Ying Yang 1 binds to the AT allele, whereas SRY (Sex
determining Region Y) binds to the G allele. Allele-specific transcription
analysis (allelotyping) was performed in 35 individuals heterozygous for
rs386770867 from a panel of 200 British families ascertained through probands
with severe stage 3 asthma. The AT allele was found to be significantly
overexpressed in these individuals (P=1.26×10(-21)). A dual-luciferase assay with
the pGL3 luciferase reporter gene showed that the AT allele significantly affects
transcriptional activities. Our results indicate that the IgE-associated AT/G
polymorphism (rs386770867) regulates transcription of SETDB2.

PMCID: PMC4763160
PMID: 26378653  [PubMed - in process]


7. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 13;10(4):e0119234. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119234.
eCollection 2015.

Epigenetic modulations in activated cells early after HIV-1 infection and their
possible functional consequences.

Maricato JT(1), Furtado MN(2), Takenaka MC(1), Nunes ER(2), Fincatti P(2), Meliso
FM(3), da Silva ID(2), Jasiulionis MG(3), Cecília de Araripe Sucupira M(2), Diaz 
RS(2), Janini LM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Paulista Medical
School, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Department of
Medicine, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. (3)Department of
Pharmacology, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Department
of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Paulista Medical School, Federal
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil; Department of Medicine, Federal
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Epigenetic modifications refer to a number of biological processes which alter
the structure of chromatin and its transcriptional activity such as DNA
methylation and histone post-translational processing. Studies have tried to
elucidate how the viral genome and its products are affected by epigenetic
modifications imposed by cell machinery and how it affects the ability of the
virus to either, replicate and produce a viable progeny or be driven to latency. 
The purpose of this study was to evaluate epigenetic modifications in PBMCs and
CD4+ cells after HIV-1 infection analyzing three approaches: (i) global DNA-
methylation; (ii) qPCR array and (iii) western blot. HIV-1 infection led to
methylation increases in the cellular DNA regardless the activation status of
PBMCs. The analysis of H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 suggested a trend towards
transcriptional repression in activated cells after HIV-1 infection. Using a qPCR
array, we detected genes related to epigenetic processes highly modulated in
activated HIV-1 infected cells. SETDB2 and RSK2 transcripts showed highest
up-regulation levels. SETDB2 signaling is related to transcriptional silencing
while RSK2 is related to either silencing or activation of gene expression
depending on the signaling pathway triggered down-stream. In addition, activated 
cells infected by HIV-1 showed lower CD69 expression and a decrease of IL-2,
IFN-<U+03B3> and metabolism-related factors transcripts indicating a possible functional
consequence towards global transcriptional repression found in HIV-1 infected
cells. Conversely, based on epigenetic markers studied here, non-stimulated cells
infected by HIV-1, showed signs of global transcriptional activation. Our results
suggest that HIV-1 infection exerts epigenetic modulations in activated cells
that may lead these cells to transcriptional repression with important functional
consequences. Moreover, non-stimulated cells seem to increase gene transcription 
after HIV-1 infection. Based on these observations, it is possible to speculate
that the outcome of viral infections may be influenced by the cellular activation
status at the moment of infection.

PMCID: PMC4395311
PMID: 25875202  [PubMed - in process]


8. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 10;6(4):2466-82.

Genetic alterations of histone lysine methyltransferases and their significance
in breast cancer.

Liu L(1), Kimball S(1), Liu H(1), Holowatyj A(1), Yang ZQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University,
Detroit, MI, USA.

Histone lysine methyltransferases (HMTs), a large class of enzymes that catalyze 
site-specific methylation of lysine residues on histones and other proteins, play
critical roles in controlling transcription, chromatin architecture, and cellular
differentiation. However, the genomic landscape and clinical significance of HMTs
in breast cancer remain poorly characterized. Here, we conducted a meta-analysis 
of approximately 50 HMTs in breast cancer and identified associations among
recurrent copy number alterations, mutations, gene expression, and clinical
outcome. We identified 12 HMTs with the highest frequency of genetic alterations,
including 8 with high-level amplification, 2 with putative homozygous deletion,
and 2 with somatic mutation. Different subtypes of breast cancer have different
patterns of copy number and expression for each HMT gene. In addition, chromosome
1q contains four HMTs that are concurrently or independently amplified or
overexpressed in breast cancer. Copy number or mRNA expression of several HMTs
was significantly associated with basal-like breast cancer and shorter patient
survival. Integrative analysis identified 8 HMTs (SETDB1, SMYD3, ASH1L, SMYD2,
WHSC1L1, SUV420H1, SETDB2, and KMT2C) that are dysregulated by genetic
alterations, classifying them as candidate therapeutic targets. Together, our
findings provide a strong foundation for further mechanistic research and
therapeutic options using HMTs to treat breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4385864
PMID: 25537518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Nat Immunol. 2015 Jan;16(1):67-74. doi: 10.1038/ni.3046. Epub 2014 Nov 24.

The methyltransferase Setdb2 mediates virus-induced susceptibility to bacterial
superinfection.

Schliehe C(1), Flynn EK(2), Vilagos B(1), Richson U(1), Swaminathan S(3), Bosnjak
B(4), Bauer L(1), Kandasamy RK(1), Griesshammer IM(1), Kosack L(1), Schmitz F(3),
Litvak V(5), Sissons J(3), Lercher A(1), Bhattacharya A(1), Khamina K(1), Trivett
AL(2), Tessarollo L(2), Mesteri I(6), Hladik A(7), Merkler D(8), Kubicek S(1),
Knapp S(7), Epstein MM(4), Symer DE(9), Aderem A(3), Bergthaler A(1).

Author information: 
(1)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of
Sciences, Vienna, Austria. (2)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Frederick, Maryland, USA. (3)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute,
Seattle, Washington, USA. (4)Department of Dermatology, DIAID, Experimental
Allergy, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (5)University of
Massachusetts, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA. (6)Department of Pathology, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (7)1] CeMM Research Center for Molecular
Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria. [2] Department of 
Medicine 1, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (8)1] Department of
Pathology and Immunology, Division of Clinical Pathology, University &University 
Hospital of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. [2] Department of Neuropathology,
Georg-August-University Goettingen, Germany. (9)1] Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland, USA. [2] Human Cancer Genetics
Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, and
Department of Internal Medicine, Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2015 Jan;16(1):6-8.

Immune responses are tightly regulated to ensure efficient pathogen clearance
while avoiding tissue damage. Here we report that Setdb2 was the only protein
lysine methyltransferase induced during infection with influenza virus. Setdb2
expression depended on signaling via type I interferons, and Setdb2 repressed
expression of the gene encoding the neutrophil attractant CXCL1 and other genes
that are targets of the transcription factor NF-<U+03BA>B. This coincided with occupancy
by Setdb2 at the Cxcl1 promoter, which in the absence of Setdb2 displayed
diminished trimethylation of histone H3 Lys9 (H3K9me3). Mice with a hypomorphic
gene-trap construct of Setdb2 exhibited increased infiltration of neutrophils
during sterile lung inflammation and were less sensitive to bacterial
superinfection after infection with influenza virus. This suggested that a
Setdb2-mediated regulatory crosstalk between the type I interferons and NF-<U+03BA>B
pathways represents an important mechanism for virus-induced susceptibility to
bacterial superinfection.

PMCID: PMC4320687
PMID: 25419628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mamm Genome. 2014 Dec;25(11-12):573-82. doi: 10.1007/s00335-014-9535-x. Epub 2014
Aug 5.

Functional analysis of a novel ENU-induced PHD finger 11 (Phf11) mouse mutant.

Zhang Y(1), Dean C, Chessum L, Nguyen D, Stewart M, Taylor M, Cookson WO, Moffatt
MF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Genomics Group, Division of Respiratory Sciences,
National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, Dovehouse Street,
London, SW3 6LY, UK, y.zhang@imperial.ac.uk.

Previously, human genetic studies have shown association between polymorphisms
within the gene encoding plant homeodomain zinc finger protein 11 (PHF11) and
asthma-related phenotypes. Initial functional studies have suggested that PHF11
may be involved in the immune response through regulation of T cell activities.
In order to study further the gene's functions, we have investigated the mouse
Phf11 locus. We have established and characterised a mouse line harbouring a
point mutation in the PHD domain of Phf11. Full-length mouse cDNA for Phf11 was
obtained by applying rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE). All five exons
encoding the PHD domain of Phf11 were directly sequenced in 3840 mouse DNA
samples from the UK MRC Harwell ENU (N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea)-mutagenised DNA
archive. Mice harbouring a valine to alanine substitution, predicted to have a
significant functional impact on the PHD zinc finger domain, were re-derived.
These Phf11 mutant mice were outcrossed to C3H mice and then backcrossed for ten 
generations in order to establish a congenic line harbouring the single point
mutation in Phf11. Macroscopic examination, haematology and histological
examination of lung structure revealed no significant differences between mutant 
and wild-type mice. After administration of lipopolysaccharide, the level of
expression of Il2, NF-kB and Setdb2 were significantly increased in Phf11 mutant 
homozygous lungs compared to control littermates. Our results provide evidence
that Phf11 can operate as a Th1 cell regulator in immune responses. Moreover, our
data indicate that these mice may provide a useful model for future studies on
Phf11.

PMCID: PMC4239810
PMID: 25091723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Hum Pathol. 2014 Aug;45(8):1674-81. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.04.013. Epub 2014
Apr 24.

Frameshift mutation of a histone methylation-related gene SETD1B and its regional
heterogeneity in gastric and colorectal cancers with high microsatellite
instability.

Choi YJ(1), Oh HR(1), Choi MR(1), Gwak M(1), An CH(2), Chung YJ(3), Yoo NJ(1),
Lee SH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul 137-701, Korea. (2)Department of General Surgery, College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Korea. (3)Department
of Microbiology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul
137-701, Korea. (4)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Korea. Electronic address:
suhulee@catholic.ac.kr.

Histone methyltransferase (HMT), which catalyzes a histone methylation, is
frequently altered in cancers at mutation and expression levels. The aims of this
study were to explore whether SETD1B, SETDB2, and SETD2, SET domain-containing
HMT genes, are mutated and expressionally altered in gastric (GC) and colorectal 
cancers (CRC). In a public database, we found that SETD1B, SETDB2, and SETD2 had 
mononucleotide repeats in coding sequences that might be mutation targets in
cancers with microsatellite instability (MSI). We analyzed the mutations in 76
GCs and 93 CRCs and found SETD1B (38.7% of GC and 35.6% of CRC with high MSI
[MSI-H]), SETDB2 (11.1% of CRC with MSI-H), and SETD2 frameshift mutations (6.7% 
of CRC with MSI-H). These mutations were not found in stable MSI/low MSI. In
addition, we analyzed intratumoral heterogeneity (ITH) of SETD1B mutation in 6
CRCs and found that 2 CRCs harbored regional ITH of SETD1B. We also analyzed
SETD1B expression in GC and CRC by immunohistochemistry. Loss of SETD1B
expression was identified in 15% to 55% of the GC and CRC with respect to the MSI
status. Of note, the loss of expression was more common in those with SETD1B
mutations than those with wild-type SETD1B. We identified alterations of SET
domain-containing HMT at various levels (frameshift mutations, genetic ITH, and
expression loss), which together might play a role in tumorigenesis of GC and CRC
with MSI-H. Our data suggest that mutation analysis in multiple regions is needed
for a better evaluation of mutation status in CRC with MSI-H.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24925220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Dev Biol. 2014 Aug 15;392(2):233-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.05.022. Epub 2014 
Jun 2.

Setdb2 controls convergence and extension movements during zebrafish gastrulation
by transcriptional regulation of dvr1.

Du TT(1), Xu PF(2), Dong ZW(3), Fan HB(3), Jin Y(1), Dong M(3), Chen Y(1), Pan
WJ(3), Ren RB(1), Liu TX(4), Deng M(5), Huang QH(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
RuiJin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China. (2)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
VA, USA. (3)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai, China. (4)State Key Laboratory for Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute
of Hematology, RuiJin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China; Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China. (5)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of
Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai, China. Electronic address: mdeng@sibs.ac.cn. (6)State Key
Laboratory for Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, RuiJin
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
Electronic address: HQH10632@rjh.com.cn.

As the primary driving forces of gastrulation, convergence and extension (C&E)
movements lead to a medio-lateral narrowing and an anterior-posterior elongation 
of the embryonic body axis. Histone methylation as a post-translational
modification plays a critical role in early embryonic development, but its
functions in C&E movements remain largely unknown. Here, we show that the
setdb2-dvr1 transcriptional cascade plays a critical role in C&E movements during
zebrafish gastrulation. Knockdown of Setdb2, a SET domain-containing protein
possessing a potential histone H3K9 methyltransferase activity, induced abnormal 
C&E movements, resulting in anterior-posterior shortening and medio-lateral
expansion of the embryonic axis, as well as abnormal notochord cell polarity.
Furthermore, we found that Setdb2 functions through fine-tuning the expression of
dvr1, a ligand of the TGF-ß superfamily, to an appropriate level to ensure proper
C&E movements in a non-cell-autonomous manner. In addition, both overexpression
and knockdown of Dvr1 at the one-cell stage resulted in defects at epiboly and
C&E. These data demonstrate that Setdb2 is a novel regulator for C&E movements
and acts by modulating the expression level of dvr1, suggesting that Dvr1 acts as
a direct and essential mediator for C&E cell movements.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24892953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Autism Res. 2012 Dec;5(6):385-97. doi: 10.1002/aur.1251. Epub 2012 Oct 10.

The expanding role of MBD genes in autism: identification of a MECP2 duplication 
and novel alterations in MBD5, MBD6, and SETDB1.

Cukier HN(1), Lee JM, Ma D, Young JI, Mayo V, Butler BL, Ramsook SS, Rantus JA,
Abrams AJ, Whitehead PL, Wright HH, Abramson RK, Haines JL, Cuccaro ML,
Pericak-Vance MA, Gilbert JR.

Author information: 
(1)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami, Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

The methyl-CpG-binding domain (MBD) gene family was first linked to autism over a
decade ago when Rett syndrome, which falls under the umbrella of autism spectrum 
disorders (ASDs), was revealed to be predominantly caused by MECP2 mutations.
Since that time, MECP2 alterations have been recognized in idiopathic ASD
patients by us and others. Individuals with deletions across the MBD5 gene also
present with ASDs, impaired speech, intellectual difficulties, repetitive
behaviors, and epilepsy. These findings suggest that further investigations of
the MBD gene family may reveal additional associations related to autism. We now 
describe the first study evaluating individuals with ASD for rare variants in
four autosomal MBD family members, MBD5, MBD6, SETDB1, and SETDB2, and expand our
initial screening in the MECP2 gene. Each gene was sequenced over all coding
exons and evaluated for copy number variations in 287 patients with ASD and an
equal number of ethnically matched control individuals. We identified 186
alterations through sequencing, approximately half of which were novel (96
variants, 51.6%). We identified 17 ASD specific, nonsynonymous variants, four of 
which were concordant in multiplex families: MBD5 Tyr1269Cys, MBD6 Arg883Trp,
MECP2 Thr240Ser, and SETDB1 Pro1067del. Furthermore, a complex duplication
spanning of the MECP2 gene was identified in two brothers who presented with
developmental delay and intellectual disability. From our studies, we provide the
first examples of autistic patients carrying potentially detrimental alterations 
in MBD6 and SETDB1, thereby demonstrating that the MBD gene family potentially
plays a significant role in rare and private genetic causes of autism.

© 2012 International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3528798
PMID: 23055267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Leukemia. 2011 Mar;25(3):489-97. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.288. Epub 2010 Dec 10.

13q deletion anatomy and disease progression in patients with chronic lymphocytic
leukemia.

Parker H(1), Rose-Zerilli MJ, Parker A, Chaplin T, Wade R, Gardiner A, Griffiths 
M, Collins A, Young BD, Oscier DG, Strefford JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genomics Group, Cancer Sciences Division, School of Medicine,
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.

Historically, genes targeted by recurrent chromosomal deletions have been
identified within the smallest genomic region shared in all patients, the
minimally deleted region (MDR). However, deletions this small do not occur in all
patients and are a simplification of the impact larger heterogeneous deletions
have during carcinogenesis. We use the example of 13q14 deletions in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia to show that genes outside MDRs are associated with disease 
progression. Genomic profiling of 224 patients identified 205 copy number
alterations on chromosome 13 in 132 cases. Deletions including DLEU2 were
heterogeneous (845<U+2009>Kb-96.2<U+2009>Mb) and identified two breakpoint cluster regions
within short interspersed nuclear elements proximal to DLEU2 and within long
interspersed nuclear elements/L1 repeats distal to GUCY1B2. After defining a
deletion class on the basis of size and location, we show that (a) at diagnosis, 
larger deletions (class II) were associated with a significantly increased risk
of disease progression (odds ratio=12.3; P=0.005), (b) in progressive patients,
class II deletions were enriched (P=0.02) and (c) this association was
independent of IgVH mutational status, ZAP70 expression and ATM/TP53 deletion.
Deletion of a 1<U+2009>Mb gene cluster (48.2-49.2<U+2009>Mb), including SETDB2, PHF11 and
RCBTB1, was significantly associated (P<0.01) with disease progression. Here, we 
show that the deletion of genes outside MDRs can influence clinical outcome.

PMID: 21151023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Biol Reprod. 2011 Jan;84(1):34-42. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.086215. Epub 2010 
Sep 8.

Identification and expression of potential regulators of the mammalian
mitotic-to-meiotic transition.

Hogarth CA(1), Mitchell D, Evanoff R, Small C, Griswold M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences and The Center for Reproductive Biology,
Washington State University, Pullman, Washington 99164, USA.

Meiosis is unique to germ cells and occurs in a sex-specific manner. The genes
regulating meiotic initiation in either sex are yet to be fully elucidated.
Recent studies have revealed the importance of retinoic acid and one of its
target genes, Stra8, in meiotic initiation in both sexes. Microarray analysis of 
whole murine embryonic ovary and postnatal testis time course data revealed a
single peak of Stra8 expression in each organ at the onset of meiosis; at
Embryonic Day 14.5 in the ovary and 10 days postpartum in the testis. In order to
identify other genes involved in the initiation of meiosis in mammals, murine
testis and ovary microarray data were examined more closely for transcripts with 
expression profiles similar to Stra8. Three such candidates include establishment
of cohesion 1 homolog 2 (Esco2), encoding a protein essential for sister
chromatid cohesion; SET domain, bifurcated 2 (Setdb2), the mouse ortholog of
Eggless, which is essential for oogenesis in Drosophila; and ubiquitin-activating
enzyme 6 (Uba6), a gene with fivefold higher expression in human and mouse testes
than any other organ. In situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry or
immunofluorescence were performed to localize Esco2, Setbd2, and Uba6 expression 
in the developing testis. The cellular expression pattern localized all three of 
these transcripts and their respective proteins to germ cells transitioning from 
mitosis to meiosis, hence supporting the hypothesis of their involvement in the
initiation of meiosis. Future research will be directed at determining a specific
role for these three proteins in germ cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3012562
PMID: 20826732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jun 25;285(26):20234-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.052399. Epub
2010 Apr 19.

CLLD8/KMT1F is a lysine methyltransferase that is important for chromosome
segregation.

Falandry C(1), Fourel G, Galy V, Ristriani T, Horard B, Bensimon E, Salles G,
Gilson E, Magdinier F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire de la Cellule, CNRS Unité Mixte de
Recherche (UMR) 5239, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon (ENS) Lyon, Université
Claude Bernard Lyon 1 (UCBL1), Institut Fédératìf de Recherche (IFR)128, Faculté 
de Médecine Lyon Sud, F-69600 Oullins, France.

Proteins bearing a SET domain have been shown to methylate lysine residues in
histones and contribute to chromatin architecture. Methylation of histone H3 at
lysine 9 (H3K9) has emerged as an important player in the formation of
heterochromatin, chromatin condensation, and transcriptional repression. Here, we
have characterized a previously undescribed member of the histone H3K9
methyltransferase family named CLLD8 (or SETDB2 or KMT1F). This protein
contributes to the trimethylation of both interspersed repetitive elements and
centromere-associated repeats and participates in the recruitment of
heterochromatin protein 1 to centromeres. Consistently, depletion in CLLD8/KMT1F 
coincides with a loss of CENP proteins and delayed mitosis, suggesting that this 
protein participates in chromosome condensation and segregation. Altogether, our 
results provide evidence that CLLD8/KMT1F is recruited to heterochromatin regions
and contributes in vivo to the deposition of trimethyl marks in concert with
SUV39H1/KMT1A.

PMCID: PMC2888436
PMID: 20404330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Feb 9;107(6):2521-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0914396107.
Epub 2010 Jan 21.

Setdb2 restricts dorsal organizer territory and regulates left-right asymmetry
through suppressing fgf8 activity.

Xu PF(1), Zhu KY, Jin Y, Chen Y, Sun XJ, Deng M, Chen SJ, Chen Z, Liu TX.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
RuiJin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai
200025, China.

Dorsal organizer formation is one of the most critical steps in early embryonic
development. Several genes and signaling pathways that positively regulate the
dorsal organizer development have been identified; however, little is known about
the factor(s) that negatively regulates the organizer formation. Here, we show
that Setdb2, a SET domain-containing protein possessing potential histone H3K9
methyltransferase activity, restricts dorsal organizer development and regulates 
left-right asymmetry by suppressing fibroblast growth factor 8 (fgf8) expression.
Knockdown of Setdb2 results in a massive expansion of dorsal organizer markers
floating head (flh), goosecoid (gsc), and chordin (chd), as well as a significant
increase of fgf8, but not fgf4 mRNAs. Consequently, disrupted midline patterning 
and resultant randomization of left-right asymmetry are observed in
Setdb2-deficient embryos. These characteristic changes induced by Setdb2
deficiency can be nearly corrected by either overexpression of a
dominant-negative fgf receptor or knockdown of fgf8, suggesting an essential role
for Setdb2-Fgf8 signaling in restricting dorsal organizer territory and
regulating left-right asymmetry. These results provide unique evidence that a SET
domain-containing protein potentially involved in the epigenetic control
negatively regulates dorsal organizer formation during early embryonic
development.

PMCID: PMC2823908
PMID: 20133783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Retrovirology. 2008 May 22;5:40. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-5-40.

Lysine methylation of HIV-1 Tat regulates transcriptional activity of the viral
LTR.

Van Duyne R(1), Easley R, Wu W, Berro R, Pedati C, Klase Z, Kehn-Hall K, Flynn
EK, Symer DE, Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)The George Washington University Medical Center, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Washington, DC 20037, USA. bcmrvv@gwumc.edu

BACKGROUND: The rate of transcription of the HIV-1 viral genome is mediated by
the interaction of the viral protein Tat with the LTR and other transcriptional
machinery. These specific interactions can be affected by the state of
post-translational modifications on Tat. Previously, we have shown that Tat can
be phosphorylated and acetylated in vivo resulting in an increase in the rate of 
transcription. In the present study, we investigated whether Tat could be
methylated on lysine residues, specifically on lysine 50 and 51, and whether this
modification resulted in a decrease of viral transcription from the LTR.
RESULTS: We analyzed the association of Tat with histone methyltransferases of
the SUV39-family of SET domain containing proteins in vitro. Tat was found to
associate with both SETDB1 and SETDB2, two enzymes which exhibit
methyltransferase activity. siRNA against SETDB1 transfected into cell systems
with both transient and integrated LTR reporter genes resulted in an increase in 
transcription of the HIV-LTR in the presence of suboptimal levels of Tat. In
vitro methylation assays with Tat peptides containing point mutations at lysines 
50 and 51 showed an increased incorporation of methyl groups on lysine 51,
however, both residues indicated susceptibility for methylation.
CONCLUSION: The association of Tat with histone methyltransferases and the
ability for Tat to be methylated suggests an interesting mechanism of
transcriptional regulation through the recruitment of chromatin remodeling
proteins to the HIV-1 promoter.

PMCID: PMC2412914
PMID: 18498648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Nov 1;176(9):849-57. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Comprehensive testing of positionally cloned asthma genes in two populations.

Hersh CP(1), Raby BA, Soto-Quirós ME, Murphy AJ, Avila L, Lasky-Su J, Sylvia JS, 
Klanderman BJ, Lange C, Weiss ST, Celedón JC.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory and Center for Genomic Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. craig.hersh@channing.harvard.edu

RATIONALE: Replication of gene-disease associations has become a requirement in
complex trait genetics.
OBJECTIVES: In studies of childhood asthma from two different ethnic groups, we
attempted to replicate associations with five potential asthma susceptibility
genes previously identified by positional cloning.
METHODS: We analyzed two family-based samples ascertained through an asthmatic
proband: 497 European-American children from the Childhood Asthma Management
Program and 439 Hispanic children from the Central Valley of Costa Rica. We
genotyped 98 linkage disequilibrium-tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in five genes: ADAM33, DPP10, GPR154 (HUGO name: NPSR1), HLA-G, and the
PHF11 locus (includes genes SETDB2 and RCBTB1). SNPs were tested for association 
with asthma and two intermediate phenotypes: airway hyperresponsiveness and total
serum immunoglobulin E levels.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Despite differing ancestries, linkage
disequilibrium patterns were similar in both cohorts. Of the five evaluated
genes, SNP-level replication was found only for GPR154 (NPSR1). In this gene,
three SNPs were associated with asthma in both cohorts, although the opposite
alleles were associated in either study. Weak evidence for locus-level
replication with asthma was found in the PHF11 locus, although there was no
overlap in the associated SNP across the two cohorts. No consistent associations 
were observed for the three other genes.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide some further support for the role of genetic
variation in GPR154 (NPSR1) and PHF11 in asthma susceptibility and also highlight
the challenges of replicating genetic associations in complex traits such as
asthma, even for genes identified by linkage analysis.

PMCID: PMC2048676
PMID: 17702965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2005 Apr;5(2):141-5.

The role of genetics in the development of asthma and atopy.

Blumenthal MN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medicine, Pediatrics, and Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA. blume001@umn.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The mapping of complex traits such as asthma and atopy is one 
of the most important and central areas of human genetics. This article will
present an overview of the current status of genetic studies of asthma and atopy 
using genome screens and association studies that have occurred in the literature
since January 2003.
RECENT FINDINGS: Many regions of the genome have been found to have linkage with 
the phenotypes of asthma and atopy. Over 70 variants in candidate genes have been
reported to be associated with these phenotypes. The main regions these variants 
have been found are on chromosomes 2q, 5q, 6p, 11q, 12q, 16q and 17q. Five
potential asthma susceptibility genes or complexes have been identified using a
positional approach. These are ADAM33, DPP10, PHF11 and SETDB2, GPRA and SPINK5. 
It is evident that environmental factors will influence the expression of genes
and the ultimate clinical phenotype of asthma and atopy.
SUMMARY: The development of asthma and atopy involves many genes and
environmental factors. An understanding of their genetic basis has great
implications for their management.

PMID: 15764904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Genes Immun. 2005 May;6(3):262-4.

Polymorphisms within the PHF11 gene at chromosome 13q14 are associated with
childhood atopic dermatitis.

Jang N(1), Stewart G, Jones G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology and Allergy Research (Westmead Millennium Institute),
University of Sydney, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, NSW, Australia.

Atopic dermatitis is an increasingly common and debilitating childhood disorder
that is often accompanied by asthma and allergic rhinitis. Although the pathology
of these disorders is distinct, the majority of cases are atopic, typified by
elevated serum IgE. A new locus at chromosome 13q14 centred on the genes SETDB2
and PHF11 and associated with increased total serum IgE has recently been
identified. Although the precise functions of SETDB2 and PHF11 are not known,
both proteins are expressed in cells of the immune system and include conserved
domains that suggest a role in chromatin remodelling or transcriptional
regulation, respectively. In a family-based association study across the SETDB2
and PHF11 genes, we have identified two single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the
PHF11 gene significantly associated with childhood atopic dermatitis in an
Australian cohort. These results provide further evidence that this locus is a
novel and important regulator of human atopic disease.

PMID: 15674390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


