
1. Int J Fertil Steril. 2016 Jan-Mar;9(4):581-5. Epub 2015 Dec 23.

Molecular Dissection Using Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization and Clinical
Evaluation of An Infertile Male Carrier of An Unbalanced Y;21 Translocation: A
Case Report and Review of The Literature.

Orrico A(1), Marseglia G(2), Pescucci C(2), Cortesi A(3), Piomboni P(4),
Giansanti A(5), Gerundino F(2), Ponchietti R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena,
Italy; Medical Genetics, Misericordia Hospital, Grosseto, Italy. (2)Diagnostic
Genetic Unit, Department of Laboratory, Careggi University Hospital, Firenze,
Italy. (3)Medical Genetics, Misericordia Hospital, Grosseto, Italy. (4)Department
of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of Siena, Azienda Ospedaliera
Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy. (5)Genitourinary Unit, University of Siena,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy.

Chromosomal defects are relatively frequent in infertile men however,
translocations between the Y chromosome and autosomes are rare and less than 40
cases of Y-autosome translocation have been reported. In particular, only three
individuals has been described with a Y;21 translocation, up to now. We report on
an additional case of an infertile man in whom a Y;21 translocation was
associated with the deletion of a large part of the Y chromosome long arm.
Applying various techniques, including conventional cytogenetic procedures,
fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) analysis and array comparative genomic 
hybridization (array-CGH) studies, we identified a derivative chromosome
originating from a fragment of the short arm of the chromosome Y translocated on 
the short arm of the 21 chromosome. The Y chromosome structural rearrangement
resulted in the intactness of the entire short arm, including the sex-determining
region Y (SRY) and the short stature homeobox (SHOX) loci, although translocated 
on the 21 chromosome, and the loss of a large part of the long arm of the Y
chromosome, including azoospermia factor-a (AZFa), AZFb, AZFc and Yq
heterochromatin regions. This is the first case in which a (Yp;21p) translocation
has been ascertained using an array-CGH approach, thus reporting details of such 
a rearrangement at higher resolution.

PMCID: PMC4793181
PMID: 26985348  [PubMed]


2. J Hum Genet. 2016 Mar 17. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2016.18. [Epub ahead of print]

Systematic molecular analyses of SHOX in Japanese patients with idiopathic short 
stature and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis.

Shima H(1,)(2), Tanaka T(3), Kamimaki T(4), Dateki S(5), Muroya K(6), Horikawa
R(7), Kanno J(8), Adachi M(6), Naiki Y(7), Tanaka H(9), Mabe H(10), Yagasaki
H(11), Kure S(8), Matsubara Y(2,)(12), Tajima T(13), Kashimada K(14), Ishii
T(15), Asakura Y(6), Fujiwara I(16), Soneda S(17), Nagasaki K(18), Hamajima
T(19), Kanzaki S(20), Jinno T(1), Ogata T(21), Fukami M(1); Japanese SHOX study
group.

Collaborators: Adachi M, Tajima T, Tanaka T, Arisaka O, Koyama S, Hamajima T,
Nose O, Ozono K, Namba N, Nagasaki K, Kamimaki T, Kanzaki S, Ogata T, Tanaka H,
Hasegawa Y, Kobayashi K, Dateki S, Mabe H, Fujiwara I, Ida S, Hasegawa T, Uematsu
A, Kashimada K, Onigata K, Miyako K, Yokoya S, Horikawa R, Fukami M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Advanced Pediatric
Medicine, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Tanaka Growth
Clinic, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Shizuoka City Shimizu
Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Nagasaki University
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan. (6)Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama,
Japan. (7)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Center for Child
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Tohoku
University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (9)Department of Pediatrics,
Okayama Saiseikai General Hospital, Okayama, Japan. (10)Department of Child
Development, Kumamoto University Hospital, Kumamoto, Japan. (11)Department of
Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Japan.
(12)National Research Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan. (14)Department of Pediatrics and Developmental Biology, Tokyo Medical and 
Dental University, Tokyo, Japan. (15)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (16)Environment and Genome Research Center,
Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (17)Department of
Pediatrics, St Marianna University School of Medicine, Kawasaki, Japan.
(18)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Homeostatic Regulation and Development,
Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata,
Japan. (19)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Aichi Children's Health and 
Medical Center, Obu, Japan. (20)Division of Pediatrics and Perinatology, Tottori 
University Faculty of Medicine, Yonago, Japan. (21)Department of Pediatrics,
Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan.

The etiology of idiopathic short stature (ISS) and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis
(LWD) in European patients is known to include SHOX mutations and copy-number
variations (CNVs) involving SHOX and/or the highly evolutionarily conserved
non-coding DNA elements (CNEs) flanking the gene. However, the frequency and
types of SHOX abnormalities in non-European patients and the clinical importance 
of mutations in the CNEs remains to be clarified. Here, we performed systematic
molecular analyses of SHOX for 328 Japanese patients with ISS or LWD. SHOX
abnormalities accounted for 3.8% of ISS and 50% of LWD cases. CNVs around SHOX
were identified in 16 cases, although the ~47<U+2009>kb deletion frequently reported in 
European patients was absent in our cases. Probably damaging mutations and
benign/silent substitutions were detected in four cases, respectively. Although
CNE-linked substitutions were detected in 15 cases, most of them affected poorly 
conserved nucleotides and were shared by unaffected individuals. These results
suggest that the frequency and mutation spectrum of SHOX abnormalities are
comparable between Asian and European patients, with the exception of a
European-specific downstream deletion. Furthermore, this study highlights the
clinical importance and genetic heterogeneity of the SHOX-flanking CNVs, and
indicates a limited clinical significance of point mutations in the CNEs.Journal 
of Human Genetics advance online publication, 17 March 2016;
doi:10.1038/jhg.2016.18.

PMID: 26984564  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2016;138:193-211. doi: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2015.10.008.
Epub 2016 Jan 6.

Effects of Growth Hormone on Bone.

Tritos NA(1), Klibanski A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroendocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Electronic address:
ntritos@mgh.harvard.edu. (2)Neuroendocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE: Describe the effects of growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth
factor 1 (IGF-1) on the skeleton.
FINDINGS: The GH and IGF-1 axis has pleiotropic effects on the skeleton
throughout the lifespan by influencing bone formation and resorption. GH
deficiency leads to decreased bone turnover, delayed statural growth in children,
low bone mass, and increased fracture risk in adults. GH replacement improves
adult stature in GH deficient children, increases bone mineral density (BMD) in
adults, and helps to optimize peak bone acquisition in patients, during the
transition from adolescence to adulthood, who have persistent GH deficiency.
Observational studies suggest that GH replacement may mitigate the excessive
fracture risk associated with GH deficiency. Acromegaly, a state of GH and IGF-1 
excess, is associated with increased bone turnover and decreased BMD in the
lumbar spine observed in some studies, particularly in patients with
hypogonadism. In addition, patients with acromegaly appear to be at an increased 
risk of morphometric-vertebral fractures, especially in the presence of active
disease or concurrent hypogonadism. GH therapy also has beneficial effects on
statural growth in several conditions characterized by GH insensitivity,
including chronic renal failure, Turner syndrome, Prader-Willi syndrome,
postnatal growth delay in patients with intrauterine growth retardation who do
not demonstrate catchup growth, idiopathic short stature, short stature
homeobox-containing (SHOX) gene mutations, and Noonan syndrome.
SUMMARY: GH and IGF-1 have important roles in skeletal physiology, and GH has an 
important therapeutic role in both GH deficiency and insensitivity states.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26940392  [PubMed - in process]


4. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2016 Feb 23. pii: S1096-6374(16)30008-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ghir.2016.02.004. [Epub ahead of print]

Growth and growth hormone: An overview.

Teran E(1), Chesner J(2), Rapaport R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Colegio de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito,
Ecuador. (2)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sina, 1 Gustave L. Levy Place, NY, USA.

Growth is a good indicator of a child's health. Growth disturbances, including
short stature or growth failure, could be indications of illnesses such as
chronic disease, nutritional deficits, celiac disease or hormonal abnormalities. 
Therefore, a careful assessment of the various requirements for normal growth
needs to be done by history, physical examination, and screening laboratory
tests. More details will be reviewed about the GH-IGF axis, its abnormalities
with special emphasis on GH deficiency, its diagnosis and treatment. GH treatment
indications in the US will be reviewed and a few only will be highlighted. They
will include GH deficiency, as well as the treatment of children born SGA,
including the results of a US study using FDA approved dose of 0.48mg/kg/week. GH
deficiency in adults will also be briefly reviewed. Treatment of patients with
SHOX deficiency will also be discussed. Possible side effects of GH treatment and
the importance of monitoring safety will be highlighted.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26936284  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Neoplasma. 2016;63(2):246-53. doi: 10.4149/210_150419N208.

The value of SHOX2 methylation test in peripheral blood samples used for the
differential diagnosis of lung cancer and other lung disorders.

Konecny M, Markus J, Waczulikova I, Dolesova L, Kozlova R, Repiska V, Novosadova 
H, Majer I.

Methylation of the cytosine residues within the CpG dinucleotides plays an
important role in the fundamental cellular processes, human diseases and even
cancer. The DNA methylation represents a very stable sign and therefore may be
used as a valuable marker for cancer screening. Epigenetic cancer biomarkers are 
independent of classical morphology and thus show extensive potential to overcome
the limitations of cytology. Several epigenetic cancer markers have been reported
to be detectable in body fluids such as bronchial aspirate, sputum, plasma and
serum.Short stature homeobox gene 2 (SHOX2) encodes a homeo-domain transcription 
factor, which has been identified as a close homologue of the SHOX gene and both 
genes are involved in skeletogenesis and heart development. Methylation of SHOX2 
gene has been shown to be present at high prevalence in carcinomas of lung,
however may also be used to identify other tumour entities.In the presented
study, we have compared suitability of two types of material associated with lung
cancer for the detection of SHOX2 methylation. We have confirmed that methylation
of SHOX2 gene represents reliable marker of lung malignancies. The parallel tests
in the blood plasma revealed that it may represent a good alternative material
for testing of the SHOX2 methylation, making the test available to patients who
are unable to undergo bronchoscopy.

PMID: 26774146  [PubMed - in process]


6. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2015 Dec 18. doi: 10.4274/jcrpe.2307. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Investigation of SHOX Gene Mutations in Turkish Patients with Idiopathic Short
Stature.

Delil K, Karabulut HG, Hacihamdioglu B, Siklar Z, Berberoglu M, Öçal G, Tükün A, 
Ilgin Ruhi H.

OBJECTIVE: We present phenotypic and genotypic data of 38 Turkish patients with
ISS and the distinctive features of 1 patient with an SHOX deletion.
METHODS: We used the microsatellite markers (MSMs) DXYS10092 (GA repeats) and
DXYS10093 (CT repeats) to select patients for fluorescent in situ hybridisation
(FISH) analysis and to screen for deletions in the SHOX gene. The FISH analysis
was applied to patients homozygous for at least one MSM. A Sanger sequencing
analysis was performed on patients with no deletions according to FISH to
investigate point mutations in the SHOX gene.
RESULTS: One patient (2.6%) had an SHOX mutation.
CONCLUSION: Although the number of cases was limited and the mutation analysis
techniques we used cannot detect all mutations, our findings emphasise the
importance of the difference in arm span and height when selecting patients for
SHOX gene testing.

PMID: 26758084  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Eur J Endocrinol. 2016 Mar;174(3):281-8. doi: 10.1530/EJE-15-1000. Epub 2015 Dec 
14.

X-chromosome gene dosage as a determinant of impaired pre and postnatal growth
and adult height in Turner syndrome.

Fiot E(1), Zenaty D(1), Boizeau P(2), Haigneré J(2), Dos Santos S(1), Léger J(3);
French Turner Syndrome Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de ParisHôpital Robert Debré, Service
d'Endocrinologie Diabétologie Pédiatrique, Centre de Référence des Maladies
Endocriniennes Rares de la Croissance, INSERM U 1141, 48 Bd Sérurier, F-75019
Paris, FranceUniversité Paris DiderotSorbonne Paris Cité, F-75019 Paris,
FranceInstitut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (Inserm)Unité
1141, DHU Protect, F-75019 Paris, FranceAP-HPHôpital Robert Debré, Unit of
Clinical Epidemiology, F-75019, Paris, FranceInsermCIC-EC 1426, F-75019 Paris,
France. (2)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de ParisHôpital Robert Debré, Service
d'Endocrinologie Diabétologie Pédiatrique, Centre de Référence des Maladies
Endocriniennes Rares de la Croissance, INSERM U 1141, 48 Bd Sérurier, F-75019
Paris, FranceUniversité Paris DiderotSorbonne Paris Cité, F-75019 Paris,
FranceInstitut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (Inserm)Unité
1141, DHU Protect, F-75019 Paris, FranceAP-HPHôpital Robert Debré, Unit of
Clinical Epidemiology, F-75019, Paris, FranceInsermCIC-EC 1426, F-75019 Paris,
France Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de ParisHôpital Robert Debré, Service
d'Endocrinologie Diabétologie Pédiatrique, Centre de Référence des Maladies
Endocriniennes Rares de la Croissance, INSERM U 1141, 48 Bd Sérurier, F-75019
Paris, FranceUniversité Paris DiderotSorbonne Paris Cité, F-75019 Paris,
FranceInstitut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (Inserm)Unité
1141, DHU Protect, F-75019 Paris, FranceAP-HPHôpital Robert Debré, Unit of
Clinical Epidemiology, F-75019, Paris, FranceInsermCIC-EC 1426, F-75019 Paris,
France. (3)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de ParisHôpital Robert Debré, Service
d'Endocrinologie Diabétologie Pédiatrique, Centre de Référence des Maladies
Endocriniennes Rares de la Croissance, INSERM U 1141, 48 Bd Sérurier, F-75019
Paris, FranceUniversité Paris DiderotSorbonne Paris Cité, F-75019 Paris,
FranceInstitut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (Inserm)Unité
1141, DHU Protect, F-75019 Paris, FranceAP-HPHôpital Robert Debré, Unit of
Clinical Epidemiology, F-75019, Paris, FranceInsermCIC-EC 1426, F-75019 Paris,
France Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de ParisHôpital Robert Debré, Service
d'Endocrinologie Diabétologie Pédiatrique, Centre de Référence des Maladies
Endocriniennes Rares de la Croissance, INSERM U 1141, 48 Bd Sérurier, F-75019
Paris, FranceUniversité Paris DiderotSorbonne Paris Cité, F-75019 Paris,
FranceInstitut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (Inserm)Unité
1141, DHU Protect, F-75019 Paris, FranceAP-HPHôpital Robert Debré, Unit of
Clinical Epidemiology, F-75019, Paris, FranceInsermCIC-EC 1426, F-75019 Paris,
France Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de ParisHôpital Robert Debré, Service
d'Endocrinologie Diabétologie Pédiatrique, Centre de Référence des Maladies
Endocriniennes Rares de la Croissance, INSERM U 1141, 48 Bd Sérurier, F-75019
Paris, FranceUniversité Paris DiderotSorbonne Paris Cité, F-75019 Paris,
FranceInstitut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (Inserm)Unité
1141, DHU Protect, F-75019 Paris, FranceAP-HPHôpital Robert Debré, Unit of
Clinical Epidemiology, F-75019, Paris, FranceInsermCIC-EC 1426, F-75019 Paris,
France juliane.leger@aphp.fr.

OBJECTIVE: Short stature is a key aspect of the phenotype of patients with Turner
syndrome (TS). SHOX haploinsufficiency is responsible for about two-thirds of the
height deficit. The aim was to investigate the effect of X-chromosome gene dosage
on anthropometric parameters at birth, spontaneous height, and adult height (AH) 
after growth hormone (GH) treatment.
DESIGN: We conducted a national observational multicenter study.
METHODS: Birth parameter SDS for gestational age, height, and AH before and after
GH treatment respectively, and height deficit with respect to target height (SDS)
were classified by karyotype subgroup in a cohort of 1501 patients with TS: 45,X 
(36%), isoXq (19%), 45,X/46,XX (15%), XrX (7%), presence of Y (6%), or other
karyotypes (17%).
RESULTS: Birth weight, length (P<0.0001), and head circumference (P<0.001),
height and height deficit with respect to target height (SDS) before GH
treatment, at a median age of 8.8 (5.3-11.8) years and after adjustment for age
and correction for multiple testing (P<0.0001), and AH deficit with respect to
target height at a median age of 19.3 (18.0-21.8) years and with additional
adjustment for dose and duration of GH treatment (P=0.006), were significantly
associated with karyotype subgroup. Growth retardation tended to be more severe
in patients with XrX, isoXq, and, to a lesser extent, 45,X karyotypes than in
patients with 45,X/46,XX karyotypes or a Y chromosome.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that haploinsufficiency for an unknown Xp gene
increases the risk of fetal and postnatal growth deficit and short AH with
respect to target height after GH therapy.

© 2016 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 26744895  [PubMed - in process]


8. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Apr;170(4):949-57. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37524. Epub 2015
Dec 24.

Duplications upstream and downstream of SHOX identified as novel causes of
Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis or idiopathic short stature.

Bunyan DJ(1), Baffico M(2), Capone L(3), Vannelli S(4), Iughetti L(5), Schmitt
S(6), Taylor EJ(1), Herridge AA(1), Shears D(7), Forabosco A(3), Coviello DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, United Kingdom. (2)Laboratory of Human Genetics, E.O. Ospedali
Galliera, Genoa, Italy. (3)Genomic Research Center, Cante di Montevecchio, Fano
PU, Italy. (4)Auxologic Unit, University of Turin, Turin, Italy. (5)Department of
Medical and Surgical Sciences of Mothers, Children, and Adults, University of
Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena MO, Italy. (6)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, 
Institute of Biology, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France. (7)Clinical Genetics,
Churchill Hospital, Oxford, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom.

Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis is a pseudoautosomal dominantly-inherited skeletal
dysplasia ascribed to haploinsufficiency of the SHOX gene caused by deletions,
point mutations, or partial duplications of the gene, or to heterozygous
deletions upstream or downstream of the intact SHOX gene involving conserved
non-coding cis-regulatory DNA elements that show enhancer activity. Recently, two
SHOX conserved non-coding element duplications, one upstream and one downstream, 
were reported in patients referred with idiopathic short stature. To further
evaluate the role of these duplications in SHOX-related disorders, we describe
seven patients (five with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and two with short
stature) all of whom have duplications of part of the upstream or downstream
conserved non-coding element regions, identified by multiplex ligation-dependent 
probe amplification. In addition, we show data from 32 patients with an
apparently identical downstream duplication that includes a proposed putative
regulatory element (identified by multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification or array comparative genome hybridization), which results in a
variable phenotype from normal to mild Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis. These
additional data provide further evidence that duplications of upstream and
downstream long range cis-regulatory DNA elements can result in a SHOX-related
phenotype. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26698168  [PubMed - in process]


9. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 3;5:17667. doi: 10.1038/srep17667.

Profiling of conserved non-coding elements upstream of SHOX and functional
characterisation of the SHOX cis-regulatory landscape.

Verdin H(1), Fernández-Miñán A(2), Benito-Sanz S(3,)(4), Janssens S(1),
Callewaert B(1), De Waele K(5), De Schepper J(5), François I(6), Menten B(1),
Heath KE(3,)(4), Gómez-Skarmeta JL(2), De Baere E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. (2)Centro
Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas and Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Sevilla, Spain. (3)Institute of
Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain. (4)Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(6)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.

Genetic defects such as copy number variations (CNVs) in non-coding regions
containing conserved non-coding elements (CNEs) outside the transcription unit of
their target gene, can underlie genetic disease. An example of this is the short 
stature homeobox (SHOX) gene, regulated by seven CNEs located downstream and
upstream of SHOX, with proven enhancer capacity in chicken limbs. CNVs of the
downstream CNEs have been reported in many idiopathic short stature (ISS) cases, 
however, only recently have a few CNVs of the upstream enhancers been identified.
Here, we set out to provide insight into: (i) the cis-regulatory role of these
upstream CNEs in human cells, (ii) the prevalence of upstream CNVs in ISS, and
(iii) the chromatin architecture of the SHOX cis-regulatory landscape in chicken 
and human cells. Firstly, luciferase assays in human U2OS cells, and 4C-seq both 
in chicken limb buds and human U2OS cells, demonstrated cis-regulatory enhancer
capacities of the upstream CNEs. Secondly, CNVs of these upstream CNEs were found
in three of 501 ISS patients. Finally, our 4C-seq interaction map of the SHOX
region reveals a cis-regulatory domain spanning more than 1 Mb and harbouring
putative new cis-regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC4668379
PMID: 26631348  [PubMed - in process]


10. Eur J Endocrinol. 2016 Apr;174(4):R145-73. doi: 10.1530/EJE-15-0937. Epub 2015
Nov 17.

MECHANISMS IN ENDOCRINOLOGY: Novel genetic causes of short stature.

Wit JM(1), Oostdijk W(2), Losekoot M(2), van Duyvenvoorde HA(2), Ruivenkamp
CA(2), Kant SG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of PaediatricsClinical GeneticsLeiden University Medical Center,
PO Box 9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands j.m.wit@lumc.nl. (2)Departments of
PaediatricsClinical GeneticsLeiden University Medical Center, PO Box 9600, 2300
RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

The fast technological development, particularly single nucleotide polymorphism
array, array-comparative genomic hybridization, and whole exome sequencing, has
led to the discovery of many novel genetic causes of growth failure. In this
review we discuss a selection of these, according to a diagnostic classification 
centred on the epiphyseal growth plate. We successively discuss disorders in
hormone signalling, paracrine factors, matrix molecules, intracellular pathways, 
and fundamental cellular processes, followed by chromosomal aberrations including
copy number variants (CNVs) and imprinting disorders associated with short
stature. Many novel causes of GH deficiency (GHD) as part of combined pituitary
hormone deficiency have been uncovered. The most frequent genetic causes of
isolated GHD are GH1 and GHRHR defects, but several novel causes have recently
been found, such as GHSR, RNPC3, and IFT172 mutations. Besides well-defined
causes of GH insensitivity (GHR, STAT5B, IGFALS, IGF1 defects), disorders of NF<U+03BA>B
signalling, STAT3 and IGF2 have recently been discovered. Heterozygous IGF1R
defects are a relatively frequent cause of prenatal and postnatal growth
retardation. TRHA mutations cause a syndromic form of short stature with elevated
T3/T4 ratio. Disorders of signalling of various paracrine factors (FGFs, BMPs,
WNTs, PTHrP/IHH, and CNP/NPR2) or genetic defects affecting cartilage
extracellular matrix usually cause disproportionate short stature. Heterozygous
NPR2 or SHOX defects may be found in ~3% of short children, and also rasopathies 
(e.g., Noonan syndrome) can be found in children without clear syndromic
appearance. Numerous other syndromes associated with short stature are caused by 
genetic defects in fundamental cellular processes, chromosomal abnormalities,
CNVs, and imprinting disorders.

© 2016 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 26578640  [PubMed - in process]


11. Ann Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Sep;20(3):162-5. doi:
10.6065/apem.2015.20.3.162. Epub 2015 Sep 30.

A Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis patient confirmed by mutation analysis of SHOX
gene.

Choi WB(1), Seo SH(2), Yoo WH(1), Kim SY(2), Kwak MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Pusan National University Hospital, Pusan National
University School of Medicine, Busan, Korea. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Pusan
National University Children's Hospital, Pusan National University School of
Medicine, Yangsan, Korea.

Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis is characterized by SHOX deficiency, Madelung
deformity, and mesomelic short stature. In addition, SHOX deficiency is
associated with idiopathic short stature, Turner syndrome, and Langer mesomelic
dysplasia. We report the first case of a Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis patient
confirmed by SHOX gene mutation analysis in Korea. The patient, who was a
7-year-old female, showed short stature. Her height and weight were 108.9 cm
(<3rd percentile) and 19.7 kg (5th-10th percentile), respectively. Her arm span, 
height of trunk, leg length, and sitting length were 100.5 cm, 58 cm, 50.9 cm,
and 62.5 cm, respectively. Her body proportion was 1.13:1. Extremities to trunk
ratio was 2.61. Her hand radiograph showed Madelung deformity. And the growth
hormone stimulation test showed a normal response. Furthermore, because of
Madelung deformity with idiopathic short stature, she was suspected of SHOX
deficiency. We performed SHOX gene mutation analysis and found a c.491G>A
(p.W164X) mutation of the SHOX gene. Accordingly, this patient was diagnosed with
Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis. Recently, many mutations have been reported in the 
SHOX gene. However, to date, mutation analysis of the SHOX gene for Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis has not been reported in Korea as yet. We report the first case
of a Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis patient confirmed by mutation analysis of the
SHOX gene.

PMCID: PMC4623345
PMID: 26512353  [PubMed]


12. Horm Res Paediatr. 2015;84(4):254-7. doi: 10.1159/000439109. Epub 2015 Sep 3.

A Deletion of More than 800 kb Is the Most Recurrent Mutation in Chilean Patients
with SHOX Gene Defects.

Poggi H(1), Vera A, Avalos C, Lagos M, Mellado C, Aracena M, Aravena T, Garcia H,
Godoy C, Cattani A, Reyes L, Lacourt P, Rumie H, Mericq V, Arriaza M,
Martinez-Aguayo A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Clinical Laboratory Department, Pontificia
Universidad Catx00F3;lica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

BACKGROUND: Deletions in the SHOX gene are the most frequent genetic cause of
Leri-Weill syndrome and Langer mesomelic dysplasia, which are also present in
idiopathic short stature.
AIM: To describe the molecular and clinical findings observed in 23 of 45
non-consanguineous Chilean patients with different phenotypes related to SHOX
deficiency.
METHODS: Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification was used to detect the 
deletions; the SHOX coding region and deletion-flanking areas were sequenced to
identify point mutations and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).
RESULTS: The main genetic defects identified in 21 patients consisted of
deletions; one of them, a large deletion of >800 kb, was found in 8 patients.
Also, a smaller deletion of >350 kb was observed in 4 patients. Although we could
not precisely determine the deletion breakpoint, we were able to identify a
common haplotype in 7 of the 8 patients with the larger deletion based on 22
informative SNPs.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the large deletion-bearing allele has a
common ancestor and was either introduced by European immigrants or had
originated in our Amerindian population. This study allowed us to identify one
recurrent deletion in Chilean patients; also, it contributed to expanding our
knowledge about the genetic background of our population.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26337568  [PubMed - in process]


13. Eur J Endocrinol. 2015 Nov;173(5):611-21. doi: 10.1530/EJE-15-0451. Epub 2015 Aug
11.

The growth response to GH treatment is greater in patients with SHOX enhancer
deletions compared to SHOX defects.

Donze SH(1), Meijer CR(1), Kant SG(1), Zandwijken GR(1), van der Hout AH(1), van 
Spaendonk RM(1), van den Ouweland AM(1), Wit JM(1), Losekoot M(1), Oostdijk W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of PediatricsClinical GeneticsLeiden University Medical Center, PO
Box 9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The NetherlandsDutch Growth Research Foundation
('Stichting Kind en Groei')PO Box 23068, 3001 KB Rotterdam, The
NetherlandsDepartment of GeneticsUniversity Medical Center Groningen, University 
of Groningen, PO Box 30.001, 9700 RB Groningen, The NetherlandsDepartment of
Clinical GeneticsVU University Medical Center, PO Box 7057, 1007 MB Amsterdam,
The NetherlandsDepartment of Clinical GeneticsErasmus Medical Center, PO Box
2060, 3000 CB Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Departments of PediatricsClinical
GeneticsLeiden University Medical Center, PO Box 9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The
NetherlandsDutch Growth Research Foundation ('Stichting Kind en Groei')PO Box
23068, 3001 KB Rotterdam, The NetherlandsDepartment of GeneticsUniversity Medical
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, PO Box 30.001, 9700 RB Groningen, The 
NetherlandsDepartment of Clinical GeneticsVU University Medical Center, PO Box
7057, 1007 MB Amsterdam, The NetherlandsDepartment of Clinical GeneticsErasmus
Medical Center, PO Box 2060, 3000 CB Rotterdam, The Netherlands
w.oostdijk@lumc.nl.

OBJECTIVE: Short stature caused by point mutations or deletions of the short
stature homeobox (SHOX) gene (SHOX haploinsufficiency (SHI)) is a registered
indication for GH treatment. Patients with a SHOX enhancer deletion (SED) have a 
similar phenotype, but their response to GH is unknown. It is uncertain if
duplications of SHOX or its enhancer (SDUP) cause short stature. This study aimed
to describe the clinical characteristics and growth response to GH treatment in
patients with aberrations of SHOX and its enhancers.
DESIGN: In this retrospective multi-center study (2002-March 2014) clinical
information was available from 130 patients (72 SHI, 44 SED, and 14 SDUP) of whom
52 patients were treated with GH. We evaluated height, sitting height (SH), arm
span, dysmorphic features and indicators of the growth response to GH (delta
height SDS, height velocity, and index of responsiveness).
RESULTS: Patients with SEDs showed similar HtSDS to patients with SHI (-2.3 and
-2.6, respectively, P=0.2), but they were less disproportionate (SH/height ratio 
SDS 2.0 vs 3.1 (P<0.01) and extremities/trunk ratio 2.57 vs 2.43 (P=0.03)). The
1st year growth response to GH treatment was significantly greater in prepubertal
patients with SEDs than SHI. None of the patients with an SDUP was
disproportionate and SDUP cosegregated poorly with short stature; their growth
response to GH treatment (n=3) was similar to the other groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with SEDs are equally short, but less disproportionate than
patients with SHI, and show a greater response to GH.

© 2015 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 26264720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Cytogenet. 2015 Aug 1;8:58. doi: 10.1186/s13039-015-0164-1. eCollection 2015.

Cytogenetic and molecular characterization of a recombinant X chromosome in a
family with a severe neurologic phenotype and macular degeneration.

Magini P(1), Poscente M(2), Ferrari S(3), Vargiolu M(4), Bacchelli E(5), Graziano
C(3), Wischmeijer A(6), Turchetti D(1), Malaspina E(7), Marchiani V(7), Cordelli 
DM(7), Franzoni E(7), Romeo G(1), Seri M(1).

Author information: 
(1)U.O. Genetica Medica, Policlinico Sant'Orsola-Malpighi, DIMEC, Università di
Bologna, via Massarenti, 9, Bologna, 40138 Italy. (2)S.S.V.D. Biologia
Molecolare, Citogenetica, Citomorfologia Ematica e Vaginale, Ospedale Belcolle,
Viterbo, Italy. (3)U.O. Genetica Medica, AOU di Bologna, Policlinico S.
Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, 40138 Italy. (4)Centro Interdipartimentale per la
Ricerca Industriale Scienze della Vita e Tecnologie per la Salute, Università di 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy. (5)Dipartimento di Farmacia e Biotecnologie, Università 
di Bologna, Bologna, Italy. (6)U.O. Genetica Medica, AOU di Bologna, Policlinico 
S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, 40138 Italy ; S.S.D. Genetica Clinica, Arcispedale
S. Maria Nuova-Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Reggio
Emilia, Italy. (7)U.O. Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Policlinico
Sant'Orsola-Malpighi, DIMEC, Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Duplications of MECP2 gene in males cause a syndrome characterized by
distinctive clinical features, including severe to profound mental retardation,
infantile hypotonia, mild dysmorphic features, poor speech development, autistic 
features, seizures, progressive spasticity and recurrent infections. Patients
with complex chromosome rearrangements, leading to Xq28 duplication, share most
of the clinical features of individuals with tandem duplications, in particular
neurologic problems, suggesting a major pathogenetic role of MECP2
overexpression.
RESULTS: We performed cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic studies in a
previously described family with affected males showing congenital ataxia,
late-onset progressive myoclonic encephalopathy and selective macular
degeneration. Microsatellite, FISH and array-CGH analyses identified a
recombinant X chromosome with a deletion of the PAR1 region, encompassing SHOX,
replaced by a duplicated segment of the Xq28 terminal portion, including MECP2.
CONCLUSIONS: Our report describes the identification of the actual genetic cause 
underlying a severe syndrome that previous preliminary analyses erroneously
associated to a terminal Xp22.33 region. In the present family as well as in
previously reported patients with similar rearrangements, the observed neurologic
phenotype is ascribable to MECP2 duplication, with an undefined contribution of
the other involved genes. Maculopathy, presented by affected males reported here,
could be a novel clinical feature associated to Xq28 disomy due to recombinant X 
chromosomes, but at present the underlying pathogenetic mechanism is unknown and 
this potential clinical correlation should be confirmed through the collection of
additional patients.

PMCID: PMC4522089
PMID: 26236399  [PubMed]


15. Ann Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jun;20(2):110-3. doi:
10.6065/apem.2015.20.2.110. Epub 2015 Jun 30.

Turner syndrome presented with tall stature due to overdosage of the SHOX gene.

Seo GH(1), Kang E(1), Cho JH(1), Lee BH(1), Choi JH(1), Kim GH(2), Seo EJ(2), Yoo
HW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, University 
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Medical Genetics Center, Asan
Medical Center Children's Hospital, University of Ulsan College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Asan Medical Center Children's
Hospital, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. ; Medical
Genetics Center, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Turner syndrome is one of the most common chromosomal disorders. It is caused by 
numerical or structural abnormalities of the X chromosome and results in short
stature and gonadal dysgenesis. The short stature arises from haploinsufficiency 
of the SHOX gene, whereas overdosage contributes to tall stature. This report
describes the first Korean case of Turner syndrome with tall stature caused by
SHOX overdosage. The patient presented with primary amenorrhea and
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism at the age of 17 years. Estrogen replacement
therapy was initiated at that time. She displayed tall stature from childhood,
with normal growth velocity, and reached a final height of 190 cm (standard
deviation score, 4.3) at the age of 30 years. Her karyotype was 46,X, psu
idic(X)(q21.2), representing partial monosomy of Xq and partial trisomy of Xp.
Analysis by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification detected a
duplication at Xp22.3-Xp22.2, encompassing the PPP2R3 gene near the 5'-end of the
SHOX gene through the FANCD gene at Xp22.2.

PMCID: PMC4504991
PMID: 26191517  [PubMed]


16. Reprod Biomed Online. 2015 Aug;31(2):217-24. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2015.04.014.
Epub 2015 May 7.

FISH and array CGH characterization of de novo derivative Y chromosome (Yq
duplication and partial Yp deletion) in an azoospermic male.

Wiland E(1), Yatsenko AN(2), Kishore A(2), Stanczak H(3), Zdarta A(1), Ligaj
M(4), Olszewska M(1), Wolski JK(5), Kurpisz M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology and Stem Cells, Institute of Human Genetics
Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland. (2)Department of OBGYN and
Reproductive Science, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA. (3)'nOvum' Fertility Clinic, Warszawa, Poland. (4)Pathology
Department, Maria Sklodowska Curie, Memorial Cancer Hospital, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)'nOvum' Fertility Clinic, Warszawa, Poland; Urooncology Department, Maria
Sklodowska Curie, Memorial Cancer Hospital, Warsaw, Poland. (6)Department of
Reproductive Biology and Stem Cells, Institute of Human Genetics Polish Academy
of Sciences, Poznan, Poland. Electronic address: kurpimac@man.poznan.pl.

This study presents a 28-year-old infertile male who was referred to the
cytogenetic laboratory for chromosomal analysis after 4 years of regular
unprotected intercourse in whom non-obstructive azoospermia was revealed.
Standard cytogenetic G-banding was performed on metaphase spreads and a de-novo
karyotype 46,X,der(Y)(q11.22;p11.3) was identified. This analysis was followed by
flourescence in-situ hybridization(FISH) and array comparative genomic
hybridization (aCGH). Finally, the patient's karyotype was identified as
46,X,der(Y)(qter<U+2192>q11.221::p11.31<U+2192>qter).ish der(Y)
(qter+,pter-,SHOX+,SRY+,Ycen+,DYZ3+;DYZ1+,qter+).arrYq11.221q12(14,448,863-59,288
,511) x2, Yp11.32p11.31(104,062-266,388) x0. It is proposed that de-novo
derivative monocentric Y chromosome with duplicated region Y
qter<U+2192>q11.221::p11.31<U+2192>qter with partial deletion of Yp PAR1 region most probably
can perturb the conjugation of sex chromosomes during first meiotic division of
spermatogenic arrested differentiation (development).

Copyright © 2015 Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4758203
PMID: 26096031  [PubMed - in process]


17. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Aug;100(8):E1133-42. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-1612.
Epub 2015 Jun 15.

Heterozygous NPR2 Mutations Cause Disproportionate Short Stature, Similar to
Léri-Weill Dyschondrosteosis.

Hisado-Oliva A(1), Garre-Vázquez AI(1), Santaolalla-Caballero F(1), Belinchón
A(1), Barreda-Bonis AC(1), Vasques GA(1), Ramirez J(1), Luzuriaga C(1), Carlone
G(1), González-Casado I(1), Benito-Sanz S(1), Jorge AA(1), Campos-Barros A(1),
Heath KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (A.H.-O., A.I.G.-V., F.S.-C.,
A.B., S.B.-S., A.C.-B., K.E.H.) and Multidisciplinary Skeletal Dysplasia Unit
(A.H.-O., A.B., A.C.B.-B., I.G.-C., S.B.-S., K.E.H.), Hospital Universitario La
Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ, 28046 Madrid, Spain; Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras Unit 753 (A.H.-O., A.B.,
S.B.-S., A.C.-B., K.E.H.), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28029 Madrid, Spain;
Department of Pediatric Endocrinology (A.C.B.-B., I.G.-C.), Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28046 Madrid, Spain;
Unidade de Endocrinologia Genetica (G.A.V., A.A.J.), Laboratorio de
Endocrinologia Celular and Molecular LIM-25, Universidade de São Paulo, 05508-900
São Paulo, Brazil; Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition (J.R.), Hospital
Universitario Príncipe de Asturias, Alcalá de Henares, 28805 Madrid, Spain;
Department of Pediatric Endocrinology (C.L.), Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla,
39008 Santander, Spain; and Department of Pediatric Endocrinology (G.C.),
Hospital Virgen del Puerto, 10600 Plasencia, Cáceres, Spain.

CONTEXT: SHOX mutations have been detected in approximately 70% of Léri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and approximately 2.5% of idiopathic short stature (ISS) 
cases, suggesting the implication of other genes or loci. The recent
identification of NPR2 mutations in ISS suggested that NPR2 mutations may also be
involved in disproportionate short stature.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to investigate whether NPR2 mutations
can account for a proportion of the cases referred for LWD and ISS in whom no
SHOX mutation was detected.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We undertook NPR2 mutation screening in 173 individuals
referred for suspected LWD and 95 for ISS, with no known defect in SHOX or its
enhancers. Intracellular localization and natriuretic peptide precursor
C-dependent guanylate cyclase activity were determined for the identified NPR2
variants.
RESULTS: Eight NPR2 variants were identified in nine individuals, seven referred 
for suspected LWD and two for ISS. Six were demonstrated to affect NPR-B cell
trafficking and/or its ability to synthesize cyclic GMP (cGMP) under response to 
natriuretic peptide precursor C/brain natriuretic peptide stimulation. All
pathogenic mutations were detected in the suspected LWD referral group (~3%).
Interestingly, one of these patients is currently being treated with recombinant 
human GH and in contrast to previous reports is showing a positive response to
the treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: NPR2 mutations account for approximately 3% of patients with
disproportionate short stature and/or clinical or radiographic indicators of SHOX
deficiency and in whom no SHOX defect has been identified. However, no patient
has yet presented with Madelung deformity. Thus, NPR2 should be screened in the
SHOX-negative LWD referrals.

PMID: 26075495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jun;29(3):353-66. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2015.01.003. Epub 2015 Feb 7.

Novel approaches to short stature therapy.

Wit JM(1), Oostdijk W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: j.m.wit@lumc.nl. (2)Department of Paediatrics,
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
w.oostdijk@lumc.nl.

Besides growth hormone, several pharmaceutical products have been investigated
for efficacy and safety in increasing short term growth or adult height.
Short-term treatment with testosterone esters in boys with constitutional delay
of growth and puberty is efficacious in generating secondary sex characteristics 
and growth acceleration. The addition of oxandrolone to growth hormone (GH) in
Turner syndrome has an additive effect on adult height gain. Treatment with GnRH 
analogs is the established treatment of central precocious puberty, and its
addition to GH therapy appears effective in increasing adult height in GH
deficient children, and possibly short children born SGA or with SHOX deficiency,
who are still short at pubertal onset. Aromatase inhibitors appear effective in
several rare disorders, but their value in increasing adult height in early
pubertal boys with GH deficiency or idiopathic short stature is uncertain. A
trial with a C-natriuretic peptide analog offers hope for children with
achondroplasia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26051296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Hum Genet. 2015 Sep;60(9):553-6. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.53. Epub 2015 Jun 4.

Rare pseudoautosomal copy-number variations involving SHOX and/or its flanking
regions in individuals with and without short stature.

Fukami M(1), Naiki Y(2), Muroya K(3), Hamajima T(4), Soneda S(5), Horikawa R(2), 
Jinno T(1), Katsumi M(1), Nakamura A(1,)(6), Asakura Y(3), Adachi M(3), Ogata
T(7), Kanzaki S(8); Japanese SHOX study group.

Collaborators: Adachi M, Tajima T, Tanaka T, Arisaka O, Koyama S, Hamajima T,
Nose O, Ozono K, Namba N, Nagasaki K, Kamimaki T, Kanzaki S, Ogata T, Tanaka H,
Hasegawa Y, Kobayashi K, Dateki S, Mabe H, Fujiwara I, Ida S, Hasegawa T, Uematsu
A, Kashimada K, Onigata K, Miyako K, Yokoya S, Horikawa R, Fukami M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Division of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, National Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kanagawa Children's Medical
Center, Yokohama, Japan. (4)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Aichi
Children's Health and Medical Center, Obu, Japan. (5)Department of Pediatrics,
St. Marianna University School of Medicine, Kawasaki, Japan. (6)Department of
Pediatrics, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. (7)Department
of Pediatrics, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan.
(8)Division of Pediatrics and Perinatology, Tottori University Faculty of
Medicine, Tottori, Japan.

Pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1) contains SHOX, in addition to seven highly
conserved non-coding DNA elements (CNEs) with cis-regulatory activity.
Microdeletions involving SHOX exons 1-6a and/or the CNEs result in idiopathic
short stature (ISS) and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD). Here, we report six
rare copy-number variations (CNVs) in PAR1 identified through copy-number
analyzes of 245 ISS/LWD patients and 15 unaffected individuals. The six CNVs
consisted of three microduplications encompassing SHOX and some of the CNEs, two 
microduplications in the SHOX 3'-region affecting one or four of the downstream
CNEs, and a microdeletion involving SHOX exon 6b and its neighboring CNE. The
amplified DNA fragments of two SHOX-containing duplications were detected at
chromosomal regions adjacent to the original positions. The breakpoints of a
SHOX-containing duplication resided within Alu repeats. A microduplication
encompassing four downstream CNEs was identified in an unaffected father-daughter
pair, whereas the other five CNVs were detected in ISS patients. These results
suggest that microduplications involving SHOX cause ISS by disrupting the
cis-regulatory machinery of this gene and that at least some of microduplications
in PAR1 arise from Alu-mediated non-allelic homologous recombination. The
pathogenicity of other rare PAR1-linked CNVs, such as CNE-containing
microduplications and exon 6b-flanking microdeletions, merits further
investigation.

PMID: 26040210  [PubMed - in process]


20. Horm Res Paediatr. 2015;84(1):14-25. doi: 10.1159/000381712. Epub 2015 May 6.

Radiological Features in Patients with Short Stature Homeobox-Containing (SHOX)
Gene Deficiency and Turner Syndrome before and after 2 Years of GH Treatment.

Child CJ(1), Kalifa G, Jones C, Ross JL, Rappold GA, Quigley CA, Zimmermann AG,
Garding G, Cutler GB Jr, Blum WF.

Author information: 
(1)Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Company, Windlesham, UK.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The short stature homeobox-containing (SHOX) gene is one of many
genes that regulate longitudinal growth. The SHOX deficiency (SHOX-D) phenotype, 
caused by intragenic or regulatory region defects, ranges from normal stature to 
mesomelic skeletal dysplasia. We investigated differences in radiological
anomalies between patients with SHOX-D and Turner syndrome (TS) and the effect of
2 years of growth hormone (GH) treatment on these anomalies.
METHODS: Left hand/wrist, forearm and lower leg radiographs were assessed at
baseline and after 2 years in children with genetically confirmed SHOX-D
(GH-treated and untreated groups) and TS (GH-treated) in a randomised,
controlled, multinational study.
RESULTS: Radiological anomalies of hand, wrist and forearm were common in SHOX-D 
and TS. Radial bowing appeared more prevalent in SHOX-D, while lower leg
anomalies were more common in TS. There were no significant differences in
radiological findings between GH-treated and untreated patients with SHOX-D after
2 years.
CONCLUSION: GH treatment had no systematic effect on skeletal findings in SHOX-D,
based on limited radiological differences between the GH-treated and untreated
groups at 2 years. Bone age radiographs allow assessment of radiological signs
indicating a potential diagnosis of SHOX-D and may lead to earlier genetic
confirmation and initiation of GH therapy.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25967354  [PubMed - in process]


21. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jul;28(7-8):937-41. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2014-0388.

Case report: long-term follow-up of a 45,X male with SHOX haploinsufficiency.

Grover M, French S, Yazdani P.

The 45,X disorder of sexual differentiation (DSD) is a rare disorder. We report
long-term follow-up of a 5-year-old African-American male whose evaluation for
short stature revealed a karyotype of 45,X der(X)t(X;Y)(p22.3;p11.2)(SRY+).
Presence of the SRY (sex-determining region Y) gene resulted in his male
development. His chromosome abnormality also resulted in a deletion of the SHOX
(short stature homeobox-containing) gene, which partly contributed to his short
stature and skeletal features. He underwent normal spontaneous pubertal
development, but his final height remained compromised due to advanced bone age, 
non-optimal response to recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) treatment during 
the period of compliance and ultimately non-compliance with rhGH therapy. To our 
knowledge, this is the first case report describing long-term follow-up of a 45,X
male DSD which highlights the similarities and differences from Turner syndrome
females.

PMID: 25781530  [PubMed - in process]


22. Mol Cytogenet. 2015 Feb 22;8:13. doi: 10.1186/s13039-015-0112-0. eCollection
2015.

Long-term follow-up of females with unbalanced X;Y translocations-reproductive
and nonreproductive consequences.

Dobek WA(1), Kim HG(2), Walls CA(1), Chorich LP(2), Tho SP(2), Wang ZX(3),
McDonough PG(2), Layman LC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia
Regents University, Augusta, GA USA. (2)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology,
Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA USA ; Section
of Reproductive Endocrinology, Infertility, & Genetics, Medical College of
Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA USA. (3)Department of Surgery
and Department of Pathology, Anatomy & Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA USA. (4)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Medical College
of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA USA ; Section of Reproductive
Endocrinology, Infertility, & Genetics, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia
Regents University, Augusta, GA USA ; Section of Reproductive Endocrinology,
Infertility, & Genetics, Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Medical College
of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, 1120 15th Street, Augusta, GA USA.

BACKGROUND: Females with Xp;Yq translocations manifest short stature and normal
fertility, but rarely have follow-up. The study purpose was to define the
phenotype of a family with t(X;Y)(p22.3;q11.2), determine long-term reproductive 
function, and compare to all reported female cases.
METHODS: Comprehensive clinical and molecular analyses were performed on the
female proband, who had regular menses, normal endocrine function, and three
pregnancies spanning seven years--a normal liveborn male and two with unbalanced 
translocations (liveborn female and stillborn male).
RESULTS: The translocation truncated KAL1 and deleted 44 genes on der(X). Our
report constitutes the longest follow-up of an X;Y translocation female. She had 
no evidence of Kallmann syndrome, gonadoblastoma, or cardiovascular disease.
Detailed analysis of 50 published female cases indicated a uniform lack of
follow-up and significant morbidity-intellectual disability (10%), facial
dysmorphism (28%), eye abnormalities (14%), and skeletal defects (28%).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate normal ovarian function to date in a woman
with an t(X;Y)(p22.3;q11.2). However, additional published studies in the
literature suggest careful follow-up is necessary and contradict the
generalization that females with Xp;Yq translocations are usually normal except
for short stature.

PMCID: PMC4347569
PMID: 25737742  [PubMed]


23. Horm Res Paediatr. 2015;83(1):26-35. doi: 10.1159/000365507. Epub 2015 Jan 31.

SHOX gene variants: growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor-1 status and
response to growth hormone treatment.

Shapiro S(1), Klein GW, Klein ML, Wallach EJ, Fen Y, Godbold JH, Rapaport R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, N.Y., USA.

CONTEXT: Short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) variants of unknown
clinical significance occur frequently among children with short stature, yet
their growth hormone (GH)/insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) status and
response to GH have not been studied.
OBJECTIVE: To define GH and IGF-1 status in children with SHOX variants and
assess their response to GH.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This is a retrospective review of children with short
stature. Children with SHOX variants were compared to those with no variants.
Height standard deviation scores (SDS) and IGF-1 SDS at baseline and during GH
treatment at 6, 12, and 24 months were analyzed. Growth velocity (GV), maximum GH
dose, IGF-BP3, and changes in height SDS, IGF-1 SDS, and GV were compared.
RESULTS: Among 355 children, 83 (23%) had SHOX variants. Nineteen different SHOX 
variants were detected. There was no difference in age, height SDS, IGF-1 SDS, or
IGF-BP3 between children with SHOX variants and those with normal SHOX. Height
SDS, IGF-1 SDS, IGF-BP3, GV, and GH dose were not different between patients with
SHOX variants and those without.
CONCLUSIONS: The GH and IGF-1 characteristics of children with short stature were
not different between children with SHOX+ variants and children with no variants.
Although these findings suggest that SHOX variants are polymorphisms, studies
prospectively comparing individual SHOX variants are needed.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25659810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Genet. 2014 Dec;93(3):809-12.

Identification of a novel SHOX mutation in a Chinese family with isolated
Madelung deformity.

Mei L(1), Huang Y, Pan Q, Li H, Liang D, Wu L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Central South University, Changsha, 
Hunan 410078, People's Republic of China. wulingqian@sklmg.edu.cn.

PMID: 25572239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2015 Feb;19(2):88-92. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2014.0236.
Epub 2014 Dec 23.

Detection of Turner Syndrome by quantitative PCR of SHOX and VAMP7 genes.

Ibarra-Ramírez M(1), Zamudio-Osuna MJ, Campos-Acevedo LD, Gallardo-Blanco HL,
Cerda-Flores RM, Rodríguez-Sánchez IP, Martínez-de-Villarreal LE.

Author information: 
(1)1 Departamento de Genética, Hospital Universitario "Dr. José Eleuterio
González," Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey , Nuevo León, México .

Turner Syndrome (TS) is an unfavorable genetic condition with a prevalence of
1:2500 in newborn girls. Prompt and effective diagnosis is very important to
appropriately monitor the comorbidities. The aim of the present study was to
propose a feasible and practical molecular diagnostic tool for newborn screening 
by quantifying the gene dosage of the SHOX, VAMP7, XIST, UBA1, and SRY genes by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) in individuals with a diagnosis of 
complete X monosomy, as well as those with TS variants, and then compare the
results to controls without chromosomal abnormalities. According to our results, 
the most useful markers for these chromosomal variants were the genes found in
the pseudoautosomic regions 1 and 2 (PAR1 and PAR2), because differences in gene 
dosage (relative quantification) between groups were more evident in SHOX and
VAMP7 gene expression. Therefore, we conclude that these markers are useful for
early detection in aneuploidies involving sex chromosomes.

PMID: 25535777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Dev Dyn. 2015 Feb;244(2):146-56. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24239. Epub 2014 Dec 30.

In vivo loss of function study reveals the short stature homeobox-containing
(shox) gene plays indispensable roles in early embryonic growth and bone
formation in zebrafish.

Sawada R(1), Kamei H, Hakuno F, Takahashi S, Shimizu T.

Author information: 
(1)Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Departments of 
Animal Sciences and Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agriculture 
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Congenital loss of the SHOX gene is considered to be a genetic cause 
of short stature phenotype in Turner syndrome and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis
patients. Though SHOX expression initiates during early fetal development, little
is known about the embryonic roles of SHOX. The evolutionary conservation of the 
zebrafish shox gene and the convenience of the early developmental stages for
analyses make zebrafish a preferred model. Here, we characterized structure,
expression, and developmental roles of zebrafish shox through a loss-of-function 
approach.
RESULTS: We found a previously undiscovered Shox protein that has both a
homeodomain and an OAR-domain in zebrafish. The shox transcript emerged during
the segmentation period and it increased in later stages. The predominant domains
of shox expression were mandibular arch, pectoral fin, anterior notochord,
rhombencephalon, and mesencephalon, suggesting that Shox is involved in bone and 
neural development. Translational blockade of Shox mRNA by an antisense
morpholino oligo delayed embryonic growth, which was restored by the
co-overexpression of morpholino-resistant Shox mRNA. At later stages, impaired
Shox expression markedly delayed the calcification process in the anterior
vertebral column and craniofacial bones.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate evolutionarily conserved Shox plays roles in
early embryonic growth and in later bone formation.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25483930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. An Pediatr (Barc). 2015 Jan;82(1):e131-4. doi: 10.1016/j.anpedi.2014.02.020. Epub
2014 Dec 2.

[X isochromosomes: delayed diagnosis of Turner's syndrome].

[Article in Spanish]

Cuesta Hernández M(1), Rueda Valencia ME(2), Pérez Rodríguez O(3), López de Lara 
D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Endocrinología, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, España.
(2)Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, España. (3)Unidad 
de Endocrinología Pediátrica, Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital Clínico San Carlos,
Madrid, España. (4)Unidad de Endocrinología Pediátrica, Servicio de Pediatría,
Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, España. Electronic address:
dldlara@gmail.com.

Turner syndrome is diagnosed by the combination of certain phenotypic
characteristics with the absence of one of the X chromosome. This absence may be 
total or partial, as occurs in isochromosomes Xq. The phenotypic consequences of 
these depend on two factors: the characteristics of the lost genes and the
percentage of cells 45, X in mosaicisms. The clinical features also change with
the cytogenetic pattern. Short stature is the most common phenotypic
manifestation, as it is due to the haploinsufficiency of the SHOX gene on the
short arm of X chromosomes. Thus, when there is isochromosomes on the long arms, 
short stature is always present. However, the typical features of this syndrome
could be absent, and the diagnosis can be delayed. This occurred in our patients,
who will not be able to obtain optimum benefits with growth hormone treatment.

Copyright © 2014 Asociación Española de Pediatría. Published by Elsevier Espana. 
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25475905  [PubMed - in process]


28. Horm Res Paediatr. 2014;82(5):310-8. doi: 10.1159/000367712. Epub 2014 Oct 8.

Copy number variants in short children born small for gestational age.

Wit JM(1), van Duyvenvoorde HA, van Klinken JB, Caliebe J, Bosch CA, Lui JC,
Gijsbers AC, Bakker E, Breuning MH, Oostdijk W, Losekoot M, Baron J, Binder G,
Ranke MB, Ruivenkamp CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: In addition to genome-wide association studies (GWAS),
height-associated genes may be uncovered by studying individuals with extreme
short or tall stature.
METHODS: Genome-wide analysis for copy number variants (CNVs), using single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays, was performed in 49 index cases born small 
for gestational age with persistent short stature. Segregation analysis was
performed, and genes in CNVs were compared with information from GWAS, gene
expression in rodents' growth plates, and published information.
RESULTS: CNVs were detected in 13 cases. In 5 children a known cause of short
stature was found: UPD7, UPD14, a duplication of the SHOX enhancer region, an
IGF1R deletion, and a 22q11.21 deletion. In the remaining 8 cases, potential
pathogenic CNVs were detected, either de novo (n = 1), segregating (n = 2), or
not segregating with short stature (n = 5). Bioinformatic analysis of the de novo
and segregating CNVs suggested that HOXD4, AGPS, PDE11A, OSBPL6, PRKRA and
PLEKHA3, and possibly DGKB and TNFRSF11B are potential candidate genes. A
SERPINA7 or NRK defect may be associated with an X-linked form of short stature.
CONCLUSION: SNP arrays detected 5 known causes of short stature with prenatal
onset and suggested several potential candidate genes.

2014 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMCID: PMC4236248
PMID: 25300501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Bone. 2014 Dec;69:23-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2014.09.001. Epub 2014 Sep 8.

Increased cortical area and thickness in the distal radius in subjects with
SHOX-gene mutation.

Frederiksen AL(1), Hansen S(2), Brixen K(2), Frost M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Sdr. Boulevard
29, DK-5000 Odense, Denmark. Electronic address: Anja.Frederiksen@rsyd.dk.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Odense University Hospital, Sdr. Boulevard 29,
DK-5000 Odense, Denmark.

INTRODUCTION: Short-stature homeobox (SHOX) gene haploinsufficiency may cause
skeletal dysplasia including Léri-Weill Dyschondrosteosis (LWD), a clinical
entity characterised by the triad of low height, mesomelic disproportion and
Madelung's deformity of the wrist. Bone microarchitecture and estimated strength 
in adult SHOX mutation carriers have not been examined.
METHODS: Twenty-two subjects with a SHOX mutation including 7 males and 15
females with a median age of 38.8 [21.1-52.2] years were recruited from five
unrelated families. The control group consisted of 22 healthy subjects matched on
age and sex. Bone mineral density (BMD) was measured by dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry. Bone geometry, volumetric density, microarchitecture and finite
element estimated (FEA) bone strength were measured using high-resolution
peripheral quantitative computed tomography (HR-pQCT). A full region of interest 
(ROI) image analysis and height-matched ROI analyses adjusting for differences in
body height between the two groups were performed.
RESULTS: Areal BMD and T-scores showed no significant differences between cases
and controls. Total radius area was smaller in cases than controls (207 [176-263]
vs. 273 [226-298] mm, p<0.01). Radius cortical bone area (74 ± 20 vs. 58 ± 17
mm(2), p=0.01) and thickness (1.16 ± 0.30 vs. 0.84 ± 0.26 mm, p<0.01) as well as 
total density (428 ± 99 vs. 328 ± 72 mg/cm(3), p<0.01) were higher in SHOX
mutation carriers compared to controls. Radius trabecular bone area (119
[103-192] vs. 202 [168-247] mm(2), p<0.01) and trabecular number (1.61
[1.46-2.07] vs. 1.89 [1.73-2.08] mm(-1), p=0.01) were smaller in SHOX mutation
carriers. Tibia trabecular thickness was lower in cases (0.067 ± 0.012 vs. 0.076 
± 0.012 mm, p=0.01). These results remained significant after adjustment for
differences in body height and when restricting analyses to females. There were
no differences in BMD, radius and tibia cortical porosity or FEA failure load
between groups. A segment of cortical bone defect was identified in the distal
radius adjacent to ulna in five unrelated SHOX mutation carriers.
CONCLUSION: Subjects with a SHOX mutation presented with a different bone
geometry in radius and tibia while there were no differences in BMD or failure
load compared to controls, suggesting that mutations in SHOX gene may have an
impact on bone microarchitecture albeit not bone strength.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25220427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Genetics. 2014 Nov;198(3):1117-26. doi: 10.1534/genetics.114.167460. Epub 2014
Sep 11.

Genetic interactions between Shox2 and Hox genes during the regional growth and
development of the mouse limb.

Neufeld SJ(1), Wang F(2), Cobb J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N
1N4, Canada. (2)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4, Canada jacobb@ucalgary.ca.

The growth and development of the vertebrate limb relies on homeobox genes of the
Hox and Shox families, with their independent mutation often giving
dose-dependent effects. Here we investigate whether Shox2 and Hox genes function 
together during mouse limb development by modulating their relative dosage and
examining the limb for nonadditive effects on growth. Using double mRNA
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in single embryos, we first show that
Shox2 and Hox genes have associated spatial expression dynamics, with Shox2
expression restricted to the proximal limb along with Hoxd9 and Hoxa11
expression, juxtaposing the distal expression of Hoxa13 and Hoxd13. By generating
mice with all possible dosage combinations of mutant Shox2 alleles and HoxA/D
cluster deletions, we then show that their coordinated proximal limb expression
is critical to generate normally proportioned limb segments. These epistatic
interactions tune limb length, where Shox2 underexpression enhances, and Shox2
overexpression suppresses, Hox-mutant phenotypes. Disruption of either Shox2 or
Hox genes leads to a similar reduction in Runx2 expression in the developing
humerus, suggesting their concerted action drives cartilage maturation during
normal development. While we furthermore provide evidence that Hox gene function 
influences Shox2 expression, this regulation is limited in extent and is unlikely
on its own to be a major explanation for their genetic interaction. Given the
similar effect of human SHOX mutations on regional limb growth, Shox and Hox
genes may generally function as genetic interaction partners during the growth
and development of the proximal vertebrate limb.

Copyright © 2014 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4224156
PMID: 25217052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Orthop Traumatol Surg Res. 2014 Oct;100(6 Suppl):S349-52. doi:
10.1016/j.otsr.2014.06.007. Epub 2014 Sep 10.

Radiological and clinical analysis of Madelung's deformity in children.

Huguet S(1), Leheup B(2), Aslan M(1), Muller F(1), Dautel G(1), Journeau P(3);
French Society of Pediatric Orthopaedics (SOFOP).

Author information: 
(1)Service de chirurgie d'orthopédie pédiatrique, hôpital d'Enfants, CHU de
Nancy, allée du Morvan, 54500 Vanduvre-lès-Nancy, France. (2)Service de
génétique clinique pédiatrique, hôpital d'Enfants, CHU de Nancy, allée du Morvan,
54500 Vanduvre-lès-Nancy, France. (3)Service de chirurgie d'orthopédie
pédiatrique, hôpital d'Enfants, CHU de Nancy, allée du Morvan, 54500
Vanduvre-lès-Nancy, France. Electronic address: p.journeau@chu-nancy.fr.

INTRODUCTION: Madelung's deformity is a bone dysplasia that occurs predominantly 
in adolescent females, characterized by early epiphyseal growth arrest in the
medial part of the distal radius. This leads to an upward and medial displacement
of the radial joint surface, restricting range of motion.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to determine whether there was a link
between clinical and radiological data in children with Madelung's deformity and 
to test the hypothesis of a relation between the deformity and a genetic
mutation.
METHODS: A retrospective study recruited 13 patients with Madelung's deformity,
with a mean age of 13.2 years (range, 8-18 years). Assessment comprised level of 
pain, range of motion and grip force, with standard AP and lateral wrist X-rays. 
Every patient except one underwent molecular genetic screening, adhering to
current recommendations.
RESULTS: Pronation-supination, radial inclination and grip force were
significantly impaired compared to normal results. All X-ray measurements were
significantly abnormal, except for the lunate-covering ratio. Genetic mutation
(SHOX) was systematic in the 12 patients screened.
DISCUSSION: Radiological deformity did not correlate with functional disturbance 
or pain. Non-acquired Madelung's deformity requires molecular screening for SHOX 
or XO mutation, which definitively diagnoses Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis or
Turner syndrome.
CONCLUSION: A larger series is necessary to confirm these preliminary results,
which nevertheless suggest that non-acquired Madelung's deformity is not isolated
but syndromic. Early detection of Léri-Weill or Turner syndrome is essential, due
to their therapeutic specificities. LEVEL: IV.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25217032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Sep;28(9-10):985-91. doi:
10.1515/jpem-2014-0180.

Carotid intima-media thickness in children treated with growth hormone.

Knop C, Wolters B, Lass N, Wunsch R, Reinehr T.

BACKGROUND: There is an ongoing discussion whether high doses of growth hormone
(GH) may lead to cardiovascular diseases. Therefore, we studied the relationships
between GH treatment and carotid intima-media thickness (cIMT), which is
predictive of the development of atherosclerosis.
METHODS: We measured cIMT in 38 children with supraphysiological doses of GH
(mean age 10.9 ± 2.2 years; 47% male; GH indication: small for gestational age, n
= 31; Turner syndrome, n = 5; SHOX deficiency, n = 2) and in 38 age- and
gender-matched healthy children without GH treatment. Furthermore, we examined
cIMT in 61 children with physiological doses of GH (mean age 12.0 ± 3.1 years;
64% male; GH indication: GH deficiency) and in 61 age- and gender-matched healthy
children without GH treatment. Moreover, we analyzed blood pressure, lipids,
HbA1c, IGF-1, and IGFBP-3 in children treated with GH.
RESULTS: The cIMT levels did not differ significantly between children with and
without GH treatment either in high-dose GH treatment or in physiological GH
doses. In backwards linear regression analyses, cIMT was significantly related to
HbA1c, but not to age, gender, BMI, pubertal stage, indication of GH treatment,
duration or doses of GH treatment, IGF-1, IGFBP-3, or to any cardiovascular risk 
factor.
CONCLUSIONS: We found no evidence that GH treatment is associated with changes in
cIMT.

PMID: 25210755  [PubMed - in process]


33. J Genet. 2014 Aug;93(2):505-8.

Analysis of common SHOX gene sequence variants and ~4.9-kb PAR1 deletion in ISS
patients.

Solc R(1), Hirschfeldova K, Kebrdlova V, Baxova A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science, Departement of Anthropology and Human Genetics, Charles
University in Prague, Vinicna 7, Prague 2, 128 43, Czech Republic.
roman.solc@natur.cuni.cz.

PMID: 25189248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Nov;164A(11):2764-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36724. Epub 2014 
Aug 13.

Homozygosity for a novel deletion downstream of the SHOX gene provides evidence
for an additional long range regulatory region with a mild phenotypic effect.

Bunyan DJ(1), Taylor EJ, Maloney VK, Blyth M.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK.

Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis is caused by heterozygous mutations in SHOX or its
flanking sequences, including whole or partial gene deletions, point mutations
within the coding sequence, and deletions of downstream regulatory elements. The 
same mutations when biallelic cause the more severe Langer Mesomelic dysplasia.
Here, we report on a consanguineous family with a novel deletion downstream of
SHOX in which homozygously deleted individuals have a phenotype intermediate
between Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and Langer Mesomelic dysplasia while
heterozygously deleted individuals are mostly asymptomatic. The deleted region is
distal to all previously described 3' deletions, suggesting the presence of an
additional regulatory element, deletions of which have a milder, variable
phenotypic effect.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25125269  [PubMed - in process]


35. Clin Pediatr Endocrinol. 2014 Jul;23(3):65-72. doi: 10.1297/cpe.23.65. Epub 2014 
Aug 6.

Skeletal Deformity Associated with SHOX Deficiency.

Seki A(1), Jinno T(2), Suzuki E(2), Takayama S(1), Ogata T(3), Fukami M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, National Center for Child Health and
Development, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National
Research Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department 
of Pediatrics, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan.

SHOX haploinsufficiency due to mutations in the coding exons or microdeletions
involving the coding exons and/or the enhancer regions accounts for approximately
80% and 2-16% of genetic causes of Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and idiopathic
short stature, respectively. The most characteristic feature in patients with
SHOX deficiency is Madelung deformity, a cluster of anatomical changes in the
wrist that can be attributed to premature epiphyseal fusion of the distal radius.
Computed tomography of SHOX-deficient patients revealed a thin bone cortex and an
enlarged total bone area at the diaphysis of the radius, while histopathological 
analyses showed a disrupted columnar arrangement of chondrocytes and an expanded 
hypertrophic layer of the growth plate. Recent studies have suggested that
perturbed programmed cell death of hypertrophic chondrocytes may underlie the
skeletal changes related to SHOX deficiency. Furthermore, the formation of an
aberrant ligament tethering the lunate and radius has been implicated in the
development of Madelung deformity. Blood estrogen levels and mutation types have 
been proposed as phenotypic determinants of SHOX deficiency, although other
unknown factors may also affect clinical severity of this entity.

PMCID: PMC4125598
PMID: 25110390  [PubMed]


36. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Jul 24;15(8):13135-50. doi: 10.3390/ijms150813135.

Overexpression of Shox2 leads to congenital dysplasia of the temporomandibular
joint in mice.

Li X(1), Liang W(2), Ye H(3), Weng X(4), Liu F(5), Liu X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Academy of Integrative Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Fuzhou 350122, China. lixihaifz@gmail.com. (2)Research Base of
Traditional Chinese Medicine Syndrome, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Fuzhou 350122, China. liangwennafz@gmail.com. (3)Academy of Integrative
Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou 350122,
China. yehzfjzy@gmail.com. (4)Academy of Integrative Medicine, Fujian University 
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou 350122, China. wengxiapingfz@gmail.com.
(5)Academy of Integrative Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Fuzhou 350122, China. liufayuanfz@gmail.com. (6)Academy of Integrative 
Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou 350122,
China. liuxianxiangfz@gmail.com.

Our previous study reported that inactivation of Shox2 led to dysplasia and
ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint (TMJ), and that replacing Shox2 with
human Shox partially rescued the phenotype with a prematurely worn out articular 
disc. However, the mechanisms of Shox2 activity in TMJ development remain to be
elucidated. In this study, we investigated the molecular and cellular basis for
the congenital dysplasia of TMJ in Wnt1-Cre; pMes-stop Shox2 mice. We found that 
condyle and glenoid fossa dysplasia occurs primarily in the second week after the
birth. The dysplastic TMJ of Wnt1-Cre; pMes-stop Shox2 mice exhibits a loss of
Collagen type I, Collagen type II, Ihh and Gli2. In situ zymography and
immunohistochemistry further demonstrate an up-regulation of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs), MMP9 and MMP13, accompanied by a significantly
increased cell apoptosis. In addition, the cell proliferation and expressions of 
Sox9, Runx2 and Ihh are no different in the embryonic TMJ between the wild type
and mutant mice. Our results show that overexpression of Shox2 leads to the loss 
of extracellular matrix and the increase of cell apoptosis in TMJ dysplasia by
up-regulating MMPs and down-regulating the Ihh signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4159784
PMID: 25062348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. BMC Med Genet. 2014 Jul 23;15:87. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-15-87.

Spectrum of phenotypic anomalies in four families with deletion of the SHOX
enhancer region.

Gatta V(1), Palka C, Chiavaroli V, Franchi S, Cannataro G, Savastano M, Cotroneo 
AR, Chiarelli F, Mohn A, Stuppia L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological, Humanities and Territory Sciences, School of
Medicine and Health Sciences, "G, d'Annunzio" University of Chieti, via dei
Vestini 31, 66013 Chieti, Italy. v.gatta@unich.it.

BACKGROUND: SHOX alterations have been reported in 67% of patients affected by
Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), with a larger prevalence of gene deletions
than point mutations. It has been recently demonstrated that these deletions can 
involve the SHOX enhancer region, rather that the coding region, with variable
phenotype of the affected patients.Here, we report a SHOX gene analysis carried
out by MLPA in 14 LWD patients from 4 families with variable phenotype.
CASE PRESENTATION: All patients presented a SHOX enhancer deletion. In
particular, a patient with a severe bilateral Madelung deformity without short
stature showed a homozygous alteration identical to the recently described
47.5 kb PAR1 deletion. Moreover, we identified, for the first time, in three
related patients with a severe bilateral Madelung deformity, a smaller deletion
than the 47.5 kb PAR1 deletion encompassing the same enhancer region (ECR1/CNE7).
CONCLUSIONS: Data reported in this study provide new information about the
spectrum of phenotypic alterations showed by LWD patients with different
deletions of the SHOX enhancer region.

PMCID: PMC4112833
PMID: 25056248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Ann Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Mar;19(1):1-7. doi: 10.6065/apem.2014.19.1.1. 
Epub 2014 Mar 31.

Growth hormone treatment in non-growth hormone-deficient children.

Loche S(1), Carta L(1), Ibba A(1), Guzzetti C(1).

Author information: 
(1)SSD Endocrinologia Pediatrica, Ospedale Microcitemico, ASL Cagliari, Cagliari,
Italy.

Until 1985 growth hormone (GH) was obtained from pituitary extracts, and was
available in limited amounts only to treat severe growth hormone deficiency
(GHD). With the availability of unlimited quantities of GH obtained from
recombinant DNA technology, researchers started to explore new modalities to
treat GHD children, as well as to treat a number of other non-GHD conditions.
Although with some differences between different countries, GH treatment is
indicated in children with Turner syndrome, chronic renal insufficiency,
Prader-Willi syndrome, deletions/mutations of the SHOX gene, as well as in short 
children born small for gestational age and with idiopathic short stature.
Available data from controlled trials indicate that GH treatment increases adult 
height in patients with Turner syndrome, in patients with chronic renal
insufficiency, and in short children born small for gestational age. Patients
with SHOX deficiency seem to respond to treatment similarly to Turner syndrome.
GH treatment in children with idiopathic short stature produces a modest mean
increase in adult height but the response in the individual patient is
unpredictable. Uncontrolled studies indicate that GH treatment may be beneficial 
also in children with Noonan syndrome. In patients with Prader-Willi syndrome GH 
treatment normalizes growth and improves body composition and cognitive function.
In any indication the response to GH seems correlated to the dose and the
duration of treatment. GH treatment is generally safe with no major adverse
effects being recorded in any condition.

PMCID: PMC4049545
PMID: 24926456  [PubMed]


39. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2015 Feb;82(2):248-53. doi: 10.1111/cen.12518. Epub 2014
Jul 2.

Muscle function in Turner syndrome: normal force but decreased power.

Soucek O(1), Lebl J, Matyskova J, Snajderova M, Kolouskova S, Pruhova S, Hlavka
Z, Sumnik Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in
Prague and Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.

OBJECTIVE: Although hypogonadism and SHOX gene haploinsufficiency likely cause
the decreased bone mineral density and increased fracture rate associated with
Turner syndrome (TS), the exact mechanism remains unclear. We tested the
hypothesis that muscle dysfunction in patients with TS contributes to increased
fracture risk. The secondary aim was to determine whether menarche, hormone
therapy duration, positive fracture history and genotype influence muscle
function parameters in patients with TS.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional study was conducted in a single university hospital
referral centre between March 2012 and October 2013.
PATIENTS: Sixty patients with TS (mean age of 13·7 ± 4·5 years) were compared to 
the control group of 432 healthy girls.
MEASUREMENTS: A Leonardo Mechanograph(®) Ground Reaction Force Platform was used 
to assess muscle force (Fmax ) by the multiple one-legged hopping test and muscle
power (Pmax ) by the single two-legged jump test.
RESULTS: While the Fmax was normal (mean weight-specific Z-score of 0·11 ± 0·77, 
P = 0·27), the Pmax was decreased in patients with TS (Z-score of -0·93 ± 1·5, P 
< 0·001) compared with healthy controls. The muscle function parameters were not 
significantly influenced by menarcheal stage, hormone therapy duration, fracture 
history or genotype (linear regression adjusted for age, weight and height; P >
0·05 for all).
CONCLUSION: Fmax , a principal determinant of bone strength, is normal in
patients with TS. Previously described changes in bone quality and structure in
TS are thus not likely related to inadequate mechanical loading but rather
represent a primary bone deficit. A decreased Pmax indicates impaired muscle
coordination in patients with TS.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24890376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 2;9(6):e98543. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098543. eCollection 
2014.

Identification of novel SHOX target genes in the developing limb using a
transgenic mouse model.

Beiser KU(1), Glaser A(1), Kleinschmidt K(2), Scholl I(1), Röth R(1), Li L(3),
Gretz N(3), Mechtersheimer G(4), Karperien M(5), Marchini A(6), Richter W(2),
Rappold GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Heidelberg University Hospital,
Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Division of Experimental Orthopaedics, Orthopaedic
University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Medical Research Center (ZMF),
Medical Faculty Mannheim at Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany.
(4)Institute of Pathology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Department of Developmental Bioengineering, University of Twente, Enschede,
The Netherlands. (6)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Heidelberg University
Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany; German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, 
Germany.

Deficiency of the human short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) has been
identified in several disorders characterized by reduced height and skeletal
anomalies such as Turner syndrome, Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and Langer
mesomelic dysplasia as well as isolated short stature. SHOX acts as a
transcription factor during limb development and is expressed in chondrocytes of 
the growth plates. Although highly conserved in vertebrates, rodents lack a SHOX 
orthologue. This offers the unique opportunity to analyze the effects of human
SHOX expression in transgenic mice. We have generated a mouse expressing the
human SHOXa cDNA under the control of a murine Col2a1 promoter and enhancer
(Tg(Col2a1-SHOX)). SHOX and marker gene expression as well as skeletal phenotypes
were characterized in two transgenic lines. No significant skeletal anomalies
were found in transgenic compared to wildtype mice. Quantitative and in situ
hybridization analyses revealed that Tg(Col2a1-SHOX), however, affected
extracellular matrix gene expression during early limb development, suggesting a 
role for SHOX in growth plate assembly and extracellular matrix composition
during long bone development. For instance, we could show that the connective
tissue growth factor gene Ctgf, a gene involved in chondrogenic and angiogenic
differentiation, is transcriptionally regulated by SHOX in transgenic mice. This 
finding was confirmed in human NHDF and U2OS cells and chicken micromass culture,
demonstrating the value of the SHOX-transgenic mouse for the characterization of 
SHOX-dependent genes and pathways in early limb development.

PMCID: PMC4041798
PMID: 24887312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Hum Genet. 2014 Sep;133(9):1075-82. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1448-y. Epub 2014 May
22.

Amniotic fluid RNA gene expression profiling provides insights into the phenotype
of Turner syndrome.

Massingham LJ(1), Johnson KL, Scholl TM, Slonim DK, Wick HC, Bianchi DW.

Author information: 
(1)Mother Infant Research Institute and Department of Pediatrics, Floating
Hospital for Children at Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA,
lmassingham@lifespan.org.

Turner syndrome is a sex chromosome aneuploidy with characteristic malformations.
Amniotic fluid, a complex biological material, could contribute to the
understanding of Turner syndrome pathogenesis. In this pilot study, global gene
expression analysis of cell-free RNA in amniotic fluid supernatant was utilized
to identify specific genes/organ systems that may play a role in Turner syndrome 
pathophysiology. Cell-free RNA from amniotic fluid of five mid-trimester Turner
syndrome fetuses and five euploid female fetuses matched for gestational age was 
extracted, amplified, and hybridized onto Affymetrix(®) U133 Plus 2.0 arrays.
Significantly differentially regulated genes were identified using paired t
tests. Biological interpretation was performed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
and BioGPS gene expression atlas. There were 470 statistically significantly
differentially expressed genes identified. They were widely distributed across
the genome. XIST was significantly down-regulated (p < 0.0001); SHOX was not
differentially expressed. One of the most highly represented organ systems was
the hematologic/immune system, distinguishing the Turner syndrome transcriptome
from other aneuploidies we previously studied. Manual curation of the
differentially expressed gene list identified genes of possible pathologic
significance, including NFATC3, IGFBP5, and LDLR. Transcriptomic differences in
the amniotic fluid of Turner syndrome fetuses are due to genome-wide
dysregulation. The hematologic/immune system differences may play a role in
early-onset autoimmune dysfunction. Other genes identified with possible
pathologic significance are associated with cardiac and skeletal systems, which
are known to be affected in females with Turner syndrome. The discovery-driven
approach described here may be useful in elucidating novel mechanisms of disease 
in Turner syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4384642
PMID: 24850140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Horm Res Paediatr. 2014;81(6):416-21. doi: 10.1159/000357141. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

Pseudoisodicentric Xp chromosome [46,X,psu idic(X)(q21.1)] and its effect on
growth and pubertal development.

van der Kamp HJ(1), Kant SG, Ruivenkamp CA, Gijsbers AC, Haring D, Oostdijk W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Most isodicentric (Xp) and (Xq) chromosomes occur as a mosaic with a 
45,X cell line. Patients with a nonmosaic 46,X,idic(Xq) are rare.
CASES: The first girl was referred at 13 years with a short stature and pubertal 
delay (M1, P2, A1). Her height was 141.6 cm (-3.1 SDS). Ovarian failure was
present. The second girl was referred because of her short stature at 12.5 years.
Her height was 142.2 cm (-2.4 SDS). She had spontaneous puberty (M3, P1, A1).
RESULTS: In both girls, conventional karyotyping of lymphocytes revealed an
aberrant X chromosome consisting of twice the short arm and a small part of the
long arm of the X chromosome [nonmosaic 46,X,psu idic(X)(q21.1)]. FISH analysis
of the aberrant X chromosome showed the presence of two centromeres, two copies
of the XIST gene and two copies of the SHOX gene.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of two XIST genes on the isodicentric X chromosome with
Xq deletion indicates the inactivation of this chromosome. This inactivation also
concerned the pseudoautosomal regions which caused haploinsufficiency of the SHOX
genes. The girls were treated with growth hormones. The critical region (Xq23 to 
Xq28) for the ovarian function was deleted in both patients, but the gonadal
function was variable. .

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 24714330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Andrologia. 2015 May;47(4):477-81. doi: 10.1111/and.12278. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

Clinical and cytogenomic studies in a case of infertility associated with a
nonmosaic dicentric Y chromosome.

Cui YX(1), Wang WP, Li TF, Li WW, Wu QY, Li N, Zhang C, Yao Q, Hu YA, Xia XY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University School 
of Medicine, Nanjing, China.

In this study, a short stature male with infertility is reported. Semen analysis 
and serum concentrations of FSH, LH, T and PRL were estimated. Chromosome
analysis was performed on lymphocytes obtained from both the male and his
parents. Cytogenomic studies were performed by fluorescent in situ hybridisation 
and the CytoScan()  HD array analysis to detect Y chromosomal rearrangements and
copy number mutations. Semen analysis showed severe oligozoospermia. Numerous
spermatogenic cells were observed in the semen, and approximately 60% of the
cells examined in semen were primary spermatocytes, showing spermatogenic arrest 
at the primary spermatocyte level. Cytogenomic studies of blood revealed his
karyotype which was 46,X,i(Y) (p11.32) (Yqter<U+2192>Yp11.32::Yp11.32<U+2192>Yqter).ish
(DYZ3++, SRY++, SHOX-). array (PLCXD1<U+2192>SHOX) ×1,(SRY <U+2192>GOLGA2P3Y)×2, (DHRSX<U+2192> ASMT, 
SPRY3 <U+2192>IL9R)×3. The rearrangement Y chromosome is de novo. This is the first case
reported with a nonmosaic 46,X, i (Y) (p11.32), which will be useful to estimate 
the infertility phenotype-molecular karyotype correlation. Haploinsufficiency of 
short stature homeobox-containing gene is primarily responsible for the short
stature. Aberrations in pseudoautosomal region 1 on the rearranged Y chromosome
may result in the deficiency of X-Y pairing or recombination, ultimately lead to 
the spermatogenic failure.

© 2014 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 24698150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2014 Mar;2(2):95-102. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.39. Epub 2013 Oct 
14.

SHOX gene and conserved noncoding element deletions/duplications in Colombian
patients with idiopathic short stature.

Sandoval GT(1), Jaimes GC(2), Barrios MC(3), Cespedes C(4), Velasco HM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, School of Medicine, Master in Human Genetics,
Universidad Nacional de Colombia Colombia. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital 
Militar Central Colombia. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital De La
Misericordia, Universidad Nacional De Colombia Colombia. (4)Department of
Pediatrics, Hospital San Ignacio, Pontificia Universidad Javeriana Colombia.

SHOX gene mutations or haploinsufficiency cause a wide range of phenotypes such
as Leri Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), Turner syndrome, and disproportionate
short stature (DSS). However, this gene has also been found to be mutated in
cases of idiopathic short stature (ISS) with a 3-15% frequency. In this study,
the multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) technique was
employed to determine the frequency of SHOX gene mutations and their conserved
noncoding elements (CNE) in Colombian patients with ISS. Patients were referred
from different centers around the county. From a sample of 62 patients, 8.1%
deletions and insertions in the intragenic regions and in the CNE were found.
This result is similar to others published in other countries. Moreover, an
isolated case of CNE 9 duplication and a new intron 6b deletion in another
patient, associated with ISS, are described. This is one of the first studies of 
a Latin American population in which deletions/duplications of the SHOX gene and 
its CNE are examined in patients with ISS.

PMCID: PMC3960050
PMID: 24689071  [PubMed]


45. Hum Reprod. 2014 May;29(5):1114-5. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deu037. Epub 2014 Mar 14.

Reply: Y-chromosome microdeletions are not associated with SHOX
haploinsufficiency.

Krausz C(1), Chianese C, Lo Giacco D, Tüttelmann F, Ferlin A, Ntostis P, Vinci S,
Balercia G, Ars E, Ruiz-Castañé E, Giglio S, Kliesch S, Forti G.

Author information: 
(1)Andrology Unit, Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences,
University of Florence, Italy.

Comment on
    Hum Reprod. 2014 May;29(5):1113-4.
    Hum Reprod. 2013 Nov;28(11):3155-60.

PMID: 24634250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Hum Reprod. 2014 May;29(5):1113-4. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deu038. Epub 2014 Mar 14.

Y-chromosome microdeletions are not associated with SHOX haploinsufficiency.

Jorgez CJ(1), Weedin JW, Sahin A, Tannour-Louet M, Han S, Bournat JC, Mielnik A, 
Cheung SW, Nangia A, Schlegel PN, Lipshultz LI, Lamb DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Comment in
    Hum Reprod. 2014 May;29(5):1114-5.

Comment on
    Hum Reprod. 2013 Nov;28(11):3155-60.

PMID: 24634249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Genet Couns. 2013;24(4):449-54.

Genetic evaluation of an infertile male with a ring Y chromosome and SHOX
deletion.

Zamani AG, Tuncez E, Yildirim MS, Acar A.

PMID: 24551992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 8;9(1):e83104. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083104. eCollection 
2014.

NPPB and ACAN, two novel SHOX2 transcription targets implicated in skeletal
development.

Aza-Carmona M(1), Barca-Tierno V(1), Hisado-Oliva A(1), Belinchón A(1),
Gorbenko-del Blanco D(2), Rodriguez JI(3), Benito-Sanz S(1), Campos-Barros A(1), 
Heath KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario
La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain ; Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto Carlos III,
Madrid, Spain. (2)Dept. Celular Biology, Immunology & Neurosciences, Facultad de 
Medicina, Universidad de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (3)Department of Pathology,
Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.

SHOX and SHOX2 transcription factors are highly homologous, with even identical
homeodomains. Genetic alterations in SHOX result in two skeletal dysplasias;
Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD), while no
human genetic disease has been linked to date with SHOX2. SHOX2 is, though,
involved in skeletal development, as shown by different knockout mice models. Due
to the high homology between SHOX and SHOX2, and their functional redundancy
during heart development, we postulated that SHOX2 might have the same
transcriptional targets and cofactors as SHOX in limb development. We selected
two SHOX transcription targets regulated by different mechanisms: 1) the
natriuretic peptide precursor B gene (NPPB) involved in the endochondral
ossification signalling and directly activated by SHOX; and 2) Aggrecan (ACAN), a
major component of cartilage extracellular matrix, regulated by the cooperation
of SHOX with the SOX trio (SOX5, SOX6 and SOX9) via the protein interaction
between SOX5/SOX6 and SHOX. Using the luciferase assay we have demonstrated that 
SHOX2, like SHOX, regulates NPPB directly whilst activates ACAN via its
cooperation with the SOX trio. Subsequently, we have identified and characterized
the protein domains implicated in the SHOX2 dimerization and also its protein
interaction with SOX5/SOX6 and SHOX using the yeast-two hybrid and
co-immunoprecipitation assays. Immunohistochemistry of human fetal growth plates 
from different time points demonstrated that SHOX2 is coexpressed with SHOX and
the members of the SOX trio. Despite these findings, no mutation was identified
in SHOX2 in a cohort of 83 LWD patients with no known molecular defect,
suggesting that SHOX2 alterations do not cause LWD. In conclusion, our work has
identified the first cofactors and two new transcription targets of SHOX2 in limb
development, and we hypothesize a time- and tissue-specific functional redundancy
between SHOX and SHOX2.

PMCID: PMC3885427
PMID: 24421874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Andrologia. 2015 Feb;47(1):116-20. doi: 10.1111/and.12219. Epub 2014 Jan 9.

Different clinical presentation of Klinefelter's syndrome in monozygotic twins.

Benaiges D(1), Pedro-Botet J, Hernández E, Tarragón S, Chillarón JJ, Flores
Le-Roux JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain;
Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Comarcal de l'Alt Penedés, Barcelona,
Spain; Department of Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain; IMIM (Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions Mèdiques), Barcelona,
Spain.

There is a wide variability in the clinical presentation of Klinefelter's
syndrome. We report the case of a 45-year-old man who was incidentally diagnosed 
a 47,XXY/46,XY karyotype in a bone marrow aspiration (case 1). He presented
hypogonadic features with undetectable testosterone levels and a height in
accordance with mid-parental height. He had a monozygous sibling (case 2) who did
not show clinical signs of hypogonadism and whose height exceeded mid-parental
height. Both patients had presented language disorders since childhood. The
karyotype of lymphocytes in peripheral blood of both subjects was compatible with
mosaic Klinefelter's syndrome (46,XY/47,XXY). Testosterone replacement was
initiated in case 1. Lack of testicular involvement due to mosaicism and the
overexpression of the SHOX gene in case 2 could explain the marked differences in
phenotype in these homozygous twins.

© 2014 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 24404777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Sep;22(9):1077-84. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.295. Epub 2014
Jan 8.

Structural and numerical changes of chromosome X in patients with esophageal
atresia.

Brosens E(1), de Jong EM(1), Barakat TS(2), Eussen BH(3), D'haene B(4), De Baere 
E(4), Verdin H(4), Poddighe PJ(3), Galjaard RJ(3), Gribnau J(2), Brooks AS(3),
Tibboel D(5), de Klein A(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre-Sophia Children's
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands [2] Department of Paediatric Surgery,
Erasmus Medical Centre-Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Reproduction and Development, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands. (3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical
Centre-Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Center for
Medical Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Erasmus Medical Centre-Sophia Children's
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Esophageal atresia with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) is a
relatively common birth defect often associated with additional congenital
anomalies such as vertebral, anal, cardiovascular, renal and limb defects, the
so-called VACTERL association. Yet, little is known about the causal genetic
factors. Rare case reports of gastrointestinal anomalies in children with triple 
X syndrome prompted us to survey the incidence of structural and numerical
changes of chromosome X in patients with EA/TEF. All available (n=269) karyotypes
of our large (321) EA/TEF patient cohort were evaluated for X-chromosome
anomalies. If sufficient DNA material was available, we determined genome-wide
copy number profiles with SNP array and identified subtelomeric aberrations on
the difficult to profile PAR1 region using telomere-multiplex ligation-dependent 
probe amplification. In addition, we investigated X-chromosome inactivation (XCI)
patterns and mode of inheritance of detected aberrations in selected patients.
Three EA/TEF patients had an additional maternally inherited X chromosome. These 
three female patients had normal random XCI patterns. Two male EA/TEF patients
had small inherited duplications of the XY-linked SHOX (Short stature
HOmeoboX-containing) locus. Patients were small for gestational age at birth
(<P5) and had additional, mostly VACTERL associated, anomalies. Triple X syndrome
is rarely described in patients with EA/TEF and no duplications of the SHOX gene 
were reported so far in these patients. As normal patterns of XCI were seen,
overexpression of X-linked genes that escape XCI, such as the SHOX gene, could be
pathogenic by disturbing developmental pathways.

PMCID: PMC4135408
PMID: 24398799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Dev Dyn. 2014 May;243(5):629-39. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24104. Epub 2014 Jan 28.

Tbx4 interacts with the short stature homeobox gene Shox2 in limb development.

Glaser A(1), Arora R, Hoffmann S, Li L, Gretz N, Papaioannou VE, Rappold GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND: The short stature homeodomain transcription factors SHOX and SHOX2
play key roles in limb formation. To gain more insight into genes regulated by
Shox2 during limb development, we analyzed expression profiles of WT and Shox2-/-
mouse embryonic limbs and identified the T-Box transcription factor Tbx4 as a
potential downstream target. Tbx4 is known to exert essential functions in
skeletal and muscular hindlimb development. In humans, haploinsufficiency of TBX4
causes small patella syndrome, a skeletal dysplasia characterized by anomalies of
the knee, pelvis, and foot.
RESULTS: Here, we demonstrate an inhibitory regulatory effect of Shox2 on Tbx4
specifically in the forelimbs. We also show that Tbx4 activates Shox2 expression 
in fore- and hindlimbs, suggesting Shox2 as a feedback modulator of Tbx4. Using
EMSA studies, we find that Tbx4/TBX4 is able to bind to distinct T-box binding
sites within the mouse and human Shox2/SHOX2 promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data identifies Tbx4 as a novel transcriptional activator of
Shox2 during murine fore- and hindlimb development. Tbx4 is also regulated by
Shox2 specifically in the forelimb bud possibly via a feedback mechanism. These
data extend our understanding of the role and regulation of Tbx4 and Shox2 in
limb development and limb associated diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4232222
PMID: 24347445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Feb;164A(2):505-10. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36284. Epub 2013
Dec 5.

Compound heterozygous deletions in pseudoautosomal region 1 in an infant with
mild manifestations of langer mesomelic dysplasia.

Tsuchiya T(1), Shibata M, Numabe H, Jinno T, Nakabayashi K, Nishimura G, Nagai T,
Ogata T, Fukami M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Pediatrics, Dokkyo Medical
University Koshigaya Hospital, Koshigaya, Japan.

Haploinsufficiency of SHOX on the short arm pseudoautosomal region (PAR1) leads
to Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), and nullizygosity of SHOX results in
Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD). Molecular defects of LWD/LMD include various
microdeletions in PAR1 that involve exons and/or the putative upstream or
downstream enhancer regions of SHOX, as well as several intragenic mutations.
Here, we report on a Japanese male infant with mild manifestations of LMD and
hitherto unreported microdeletions in PAR1. Clinical analysis revealed mesomelic 
short stature with various radiological findings indicative of LMD. Molecular
analyses identified compound heterozygous deletions, that is, a maternally
inherited ~46<U+2009>kb deletion involving the upstream region and exons 1-5 of SHOX,
and a paternally inherited ~500<U+2009>kb deletion started from a position ~300<U+2009>kb
downstream from SHOX. In silico analysis revealed that the downstream deletion
did not affect the known putative enhancer regions of SHOX, although it
encompassed several non-coding elements which were well conserved among various
species with SHOX orthologs. These results provide the possibility of the
presence of a novel enhancer for SHOX in the genomic region ~300 to ~800<U+2009>kb
downstream of the start codon.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24311385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Horm Res Paediatr. 2013;80(6):449-56. doi: 10.1159/000355411. Epub 2013 Nov 26.

The sitting height/height ratio for age in healthy and short individuals and its 
potential role in selecting short children for SHOX analysis.

Malaquias AC(1), Scalco RC, Fontenele EG, Costalonga EF, Baldin AD, Braz AF,
Funari MF, Nishi MY, Guerra-Junior G, Mendonca BB, Arnhold IJ, Jorge AA.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia-Genetica, LIM/25, Disciplina de Endocrinologia da
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo (FMUSP), Hospital das Clinicas
da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

AIMS: To determine the presence of abnormal body proportion, assessed by sitting 
height/height ratio for age and sex (SH/H SDS) in healthy and short individuals, 
and to estimate its role in selecting short children for SHOX analysis.
METHODS: Height, sitting height and weight were evaluated in 1,771 healthy
children, 128 children with idiopathic short stature (ISS), 58 individuals with
SHOX defects (SHOX-D) and 193 females with Turner syndrome (TS).
RESULTS: The frequency of abnormal body proportion, defined as SH/H SDS >2, in
ISS children was 16.4% (95% CI 10-22%), which was higher than in controls (1.4%, 
95% CI 0.8-1.9%, p < 0.001). The SHOX gene was evaluated in all disproportionate 
ISS children and defects in this gene were observed in 19%. Among patients with
SHOX-D, 88% of children (95% CI 75-100%) and 96% of adults had body
disproportion. In contrast, SH/H SDS >2 were less common in children (48%, 95% CI
37-59%) and in adults (28%, 95% CI 20-36%) with TS.
CONCLUSION: Abnormal body proportions were observed in almost all individuals
with SHOX-D, 50% of females with TS and 16% of children considered ISS. Defects
in SHOX gene were identified in 19% of ISS children with SH/H SDS >2, suggesting 
that SH/H SDS is a useful tool to select children for undergoing SHOX molecular
studies.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24296787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Horm Res Paediatr. 2013;80(6):431-42. doi: 10.1159/000355410. Epub 2013 Nov 26.

Alu-mediated recombination defect in IGF1R: haploinsufficiency in a patient with 
short stature.

Harmel EM(1), Binder G, Barnikol-Oettler A, Caliebe J, Kiess W, Losekoot M, Ranke
MB, Rappold GA, Schlicke M, Stobbe H, Wit JM, Pfäffle R, Klammt J.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital for Children and Adolescents, Centre for Paediatric
Research, Leipzig, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The insulin-like growth factor (IGF) receptor (IGF1R) is essential
for normal development and growth. IGF1R mutations cause IGF-1 resistance
resulting in intrauterine and postnatal growth failure. The phenotypic spectrum
related to IGF1R mutations remains to be fully understood.
METHODS: Auxological and endocrinological data of a patient identified previously
were assessed. The patient's fibroblasts were studied to characterize the IGF1R
deletion, mRNA fate, protein expression and signalling capabilities.
RESULTS: The boy, who carries a heterozygous IGF1R exon 6 deletion caused by Alu 
element-mediated recombination and a heterozygous SHOX variant (p.Met240Ile), was
born appropriate for gestational age but developed proportionate short stature
postnatally. IGF-1 levels were low-normal. None of the stigmata associated with
SHOX deficiency or sporadically observed in IGF1R mutation carriers were present.
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay led to a substantial decline of IGF1R dosage and
IGF-1-dependent receptor autophosphorylation but not impaired downstream
signalling.
CONCLUSION: We present the first detailed report of an intragenic IGF1R deletion 
identified in a patient who, apart from short stature, deviates from all
established markers that qualify a growth-retarded child for IGF1R analysis.
Although such children will usually escape routine clinical mutation screenings, 
they can contribute to the understanding of factors and mechanisms that cooperate
with the IGF1R.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24296753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cell Tissue Res. 2014 Feb;355(2):345-54. doi: 10.1007/s00441-013-1743-2. Epub
2013 Nov 19.

Replacing Shox2 with human SHOX leads to congenital disc degeneration of the
temporomandibular joint in mice.

Li X(1), Liu H, Gu S, Liu C, Sun C, Zheng Y, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Academy of Integrative Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian, 350122, People's Republic of China.

The temporomandibular joint (TMJ) consists in the glenoid fossa arising from the 
otic capsule through intramembranous ossification, the fibrocartilaginous disc
and the condyle, which is derived from the secondary cartilage by endochondral
ossification. We have reported previously that cranial neural-crest-specific
inactivation of the homeobox gene Shox2, which is expressed in the mesenchymal
cells of the maxilla-mandibular junction and later in the progenitor cells and
perichondrium of the developing chondyle, leads to dysplasia and ankylosis of the
TMJ and that replacement of the mouse Shox2 with the human SHOX gene rescues the 
dysplastic and ankylosis phenotypes but results in a prematurely worn out
articular disc. In this study, we investigate the molecular and cellular bases
for the prematurely worn out articular disc in the TMJ of mice carrying the human
SHOX replacement allele in the Shox2 locus (termed Shox2 (SHOX-KI/KI)). We find
that the developmental process and expression of several key genes in the TMJ of 
Shox2 (SHOX-KI/KI) mice are similar to that of controls. However, the disc of the
Shox2 (SHOX-KI/KI) TMJ exhibits a reduced level of Collagen I and Aggrecan,
accompanied by increased activities of matrix metalloproteinases and a
down-regulation of Ihh expression. Dramatically increased cell apoptosis in the
disc was also observed. These combinatory cellular and molecular defects appear
to contribute to the observed disc phenotype, suggesting that, although human
SHOX can exert similar functions to mouse Shox2 in regulating early TMJ
development, it apparently has a distinct function in the regulation of those
molecules that are involved in tissue homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3945842
PMID: 24248941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Gene. 2014 Feb 1;535(1):70-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.10.020. Epub 2013 Nov 2.

Chromosomal microarray analysis of consecutive individuals with autism spectrum
disorders or learning disability presenting for genetic services.

Roberts JL(1), Hovanes K(2), Dasouki M(3), Manzardo AM(1), Butler MG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Psychiatry, Behavioral Sciences and Pediatrics, The University 
of Kansas, Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA. (2)CombiMatrix Diagnostics,
Irvine, CA, USA. (3)Department of Neurology, The University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, KS, USA; King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (4)Departments of Psychiatry, Behavioral Sciences
and Pediatrics, The University of Kansas, Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA.
Electronic address: mbutler4@kumc.edu.

Chromosomal microarray analysis is now commonly used in clinical practice to
identify copy number variants (CNVs) in the human genome. We report our
experience with the use of the 105 K and 180K oligonucleotide microarrays in 215 
consecutive patients referred with either autism or autism spectrum disorders
(ASD) or developmental delay/learning disability for genetic services at the
University of Kansas Medical Center during the past 4 years (2009-2012). Of the
215 patients [140 males and 75 females (male/female ratio=1.87); 65 with ASD and 
150 with learning disability], abnormal microarray results were seen in 45
individuals (21%) with a total of 49 CNVs. Of these findings, 32 represented a
known diagnostic CNV contributing to the clinical presentation and 17 represented
non-diagnostic CNVs (variants of unknown significance). Thirteen patients with
ASD had a total of 14 CNVs, 6 CNVs recognized as diagnostic and 8 as
non-diagnostic. The most common chromosome involved in the ASD group was
chromosome 15. For those with a learning disability, 32 patients had a total of
35 CNVs. Twenty-six of the 35 CNVs were classified as a known diagnostic CNV,
usually a deletion (n=20). Nine CNVs were classified as an unknown non-diagnostic
CNV, usually a duplication (n=8). For the learning disability subgroup,
chromosomes 2 and 22 were most involved. Thirteen out of 65 patients (20%) with
ASD had a CNV compared with 32 out of 150 patients (21%) with a learning
disability. The frequency of chromosomal microarray abnormalities compared by
subject group or gender was not statistically different. A higher percentage of
individuals with a learning disability had clinical findings of seizures,
dysmorphic features and microcephaly, but not statistically significant. While
both groups contained more males than females, a significantly higher percentage 
of males were present in the ASD group.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4423794
PMID: 24188901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Mar 15;23(6):1619-30. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt552. Epub 2013 Nov 
1.

SHOX triggers the lysosomal pathway of apoptosis via oxidative stress.

Hristov G(1), Marttila T, Durand C, Niesler B, Rappold GA, Marchini A.

Author information: 
(1)Tumour Virology Division F010, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 242, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.

The SHOX gene encodes for a transcription factor important for normal bone
development. Mutations in the gene are associated with idiopathic short stature
and are responsible for the growth failure and skeletal defects found in the
majority of patients with Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and Langer mesomelic
dysplasia. SHOX is expressed in growth plate chondrocytes where it is supposed to
modulate the proliferation, differentiation and cell death of these cells.
Supporting this hypothesis, in vitro studies have shown that SHOX expression
induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in both transformed and primary cells. In
this study, we further characterized the cell death mechanisms triggered by SHOX 
and compared them with the effects induced by one clinically relevant mutant form
of SHOX, detected in LWD patients (SHOX R153L) and a SHOX C-terminally truncated 
version (L185X). We show that SHOX expression in U2OS osteosarcoma cells leads to
oxidative stress that, in turn, induces lysosomal membrane rupture with release
of active cathepsin B to the cytosol and subsequent activation of the intrinsic
apoptotic pathway characterized by mitochondrial membrane permeabilization and
caspase activation. Importantly, cells expressing SHOX R153L or L185X did not
display any of these features. Given the fact that many of the events observed in
SHOX-expressing cells also characterize the complex cell death process occurring 
in the growth plate during endochondral ossification, our findings further
support the hypothesis that SHOX may play a central role in the regulation of the
cell death pathways activated during long bone development.

PMID: 24186869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Endocr J. 2013;60(12):1329-34. Epub 2013 Oct 3.

Critical role of Yp inversion in PRKX/PRKY-mediated Xp;Yp translocation in a
patient with 45,X testicular disorder of sex development.

Nakashima S(1), Watanabe Y, Okada J, Ono H, Nagata E, Fukami M, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu
431-3192, Japan.

45,X testicular disorder of sex development (TDSD), previously known as 45,X
maleness, with unbalanced Xp;Yp translocation is an extremely rare condition
caused by concomitant occurrence of loss of an X chromosome of maternal origin
and an aberrant Xp;Yp translocation during paternal meiosis. We identified a
Japanese male infant with an apparently 45,X karyotype who exhibited
chondrodysplasia punctata and growth failure. Cytogenetic analysis revealed a
45,X.ish der(X)t(X;Y)(p22.33;p11.2)(DXZ1+,SRY+) karyotype. Array comparative
genome hybridization analysis showed a simple Xp terminal deletion involving SHOX
and ARSE with the breakpoint just centromeric to PRKX, and an apparently complex 
Yp translocation with the middle Yp breakpoint just telomeric to PRKY and the
centromeric and the telomeric Yp breakpoints around the long inverted repeats for
the generation of a common paracentric Yp inversion. Subsequently, a long PCR
product was obtained with an X-specific and a Y-specific primers that were
designed on the assumption of the presence of a Yp inversion that permits the
alignment of PRKX and PRKY in the same direction, and the translocation fusion
point was determined to reside within a 246 bp X-Y homologous segment at the "hot
spot A" in the 5' region of PRKX/PRKY, by sequential direct sequencing for the
long PCR product. These results argue not only for the presence of rare 45,X-TDSD
with Xp;Yp translocation, but also for a critical role of a common paracentric Yp
inversion in the occurrence of PRKX/PRKY-mediated unbalanced Xp;Yp translocation.

PMID: 24088663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 May;22(5):602-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.203. Epub 2013 Sep 
25.

Copy number variants in patients with short stature.

van Duyvenvoorde HA(1), Lui JC(2), Kant SG(3), Oostdijk W(4), Gijsbers AC(3),
Hoffer MJ(3), Karperien M(5), Walenkamp MJ(6), Noordam C(7), Voorhoeve PG(8),
Mericq V(9), Pereira AM(10), Claahsen-van de Grinten HL(7), van Gool SA(4),
Breuning MH(3), Losekoot M(3), Baron J(2), Ruivenkamp CA(3), Wit JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands [2] Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands [3] Department of Clinical
Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (2)Section
on Growth and Development, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD, USA. (3)Department of Clinical
Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. (5)Department of Developmental BioEngineering, MIRA Institute for
Biomedical Technology and Technical Medicine, University of Twente, Enschede, The
Netherlands. (6)Department of Pediatrics, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Radboud University
Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (8)Department of Pediatrics, 
Canisius-Wilhelmina Hospital, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (9)Institute of Maternal
and Child Disease, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile. (10)Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands.

Height is a highly heritable and classic polygenic trait. Recent genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) have revealed that at least 180 genetic variants
influence adult height. However, these variants explain only about 10% of the
phenotypic variation in height. Genetic analysis of short individuals can lead to
the discovery of novel rare gene defects with a large effect on growth. In an
effort to identify novel genes associated with short stature, genome-wide
analysis for copy number variants (CNVs), using single-nucleotide polymorphism
arrays, in 162 patients (149 families) with short stature was performed.
Segregation analysis was performed if possible, and genes in CNVs were compared
with information from GWAS, gene expression in rodents' growth plates and
published information. CNVs were detected in 40 families. In six families, a
known cause of short stature was found (SHOX deletion or duplication, IGF1R
deletion), in two combined with a de novo potentially pathogenic CNV.
Thirty-three families had one or more potentially pathogenic CNVs (n=40). In 24
of these families, segregation analysis could be performed, identifying three de 
novo CNVs and nine CNVs segregating with short stature. Four were located near
loci associated with height in GWAS (ADAMTS17, TULP4, PRKG2/BMP3 and PAPPA).
Besides six CNVs known to be causative for short stature, 40 CNVs with possible
pathogenicity were identified. Segregation studies and bioinformatics analysis
suggested various potential candidate genes.

PMCID: PMC3992565
PMID: 24065112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Horm Res Paediatr. 2013;80(4):273-80. doi: 10.1159/000354989. Epub 2013 Sep 18.

Short stature before puberty: which children should be screened for SHOX
deficiency?

Wolters B(1), Lass N, Wunsch R, Böckmann B, Austrup F, Reinehr T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition Medicine,
Vestische Hospital for Children and Adolescents Datteln, University of
Witten/Herdecke, Datteln, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: We studied the prevalence of deficiency in the short stature homeobox 
containing gene (SHOX) in prepubertal short-statured children and analyzed the
clinical and radiological signs.
METHODS: Screening for SHOX deficiency was performed in 449 prepubertal
short-statured children (54% females, aged 4-10 years) by direct sequencing and
multiplex ligation probe-dependent amplification. Children with SHOX deficiency
were compared to 1:2 age- and gender-matched prepubertal children without SHOX
deficiency with respect to left-hand radiographs and anthropometrics including
different ratios to height and proposed scores.
RESULTS: We identified 22 (4.9%) patients with SHOX deficiency (64% point
mutations). Children with SHOX deficiency demonstrated a mesomelic shortening of 
extremities. Lower leg lengths but not forearm length was reduced in children <8 
years with SHOX deficiency. 36% of all children and none of the children <8 years
with SHOX deficiency demonstrated any typical radiologic sign. Increased sitting 
height-to-height ratio and decreased extremities-to-trunk ratio demonstrated the 
best positive and negative predictive values to identify SHOX deficiency.
CONCLUSIONS: Screening for SHOX deficiency seems rational, especially in children
with increased sitting height-to-height ratio or decreased extremities-to-trunk
ratio. These criteria were also valid in young children.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24051572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2013 Oct;25(5):382-7. doi:
10.1097/GCO.0b013e328363d67f.

Management of vaginal agenesis.

Edmonds DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Queen Charlotte's and Chelsea Hospital, London, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome is undergoing new
research outcomes involving genetics and management.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent literature supports a polygenic multifactorial genetic
basis for the syndrome. Management is now predominantly by vaginal dilators and
nonsurgical, but holistic. The future of uterine transplantation is discussed.
SUMMARY: New developments open new possibilities for understanding the genetic
basis of the disease, and research in this area will continue. Management in
terms of fertility may have an added dimension if uterine transplantation and
successful pregnancy outcome can be proven.

PMID: 24018875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Hum Reprod. 2013 Nov;28(11):3155-60. doi: 10.1093/humrep/det322. Epub 2013 Sep 5.

Y-chromosome microdeletions are not associated with SHOX haploinsufficiency.

Chianese C(1), Lo Giacco D, Tüttelmann F, Ferlin A, Ntostis P, Vinci S, Balercia 
G, Ars E, Ruiz-Castañé E, Giglio S, Forti G, Kliesch S, Krausz C.

Author information: 
(1)Andrology Unit, Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences,
University of Florence, Florence 50139, Italy.

Comment in
    Hum Reprod. 2014 May;29(5):1113-4.
    Hum Reprod. 2014 May;29(5):1114-5.

STUDY QUESTION: Are Y-chromosome microdeletions associated with SHOX
haploinsufficiency, thus representing a risk of skeletal anomalies for the
carriers and their male descendents?
SUMMARY ANSWER: The present study shows that SHOX haploinsufficiency is unlikely 
to be associated with Y-chromosome microdeletions.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Y-chromosome microdeletions are not commonly known as a
major molecular genetic cause of any pathological condition except spermatogenic 
failure. However, it has been recently proposed that they are associated not only
with infertility but also with anomalies in the pseudoautosomal regions (PAR),
among which SHOX haploinsufficiency stands out with a frequency of 5.4% in
microdeletion carriers bearing a normal karyotype. This finding implies that sons
fathered by men with Y-chromosome defects will not only exhibit fertility
problems, but might also suffer from SHOX-related conditions.
STUDY DESIGN: Five European laboratories (Florence, Münster, Barcelona, Padova
and Ancona), routinely performing Y-chromosome microdeletion screening, were
enrolled in a multicenter study.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: PAR-linked and SHOX copy number
variations (CNVs) were analyzed in 224 patients carrying Y-chromosome
microdeletions and 112 controls with an intact Y chromosome, using customized
X-chromosome-specific array-CGH platforms and/or qPCR assays for SHOX and SRY
genes.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Our data show that 220 out of 224 (98.2%)
microdeletion carriers had a normal SHOX copy number, as did all the controls. No
SHOX deletions were found in any of the examined subjects (patients as well as
controls), thus excluding an association with SHOX haploinsufficiency. SHOX
duplications were detected in 1.78% of patients (n = 4), of whom two had an
abnormal and two a normal karyotype. This might suggest that Y-chromosome
microdeletions have a higher incidence for SHOX duplications, irrespective of the
patient's karyotype. However, the only clinical condition observed in our four
SHOX-duplicated patients was infertility.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The number of controls analyzed is rather low
to assess whether the SHOX duplications found in the two men with Y-chromosome
microdeletions and a normal karyotype represent a neutral polymorphism or are
actually associated with the presence of the microdeletion.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Men suffering from infertility due to the
presence of Y-chromosome microdeletions can resort to artificial reproductive
technology (ART) to father their biological children. However, infertile couples 
must be aware of the risks implied and this makes genetic counseling a crucial
step in the patient's management. This study does not confirm previous alarming
data that showed an association between Y-chromosome microdeletions and SHOX
haploinsufficiency. Our results imply that deletion carriers have no augmented
risk of SHOX-related pathologies (short stature and skeletal anomalies) and
indicate that there is no need for radical changes in genetic counseling of Yq
microdeletion carriers attempting ART, since the only risk established so far for
their male offspring remains impaired spermatogenesis.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): This work was supported by the Italian
Ministry of University (grant PRIN 2010-2012 to C.K.), Tuscan Regional Health
Research Program ('Progetto Salute 2009') to G.F., the Spanish Ministry of Health
(grant FIS-11/02254) and the European Union 'Reprotrain' Marie Curie Network
(project number: 289880 to C.K.). The authors declare that no conflicting
interests exist.

PMID: 24008148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Oct;161A(10):2594-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36097. Epub 2013 
Aug 5.

De novo complex X chromosome rearrangement unmasking maternally inherited CSF2RA 
deletion in a girl with pulmonary alveolar proteinosis.

Auger J(1), Bonnet C, Valduga M, Philippe C, Bertolo-Houriez E, Beri-Dexheimer M,
Schweitzer C, Leheup B, Jonveaux P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nancy, 
Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, France; Service de Médecine Infantile 3 et Génétique
Clinique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nancy, Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy,
France.

We report on a 3-year-old girl with a de novo complex X chromosome rearrangement 
associated with congenital pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) and short
stature. Array comparative genome hybridization and FISH analyses contributed to 
characterize the complex rearrangement consisting of a 7.37<U+2009>Mb terminal deletion 
of Xp22.33p22.2, a 17.3<U+2009>Mb interstitial inverted duplication of Xp22.2p21.3, and 
a 10.14<U+2009>Mb duplication of Xq27.3q28. PCR analysis of microsatellite markers
supported a paternal origin of the X chromosome rearrangement. A pre-meiotic
two-step mechanism may explain the occurrence of this complex X rearrangement: an
inverted duplication deletion event on Xp, and duplication of the Xq27.3qter
region through a telomere capture event stabilizing the broken chromosome Xp end.
The girl has also inherited from her healthy mother an X chromosome with a colony
stimulating factor 2 receptor, alpha (CSF2RA) gene deletion. Consistent with the 
recessive mode of inheritance, the de novo paternal Xp22.33p22.2 deletion
combined to the maternally inherited CSF2RA gene deletion led to homozygous
deletion of CSF2RA and PAP diagnosis in the girl. The Xp deletion encompasses the
pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1) which contains genes that escape X inactivation. 
Short stature homeobox (SHOX) haploinsufficiency explains growth retardation.
Absence of other symptoms in relation to the X deletion/amplification is most
probably due to skewed X inactivation. Finally, inherited deletions may unmask
rare pathogenic genomic rearrangement and contribute to clinical phenotypes by a 
recessive mode of gene action.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23918747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2014 Apr;33(2):71-83. doi: 10.3109/15513815.2013.807322.
Epub 2013 Jul 24.

Langer mesomelic dysplasia in early fetuses: two cases and a literature review.

Ambrosetti F(1), Palicelli A, Bulfamante G, Rivasi F.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomia Patologica, Oncologia, Reggio Emilia, Italy.

In the article, we report the autoptic, histological and radiographic phenotype
of two fetuses (22 and 12 weeks) with Langer mesomelic dysplasia, a homozygous
deletion of the 3' enhancer of the SHOX gene, and consanguineous parents affected
by Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis, performing a literature review of the primary
forms of mesomelic dysplasia. A proper identification of the type of mesomelic
dysplasia is important for genetic and reproductive counseling, estimation of
child growth and prevention and/or treatment of complications. A competent
pathologist could provide important diagnostic information, orienting or
confirming the echographic or genetic suspect, sometimes suggesting diagnostic
hypothesis concerning parental unidentified congenital syndromes.

PMID: 23883335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Pediatr. 2013 Oct;163(4):1174-8.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2013.06.005. Epub 2013
Jul 19.

Single-nucleotide polymorphism array-based characterization of ring chromosome
18.

Spreiz A(1), Guilherme RS, Castellan C, Green A, Rittinger O, Wellek B, Utermann 
B, Erdel M, Fauth C, Haberlandt E, Kim CA, Kulikowski LD, Meloni VA, Utermann G, 
Zschocke J, Melaragno MI, Kotzot D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular and
Clinical Pharmacology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.

OBJECTIVE: To study genotype-phenotype correlation of ring chromosome 18 [r(18)] 
in 9 patients with 46,XN karyotype.
STUDY DESIGN: In 9 patients with a de novo 46,XN,r(18) karyotype (7 females, 2
males), we performed high-resolution single-nucleotide polymorphism array
analysis (Illumina Human Omni1-QuadV1 array in 6 patients, Affymetrix 6.0 array
in 3 patients), investigation of parental origin, and genotype-phenotype
correlation.
RESULTS: No breakpoint was recurrent. Single metaphases with loss of the ring,
double rings, or secondarily rearranged rings were found in some cases, but true 
mosaicism was present in none of these cases. In 3 patients, additional
duplications in 18p (of 1.4 Mb, 2 Mb, and 5.8 Mb) were detected. In 1 patient, an
additional deletion of 472 kb in Xp22.33, including the SHOX gene, was found.
Parental origin of r(18) was maternal in 2 patients and paternal in 4 patients,
and formation was most likely meiotic. Karyotype was normal in all investigated
parents (n = 15). At birth, mean maternal age was 30 years (n = 9) and mean
paternal age was 34.4 years (n = 9).
CONCLUSION: Genotype-phenotype correlation revealed extensive clinical
variability but no characteristic r(18) phenotype. Severity of clinical signs
were generally correlated with the size of the deletion. Patients with large
deletions in 18p and small deletions in 18q exhibited mainly symptoms related to 
18p-, whereas those with large deletions in 18q and small deletions in 18p had
symptoms of 18q-.

Copyright © 2013 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23876976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Pediatr Orthop B. 2014 Mar;23(2):200-2. doi: 10.1097/BPB.0b013e3283642242.

Langer's mesomelic dysplasia: a case report.

Aggarwal V(1), Aggarwal N, Venkat B.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of aOrthopedics bRadiodiagnosis, Indira Gandhi Medical College,
Shimla, India.

Langer's mesomelic dysplasia is a rare cause of disproportionate dwarfism. The
affected children have a normal intellect and life span and are usually seen
later in life for management of skeletal deformities. The diagnosis is usually
established on clinical and anthropometric analyses supported with relevant
radiological investigations. Plain radiographs and full-length scanograms are
sufficient in establishing the diagnosis. Further genetic studies are sometimes
performed for confirmation, as Leri Weill dyschondrosteosis and Langer's
mesomelic dysplasia are inherited because of mutations in the short stature
homeobox (SHOX) gene. The literature is sparse with less than a hundred cases
reported, and this case adds to the available data on this rare syndrome.

PMID: 23863349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Int J Pediatr Endocrinol. 2013;2013(1):11. doi: 10.1186/1687-9856-2013-11. Epub
2013 Jun 28.

Rare inheritance of Leri-Weill Syndrome due to crossover of short stature
Homeobox Gene (SHOX) Deletions between X and Y Chromosomes: a case report.

Censani M(1), Anyane-Yeboa K(2), Wapner R(3), Spiegel E(3), Guzman E(2),
Oberfield SE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Columbia
University Medical Center, PH5E-522, 622 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032,
USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical Genetics, Columbia
University Medical Center, 3959 Broadway, 6 N-601A, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(3)Department of Maternal Fetal Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center,
3959 Broadway, 12 Central, Room 1207, New York, NY 10032, USA. (4)Department of
Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Columbia University Medical
Center, PH5E-522, 622 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA ; Columbia
University Medical Center, 622 West 168th Street, PH 5E-522, New York, NY 10032, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Leri-Weill syndrome (LWS) is a genetic disorder caused by deletions
or mutations in the SHOX gene or by deletions downstream of the gene and is
classically characterized by short stature, mesomelic shortening of forearms and 
legs, and Madelung deformity. Correct identification of short stature
homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) deficiency in children with growth problems is
vital for appropriate initiation of growth hormone therapy.
METHOD: We report a phenotypically normal 23 day old male infant born to a father
diagnosed with Leri-Weill syndrome at age 12 years with a documented SHOX
deletion on his X chromosome. The patient's fetal long bones had been found to be
about three weeks delayed in growth on prenatal ultrasound during the second
trimester.
RESULTS: The infant underwent genetic evaluation at 23 days of life and was found
to have a SHOX deletion on Yp11.32 identified using single nucleotide
polymorphism microarray (SNP) analysis and confirmed by FISH using a SHOX gene
probe.
CONCLUSION: We report the case of a male infant diagnosed with Leri-Weill
syndrome with an unusual documented inheritance between father and son due to
crossover between X and Y chromosomes during paternal meiosis. Our case is the
youngest patient in literature documented by FISH analysis to have an X to Y
chromosome transfer and the first of these patients diagnosed prior to onset of
short stature or Madelung deformity. Our patient was identified prior to growth
failure and can now be monitored for growth abnormalities with the ability to
implement growth augmentation therapy without delay. Our case highlights the
importance of advising affected SHOX patients of risks to future offspring and
supports screening off-spring of parents carrying SHOX abnormalities regardless
of sex.

PMCID: PMC3716959
PMID: 23809065  [PubMed]


68. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2014 Aug;24(4):353-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1349056. Epub 2013 
Jun 25.

A case with bladder exstrophy and unbalanced X chromosome rearrangement.

Soderhall C(1), Lundin J(2), Lagerstedt-Robinson K(3), Grigelioniene G(2),
Lackgren G(4), Kockum CC(5), Nordenskjold A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge,
Sweden. (2)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Center for Molecular
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Department of Molecular
Medicine and Surgery, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Section of Urology, Uppsala Academic Children Hospital,
Uppsala, Sweden. (5)Department of Pediatric Surgery, University Hospital, Lund,
Sweden.

INTRODUCTION: Bladder exstrophy is a rare congenital malformation of the bladder 
and is believed to be a complex disorder with genetic and environmental
background. We describe a young adult female with an isolated bladder exstrophy
and with an X chromosome aberration. Patients and
METHODS: Karyotyping identified an X chromosome rearrangement that was further
characterized with array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and confirmed by
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis.
RESULTS: The identified X chromosome rearrangement in our index patient consists 
of a gain of chromosomal material in region Xq26.3-<U+2009>><U+2009>qter and loss in region
Xp22.12-<U+2009>><U+2009>pter. This aberration was also carried by her mother and sister, none 
with bladder exstrophy. All three have a disproportionate short stature, as
expected due to the deletion of one of the copies of the SHOX gene on Xp22.3.
X-inactivation studies revealed a complete skewed inactivation pattern in
carriers. Crossover events in the maternal germline furthermore resulted in
different genetic material on the rearranged X chromosome between the index
patient and her sister.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest an X-linked genetic risk factor for bladder
exstrophy.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 23801353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Gene. 2013 Sep 25;527(2):578-83. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.06.018. Epub 2013 Jun
18.

Xp22.3 interstitial deletion: a recognizable chromosomal abnormality encompassing
VCX3A and STS genes in a patient with X-linked ichthyosis and mental retardation.

Ben Khelifa H(1), Soyah N, Ben-Abdallah-Bouhjar I, Gritly R, Sanlaville D,
Elghezal H, Saad A, Mougou-Zerelli S.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetic and Reproductive Biology Department, Farhat Hached University
Teaching Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia.

X-linked ichthyosis is a genetic disorder affecting the skin and caused by a
deficit in the steroid sulfatase enzyme (STS), often associated with a recurrent 
microdeletion at Xp22.31. Most of the STS deleted patients have X-linked
ichthyosis as the only clinical feature and it is believed that patients with
more complex disorders including mental retardation could be present as a result 
of contiguous gene deletion. In fact, VCX3A gene, a member of the VCX (variable
charge, X chromosome) gene family, was previously proposed as the candidate gene 
for X-linked non-specific mental retardation in patients with X-linked
ichthyosis. We report on a boy with familial ichthyosis, dysmorphic features and 
moderate mental retardation with approximately 2 Mb interstitial deletion on
Xp22.3 involving VCX3A and STS genes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23791652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2013;26(7-8):729-34. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2013-0023.

Clinical and molecular characterization of Chilean patients with Léri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis.

Rodríguez FA, Unanue N, Hernandez MI, Basaure J, Heath KE, Cassorla F.

AIM: Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) is a mesomelic dysplasia with
disproportionate short stature associated with short stature homeobox-containing 
gene (SHOX) haploinsufficiency. The objective of this study was to improve the
diagnosis of patients with suspected LWD through molecular analysis.
METHODS: Twelve patients from 11 families with a clinical diagnosis of LWD were
analyzed with multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification to detect
deletions and duplications of SHOX and its enhancer regions. High resolution
melting and sequencing was employed to screen for mutations in SHOX coding exons.
RESULTS: The molecular-based screening strategy applied in these patients allowed
detection of five SHOX deletions and two previously unreported SHOX missense
mutations.
CONCLUSION: Molecular studies confirmed the clinical diagnosis of LWD in seven
out of 12 patients, which provided support for therapeutic decisions and improved
genetic counseling in their families.

PMID: 23729538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Aug;98(8):E1383-92. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-1222. Epub
2013 May 29.

GH treatment to final height produces similar height gains in patients with SHOX 
deficiency and Turner syndrome: results of a multicenter trial.

Blum WF(1), Ross JL, Zimmermann AG, Quigley CA, Child CJ, Kalifa G, Deal C, Drop 
SL, Rappold G, Cutler GB Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Eli Lilly and Company, Werner-Reimers-Strasse 2-4, D-61352 Bad Homburg,
Germany. wernblum@gmail.com

Erratum in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Dec;98(12):4992.

CONTEXT: Growth impairment in short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX)
deficiency and Turner syndrome share a similar etiology. Because of the
established effect of GH treatment on height in patients with Turner syndrome, we
hypothesized that GH therapy would also stimulate growth in patients with SHOX
deficiency.
OBJECTIVE: Our objectives were to evaluate long-term efficacy of GH treatment in 
short patients with SHOX deficiency and to compare the effect on final (adult)
height (FH) in patients with SHOX deficiency and Turner syndrome.
DESIGN AND SETTING: A prospective, multinational, open-label, randomized 3-arm
study consisting of a 2-year control period and a subsequent extension period to 
FH. The treatment groups were 1) SHOX-D-C/GH (untreated during the control
period, GH-treated during the extension), 2) SHOX-D-GH/GH, and 3) Turner-GH/GH
(GH-treated during both study periods).
PATIENTS: Short-statured prepubertal patients with genetically confirmed SHOX
deficiency (n = 49) or Turner syndrome (n = 24) who participated in the
extension.
INTERVENTION: Depending on the study arm, patients received a daily sc injection 
of 0.05 mg/kg recombinant human GH from start of the study or start of the
extension until attainment of FH or study closure.
RESULTS: Height SD score gain from start of GH treatment to FH was similar
between the combined SHOX-deficient groups (n = 28, 1.34 ± 0.18 [least-squares
mean ± SE]) and the Turner group (n = 19, 1.32 ± 0.22). In this FH population,
57% of the patients with SHOX deficiency and 32% of the patients with Turner
syndrome achieved a FH greater than -2 SD score.
CONCLUSIONS: GH treatment in short children with SHOX deficiency showed similar
long-term efficacy as seen in girls with Turner syndrome.

PMID: 23720786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jul;98(7):E1241-7. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-1113. Epub 
2013 May 10.

Prepubertal girls with Turner syndrome and children with isolated SHOX deficiency
have similar bone geometry at the radius.

Soucek O(1), Zapletalova J, Zemkova D, Snajderova M, Novotna D, Hirschfeldova K, 
Plasilova I, Kolouskova S, Rocek M, Hlavka Z, Lebl J, Sumnik Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Second Faculty ofMedicine, Charles University in
Prague and University Hospital Motol, 15006 Prague 5, Czech Republic.
ondrej.soucek@lfmotol.cuni.cz

CONTEXT: The low bone mineral density (BMD) and alterations in bone geometry
observed in patients with Turner syndrome (TS) are likely caused by
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and/or by haploinsufficiency of the SHOX gene.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to compare BMD, bone geometry, and strength at the
radius between prepubertal girls with TS and children with isolated SHOX
deficiency (SHOX-D) to test the hypothesis that the TS radial bone phenotype may 
be caused by SHOX-D.
DESIGN AND SETTING: This comparative cross-sectional study was performed between 
March 2008 and May 2011 in 5 large centers for pediatric endocrinology.
PATIENTS: Twenty-two girls with TS (mean age 10.3 years) and 10 children with
SHOX-D (mean age 10.3 years) were assessed using peripheral quantitative computed
tomography of the forearm.
MAIN OUTCOMES: BMD, bone geometry, and strength at 4% and 65% sites of the radius
were evaluated.
RESULTS: Trabecular BMD was normal in TS (mean Z-score = -0.2 ± 1.1, P = .5) as
well as SHOX-D patients (mean Z-score = 0.5 ± 1.5, P = .3). At the proximal
radius, we observed increased total bone area (Z-scores = 0.9 ± 1.5, P = .013,
and 1.5 ± 1.4, P = .001, for TS and SHOX-D patients, respectively) and thin
cortex (Z-scores = -0.7 ± 1.2, P = 0.013, and -2.0 ± 1.2, P < .001, respectively)
in both groups. Bone strength index was normal in TS as well as SHOX-D patients
(Z-scores = 0.3 ± 1.0, P = .2, and 0.1 ± 1.3, P = .8, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The similar bone geometry changes of the radius in TS and SHOX-D
patients support the hypothesis that loss of 1 copy of SHOX is responsible for
the radial bone phenotype associated with TS.

PMID: 23666967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PeerJ. 2013 Feb 19;1:e35. doi: 10.7717/peerj.35. Print 2013.

Phenotypic characterization of patients with deletions in the 3'-flanking SHOX
region.

Kant SG(1), Broekman SJ, de Wit CC, Bos M, Scheltinga SA, Bakker E, Oostdijk W,
van der Kamp HJ, van Zwet EW, van der Hout AH, Wit JM, Losekoot M.

Author information: 
(1)CHCG-Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center ,
Leiden , The Netherlands.

Context. Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis is a clinically variable skeletal
dysplasia, caused by SHOX deletion or mutations, or a deletion of enhancer
sequences in the 3'-flanking region. Recently, a 47.5 kb recurrent PAR1 deletion 
downstream of SHOX was reported, but its frequency and clinical importance are
still unknown. Objective. This study aims to compare the clinical features of
different sizes of deletions in the 3'-flanking SHOX region in order to determine
the relevance of the regulatory sequences in this region. Design. We collected
DNA from 28 families with deletions in the 3'-PAR1 region. Clinical data were
available from 23 index patients and 21 relatives. Results. In 9 families (20
individuals) a large deletion ( ~ 200-900 kb) was found and in 19 families (35
individuals) a small deletion was demonstrated, equal to the recently described
47.5 kb PAR1 deletion. Median height SDS, sitting height/height ratio SDS and the
presence of Madelung deformity in patients with the 47.5 kb deletion were not
significantly different from patients with larger deletions. The index patients
had a median height SDS which was slightly lower than in their affected family
members (p = 0.08). No significant differences were observed between male and
female patients. Conclusions. The phenotype of patients with deletions in the
3'-PAR1 region is remarkably variable. Height, sitting height/height ratio and
the presence of Madelung deformity were not significantly different between
patients with the 47.5 kb recurrent PAR1 deletion and those with larger
deletions, suggesting that this enhancer plays an important role in SHOX
expression.

PMCID: PMC3629036
PMID: 23638371  [PubMed]


74. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jun;161A(6):1329-38. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35919. Epub 2013 
May 1.

Diagnostic screening identifies a wide range of mutations involving the SHOX
gene, including a common 47.5<U+2009>kb deletion 160<U+2009>kb downstream with a variable
phenotypic effect.

Bunyan DJ(1), Baker KR, Harvey JF, Thomas NS.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. dave.bunyan@salisbury.nhs.uk

Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) results from heterozygous mutations of the
SHOX gene, with homozygosity or compound heterozygosity resulting in the more
severe form, Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD). These mutations typically take the
form of whole or partial gene deletions, point mutations within the coding
sequence, or large (>100<U+2009>kb) 3' deletions of downstream regulatory elements. We
have analyzed the coding sequence of the SHOX gene and its downstream regulatory 
regions in a cohort of 377 individuals referred with symptoms of LWD, LMD or
short stature. A causative mutation was identified in 68% of the probands with
LWD or LMD (91/134). In addition, a 47.5<U+2009>kb deletion was found 160<U+2009>kb downstream 
of the SHOX gene in 17 of the 377 patients (12% of the LWD referrals, 4.5% of all
referrals). In 14 of these 17 patients, this was the only potentially causative
abnormality detected (13 had symptoms consistent with LWD and one had short
stature only), but the other three 47.5<U+2009>kb deletions were found in patients with 
an additional causative SHOX mutation (with symptoms of LWD rather than LMD).
Parental samples were available on 14/17 of these families, and analysis of these
showed a more variable phenotype ranging from apparently unaffected to LWD.
Breakpoint sequence analysis has shown that the 47.5<U+2009>kb deletion is identical in 
all 17 patients, most likely due to an ancient founder mutation rather than
recurrence. This deletion was not seen in 471 normal controls (P<0.0001),
providing further evidence for a phenotypic effect, albeit one with variable
penetration.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23636926  [PubMed - in process]


75. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Aug 1;22(15):3063-76. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt163. Epub 2013 Apr 
10.

Comparative transgenic analysis of enhancers from the human SHOX and mouse Shox2 
genomic regions.

Rosin JM(1), Abassah-Oppong S, Cobb J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, 2500 University Drive N.W. University of
Calgary, Calgary AB T2N 1N4, Canada.

Disruption of presumptive enhancers downstream of the human SHOX gene (hSHOX) is 
a frequent cause of the zeugopodal limb defects characteristic of Léri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis (LWD). The closely related mouse Shox2 gene (mShox2) is also
required for limb development, but in the more proximal stylopodium. In this
study, we used transgenic mice in a comparative approach to characterize enhancer
sequences in the hSHOX and mShox2 genomic regions. Among conserved noncoding
elements (CNEs) that function as enhancers in vertebrate genomes, those that are 
maintained near paralogous genes are of particular interest given their ancient
origins. Therefore, we first analyzed the regulatory potential of a genomic
region containing one such duplicated CNE (dCNE) downstream of mShox2 and hSHOX. 
We identified a strong limb enhancer directly adjacent to the mShox2 dCNE that
recapitulates the expression pattern of the endogenous gene. Interestingly, this 
enhancer requires sequences only conserved in the mammalian lineage in order to
drive strong limb expression, whereas the more deeply conserved sequences of the 
dCNE function as a neural enhancer. Similarly, we found that a conserved element 
downstream of hSHOX (CNE9) also functions as a neural enhancer in transgenic
mice. However, when the CNE9 transgenic construct was enlarged to include
adjacent, non-conserved sequences frequently deleted in LWD patients, the
transgene drove expression in the zeugopodium of the limbs. Therefore, both hSHOX
and mShox2 limb enhancers are coupled to distinct neural enhancers. This is the
first report demonstrating the activity of cis-regulatory elements from the hSHOX
and mShox2 genomic regions in mammalian embryos.

PMID: 23575226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Pharmacogenomics. 2013 Apr;14(6):607-12. doi: 10.2217/pgs.13.44.

Height outcome of the recombinant human growth hormone treatment in patients with
SHOX gene haploinsufficiency: a meta-analysis.

Massart F(1), Bizzi M, Baggiani A, Miccoli M.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Unit, Maternal & Infant Department, St Chiara University Hospital of
Pisa, Pisa, Italy. massart@med.unipi.it

BACKGROUND: Patients with mutations or deletions of the SHOX gene present
variable growth impairment, with or without mesomelic skeletal dysplasia. If
untreated, short patients with SHOX haplodeficiency (SHOXD) remain short into
adulthood. Although recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) treatment improves
short-term linear growth, there are episodic data on the final height of treated 
SHOXD subjects.
PATIENTS & METHODS: After a thorough search of the published literature for
pertinent studies, we undertook a meta-analysis evaluation of the efficacy and
safety of rhGH treatment in SHOXD patients.
RESULTS: In SHOXD patients, administration of rhGH progressively improved the
height deficit from baseline to 24 months, although the major catch-up growth was
detected after 12 months. The rhGH-induced growth appeared constant until final
height.
CONCLUSION: Our meta-analysis suggested rhGH therapy improves height outcome of
SHOXD patients, though future studies using carefully titrated rhGH protocols are
needed. Original submitted 29 October 2012; Revision submitted 22 February 2013.

PMID: 23570464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Gene. 2013 May 1;519(2):374-80. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.01.065. Epub 2013 Feb
19.

Identification and molecular cytogenetic characterization of a novel complex Y
chromosome rearrangement in a boy with disorder of sexual development.

Dutta UR(1), Pidugu VK, Goud ChV, Hoefers C, Hagemann M, Dalal A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, Nampally, Hyderabad-500 001,
India. ushadutta@hotmail.com

Ambiguous genitalia or disorder of the sexual development is a birth defect where
the external genitals do not have the typical appearance of either a male or
female. Here we report a boy with ambiguous genitalia and short stature. The
cytogenetic analysis by G-banding revealed a small Y chromosome and an additional
material on the 15p arm. Further, molecular cytogenetic analysis by Fluorescence 
in situ hybridization (FISH) using whole chromosome paint probes showed the
presence of Y sequences on the 15p arm, confirming that it is a Y;15
translocation. Subsequent, FISH with centromere probe Y showed two signals
depicting the presence of two centromeres and differing with a balanced
translocation. The dicentric nature of the derivative 15 chromosome was confirmed
by FISH with both 15 and Y centromeric probes. Further, the delineation of the Y 
chromosomal DNA was also done by quantitative real time PCR. Additional Y-short
tandem repeat typing was performed to find out the extent of deletion on small Y 
chromosome. Fine mapping was carried out with 8 Y specific BAC clones which
helped in defining the breakpoint regions. MLPA was performed to check the
presence or absence of subtelomeric regions and SHOX regions on Y. Finally array 
CGH helped us in confirming the breakpoint regions. In our study we identified
and characterized a novel complex Y chromosomal rearrangement with a complete
deletion of the Yq region and duplication of the Yp region with one copy being
translocated onto the15p arm. This is the first report of novel and unique Y
complex rearrangement showing a deletion, duplication and a translocation in the 
same patient. The possible mechanism of the rearrangement and the
phenotype-genotype correlation are discussed.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23428792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2012;25(9-10):889-95. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2012-0173.

A novel intronic mutation in SHOX causes short stature by disrupting a splice
acceptor site: direct demonstration of aberrant splicing by expression of a
minigene in HEK-293T cells.

Danzig J(1), Levine MA.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA, USA.

SHOX, the short stature homeobox-containing gene, encodes a critical regulatory
protein controlling long bone growth. We examined patients in one family,
identified an intronic mutation, and expressed SHOX minigenes in HEK293T cells to
characterize the effect on gene splicing. We identified a novel mutation at
position -3 (c.-432-3C>A;g.6120C>A) of the intron 1 splice acceptor site; three
short (height Z-score -2.4 to -1.7) children were heterozygous and the father
(height Z-score -3.4) was homozygous. A wild-type minigene produced alternative
transcripts; one utilized the normal splice site between intron 1 and exon 2, the
other a cryptic splice site in exon 2. Mutant SHOX minigene generated only the
smaller transcript. The exon 2 acceptor splice site is weak; an alternative
transcript is normally produced using a downstream cryptic splice site. The
c.-432-3C>A mutation causes further weakening, and the cryptic splice site is
preferentially utilized, resulting in SHOX deficiency and short stature.

PMID: 23426818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2013 Feb;121(2):109-14. doi:
10.1055/s-0032-1333260. Epub 2013 Feb 20.

Bone geometry and volumetric bone density at the radius in patients with isolated
SHOX deficiency.

Soucek O(1), Lebl J, Zapletalova J, Novotna D, Plasilova I, Kolouskova S, Zemkova
D, Rocek M, Hlavka Z, Hirschfeldova K, Sumnik Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in
Prague and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
ondrej.soucek@lfmotol.cuni.cz

The short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) plays an important role in bone
development and growth. We aimed to assess bone geometry and volumetric bone
mineral density at the radius in patients with isolated SHOX deficiency and to
relate these bone parameters to the severity of disproportion between the upper
and the lower body segment. 17 patients with isolated SHOX deficiency (median age
12.3 yrs, range 6.7-37.2, 12 children and 5 adults) were examined by peripheral
quantitative CT (pQCT) at the non-dominant forearm. Results were expressed as
Z-scores using published reference data. Linear regression analyses were
performed to describe associations between pQCT parameters and the severity of
disproportion expressed as sitting height to standing subischial leg height
ratio. Trabecular volumetric bone mineral density (vBMD) at the distal radius was
normal, whereas cortical vBMD was decreased (mean Z-scores 0.34±1.5, n.s., and
-2.2±2.2, p<0.001, respectively). Total bone cross-sectional area was enlarged at
the diaphysis (2.1±1.2, p<0.001), while cortical bone cross-sectional area was
normal (-0.51±1.4, n.s.). Consequently, cortical thickness was decreased
(-1.2±1.3, p<0.01). The polar strength-strain index as a surrogate of long bone
strength was normal (0.40±1.4, n.s.). We found no associations between pQCT
parameters and the severity of disproportion.CONCLUSIONS: Patients with isolated 
SHOX deficiency are characterized by decreased cortical vBMD and cortical
thickness and enlarged diaphysis. As similar changes have been described in girls
with Turner syndrome, these findings suggest that haploinsufficiency of SHOX
could cause characteristic skeletal anomalies at the radius.

© J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 23426705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2013 Mar;9(3):171-7. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2012.251. Epub 2013 
Jan 22.

Height matters-from monogenic disorders to normal variation.

Durand C(1), Rappold GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 366, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Height is a classic polygenic quantitative trait with a high level of
heritability. As it is a simple and stable parameter to measure, height is a
model for both common, complex disorders and monogenic, Mendelian disease. In
this Review, we examine height from the perspective of monogenic and complex
genetics and discuss the lessons learned so far. We explore several examples of
rare sequence variants with large effects on height and compare these variants to
the common variants identified in genome-wide association studies that have small
effects on height. We discuss how copy number changes or genetic interactions
might contribute to the unidentified aspects of the heritability of height. We
also ask whether information derived from genome-wide association studies on
specific loci in the vicinity of genes can be used for further research in
clinical paediatric endocrinology. Furthermore, we address key challenges that
remain for gene discovery and for the transition of moving from genomic
localization to mechanistic insights, with an emphasis on using next-generation
sequencing to identify causative variants of people at the extremes of height
distribution.

PMID: 23337954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2012 Aug;9(4):727-33.

The SHOX gene and the short stature. Roundtable on diagnosis and treatment of
short stature due to SHOX haploinsufficiency: how genetics, radiology and
anthropometry can help the pediatrician in the diagnostic process Padova (April
20th, 2011).

De Sanctis V(1), Tosetto I, Iughetti L, Antoniazzi F, Clementi M, Toffolutti T,
Facchin P, Monti E, Pisanello L, Tonini G, Greggio NA.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric and Adolescent Outpatient Clinic, Quisisana Hospital Ferrara -
Italy.

The growth of the human body depends from a complex interaction between
nutritional, environmental and hormonal factors and by a large number of
different genes. One of these genes, short stature homeobox (SHOX), is believed
to play a major role in growth. SHOX haploinsufficiency is associated with a wide
spectrum of conditions, all characterized growth failure such as Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis, Turner syndrome, short stature with subtle auxological and
radiological findings and the so called "idiopathic short stature" (short stature
with no specific findings other than growth failure). The document was prepared
by a multidisciplinary team (paediatric endocrinologists, paediatrician,
radiologist, geneticist and epidemiologist) to focus on the investigation of
children with suspected SHOX- deficiency (SHOX-D) for an early identification and
a correct diagnostic work - up of this genetic disorder. On the basis of a number
of screening studies, SHOX-D appears to be a relatively frequent cause of short
stature. The following recommendations were suggested by our multidisciplinary
team: (i) a careful family history, measurements of body proportions and
detection of any dysmorphic features are important for the suspect of a genetic
disorder ,(ii)the presence of any combination of the following physical findings,
such as reduced arm span/height ratio, increased sitting height/height ratio,
above average BMI, Madelung deformity, cubitus valgus, short or bowed forearm,
dislocation of the ulna at the elbow, or the appearance of muscular hypertrophy, 
should prompt the clinician to obtain a molecular analysis of the SHOX region,
(iii) it is of practical importance to recognise early or mild signs of Madelung 
deformity on hand and wrist radiographs, (iv) growth hormone ,after stimulation
test, is usually normal. However, treatment with rhGH may improve final adult
height; the efficacy of treatment is similar to that observed in those treated
for Turner syndrome.

PMID: 23304810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Bull Acad Natl Med. 2012 Jan;196(1):127-35; discussion 135-7.

[Is there a relationship between the growth hormone dose and tumoral or
cardiovascular complications?].

[Article in French]

Le Bouc Y(1), Brioude F.

Author information: 
(1)yves.le-bouc@inserm.fr

Growth hormone (GH) affects protein (anabolism), lipid (lipolysis) and
carbohydrate (hyperglycemia) metabolism and stimulates hepatic synthesis of
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1). IGF1 is believed to act as a postnatal
growth factor. In addition to its effects on growth, IGF1 affects cell
proliferation, differentiation and survival, and has anabolic effects on
proteins, and also lipogenic and glucose-lowering effects. The increasing
availability of biosynthetic pituitary GH has made it feasible to treat
GH-deficient children and adults, and patients of short stature due to a variety 
of other causes (Turner's syndrome, anomalies of SHOX, intrauterine growth
retardation (IUGR), chronic renal failure, Prader-Willi syndrome, or idiopathic
short stature). The therapeutic dose has been increased in some situations in
which the response is inadequate, particularly in patients with certain
conditions such as IUGR. However, it has been reported that cancers and
cardiovascular diseases are associated with high plasma concentrations of GH and 
IGF1, particularly in patients with acromegaly but also in large epidemiological 
studies of apparently healthy populations. These findings raise questions as to
the safety of GH treatment. Some long-term follow-up studies have shown an
increase in the risk of some kinds of cancer or cerebrovascular disease, but
these findings have not been replicated by others. The results of these studies
remain debatable, due to their small sample sizes, methodological weaknesses,
nonexhaustive data collection and problems involved in comparing these patients
with an appropriate control group. Finally, GH and IGF1 deficiencies are
themselves associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular diseases, as is
small stature/low weight at birth (due to IUGR). Recent studies have demonstrated
a higher risk of cardiovascular disease in patients with both low and high plasma
concentrations of GH and IGF1, these risks disappearing at average values. These 
findings suggest that the GH dose should be adjusted during treatment to ensure
that plasma IGF1 concentrations remain within the physiological range.

PMID: 23259340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Horm Res Paediatr. 2012;78(5-6):279-87. doi: 10.1159/000345354. Epub 2012 Nov 28.

Impaired GH secretion in patients with SHOX deficiency and efficacy of
recombinant human GH therapy.

Iughetti L(1), Vannelli S, Street ME, Pirazzoli P, Bertelloni S, Radetti G,
Capone L, Stasiowska B, Mazzanti L, Gastaldi R, Maggio MC, Predieri B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena,
Italy. iughetti.lorenzo@unimore.it

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Mutations of the short stature homeobox-containing (SHOX) gene
on the pseudoautosomal region of the sex chromosomes cause short stature. GH
treatment has been recently proposed to improve height in short patients with
SHOX deficiency. The aim of this study was to evaluate GH secretion and analyze
growth and safety of recombinant human GH (rhGH) therapy in short children and
adolescents with SHOX deficiency.
PATIENTS AND DESIGN: We studied 16 patients (10 females; 9.7 ± 2.9 years old;
height -2.46 ± 0.82 standard deviation score, SDS) with SHOX deficiency. All
subjects underwent auxological evaluations, biochemical investigations, and were 
treated with rhGH (0.273 ± 0.053 mg/kg/week).
RESULTS: Impaired GH secretion was present in 37.5% of the studied subjects.
Comparing baseline data with those at the last visit, we found that rhGH
treatment improved growth velocity SDS (from -1.03 ± 1.44 to 2.77 ± 1.95; p =
0.001), height SDS (from -2.41 ± 0.71 to -1.81 ± 0.87; p < 0.001), and IGF-1
values (from -0.57 ± 1.23 to 0.63 ± 1.63 SDS, p = 0.010) without affecting body
mass index SDS. Height SDS measured at the last visit was significantly
correlated with chronological age (r = -0.618, p = 0.032), bone age (r = -0.582, 
p = 0.047) and height SDS (r = 0.938, p < 0.001) at the beginning of treatment.
No adverse events were reported on rhGH therapy which was never discontinued.
CONCLUSION: These data showed that impaired GH secretion is not uncommon in SHOX 
deficiency subjects, and that rhGH therapy may be effective in increasing height 
in most of these patients independent of their GH secretory status, without
causing any adverse events of concern.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23208451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Korean Med Sci. 2012 Oct;27(10):1273-7. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2012.27.10.1273. Epub
2012 Oct 2.

A case of 9.7 Mb terminal Xp deletion including OA1 locus associated with
contiguous gene syndrome.

Cho EH(1), Kim SY, Kim JK.

Author information: 
(1)Greencross Reference Laboratory, Seoul, Korea.

Terminal or interstitial deletions of Xp (Xp22.2<U+2192>Xpter) in males have been
recognized as a cause of contiguous gene syndromes showing variable association
of apparently unrelated clinical manifestations such as Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis (SHOX), chondrodysplasia punctata (CDPX1), mental retardation
(NLGN4), ichthyosis (STS), Kallmann syndrome (KAL1), and ocular albinism
(GPR143). Here we present a case of a 13.5 yr old boy and sister with a same
terminal deletion of Xp22.2 resulting in the absence of genes from the telomere
of Xp to GPR143 of Xp22. The boy manifested the findings of all of the disorders 
mentioned above. We began a testosterone enanthate monthly replacement therapy.
His sister, 11 yr old, manifested only Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis, and had
engaged in growth hormone therapy for 3 yr. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first report of a male with a 9.7 Mb terminal Xp deletion including the OA1
locus in Korea.

PMCID: PMC3468769
PMID: 23091330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Cell Sci. 2012 Dec 15;125(Pt 24):6071-83. doi: 10.1242/jcs.111997. Epub 2012
Oct 4.

Shox2 regulates progression through chondrogenesis in the mouse proximal limb.

Bobick BE(1), Cobb J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, 2500 University
Drive NW, Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4, Canada.

In humans, loss of SHOX gene function is responsible for the mesomelic short
stature characteristic of Turner syndrome, Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis, and
Langer dysplasia. In a mouse model of SHOX deficiency, Prrx1-Cre-driven
limb-specific deletion of the paralogous gene Shox2 results in severe rhizomelia.
In this study, we show that Col2a1-Cre-driven deletion of Shox2 in developing
chondrocytes also results in shortening of the stylopodial skeleton (i.e.
humerus, femur) and that this rhizomelia is due to precocious chondrocyte
maturation and hypertrophy. We demonstrate, using the micromass culture model
system, that increased BMP activity triggers accelerated maturation and
hypertrophy in Col2a1-Cre Shox2 mutant chondrocytes and we confirm in vivo that
elevated transcript levels and expanded expression domains of Bmp2 and 4 are
associated with premature formation of the hypertrophic zone in mutant humeri. In
micromass cultures of Prrx1-Cre Shox2 mutant limb cells, we find that Shox2
deletion in undifferentiated mesenchymal cells results in increased BMP activity 
that enhances early chondrogenesis, but is insufficient to provoke chondrocyte
maturation and hypertrophy. Similarly, shRNA-mediated Shox2 knockdown in
multipotent C3H10T1/2 cells and primary mouse bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells 
results in spontaneous chondrogenesis in the absence of chondrostimulation, but
again fails to induce progression through the later stages of chondrogenic
differentiation. Importantly, exogenous BMP supplementation can overcome the
block to maturation and hypertrophy caused by Shox2 depletion prior to overt
chondrogenesis. Thus, we provide evidence that Shox2 regulates progression
through chondrogenesis at two distinct stages--the onset of early differentiation
and the transition to maturation and hypertrophy.

PMID: 23038774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45369. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045369. Epub 2012 Sep 20.

The homeobox transcription factor HOXA9 is a regulator of SHOX in U2OS cells and 
chicken micromass cultures.

Durand C(1), Decker E, Roeth R, Schneider KU, Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

The homeobox gene SHOX encodes for a transcription factor that plays an important
role during limb development. Mutations or deletions of SHOX in humans cause
short stature in Turner, Langer and Leri-Weill syndrome as well as idiopathic
short stature. During embryonic development, SHOX is expressed in a complex
spatio-temporal pattern that requires the presence of specific regulatory
mechanisms. Up to now, it was known that SHOX is regulated by two upstream
promoters and several enhancers on either side of the gene, but no regulators
have been identified that can activate or repress the transcription of SHOX by
binding to these regulatory elements. We have now identified the homeodomain
protein HOXA9 as a positive regulator of SHOX expression in U2OS cells. Using
luciferase assays, chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays, we could narrow down the HOXA9 binding site to two AT-rich
sequences of 31 bp within the SHOX promoter 2. Virus-induced Hoxa9 overexpression
in a chicken micromass model validated the regulation of Shox by Hoxa9 (negative 
regulation). As Hoxa9 and Shox are both expressed in overlapping regions of the
developing limb buds, a regulatory relationship of Hoxa9 and Shox during the
process of limb development can be assumed.

PMCID: PMC3447975
PMID: 23028966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Fertil Steril. 2012 Oct;98(4):775-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2012.08.021.

Genetic considerations in the patient with Turner syndrome--45,X with or without 
mosaicism.

Zhong Q(1), Layman LC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Reproductive Endocrinology, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology; and Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Neuroscience
Program, Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

Turner syndrome (TS) is a complex developmental disorder in individuals with
short stature who possess a 45,X cell line, with or without mosaicism. Because
the single X chromosome is maternally derived in 80% of patients, the genesis of 
the 45,X karyotype is due to instability of the Y chromosome leading to its loss 
during meiosis. Phenotypic features vary depending on the mode of ascertainment, 
with postnatal presentation usually generating a more severe phenotype than a
prenatal one. Although patients with pure 45,X present with delayed puberty more 
often than those with mosaicism for 46,XX or 47,XXX cell lines, the chromosomal
complement cannot reliably predict the clinical presentation. Most living TS
patients are mosaics, whereas nearly all first-trimester TS fetuses have a single
45,X cell line. Exclusion of a Y cell line, the presence of which increases the
risk of gonadoblastomas and subsequent gonadal germ cell tumors, is best
accomplished by karyotype, fluorescence in situ hybridization, and DNA analysis
if necessary. The precise genetic etiology of TS has not been elucidated, but it 
does appear that deletion of the short arm of the X chromosome is sufficient to
result in the TS phenotype, thereby implicating haploinsufficiency of multiple
genes, including SHOX.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3573687
PMID: 23020909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Nov;97(11):4206-11. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-2598. Epub
2012 Sep 7.

C-Type Natriuretic Peptide (CNP) levels are altered in boys with Klinefelter
syndrome.

Olney RC(1), Prickett TC, Espiner EA, Ross JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nemours Children's Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida 32207, USA.
rolney@nemours.org

CONTEXT: B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) expression in vitro is up-regulated by 
the protein coded by the short stature homeobox gene (SHOX). C-type natriuretic
peptide (CNP) is a paracrine regulatory factor of the growth plate that plays a
key role in endochondral growth and shares clearance pathways with BNP. We
explored the possibility that alterations in natriuretic peptide regulation may
play a role in the overgrowth of boys with Klinefelter syndrome.
OBJECTIVE: The objectives of the study were to document the blood levels of
amino-terminal propeptide of B-type natriuretic peptide (NTproBNP), CNP, and its 
amino-terminal propeptide (NTproCNP) in boys with Klinefelter syndrome and
compare values with age- and height-matched control subjects.
DESIGN: This was a prospective, case-controlled, observational study.
SUBJECTS: Participants were 24 healthy boys with Klinefelter syndrome between 4
and 14 yr of age. Data from sex-, age-, and height-matched healthy controls were 
obtained from subjects participating in a previously described study.
RESULTS: Plasma levels of NTproBNP and CNP were lower, whereas levels of NTproCNP
were higher in boys with Klinefelter syndrome compared with published reference
ranges. In addition, CNP levels were lower and NTproCNP levels higher than in
sex-, age-, and height-matched controls.
CONCLUSIONS: In contrast to plasma NTproBNP, CNP production and clearance are
increased in boys with Klinefelter syndrome. Together these findings argue
against an interaction between BNP with CNP in the growth plate. Why CNP peptide 
levels are altered in Klinefelter syndrome remains to be explored.

PMID: 22962429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2012 May;9 Suppl 2:733-8.

New roles of SHOX as regulator of target genes.

Rappold GA(1), Durand C, Decker E, Marchini A, Schneider KU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Department of Human Molecular Genetics,
University of Heidelberg,69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
gudrun.rappold@med.uni-heidelberg.de

The homeobox gene SHOX encodes a transcription factor which is important for
normal limb development. Approximately 5 to 10% of short patients exhibit a
mutation or deletion in either the SHOX gene or its downstream enhancer regions. 
In humans, SHOX deficiency has been associated with various short stature
syndromes as well as non-syndromic idiopathic short stature. A common feature of 
these syndromes is disproportionate short stature with a particular shortening of
the forearms and lower legs. Madelung deformity, cubitus valgus, high-arched
palate and muscular hypertrophy also differed markedly between patients with or
without SHOX gene defects. A clinical trial in patients with SHOX deficiency and 
Turner syndrome demonstrated highly significant growth hormone-stimulated
increases in height velocity and height SDS in both groups. Employing microarray 
analyses and cell culture experiments, a strong effect of SHOX on the expression 
of the natriuretic peptide BNP and the fibroblast growth factor receptor gene
FGFR3 could be demonstrated. We found that BNP was positively regulated, while
Fgfr3 was negatively regulated by SHOX. A regulation that occurs mainly in the
mesomelic segments, a region where SHOX is known to be strongly expressed, offers
a possible explanation for the phenotypes seen in patients with FGFR3 (e.g.
achondroplasia) and SHOX defects (e.g. Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis).

PMID: 22946287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2012 Aug 1;2(8). pii: a007658. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a007658.

Islet autoantigens: structure, function, localization, and regulation.

Arvan P(1), Pietropaolo M, Ostrov D, Rhodes CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Diabetes, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA. Parrvan@umich.edu

Islet autoantigens associated with autoimmune type 1 diabetes (T1D) are expressed
in pancreatic ß cells, although many show wider patterns of expression in the
neuroendocrine system. Within pancreatic ß cells, every T1D autoantigen is in one
way or another linked to the secretory pathway. Together, these autoantigens play
diverse roles in glucose regulation, metabolism of biogenic amines, as well as
the regulation, formation, and packaging of secretory granules. The mechanism(s) 
by which immune tolerance to islet-cell antigens is lost during the development
of T1D, remains unclear. Antigenic peptide creation for immune presentation may
potentially link to the secretory biology of ß cells in a number of ways,
including proteasomal digestion of misfolded products, exocytosis and endocytosis
of cell-surface products, or antigen release from dying ß cells during normal or 
pathological turnover. In this context, we evaluate the biochemical nature and
immunogenicity of the major autoantigens in T1D including (pro)insulin, GAD65,
ZnT8, IA2, and ICA69.

PMCID: PMC3405822
PMID: 22908193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Oct;158A(10):2456-62. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35564. Epub 2012
Aug 17.

New proposed clinico-radiologic and molecular criteria in hypochondroplasia: FGFR
3 gene mutations are not the only cause of hypochondroplasia.

Song SH(1), Balce GC, Agashe MV, Lee H, Hong SJ, Park YE, Kim SG, Song HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Institute for Rare Diseases, Korea
University Medical Center Guro Hospital, Guro-Gu, Seoul, Korea.

We applied a comprehensive set of clinical and radiological criteria for the
diagnosis of hypochondroplasia (HCH) in 160 patients with short stature 58 of
whom were diagnosed to have HCH. Taking into account the genotypic and phenotypic
variations in HCH, we conducted a study with these 58 patients and tested them
for mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) and the short
stature homeobox (SHOX) gene. We characterized the phenotypes by clinical and
radiologic findings. In the patients with HCH, 19 were included in Group I (FGFR3
mutations-mutations of definite significance), and 39 were in Group II (6 SHOX
mutations and 33 negative for disease-causing FGFR3 mutations). The clinical
findings were similar in two groups regardless of the presence or absence of
mutations. More than 95% of the patients had mesomelic proportions. In Group I,
the radiological findings of mesomelia of upper and lower limbs and, L1/L4 ratio 
in anterior-posterior and lateral view were more typical than in Group II. This
study proposes comprehensive clinico-radiological criteria for the diagnosis of
HCH, which would help in detecting the true incidence of this underdiagnosed
condition. The presence of SHOX mutations suggest genotypic-phenotypic overlap
between HCH and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis, though further investigation is
needed to effectively elucidate the importance of these mutations. Also, the
56.9% of HCH patients with negative mutations for FGFR3 suggests that there are
other undiscovered gene mutations associated with this phenotypic entity.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22903874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Horm Res Paediatr. 2012;78(2):127-34. Epub 2012 Jul 25.

A rare case of a male with 45, XO, SRY+, ZFY+ with short stature and mild Turner 
stigmata.

Ntali G(1), Sofocleous C, Kouvidi E, Tsagaraki G, Dolianiti M,
Kaimara-Papathanasiou A, Fryssira H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Aglaia Kyriakou Children's Hospital,
Goudi, Athens, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Turner syndrome is hypothesized to result from haploinsufficiency of 
certain genes expressed from both sex chromosomes that escape X inactivation.
CASE REPORT: We present the rare case of a 4-year-old boy who was referred to the
pediatric endocrinology unit for evaluation of slight growth delay.
RESULTS: Standard cytogenetic analysis showed a 45,XO karyotype. Molecular
studies disclosed the presence of an intact SRY homeobox region and the ZFY
region sited on the Y short arm. Other Y chromosome sequences which are normally 
found on the short arm of chromosome Y (p) were absent and their exact location
on a different chromosome remained unclear. Subsequently, FISH (fluorescent in
situ hybridization) analysis failed to detect any Y sequences, while haplotype
analysis indicated that the present X chromosome was of paternal origin.
CONCLUSION: Phenotype-genotype correlation studies were consistent with a male
patient presenting with short stature and some of the Turner's syndrome stigmata.
The consequences for the patients with this chromosomal abnormality and treatment
with recombinant growth hormone are also discussed.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22832081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Med Genet. 2012 Jul;49(7):442-50. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2011-100678.

Identification of the first recurrent PAR1 deletion in Léri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis and idiopathic short stature reveals the presence of a novel
SHOX enhancer.

Benito-Sanz S(1), Royo JL, Barroso E, Paumard-Hernández B, Barreda-Bonis AC, Liu 
P, Gracía R, Lupski JR, Campos-Barros Á, Gómez-Skarmeta JL, Heath KE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario
La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ, Spain.

BACKGROUND: SHOX, located in the pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1) of the sexual
chromosomes, encodes a transcription factor implicated in human growth. Defects
in SHOX or its enhancers have been observed in ~60% of Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis (LWD) patients, a skeletal dysplasia characterised by short
stature and/or the characteristic Madelung deformity, and in 2-5% of idiopathic
short stature (ISS). To identify the molecular defect in the remaining
genetically undiagnosed LWD and ISS patients, this study screened previously
unanalysed PAR1 regions in 124 LWD and 576 ISS probands.
METHODS: PAR1 screening was undertaken by multiplex ligation dependent probe
amplification (MLPA). Copy number alterations were subsequently confirmed and
delimited by locus-specific custom-designed MLPA, array comparative genomic
hybridisation (CGH) and breakpoint junction PCR/sequencing.
RESULTS: A recurrent PAR1 deletion downstream of SHOX spanning 47543 bp with
identical breakpoints was identified in 19 LWD (15.3%) and 11 ISS (1.9%)
probands, from 30 unrelated families. Eight evolutionarily conserved regions
(ECRs 1-8) identified within the deleted sequence were evaluated for SHOX
regulatory activity by means of chromosome conformation capture (3C) in chicken
embryo limbs and luciferase reporter assays in human U2OS osteosarcoma cells. The
3C assay indicated potential SHOX regulatory activity by ECR1, which was
subsequently confirmed to act as a SHOX enhancer, operating in an orientation and
position independent manner, in human U2OS cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This study has identified the first recurrent PAR1 deletion in LWD
and ISS, which results in the loss of a previously uncharacterised SHOX enhancer.
The loss of this enhancer may decrease SHOX transcription, resulting in LWD or
ISS due to SHOX haploinsufficiency.

PMID: 22791839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Endocr Rev. 2012 Oct;33(5):677-714. doi: 10.1210/er.2011-1059. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Cardiovascular phenotype in Turner syndrome--integrating cardiology, genetics,
and endocrinology.

Mortensen KH(1), Andersen NH, Gravholt CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital,
8000 Aarhus, Denmark.

Cardiovascular disease is emerging as a cardinal trait of Turner syndrome, being 
responsible for half of the 3-fold excess mortality. Turner syndrome has been
proposed as an independent risk marker for cardiovascular disease that manifests 
as congenital heart disease, aortic dilation and dissection, valvular heart
disease, hypertension, thromboembolism, myocardial infarction, and stroke. Risk
stratification is unfortunately not straightforward because risk markers derived 
from the general population inadequately identify the subset of females with
Turner syndrome who will suffer events. A high prevalence of endocrine disorders 
adds to the complexity, exacerbating cardiovascular prognosis. Mounting knowledge
about the prevalence and interplay of cardiovascular and endocrine disease in
Turner syndrome is paralleled by improved understanding of the genetics of the
X-chromosome in both normal health and disease. At present in Turner syndrome,
this is most advanced for the SHOX gene, which partly explains the growth
deficit. This review provides an up-to-date condensation of current
state-of-the-art knowledge in Turner syndrome, the main focus being
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. The aim is to provide insight into
pathogenesis of Turner syndrome with perspectives to advances in the
understanding of genetics of the X-chromosome. The review also incorporates
important endocrine features, in order to comprehensively explain the
cardiovascular phenotype and to highlight how raised attention to endocrinology
and genetics is important in the identification and modification of
cardiovascular risk.

PMID: 22707402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Horm Res Paediatr. 2012;77(4):250-60. doi: 10.1159/000338341. Epub 2012 May 9.

IGF1, IGF1R and SHOX mutation analysis in short children born small for
gestational age and short children with normal birth size (idiopathic short
stature).

Caliebe J(1), Broekman S, Boogaard M, Bosch CA, Ruivenkamp CA, Oostdijk W, Kant
SG, Binder G, Ranke MB, Wit JM, Losekoot M.

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital, Tuebingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Because the criteria for genetic screening of short children are
unknown, we performed genetic analysis of 199 short children born small for
gestational age (SGA) or with normal birth size (idiopathic short stature, ISS).
METHODS: After selection with a modified scoring system for SHOX and a novel
score for IGF1 and IGF1R defects, direct sequencing and multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) was performed for SHOX and IGF1R in
selected patients, and confirmed by SNP array analysis.
RESULTS: In 6 children, gene variants were identified in SHOX, its adjacent
pseudoautosomal region (PAR) and IGF1R: a SHOX mutation, terminal 15q deletion, a
SHOX and IGF1R defect, a deletion of the Xp22.3 PAR region, and two patients with
duplications in the Xp22.3 PAR region. In a seventh patient, steroid sulfatase
deficiency was detected because a probe for STS was used as control; this
syndrome has not been associated with short stature before.
CONCLUSION: A selection process using clinical scores for SHOX, IGF1 and IGF1R
defects followed by genetic testing with MLPA and direct sequencing led to the
detection of a SHOX or IGF1R genetic variant in 6% of short children.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22572840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Jul;97(7):E1257-65. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-3460. Epub
2012 Apr 19.

Genotypes and phenotypes of children with SHOX deficiency in France.

Rosilio M(1), Huber-Lequesne C, Sapin H, Carel JC, Blum WF, Cormier-Daire V.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Department, Lilly France, 13 Rue Pagès, 92158 Suresnes Cedex, France. 
rosilio_myriam@lilly.com

CONTEXT: The prevalence of SHOX deficiency in children with short stature (SS) is
variable in the literature and various genotypes have been identified.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of our study was to determine the frequency and distribution 
of SHOX genotypes in a large sample of children with SS in France.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PATIENTS: Children were enrolled in 38 French pediatric
endocrinology centers and were either diagnosed with Leri-Weill syndrome (LWS),
idiopathic short stature (ISS), or disproportionate short stature (DSS).
INTERVENTION AND MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: SHOX analysis was performed centrally as
part of the Genetics and Neuroendocrinology of Short Stature International Study 
observational study. We compared patients with (SHOX-D) and without SHOX
deficiency (non-SHOX-D).
RESULTS: Among the 537 patients tested [58.3% females, mean age 11.0 (4.2) yr],
27.7% had SHOX deficiency (LWS, 48.9%; ISS, 16.9%; DSS, 18.8%). Mean height [-2.3
(0.9) sd score] was similar in SHOX-D and non-SHOX-D patients. The majority of
SHOX-D patients with LWS had either a deletion encompassing SHOX or a point
mutation (69%), whereas 59% of those with ISS had a deletion downstream of SHOX
in the enhancer region. The height of the parents carrying a deletion downstream 
of SHOX was higher than the height of the parents carrying the other gene
anomalies.
CONCLUSIONS: SHOX deletions and point mutations as well as downstream SHOX
enhancer deletions were identified in almost one third of the patients tested. An
anomaly in this latter region seemed to be linked to a milder phenotype. Although
further confirmation is needed, we suggest that the enhancer region should be
systematically analyzed in patients suspected of SHOX deficiency.

PMID: 22518848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Aug;20(8). doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.64. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

Clinical utility gene card for: Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and Langer
mesomelic dysplasia (LMD).

Albuisson J(1), Schmitt S, Baron S, Bézieau S, Benito-Sanz S, Heath KE.

Author information: 
(1)CHU Nantes Hôtel-Dieu, Institut de Biologie, Service de Génétique Médicale,
Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Nantes, France.

PMCID: PMC3400739
PMID: 22510850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Pediatr Ann. 2012 Apr;41(4):e1-9. doi: 10.3928/00904481-20120307-07.

Growth and growth disorders in children and adolescents.

Graber E(1), Rapaport R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, USA.

Evaluation of a child's growth is one of the most important aspects of the
general pediatric visit. Concerns about abnormal growth are the leading reasons
general pediatricians refer patients to a pediatric endocrinologist. There is
wide variation in normal growth patterns and an even greater variety of
conditions that manifest with growth abnormalities. Here, we review patterns of
normal growth in the pediatric and adolescent populations. We then review
abnormal patterns of growth that require further evaluation and possible
treatment.

Copyright 2012, SLACK Incorporated.

PMID: 22494211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Clin Pathol. 2012 Sep;65(9):844-6. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2011-200626. Epub
2012 Mar 29.

A170P mutation in SHOX gene in a patient not presenting with Madelung deformity.

Alvarez-Mora MI(1), Madrigal I, Rodriguez-Revenga L, Mur A, Calvo D, Pascual I
Bardají J, Milà M.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Department, Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS,
Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    J Clin Pathol. 2012 Oct;65(10):962.

Idiopathic short stature is a multifactorial disease caused by defects in several
genes. Among them, short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) mutations have
an incidence of 2%-15% within the idiopathic short population. The authors report
a patient with moderate intellectual disability, short stature and no other
radiological traits referred for subtelomeric screening. MLPA and sequencing
results showed a heterozygous mutation in SHOX gene (A170P). This mutation has
been described to fully cosegregate with Madelung deformity in patients affected 
with Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and Langer mesomelic dysplasia. The authors
report the first case of idiopathic short stature due to the A170P mutation in a 
patient without any radiological trait. The A170P mutation is the most prevalent 
mutation in the Spanish gypsy population affected with short stature disorders.
The authors strongly recommend SHOX screening for deletions, duplications and
point mutations in patients affected with short stature although they do not
present any radiological traits.

PMID: 22461651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Pediatr Cardiol. 2012 Aug;33(6):882-9. doi: 10.1007/s00246-012-0179-x. Epub 2012 
Feb 4.

The role of Shox2 in SAN development and function.

Liu H(1), Espinoza-Lewis RA, Chen C, Hu X, Zhang Y, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA
70118, USA.

Embryonic development is a tightly regulated process, and many families of genes 
functions to provide a regulatory genetic network to achieve such a program. The 
homeobox genes are an extensive family that encodes transcription factors with a 
characteristic 60-amino acid homeodomain. Mutations in these genes or in the
encoded proteins might result in structural malformations, physiological defects,
and even embryonic death. Mutations in the short-stature homeobox gene (SHOX) is 
associated with idiopathic short stature in humans, as observed in patients with 
Turner syndrome and/or Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis. A closely related human
homolog, SHOX2, has not been linked to any syndrome or defect so far. In mice, a 
SHOX ortholog gene is not present in the genome; however, a true SHOX2 ortholog
has been identified. Analyses of Shox2 knockout mouse models have showed crucial 
functions during embryonic development, including limb skeletogenesis,
palatogenesis, temporomandibular joint formation, and cardiovascular development.
During embryonic cardiac development, Shox2 is restrictedly expressed in the
sinus venosus region, including the sinoatrial node (SAN) and the sinus valves.
Shox2 null mutant is embryonically lethal due to cardiovascular defects,
including a severely hypoplastic SAN and sinus valves attributed to a
significantly decreased level of cell proliferation in addition to an abnormal
low heartbeat rate (bradycardia). In addition, it has been demonstrated that
Shox2 regulates a genetic network through the repression of Nkx2.5 to maintain
the SAN fate and thus plays essential roles in its proper formation and
differentiation.

PMID: 22307400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2012;136(2):157-62. doi: 10.1159/000335705. Epub 2012 Jan
25.

47,X,idic(Y),inv dup(Y): a non-mosaic case of a phenotypically normal boy with
two different Y isochromosomes and neocentromere formation.

Pasantes JJ(1), Wimmer R, Knebel S, Münch C, Kelbova C, Junge A, Kieback P,
Küpferling P, Schempp W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology, University of Vigo, Vigo,
Spain.

A de novo aberrant karyotype with 47 chromosomes including 2 different-sized
markers was identified during prenatal diagnosis. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) with a Y painting probe tagged both marker chromosomes which
were supposed to be isochromosomes of the short and the long arm, respectively. A
normal boy was born in time who shows normal physical and mental development. To 
characterize both Y markers in detail, we postnatally FISH-mapped a panel of Y
chromosomal probes including SHOX (PAR1), TSPY, DYZ3 (Y centromere), UTY, XKRY,
CDY, RBMY, DAZ, DYZ1 (Yq12 heterochromatin), SYBL1 (PAR2), and the human
telomeric sequence (TTAGGG)(n). The smaller Y marker turned out to be an
isochromosome containing an inverted duplication of the entire short arm, the
original Y centromere, and parts of the proximal long arm, including AZFa. The
bigger Y marker was an isochromosome of the rest of the Y long arm. Despite a
clearly visible primary constriction within one of the DAPI- and DYZ1-positive
heterochromatic regions, hybridization of DYZ3 detected no Y-specific alphoid
sequences in that constriction. Because of its stable mitotic distribution, a de 
novo formation of a neocentromere has to be assumed.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22286088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Jan;20(1):125-7. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.210. Epub 2011 Nov 
9.

Identification of the first PAR1 deletion encompassing upstream SHOX enhancers in
a family with idiopathic short stature.

Benito-Sanz S(1), Aza-Carmona M, Rodríguez-Estevez A, Rica-Etxebarria I, Gracia
R, Campos-Barros A, Heath KE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ, Spain.

Short stature homeobox-containing gene, MIM 312865 (SHOX) is located within the
pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1) of the sex chromosomes. Mutations in SHOX or its 
downstream transcriptional regulatory elements represent the underlying molecular
defect in ~60% of Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and ~5-15% of idiopathic
short stature (ISS) patients. Recently, three novel enhancer elements have been
identified upstream of SHOX but to date, no PAR1 deletions upstream of SHOX have 
been observed that only encompass these enhancers in LWD or ISS patients. We set 
out to search for genetic alterations of the upstream SHOX regulatory elements in
63 LWD and 100 ISS patients with no known alteration in SHOX or the downstream
enhancer regions using a specifically designed MLPA assay, which covers the PAR1 
upstream of SHOX. An upstream SHOX deletion was identified in an ISS proband and 
her affected father. The deletion was confirmed and delimited by array-CGH, to
extend ~286 kb. The deletion included two of the upstream SHOX enhancers without 
affecting SHOX. The 13.3-year-old proband had proportionate short stature with
normal GH and IGF-I levels. In conclusion, we have identified the first PAR1
deletion encompassing only the upstream SHOX transcription regulatory elements in
a family with ISS. The loss of these elements may result in SHOX
haploinsufficiency because of decreased SHOX transcription. Therefore, this
upstream region should be included in the routine analysis of PAR1 in patients
with LWD, LMD and ISS.

PMCID: PMC3234524
PMID: 22071895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Gene. 2012 Jan 10;491(2):123-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.10.011. Epub 2011 Oct
14.

SHOX gene defects and selected dysmorphic signs in patients of idiopathic short
stature and Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis.

Hirschfeldova K(1), Solc R, Baxova A, Zapletalova J, Kebrdlova V, Gaillyova R,
Prasilova S, Soukalova J, Mihalova R, Lnenicka P, Florianova M, Stekrova J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine and General
Teaching Hospital, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
kzidk@lf1.cuni.cz

The aim of the study was to analyze frequency of SHOX gene defects and selected
dysmorphic signs in patients of both idiopathic short stature (ISS) and
Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), all derived from the Czech population.
Overall, 98 subjects were analyzed in the study. Inclusion criteria were the
presence of short stature (-2.0 SD), in combination with at least one of the
selected dysmorphic signs for the ISS+ group; and the presence of Madelung
deformity, without positive karyotyping for the LWD+ group. Each proband was
analyzed by use of P018 MLPA kit, which covers SHOX and its regulatory sequences.
Additionally, mutational analysis was done of the coding portions of the SHOX.
Both extent and breakpoint localizations in the deletions/duplications found were
quite variable. Some PAR1 rearrangements were detected, without obvious
phenotypic association. In the ISS+ group, MLPA analysis detected four PAR1
deletions associated with a SHOX gene defect, PAR1 duplication with an ambiguous 
effect, and two SHOX mutations (13.7%). In the LWD+ group, MLPA analysis detected
nine deletions in PAR1 region, with a deleterious effect on SHOX, first reported 
case of isolated SHOX enhancer duplication, and SHOX mutation (68.8%). In both
ISS+ and LWD+ groups were positivity associated with a disproportionately short
stature; in the ISS+ group, in combination with muscular hypertrophy. It seems
that small PAR1 rearrangements might be quite frequent in the population. Our
study suggests disproportionateness, especially in combination with muscular
hypertrophy, as relevant indicators of ISS to be the effect of SHOX defect.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22020182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Horm Res Paediatr. 2011;76 Suppl 3:11-3. doi: 10.1159/000330140. Epub 2011 Sep 7.

Genetics of human stature: Insight from single gene disorders.

Kiess W(1), Kratzsch J, Kruis T, Müller E, Wallborn T, Odeh R, Schlicke M, Klammt
J, Pfäffle R.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Leipzig, Leipzig,
Germany.

Mutations of numerous genes encoding proteins that affect multiple pathways
responsible for regulation of cell proliferation can cause growth disturbances in
humans. Genes such as HESX1, PROP1, PIT1/POU1F1 and GLI2 have been shown to cause
pituitary hormone deficiency. In addition, heterozygous mutations or gene
deletions in the growth hormone-insulin-like growth factor (GH-IGF) axis such as 
the GH, GH-releasing hormone receptor, GH receptor, STAT5b, IGF-I, IGF-I receptor
and the acid labile subunit have also been observed in children with growth
failure and short stature. More recently, mutations of genes encoding regulators 
of cell proliferation and division, i.e., the pericentrin gene, have also
resulted in severe growth disturbances.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21912148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Endocrinol Nutr. 2011 Oct;58(8):433-42. doi: 10.1016/j.endonu.2011.06.005. Epub
2011 Sep 16.

The role of the SHOX gene in the pathophysiology of Turner syndrome.

Oliveira CS(1), Alves C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health Sciences, Federal University of Bahia, Salvador, Bahia,
Brazil.

Turner syndrome (TS) affects 1:2500 live females. It is caused by partial or
complete absence of a sex chromosome. Patients with deletions of the distal
segment of the short arm of X chromosome (Xp-) including haploinsufficiency of
the SHOX (short stature homeobox) have, more often, short stature, skeletal
abnormalities and hearing impairments. This article evaluates the current
knowledge of the SHOX gene role in TS pathophysiology. Articles were searched
from MEDLINE and LILACS databases, in the past 10 years, using the following
keywords: Turner syndrome, SHOX gene, haploinsufficiency, short stature and
hearing loss. As the inheritance of only one copy of the SHOX gene does not
explain most of TS anomalies, more studies are needed to explain them. These
studies will also improve understanding how SHOX participates in cartilage and
bone growth and will help develop novel therapeutic strategies focused on
SHOX-related disorders.

Copyright © 2011 SEEN. Published by Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21925981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Horm Res Paediatr. 2011;76(3):178-85. doi: 10.1159/000329359. Epub 2011 Sep 10.

Clinical and radiological characteristics of 22 children with SHOX anomalies and 
familial short stature suggestive of Léri-Weill Dyschondrosteosis.

Salmon-Musial AS(1), Rosilio M, David M, Huber C, Pichot E, Cormier-Daire V,
Nicolino M.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Department, American Memorial Hospital, Reims, France.

AIMS: To describe genetic, clinical, anthropometric and radiological
characteristics of 22 children with SHOX gene anomalies and familial short
stature suggestive of Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis.
METHODS: Monocentric retrospective observational study.
RESULTS: Six children (27%) presented with deletions located downstream of SHOX
(mean height -1.4 ± 0.9 SDS) and 16 (68%) with either deletions encompassing
SHOX, intragenic deletions or point mutations of SHOX (mean patient height for
the 3 latter types of anomalies: -2.6 ± 0.8 SDS). In our sample, the two most
frequently observed dysmorphic signs were clinical and/or radiological Madelung
deformity (86%) and high arched palate (77%). Half the girls were born small for 
gestational age. Sixteen children treated with recombinant growth hormone had an 
increase in height from -2.7 ± 0.7 to -1.4 ± 0.7 SDS. Four children achieved
adult height (-2.0 ± 0.9 SDS) with a gain over baseline height of 1.0 ± 0.5 SDS
after a mean treatment duration of 5.8 ± 2.1 years.
CONCLUSION: Patients shared common clinical, anthropometric and radiological
signs but their height deficit varied, depending on the type of the SHOX gene
anomaly. Due to the small size of our sample, our findings need to be confirmed
in a larger population of patients.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21912078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Feb;20(2). doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.158. Epub 2011 Sep 7.

Clinical utility gene card for: Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome.

Morcel K(1), Dallapiccola B, Pasquier L, Watrin T, Bernardini L, Guerrier D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UMR 6061-IGDR, Equipe 'Génétique des Pathologies Liées au
Développement', Rennes, France.

PMCID: PMC3260917
PMID: 21897448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Endocr Dev. 2011;21:30-41. doi: 10.1159/000328119. Epub 2011 Aug 22.

Endocrine regulation of longitudinal bone growth.

Wit JM(1), Camacho-Hübner C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. j.m.wit@lumc.nl

Longitudinal growth is primarily influenced by the GH-IGF-I axis, which is a
mixed endocrine-paracrine-autocrine system. Further, classical hormones such as
thyroxine, glucocorticosteroids and sex steroids play a role, as well as
primarily paracrine systems. In the GH-IGF-I axis, seven disorders can be
differentiated: (1) GH deficiency; (2) GHR defects; (3) defects in the GH signal 
transduction pathway; (4) IGF1 defects; (5) IGFALS defects; (6) IGF1R defects,
and (7) IGF2 defects. Children with one of the first 3 disorders have near-normal
prenatal growth, while children with defects of IGF1, IGF1R or IGF2 show prenatal
as well as postnatal growth retardation. Hypothyroidism or a thyroid hormone
resistance cause growth failure, but the effect of hyperthyroidism on growth is
modest. Hypercortisolism causes poor growth, while FGD caused by ACTH
insensitivity is associated with tall stature. Increased sex steroids in
childhood cause advanced growth but even more skeletal maturation, so that adult 
height is decreased. Finally, the paracrine-autocrine SHOX-BNP pathway and the
related CNP-NPR2 pathway are also involved in growth, as very many other growth
factors and their receptors and mediators.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21865752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2011 Aug 2;6:53. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-53.

Evaluation of SHOX copy number variations in patients with Müllerian aplasia.

Sandbacka M(1), Halttunen M, Jokimaa V, Aittomäki K, Laivuori H.

Author information: 
(1)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland.
maria.sandbacka@helsinki.fi

BACKGROUND: Müllerian aplasia (MA) characterized by congenital loss of functional
uterus and vagina is one of the most difficult disorders of female reproductive
health. Despite of growing interest in this research field, the cause of the
disorder for the majority of patients is still unknown. A recent report of
partial SHOX duplications in five patients with MA has motivated us to further
evaluate their role in the disorder. Therefore we have studied SHOX copy number
variations (CNVs) in a cohort of 101 Finnish patients with MA and in 115 healthy 
controls.
METHODS: We used multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) to study
SHOX CNVs.
RESULTS: All patients showed normal amplification of SHOX. Several aberrations,
duplications and deletions, were found downstream of the gene in five patients
and seven controls, but these were all copy number polymorphisms.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study in an extensive cohort of patients with MA does not
support a role for SHOX CNVs in the aetiology of the disorder. Further studies in
the field are important for both patients looking for answers as well as for the 
scientific community for better understanding the regulation of the female
reproductive duct development.

PMCID: PMC3159099
PMID: 21806840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21498. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021498. Epub 2011 Jun 24.

Functional analysis of conserved non-coding regions around the short stature hox 
gene (shox) in whole zebrafish embryos.

Kenyon EJ(1), McEwen GK, Callaway H, Elgar G.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Cambridge,
Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom. ek1@sanger.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the SHOX gene are responsible for Leri-Weill
Dyschondrosteosis, a disorder characterised by mesomelic limb shortening. Recent 
investigations into regulatory elements surrounding SHOX have shown that
deletions of conserved non-coding elements (CNEs) downstream of the SHOX gene
produce a phenotype indistinguishable from Leri-Weill Dyschondrosteosis. As this 
gene is not found in rodents, we used zebrafish as a model to characterise the
expression pattern of the shox gene across the whole embryo and characterise the 
enhancer domains of different CNEs associated with this gene.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Expression of the shox gene in zebrafish was
identified using in situ hybridization, with embryos showing expression in the
blood, putative heart, hatching gland, brain pharyngeal arch, olfactory
epithelium, and fin bud apical ectodermal ridge. By identifying sequences showing
65% identity over at least 40 nucleotides between Fugu, human, dog and opossum we
uncovered 35 CNEs around the shox gene. These CNEs were compared with CNEs
previously discovered by Sabherwal et al., resulting in the identification of
smaller more deeply conserved sub-sequence. Sabherwal et al.'s CNEs were assayed 
for regulatory function in whole zebrafish embryos resulting in the
identification of additional tissues under the regulatory control of these CNEs.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results using whole zebrafish embryos have provided 
a more comprehensive picture of the expression pattern of the shox gene, and a
better understanding of its regulation via deeply conserved noncoding elements.
In particular, we identify additional tissues under the regulatory control of
previously identified SHOX CNEs. We also demonstrate the importance of these CNEs
in evolution by identifying duplicated shox CNEs and more deeply conserved
sub-sequences within already identified CNEs.

PMCID: PMC3123344
PMID: 21731768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Dec;19(12):1218-25. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.128. Epub 2011
Jun 29.

Identification of a Gypsy SHOX mutation (p.A170P) in Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis
and Langer mesomelic dysplasia.

Barca-Tierno V(1), Aza-Carmona M, Barroso E, Heine-Suner D, Azmanov D, Rosell J, 
Ezquieta B, Montané LS, Vendrell T, Cruz J, Santos F, Rodríguez JI, Pozo J,
Argente J, Kalaydjieva L, Gracía R, Campos-Barros A, Benito-Sanz S, Heath KE.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular, Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

We report the clinical and molecular characteristics of 12 Spanish families with 
multiple members affected with Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) or Langer
mesomelic dysplasia (LMD), who present the SHOX (short stature homeobox gene)
mutation p.A170P (c.508G>C) in heterozygosity or homozygosity, respectively. In
all studied families, the A170P mutation co-segregated with the fully penetrant
phenotype of mesomelic limb shortening and Madelung deformity. A shared haplotype
around SHOX was observed by microsatellite analysis, confirming the presence of a
common ancestor, probably of Gypsy origin, as 11 of the families were of this
ethnic group. Mutation screening in 359 Eastern-European Gypsies failed to
identify any carriers. For the first time, we have shown SHOX expression in the
human growth plate of a 22-week LMD fetus, homozygous for the A170P mutation.
Although the mutant SHOX protein was expressed in all zones of the growth plate, 
the chondrocyte columns in the proliferative zone were disorganized with the
chondrocytes occurring in smaller columnal clusters. We have also identified a
novel mutation at the same residue, c. 509C>A (p.A170D), in two unrelated Spanish
LWD families, which similar to A170P mutation impedes nuclear localization of
SHOX. In conclusion, we have identified A170P as the first frequent SHOX mutation
in Gypsy LWD and LMD individuals.

PMCID: PMC3230364
PMID: 21712857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Thorac Oncol. 2011 Oct;6(10):1632-8. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318220ef9a.

SHOX2 DNA methylation is a biomarker for the diagnosis of lung cancer in plasma.

Kneip C(1), Schmidt B, Seegebarth A, Weickmann S, Fleischhacker M, Liebenberg V, 
Field JK, Dietrich D.

Author information: 
(1)Theracode GmbH, Mainz, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Recently, analysis of DNA methylation of the SHOX2 locus was shown 
to reliably identify lung cancer in bronchial aspirates of patients with disease.
As a plasma-based assay would expand the possible applications of the SHOX2
biomarker, this study aimed to develop a modified SHOX2 assay for use in a
blood-based test and to analyze the performance of this optimized SHOX2
methylation assay in plasma.
METHODS: Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to analyze DNA
methylation of SHOX2 in plasma samples from 411 individuals. A training study (20
stage IV patients with lung cancer and 20 controls) was performed to show the
feasibility of detecting the SHOX2 biomarker in blood and to determine a
methylation cutoff for patient classification. The resulting cutoff was verified 
in a testing study composed of 371 plasma samples from patients with lung cancer 
and controls.
RESULTS: DNA methylation of SHOX2 could be used as a biomarker to distinguish
between malignant lung disease and controls at a sensitivity of 60% (95%
confidence interval: 53-67%) and a specificity of 90% (95% confidence interval:
84-94%). Cancer in patients with stages II (72%), III (55%), and IV (83%) was
detected at a higher sensitivity when compared with stage I patients. Small cell 
lung cancer (80%) and squamous cell carcinoma (63%) were detected at the highest 
sensitivity when compared with adenocarcinomas.
CONCLUSIONS: SHOX2 DNA methylation is a biomarker for detecting the presence of
malignant lung disease in blood plasma from patients with lung cancer.

PMID: 21694641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. BMC Evol Biol. 2011 Jun 16;11:169. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-169.

The dynamics of vertebrate homeobox gene evolution: gain and loss of genes in
mouse and human lineages.

Zhong YF(1), Holland PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PS,
UK.

Erratum in
    BMC Evol Biol. 2011;11:204.

BACKGROUND: Homeobox genes are a large and diverse group of genes, many of which 
play important roles in transcriptional regulation during embryonic development. 
Comparison of homeobox genes between species may provide insights into the
evolution of developmental mechanisms.
RESULTS: Here we report an extensive survey of human and mouse homeobox genes
based on their most recent genome assemblies, providing the first comprehensive
analysis of mouse homeobox genes and updating an earlier survey of human homeobox
genes. In total we recognize 333 human homeobox loci comprising 255 probable
genes and 78 probable pseudogenes, and 324 mouse homeobox loci comprising 279
probable genes and 45 probable pseudogenes (accessible at
http://homeodb.zoo.ox.ac.uk). Comparison to partial genome sequences from other
species allows us to resolve which differences are due to gain of genes and which
are due to gene losses.
CONCLUSIONS: We find there has been much more homeobox gene loss in the rodent
evolutionary lineage than in the primate lineage. While humans have lost only the
Msx3 gene, mice have lost Ventx, Argfx, Dprx, Shox, Rax2, LOC647589, Tprx1 and
Nanognb. This analysis provides insight into the patterns of homeobox gene
evolution in the mammals, and a step towards relating genomic evolution to
phenotypic evolution.

PMCID: PMC3141429
PMID: 21679462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Arch Dis Child. 2012 Jan;97(1):63-8. doi: 10.1136/adc.2010.186205. Epub 2011 May 
3.

Indications for growth hormone therapy in children.

Kirk J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Birmingham Children's Hospital, Steelhouse Lane, 
Birmingham B4 6NH, UK. jeremy.kirk@bch.nhs.uk

Growth hormone (GH) therapy has now been available for over 5 decades, with all
GH now biosynthetically produced, and administered by daily injection. Paediatric
GH is currently licensed in six different conditions: growth hormone deficiency
(GHD), Turner syndrome (TS), small for gestational age (SGA),
Prader-Willi-syndrome (PWS), chronic renal insufficiency (CRI), and short stature
due to SHOX deficiency; all of these have been ratified by the most recent (2010)
NICE review. Whilst the primary purpose of paediatric GH therapy in most
indications is to improve short and long-term growth, in others (eg. PWS) it has 
a role in improvement of body composition. Recent UK national audits indicate
approximately 4700 children receiving GH therapy, with approximately 760 new
starts a year, with most prescription still via historical growth centres. There 
are currently 7 different manufacturers of GH, and while most UK units currently 
offer free patient choice for GH device, with preliminary evidence indicating
that this may improve adherence with therapy, the 30% price difference may limit 
choice in the future.

PMID: 21540481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 13;286(19):17029-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.234252. Epub
2011 Mar 28.

Functional redundancy between human SHOX and mouse Shox2 genes in the regulation 
of sinoatrial node formation and pacemaking function.

Liu H(1), Chen CH, Espinoza-Lewis RA, Jiao Z, Sheu I, Hu X, Lin M, Zhang Y, Chen 
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans,
Louisiana 70118, USA.

The homeodomain transcription factor Shox2 plays a crucial regulatory role in the
development of sinoatrial node (SAN) by repressing the expression of Nkx2.5, as
demonstrated by failed differentiation of SAN in Shox2 null mice. The SHOX (short
stature homeobox) gene family consists of two closely related members, SHOX and
SHOX2 in humans, but a SHOX ortholog does not exist in the mouse genome. These
two genes exhibit overlapping and distinct expression patterns in many developing
organs but whether they share functional redundancy is not known. In this study, 
we set to investigate possible functional redundancy between SHOX and SHOX2 in
vitro and in vivo. We first showed that human SHOX and SHOX2 and mouse Shox2
possess similar transcriptional repressive activities in cell cultures,
particularly the repressive effects on the Nkx2.5 promoter activity. We further
created an SHOX/Shox2 knock-in mouse line (replacement of Shox2 with SHOX,
referred as Shox2(KI/KI)). Mice carrying the hypomorphic Shox2(KI+Neo/KI+Neo)
allele exhibit bradycardia and arrhythmia and die a few days after birth.
However, mice carrying the Shox2(KI/KI) allele grow to adulthood. Physiological, 
histological, and molecular analyses demonstrate a fully developed SAN and normal
pacemaking function in Shox2(KI/KI) mice. Our results demonstrate a functional
redundancy between human SHOX and mouse Shox2 in the regulation of SAN formation 
and pacemaking function in addition to several other organs. The SHOX/Shox2 dose 
appears to be critical for normal pacemaking function.

PMCID: PMC3089547
PMID: 21454626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 23;6(3):e18115. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018115.

Alternative splicing and nonsense-mediated RNA decay contribute to the regulation
of SHOX expression.

Durand C(1), Roeth R, Dweep H, Vlatkovic I, Decker E, Schneider KU, Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

The human SHOX gene is composed of seven exons and encodes a paired-related
homeodomain transcription factor. SHOX mutations or deletions have been
associated with different short stature syndromes implying a role in growth and
bone formation. During development, SHOX is expressed in a highly specific
spatiotemporal expression pattern, the underlying regulatory mechanisms of which 
remain largely unknown. We have analysed SHOX expression in diverse embryonic,
fetal and adult human tissues and detected expression in many tissues that were
not known to express SHOX before, e.g. distinct brain regions. By using RT-PCR
and comparing the results with RNA-Seq data, we have identified four novel exons 
(exon 2a, 7-1, 7-2 and 7-3) contributing to different SHOX isoforms, and also
established an expression profile for the emerging new SHOX isoforms.
Interestingly, we found the exon 7 variants to be exclusively expressed in fetal 
neural tissues, which could argue for a specific role of these variants during
brain development. A bioinformatical analysis of the three novel 3'UTR exons
yielded insights into the putative role of the different 3'UTRs as targets for
miRNA binding. Functional analysis revealed that inclusion of exon 2a leads to
nonsense-mediated RNA decay altering SHOX expression in a tissue and time
specific manner. In conclusion, SHOX expression is regulated by different
mechanisms and alternative splicing coupled with nonsense-mediated RNA decay
constitutes a further component that can be used to fine tune the SHOX expression
level.

PMCID: PMC3063249
PMID: 21448463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Apr;155A(4):935-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33872. Epub 2011
Mar 17.

A non-pathogenic pseudoautosomal region 1 copy number variant downstream of SHOX.

Benito-Sanz S, Aragones A, Gracia R, Campos-Barros A, Heath KE.

Comment on
    Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Sep;152A(9):2230-5.

PMID: 21416591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Apr;155A(4):938-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33871. Epub 2011
Mar 15.

A non-pathogenic pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1) copy number variant downstream
of SHOX.

Reish O, Huber C, Altarescu G, Chapman-Shimshoni D, Levy-Lahad E, Renbaum P,
Mashevich M, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V.

PMID: 21412972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. An Pediatr (Barc). 2011 Jun;74(6):405-8. doi: 10.1016/j.anpedi.2011.01.005. Epub 
2011 Mar 11.

[Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis. A variable expression SHOX gene mutation].

[Article in Spanish]

Llano-Rivas I(1), Fernández-Toral J, Navarro-Vera I.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Genética, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo,
Asturias, Spain. isallano@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: A mesomelic dysplasia with shortened limbs was first described by
Leri and Weill in 1929. Since then the causal gene has been known as SHOX (short 
stature homeobox) gene, located in Xp22 and Yp11.3, with mutations being
identified in between 56% and 100% of the patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: One of the observations is familial and the other is an
isolated case. The diagnosis in both cases was clinical, supported by radiology
and a molecular study of the SHOX gene using multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA).
CONCLUSIONS: Knowledge of this condition has therapeutic implications, given the 
favourable progress with growth hormone treatment, as well as possible surgical
procedures and genetic counselling, due to its autosomal dominant hereditary
character.

Copyright © 2010 Asociación Española de Pediatría. Published by Elsevier Espana. 
All rights reserved.

PMID: 21397576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Mar;96(3):573-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-1131.

Update in growth hormone therapy of children.

Collett-Solberg PF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Estadual de Diabetes e Endocrinologia Luiz Capriglione, 22470-030
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. paulosolberg@yahoo.com

Although recombinant human GH (rhGH) has been available since 1985, there are
several questions related to its use that remain unanswered. The Entrez-PubMed
search engine was used to conduct a review of publications appearing since 2007
that address growth and GH treatment. Recent publications related to the
diagnosis of GH deficiency, genetics of growth, the use of rhGH in different
genetic conditions, in idiopathic short stature, and in puberty, and strategies
to adjust rhGH dose were reviewed. New studies investigating the genetics of
growth and the response to rhGH therapy in different groups are helping in the
understanding of the physiology of normal growth. Although in most children
treated with rhGH there is a short-term benefit, the clinical relevance of the
benefits after long-term treatment in some conditions remains unclear. The
challenges are to define milder forms of GH deficiency and to assess the
relevance of the benefits, if any, caused by rhGH in different patient
populations and the best therapeutic approach for these patients. Well-designed
long-term studies using anthropometric, genetic, and laboratory data that will
also assess long-term quality of life benefits are needed to help clinicians
select patients to initiate treatment with rhGH and to adjust treatment to
improve outcome.

PMID: 21378219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Horm Res Paediatr. 2011 Feb;75(2):81-9. doi: 10.1159/000324105. Epub 2011 Feb 4.

Short stature due to SHOX deficiency: genotype, phenotype, and therapy.

Binder G(1).

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital, Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology,
Tübingen, Germany. gerhard.binder @ med.uni-tuebingen.de

SHOX deficiency is a frequent cause of short stature. The short stature
homeobox-containing gene resides in the telomeric PAR1 region on the short arm of
both sex chromosomes and escapes X inactivation. For this review, abstracts of
207 publications presented by PubMed for the search term 'SHOX' were screened.
Heterozygote SHOX mutations (80% deletions) were detected in 2-15% of individuals
with formerly idiopathic short stature, in 50-90% of individuals with Leri-Weill 
dyschondrosteosis, and in almost 100% of girls with Turner syndrome. Mutational
analysis is primarily performed by MLPA analysis followed by gene sequencing if
necessary. SHOX is a nuclear protein that binds to DNA and acts as a
transcriptional activator. Orthologs are present in many vertebrates but not in
rodents. Gene expression starting as early as 33 days postconception in humans is
predominant in the mid portion of the buds and in the first and second pharyngeal
arches. In the growth plate, hypertrophic chondrocytes express SHOX where it
seems to have antiproliferative potency. The penetrance of SHOX deficiency is
high, but its clinical expression is very variable becoming more pronounced with 
age and being more severe in females. Growth failure starts early during the
first years of life and the height deficit present at preschool age seems not to 
deteriorate further. The mean adult height is -2.2 SDS. Auxological analysis of
the body proportions (mesomelia), the presence of minor abnormalities, and the
search for subtle radiographic signs are important keys to the diagnosis which
has to be confirmed by genetic analysis. The growth-promoting effect of GH
therapy approved for individuals with SHOX mutations seems to be equal to the
effect seen in Turner syndrome.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21325865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Apr 15;20(8):1524-35. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr030. Epub 2011 Jan 
27.

FGFR3 is a target of the homeobox transcription factor SHOX in limb development.

Decker E(1), Durand C, Bender S, Rödelsperger C, Glaser A, Hecht J, Schneider KU,
Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany.

The short stature homeobox gene SHOX encodes a transcription factor which is
important for normal limb development. In humans, SHOX deficiency has been
associated with various short stature syndromes including Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis (LWD), Langer mesomelic dysplasia and Turner syndrome as well
as non-syndromic idiopathic short stature. A common feature of these syndromes is
disproportionate short stature with a particular shortening of the forearms and
lower legs. In our studies employing microarray analyses and cell culture
experiments, we revealed a strong positive effect of SHOX on the expression of
the fibroblast growth factor receptor gene FGFR3, another well-known factor for
limb development. Luciferase reporter gene assays show that SHOX activates the
extended FGFR3 promoter, and results from chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP)-sequencing, ChIP and electrophoretic mobility shift assay experiments
suggest a direct binding of SHOX to multiple upstream sequences of FGFR3. To
further investigate these regulations in a cellular system for limb development, 
the effect of viral overexpression of Shox in limb bud derived chicken micromass 
cultures was tested. We found that Fgfr3 was negatively regulated by Shox, as
demonstrated by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and in situ
hybridization. This repressive effect might explain the almost mutually exclusive
expression patterns of Fgfr3 and Shox in embryonic chicken limbs. A negative
regulation that occurs mainly in the mesomelic segments, a region where SHOX is
known to be strongly expressed, offers a possible explanation for the phenotypes 
seen in patients with FGFR3 (e.g. achondroplasia) and SHOX defects (e.g. LWD). In
summary, these data present a link between two frequent short stature phenotypes.

PMID: 21273290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Apr 15;20(8):1547-59. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr032. Epub 2011 Jan 
24.

SHOX interacts with the chondrogenic transcription factors SOX5 and SOX6 to
activate the aggrecan enhancer.

Aza-Carmona M(1), Shears DJ, Yuste-Checa P, Barca-Tierno V, Hisado-Oliva A,
Belinchón A, Benito-Sanz S, Rodríguez JI, Argente J, Campos-Barros A, Scambler
PJ, Heath KE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario
La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain.

SHOX (short stature homeobox-containing gene) encodes a transcription factor
implicated in skeletal development. SHOX haploinsufficiency has been demonstrated
in Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), a skeletal dysplasia associated with
disproportionate short stature, as well as in a variable proportion of cases with
idiopathic short stature (ISS). In order to gain insight into the SHOX signalling
pathways, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen to identify SHOX-interacting
proteins. Two transcription factors, SOX5 and SOX6, were identified.
Co-immunoprecipitation assays confirmed the existence of the SHOX-SOX5 and
SHOX-SOX6 interactions in human cells, whereas immunohistochemical studies
demonstrated the coexpression of these proteins in 18- and 32-week human fetal
growth plates. The SHOX homeodomain and the SOX6 HMG domain were shown to be
implicated in the SHOX-SOX6 interaction. Moreover, different SHOX missense
mutations, identified in LWD and ISS patients, disrupted this interaction. The
physiological importance of these interactions was investigated by studying the
effect of SHOX on a transcriptional target of the SOX trio, Agc1, which encodes
one of the main components of cartilage, aggrecan. Our results show that SHOX
cooperates with SOX5/SOX6 and SOX9 in the activation of the upstream Agc1
enhancer and that SHOX mutations affect this activation. In conclusion, we have
identified SOX5 and SOX6 as the first two SHOX-interacting proteins and have
shown that this interaction regulates aggrecan expression, an essential factor in
chondrogenesis and skeletal development.

PMID: 21262861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Apr;96(4):E674-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-2018. Epub
2011 Jan 20.

Aberrations in pseudoautosomal regions (PARs) found in infertile men with
Y-chromosome microdeletions.

Jorgez CJ(1), Weedin JW, Sahin A, Tannour-Louet M, Han S, Bournat JC, Mielnik A, 
Cheung SW, Nangia AK, Schlegel PN, Lipshultz LI, Lamb DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Scott Department of Urology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA.

CONTEXT: The pseudoautosomal regions (PARs) of the Y-chromosome undergo meiotic
recombination with the X-chromosome. PAR mutations are associated with
infertility and mental and stature disorders.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to determine whether men with Y-chromosome
microdeletions have structural defects in PARs.
DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: Eighty-seven infertile men with Y-chromosome
microdeletions and 35 controls were evaluated for chromosomal rearrangements
using commercial or custom (X- and Y-chromosome) array comparative genomic
hybridization or by quantitative PCR of selected PAR genes. Multisoftware-defined
chromosomal gains or losses were validated by quantitative PCR and FISH.
RESULTS: Array comparative genomic hybridization confirmed the AZF deletions
identified by multiplex PCR. All men with Y-chromosome microdeletions and an
abnormal karyotype displayed PAR abnormalities, as did 10% of men with
Y-chromosome microdeletions and a normal karyotype. None of the control subjects 
or infertile men without Y-chromosome microdeletions had PAR duplications or
deletions. SHOX aberrations occurred in 14 men (nine gains and five losses); four
were short in stature (<10th percentile), and one was tall (>95th percentile). In
contrast, the height of 23 men with Y-chromosome microdeletions and normal PARs
was average at 176.8 cm (50th percentile).
CONCLUSIONS: Y-chromosome microdeletions can include PAR defects causing genomic 
disorders such as SHOX, which may be transmitted to offspring. Previously
unrecognized PAR gains and losses in men with Y-chromosome microdeletions may
have consequences for offspring.

PMCID: PMC3070254
PMID: 21252244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Dev Biol. 2011 Feb 15;350(2):323-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.11.031. Epub 2010 
Dec 13.

Shox2 function couples neural, muscular and skeletal development in the proximal 
forelimb.

Vickerman L(1), Neufeld S, Cobb J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.

The mouse Shox2 gene codes for a homeodomain transcription factor that is
required to form the proximal bones of the limbs, the humerus and femur. Shox2 is
the only gene known to be essential for the specific development of these
skeletal elements. Shox2 is also of special interest because it is closely
related to the human SHOX gene, deficiencies of which cause the short stature in 
Turner, Langer and Léri-Weill syndromes. In order to understand in more detail
the development of the proximal limb, we searched for Shox2-dependent gene
expression patterns using Affymetrix microarrays. We compared the mRNA of
Shox2-mutant and wild-type forelimb buds at 10.5 and 11.5 days of embryonic
development (E10.5 and E11.5) and successfully identified a set of genes whose
wild-type expression pattern requires Shox2 function, as confirmed by in situ
hybridization for eleven of the candidates. Strikingly, several of the identified
genes were predicted to have functions in tissues other than the skeleton,
including nerves and muscle precursors, prompting us to analyze neural and
muscular patterning in Shox2 mutants. We report here an axonal migration defect
in Shox2 mutants resulting in a profound innervation deficiency of the dorsal
forelimb, including the complete absence of the radial and axillary nerves.
Muscular development was also altered as early as E11.5. Specifically, the
triceps muscles that develop along the posterior face of the humerus had severe
abnormalities. These data demonstrate that Shox2 is required for normal skeletal,
neural and muscular development in the forelimb at a similar early developmental 
stage in each tissue.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21156168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2010 Dec;8(2):79-85.

Short stature caused by isolated SHOX gene haploinsufficiency: update on the
diagnosis and treatment.

Jorge AA(1), Funari MF, Nishi MY, Mendonca BB.

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

Heterozygous SHOX defects are observed in about 50 to 90% of patients with
Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), a common dominant inherited skeletal
dysplasia; and in 2 to 15% of children with idiopathic short stature (ISS),
indicating that SHOX defects are the most important monogenetic cause of short
stature. In addition, children selected by disproportionate idiopathic short
stature had a higher frequency of SHOX mutations (22%). A careful clinical
evaluation of family members with short stature is recommended since it usually
revealed LWD patients in families first classified as having ISS or familial
short stature. SHOX-molecular analysis is indicated in families with LWD and ISS 
children with disproportionate short stature. Treatment with recombinant human
growth hormone is considered an accepted approach to treat short stature
associated with isolated SHOX defect. Here we review clinical, molecular and
therapeutic aspects of SHOX haploinsufficiency.

PMID: 21150837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Feb;96(2):E404-12. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-1689. Epub 
2010 Dec 8.

Clinical and molecular evaluation of SHOX/PAR1 duplications in Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and idiopathic short stature (ISS).

Benito-Sanz S(1), Barroso E, Heine-Suñer D, Hisado-Oliva A, Romanelli V, Rosell
J, Aragones A, Caimari M, Argente J, Ross JL, Zinn AR, Gracia R, Lapunzina P,
Campos-Barros A, Heath KE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ, and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en 
Red de Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28046 Madrid, Spain.

CONTEXT: Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) is a skeletal dysplasia characterized
by disproportionate short stature and the Madelung deformity of the forearm. SHOX
mutations and pseudoautosomal region 1 deletions encompassing SHOX or its
enhancers have been identified in approximately 60% of LWD and approximately 15% 
of idiopathic short stature (ISS) individuals. Recently SHOX duplications have
been described in LWD/ISS but also in individuals with other clinical
manifestations, thus questioning their pathogenicity.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to investigate the pathogenicity of
SHOX duplications in LWD and ISS.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification is routinely
used in our unit to analyze for SHOX/pseudoautosomal region 1 copy number changes
in LWD/ISS referrals. Quantitative PCR, microsatellite marker, and fluorescence
in situ hybridization analysis were undertaken to confirm all identified
duplications.
RESULTS: During the routine analysis of 122 LWD and 613 ISS referrals, a total of
four complete and 10 partial SHOX duplications or multiple copy number (n > 3) as
well as one duplication of the SHOX 5' flanking region were identified in nine
LWD and six ISS cases. Partial SHOX duplications appeared to have a more
deleterious effect on skeletal dysplasia and height gain than complete SHOX
duplications. Importantly, no increase in SHOX copy number was identified in 340 
individuals with normal stature or 104 overgrowth referrals.
CONCLUSION: MLPA analysis of SHOX/PAR1 led to the identification of partial and
complete SHOX duplications or multiple copies associated with LWD or ISS,
suggesting that they may represent an additional class of mutations implicated in
the molecular etiology of these clinical entities.

PMID: 21147883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2011 Mar;28(3):233-8. doi: 10.1007/s10815-010-9508-2. Epub
2010 Dec 1.

Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) for SHOX-related haploinsufficiency in
conjunction with trisomy 21 detection by molecular analysis.

Altarescu G(1), Reish O, Renbaum P, Kasterstein E, Komarovsky D, Komsky A, Bern
O, Strassburger D, Levy-Lahad E, Ron-El R.

Author information: 
(1)ZOHAR PGD Unit, Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, POB
3235, Jerusalem, Israel. gheona@szmc.org.il

PURPOSE: Development of a molecular PGD protocol for a male with an X-linked
deletion in the SHOX gene region, located in the pseudoautosomal region of the
X/Y chromosomes. Due to excessive recombination in this region, the deletion can 
be found in male offspring.
METHODS: We developed a 13 marker multiplex fluorescent PCR protocol: 3 markers
within the deleted SHOX region, 5 flanking markers, 3 informative markers on
chromosome 21 (advanced maternal age) and 2 markers for sex determination.
RESULTS: Of four embryos, two wild type males, diploid for chromosome 21 were
transferred resulting in twin boys. One embryo was an affected female and another
embryo was Turner. Amniocentesis confirmed the implanted embryos were males
(46XY), with no recombinations.
CONCLUSIONS: While many X-linked disorders can be analyzed by sexing, genes
located in the pseudoautosomal regions have high XY recombination rates,
requiring multiple markers to enable an accurate diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC3082663
PMID: 21120598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Feb;96(2):E356-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-1505. Epub
2010 Nov 10.

The jumping SHOX gene--crossover in the pseudoautosomal region resulting in
unusual inheritance of Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis.

Kant SG(1), van der Kamp HJ, Kriek M, Bakker E, Bakker B, Hoffer MJ, van Bunderen
P, Losekoot M, Maas SM, Wit JM, Rappold G, Breuning MH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human and Clinical Genetics-Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden
University Medical Center, P.O. Box 9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands.
s.g.kant@lumc.nl

CONTEXT: During meiosis I, the recombination frequency in the pseudoautosomal
region on Xp and Yp (PAR1) in males is very high. As a result, mutated genes
located within the PAR1 region can be transferred from the Y-chromosome to the
X-chromosome and vice versa.
PATIENTS: Here we describe three families with SHOX abnormalities resulting in
Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis or Langer mesomelic dysplasia.
RESULTS: In about half of the segregations investigated, a transfer of the SHOX
abnormality to the alternate sex chromosome was demonstrated.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with an abnormality of the SHOX gene should receive genetic
counseling as to the likelihood that they may transmit the mutation or deletion
to a son as well as to a daughter.

PMID: 21068148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Health Technol Assess. 2010 Sep;14(42):1-209, iii-iv. doi: 10.3310/hta14420.

Recombinant human growth hormone for the treatment of growth disorders in
children: a systematic review and economic evaluation.

Takeda A(1), Cooper K, Bird A, Baxter L, Frampton GK, Gospodarevskaya E, Welch K,
Bryant J.

Author information: 
(1)Southampton Health Technology Assessments Centre, Southampton, UK.

BACKGROUND: Recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) is licensed for short stature
associated with growth hormone deficiency (GHD), Turner syndrome (TS),
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS), chronic renal insufficiency (CRI), short stature
homeobox-containing gene deficiency (SHOX-D) and being born small for gestational
age (SGA).
OBJECTIVES: To assess the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of rhGH
compared with treatment strategies without rhGH for children with GHD, TS, PWS,
CRI, SHOX-D and those born SGA.
DATA SOURCES: The systematic review used a priori methods. Key databases were
searched (e.g. MEDLINE, EMBASE, NHS Economic Evaluation Database and eight
others) for relevant studies from their inception to June 2009. A
decision-analytical model was developed to determine cost-effectiveness in the
UK.
STUDY SELECTION: Two reviewers assessed titles and abstracts of studies
identified by the search strategy, obtained the full text of relevant papers, and
screened them against inclusion criteria.
STUDY APPRAISAL: Data from included studies were extracted by one reviewer and
checked by a second. Quality of included studies was assessed using standard
criteria, applied by one reviewer and checked by a second. Clinical effectiveness
studies were synthesised through a narrative review.
RESULTS: Twenty-eight randomised controlled trials (RCTs) in 34 publications were
included in the systematic review. GHD: Children in the rhGH group grew 2.7
cm/year faster than untreated children and had a statistically significantly
higher height standard deviation score (HtSDS) after 1 year: -2.3 ± 0.45 versus
-2.8 ± 0.45. TS: In one study, treated girls grew 9.3 cm more than untreated
girls. In a study of younger children, the difference was 7.6 cm after 2 years.
HtSDS values were statistically significantly higher in treated girls. PWS:
Infants receiving rhGH for 1 year grew significantly taller (6.2 cm more) than
those untreated. Two studies reported a statistically significant difference in
HtSDS in favour of rhGH. CRI: rhGH-treated children in a 1-year study grew an
average of 3.6 cm more than untreated children. HtSDS was statistically
significantly higher in treated children in two studies. SGA: Criteria were
amended to include children of 3+ years with no catch-up growth, with no
reference to mid-parental height. Only one of the RCTs used the licensed dose;
the others used higher doses. Adult height (AH) was approximately 4 cm higher in 
rhGH-treated patients in the one study to report this outcome, and AH-gain SDS
was also statistically significantly higher in this group. Mean HtSDS was higher 
in treated than untreated patients in four other studies (significant in two).
SHOX-D: After 2 years' treatment, children were approximately 6 cm taller than
the control group and HtSDS was statistically significantly higher in treated
children. The incremental cost per quality adjusted life-year (QALY) estimates of
rhGH compared with no treatment were: 23,196 pounds for GHD, 39,460 pounds for
TS, 135,311 pounds for PWS, 39,273 pounds for CRI, 33,079 pounds for SGA and
40,531 pounds for SHOX-D. The probability of treatment of each of the conditions 
being cost-effective at 30,000 pounds was: 95% for GHD, 19% for TS, 1% for PWS,
16% for CRI, 38% for SGA and 15% for SHOX-D.
LIMITATIONS: Generally poorly reported studies, some of short duration.
CONCLUSIONS: Statistically significantly larger HtSDS values were reported for
rhGH-treated children with GHD, TS, PWS, CRI, SGA and SHOX-D. rhGH-treated
children with PWS also showed statistically significant improvements in body
composition measures. Only treatment of GHD would be considered cost-effective at
a willingness-to-pay threshold of 20,000 to 30,000 pounds per QALY gained. This
analysis suggests future research should include studies of longer than 2 years
reporting near-final height or final adult height.

PMID: 20849734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Genet Med. 2010 Oct;12(10):634-40. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181ed6185.

SHOX duplications found in some cases with type I Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser 
syndrome.

Gervasini C(1), Grati FR, Lalatta F, Tabano S, Gentilin B, Colapietro P, De
Toffol S, Frontino G, Motta F, Maitz S, Bernardini L, Dallapiccola B, Fedele L,
Larizza L, Miozzo M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry, Università
degli Studi di Milano, Italy.

PURPOSE: The Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome is defined as congenital
aplasia of müllerian ducts derived structures in females with a normal female
chromosomal and gonadal sex. Most cases with Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser
syndrome are sporadic, although familial cases have been reported. The genetic
basis of Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome is largely unknown and seems
heterogeneous, and a small number of cases were found to have mutations in the
WNT4 gene. The aim of this study was to identify possible recurrent
submicroscopic imbalances in a cohort of familial and sporadic cases with
Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome.
METHODS: Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification was used to screen the 
subtelomeric sequences of all chromosomes in 30 patients with
Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome (sporadic, n = 27 and familial, n = 3).
Segregation analysis and pyrosequencing were applied to validate the MLPA results
in the informative family.
RESULTS: Partial duplication of the Xpter pseudoautosomal region 1 containing the
short stature homeobox (SHOX) gene was detected in five patients with
Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome (familial, n = 3 and sporadic, n = 2) and
not in 53 healthy controls. The duplications were not overlapping, and SHOX was
never entirely duplicated. Haplotyping in the informative family revealed that
SHOX gene duplication was inherited from the unaffected father and was absent in 
two healthy sisters.
CONCLUSIONS: Partial duplication of SHOX gene is found in some cases with both
familial and sporadic Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser type I syndrome.

PMID: 20847698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Horm Res Paediatr. 2010;74(4):297-304. doi: 10.1159/000309418. Epub 2010 Aug 5.

Trisomy of the short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) due to
duplication/deletion of the X chomosome: clinical implications on the stature.

del Rey G(1), Jasper H, Bengolea SV, Boywitt A, De Bellis R, Heinrich JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Endocrinológicas, CEDIE-CONICET, Hospital de Niños
Ricardo Gutiérrez, Buenos Aires, Argentina. gracieladelrey@cedie.org.ar

BACKGROUND: The karyotypes of 2 patients with abnormal stature and different
phenotypes revealed one similar structural abnormality in the X chromosome by
conventional cytogenetic studies and fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis 
(FISH). FISH strongly suggested the presence of two copies of the SHOX gene in
the der(X) chromosome.
PATIENTS AND RESULTS: Patient 1 is a teenager girl with tall stature, behavioral 
disturbances and normal pubertal development. The abnormal X chromosome was
present in all cells studied. Parent's karyotypes were normal. Patient 2 is a
girl with gonadal dysgenesis, mild Turner syndrome phenotype and short stature.
The karyotype was a mosaic 45,X/46,X,r(X) and der(X) chromosome presented in most
metaphases of the cell lines. Parent's karyotypes were normal. Nearly all
duplication of Xp and partial deletion of the long arm (Xq) from Xq27 or Xq21 to 
Xqter, in cases 1 and 2, respectively, were observed. In both patients,
duplication of Xp translocated to deleted Xq occurred leading to a triplication
of the pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1) where the SHOX gene is located (Xp22.3).
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that in some cases of trisomy for the SHOX gene, the
effect of overdosage per se may affect the stature, even in patients with
preserved ovarian function (case 1), and that estrogen deprivation may not always
be a contributor for tall stature (case 2).

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20689243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Sep;152A(9):2230-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33563.

Mosaic compound heterozygosity of SHOX resulting in Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis 
with marked short stature: implications for disease mechanisms and recurrence
risks.

Reish O(1), Huber C, Altarescu G, Chapman-Shimshoni D, Levy-Lahad E, Renbaum P,
Mashevich M, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Institute, Assaf Harofeh Medical Center, Zerifin, Israel.
oreish@post.tau.ac.il

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Apr;155A(4):935-7.

Mutations or deletions in the SHOX gene cause Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) 
and Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD) when present in heterozygous or homozygous
form, respectively. A new class of enhancer deletions was identified 30-250 kb
downstream of SHOX. We identified a female patient with marked short stature,
mosaic for monosomy X in 31% of her lymphocytes, and findings consistent with
LWD. Additional molecular studies demonstrated segregation of 17 polymorphic
markers flanking and including the SHOX locus, spanning 328 kb of pseudoautosomal
region 1 (PAR1) region. A deletion up to 10 kb residing 197 kb downstream of SHOX
gene was detected, which was germinally transmitted from her clinically
unaffected father. This was associated with post-zygotic mosaic loss of the
normal maternal X-chromosome, evidenced by fluorescent fragment analysis. Since
most patients with LMD with deletions downstream of SHOX gene also have SHOX
mutations in trans, it may suggest these deletions are associated with a milder
phenotype. Further studies are required to elucidate the role of the former
region in disease etiology. Mutations should be sought in clinically non-affected
family members because of the variable expressivity in hemizygous carriers, and
cytogenetic evaluation should be considered to detect possible X-chromosome
rearrangements underlying the haploinsufficiency for the PAR1 when deletion is
detected by molecular analysis. Similarly, when LWD and marked short stature
occur in a patient with mosaic Turner syndrome, the possibility of mutations in
SHOX and the downstream of SHOX gene should be considered.

Copyright 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20683993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Clin Genet. 2011 May;79(5):489-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01488.x.

Pseudoautosomal inheritance of Léri-Weill syndrome: what does it mean?

Evers C(1), Heidemann PH, Dunstheimer D, Schulze E, Haag C, Janssen JW, Fischer
C, Jauch A, Moog U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.

The short stature homeobox (SHOX) gene is located in the pseudoautosomal region 1
of both sex chromosomes. Haploinsufficiency of SHOX leads to different phenotypes
ranging from isolated short stature to Léri-Weill syndrome characterized by short
stature, mesomelia and Madelung deformity. We describe a family with a SHOX
deletion originally located on the Y chromosome and transmitted from father to
daughter by crossover during meiosis. The male index patient presented with short
stature, mesomelia and mild Madelung deformity. His father had a normal height
but slightly disproportionate short legs. The sister of the index patient
presented with marked Madelung deformity and normal height. A deletion of the
SHOX gene was identified in the male index patient, his father and his sister.
Metaphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analyses showed a deletion of
the SHOX gene on the Y chromosomes of the index patient and his father, and on
the X chromosome of his sister, indicating that a meiotic crossover of the SHOX
gene region between the X and Y chromosomes had occurred. The pseudoautosomal
region 1 is a known recombination 'hot spot' in male meiosis. Published genetic
maps indicate high recombination frequency of ~40% for SHOX in male meiosis
leading to pseudoautosomal inheritance.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 20681991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2010 Mar;7(3):1047-75. doi:
10.3390/ijerph7031047. Epub 2010 Mar 11.

Leg length, body proportion, and health: a review with a note on beauty.

Bogin B(1), Varela-Silva MI.

Author information: 
(1)Health & Lifespan Research Centre, School of Sport, Exercise & Health
Sciences, Loughborough University, Loughborough, Leicestershire LE11 3TU, UK.
b.a.bogin@lboro.ac.uk

Decomposing stature into its major components is proving to be a useful strategy 
to assess the antecedents of disease, morbidity and death in adulthood. Human leg
length (femur + tibia), sitting height (trunk length + head length) and their
proportions, for example, (leg length/stature), or the sitting height ratio
(sitting height/stature x 100), among others) are associated with epidemiological
risk for overweight (fatness), coronary heart disease, diabetes, liver
dysfunction and certain cancers. There is also wide support for the use of
relative leg length as an indicator of the quality of the environment for growth 
during infancy, childhood and the juvenile years of development. Human beings
follow a cephalo-caudal gradient of growth, the pattern of growth common to all
mammals. A special feature of the human pattern is that between birth and puberty
the legs grow relatively faster than other post-cranial body segments. For groups
of children and youth, short stature due to relatively short legs (i.e., a high
sitting height ratio) is generally a marker of an adverse environment. The
development of human body proportions is the product of environmental x genomic
interactions, although few if any specific genes are known. The HOXd and the
short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) are genomic regions that may be
relevant to human body proportions. For example, one of the SHOX related
disorders is Turner syndrome. However, research with non-pathological populations
indicates that the environment is a more powerful force influencing leg length
and body proportions than genes. Leg length and proportion are important in the
perception of human beauty, which is often considered a sign of health and
fertility.

PMCID: PMC2872302
PMID: 20617018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 2010 Jun;36(3):671-5. doi:
10.1111/j.1447-0756.2010.01193.x.

Prenatal findings in a fetus with contiguous gene syndrome caused by deletion of 
Xp22.3 that includes locus for X-linked recessive type of chondrodysplasia
punctata (CDPX1).

Horikoshi T(1), Kikuchi A, Tamaru S, Ono K, Kita M, Takagi K, Miyashita S, Kawame
H, Shimokawa O, Harada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Center for Perinatal Medicine, Nagano Children's
Hospital, Azumino, Nagano, Japan.

The X-linked recessive type of chondrodysplasia punctata (CDPX1) is a skeletal
disorder that is characterized by stippled calcification at an epiphyseal nucleus
and the surrounding soft tissue, short stature and an unusual face because of
nasal hypoplasia. In most of the patients, this condition is noted after birth
because of a characteristic face or respiratory problems. Here, we report a fetus
with CDPX1. Two-dimensional ultrasound examination revealed unexplained
polyhydramnios and a male fetus. Fetal biometry showed shortened long bones.
Three-dimensional ultrasonography clearly demonstrated a hypoplastic nose with a 
depressed nasal bridge and contracture of wrists and fingers. Chromosome analysis
of the amniotic fluid cells revealed the 46,Y,del(X)(p22.3) karyotype.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization revealed a deletion of subtelomeric sequences 
at the Xpter and STS gene, but not a deletion of the KAL gene. The genomic copy
number analysis demonstrated terminal deletion of 8.33 Mb that included SHOX,
CSF2RA, XG, ARSE, NLGN4 and STS genes. We think that our case presents typical
features of a fetus with this disorder and will be of great help in prenatal
ultrasound diagnosis.

PMID: 20598055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Eur J Med Genet. 2010 Sep-Oct;53(5):234-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2010.06.001. Epub 
2010 Jun 9.

Usefulness of MLPA in the detection of SHOX deletions.

Funari MF(1), Jorge AA, Souza SC, Billerbeck AE, Arnhold IJ, Mendonca BB, Nishi
MY.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Hospital das Clinicas, Faculdade
de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

SHOX haploinsufficiency causes a wide spectrum of short stature phenotypes, such 
as Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and disproportionate short stature (DSS).
SHOX deletions are responsible for approximately two thirds of isolated
haploinsufficiency; therefore, it is important to determine the most appropriate 
methodology for detection of gene deletion. In this study, three methodologies
for the detection of SHOX deletions were compared: the fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH), microsatellite analysis and multiplex ligation-dependent
probe amplification (MLPA). Forty-four patients (8 LWD and 36 DSS) were analyzed.
The cosmid LLNOYCO3'M'34F5 was used as a probe for the FISH analysis and
microsatellite analysis were performed using three intragenic microsatellite
markers. MLPA was performed using commercial kits. Twelve patients (8 LWD and 4
DSS) had deletions in SHOX area detected by MLPA and 2 patients generated
discordant results with the other methodologies. In the first case, the deletion 
was not detected by FISH. In the second case, both FISH and microsatellite
analyses were unable to identify the intragenic deletion. In conclusion, MLPA was
more sensitive, less expensive and less laborious; therefore, it should be used
as the initial molecular method for the detection of SHOX gene deletion.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20538086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Endocr Dev. 2010;18:92-108. doi: 10.1159/000316130. Epub 2010 Jun 3.

Current indications for growth hormone therapy for children and adolescents.

Richmond E(1), Rogol AD.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology, National Children's Hospital, San José, Costa Rica.

Growth hormone (GH) therapy has been appropriate for severely GH-deficient
children and adolescents since the 1960s. Use for other conditions for which
short stature was a component could not be seriously considered because of the
small supply of human pituitary-derived hormone. That state changed remarkably in
the mid-1980s because of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease associated with human
pituitary tissue-derived hGH and the development of a (nearly) unlimited supply
of recombinant, 22 kDa (r)hGH. The latter permitted all GH-deficient children to 
have access to treatment and one could design trials using rhGH to increase adult
height in infants, children and adolescents with causes of short stature other
than GH deficiency, as well as trials in adult GH-deficient men and women.
Approved indications (US Food and Drug Administration) include: GH deficiency,
chronic kidney disease, Turner syndrome, small-for-gestational age with failure
to catch up to the normal height percentiles, Prader-Willi syndrome, idiopathic
short stature, SHOX gene haploinsufficiency and Noonan syndrome (current to
October 2008). The most common efficacy outcome in children is an increase in
height velocity, although rhGH may prevent hypoglycemia in some infants with
congenital hypopituitarism and increase the lean/fat ratio in most children -
especially those with severe GH deficiency or Prader-Willi syndrome. Doses for
adults, which affect body composition and health-related quality of life, are
much lower than those for children, per kilogram of lean body mass. The safety
profile is quite favorable with a small, but significant, incidence of raised
intracranial pressure, scoliosis, muscle and joint discomfort, including slipped 
capital femoral epiphysis. The approval of rhGH therapy for short,
non-GH-deficient children has validated the notion of GH sensitivity, which gives
the opportunity to some children with significant short stature, but with normal 
stimulated GH test results, to benefit from rhGH therapy and perhaps attain an
adult height within the normal range and appropriate for their mid-parental
target height (genetic potential).

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20523020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jul 15;19(14):2841-57. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq184. Epub 2010 May
10.

SMARCA2 and other genome-wide supported schizophrenia-associated genes:
regulation by REST/NRSF, network organization and primate-specific evolution.

Loe-Mie Y(1), Lepagnol-Bestel AM, Maussion G, Doron-Faigenboim A, Imbeaud S,
Delacroix H, Aggerbeck L, Pupko T, Gorwood P, Simonneau M, Moalic JM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U675/U894, Centre Psychiatrie & Neurosciences, Université
Paris-Descartes, 75014 Paris, France.

The SMARCA2 gene, which encodes BRM in the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex, 
was recently identified as being associated with schizophrenia (SZ) in a
genome-wide approach. Polymorphisms in SMARCA2, associated with the disease,
produce changes in the expression of the gene and/or in the encoded amino acid
sequence. We show here that an SWI/SNF-centered network including the Smarca2
gene is modified by the down-regulation of REST/NRSF in a mouse neuronal cell
line. REST/NRSF down-regulation also modifies the levels of Smarce1, Smarcd3 and 
SWI/SNF interactors (Hdac1, RcoR1 and Mecp2). Smarca2 down-regulation generates
an abnormal dendritic spine morphology that is an intermediate phenotype of SZ.
We further found that 8 (CSF2RA, HIST1H2BJ, NOTCH4, NRGN, SHOX, SMARCA2, TCF4 and
ZNF804A) out of 10 genome-wide supported SZ-associated genes are part of an
interacting network (including SMARCA2), 5 members of which encode transcription 
regulators. The expression of 3 (TCF4, SMARCA2 and CSF2RA) of the 10 genome-wide 
supported SZ-associated genes is modified when the REST/NRSF-SWI/SNF
chromatin-remodeling complex is experimentally manipulated in mouse cell lines
and in transgenic mouse models. The REST/NRSF-SWI/SNF deregulation also results
in the differential expression of genes that are clustered in chromosomes
suggesting the induction of genome-wide epigenetic changes. Finally, we found
that SMARCA2 interactors and the genome-wide supported SZ-associated genes are
considerably enriched in genes displaying positive selection in primates and in
the human lineage which suggests the occurrence of novel protein interactions in 
primates. Altogether, these data identify the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling
complex as a key component of the genetic architecture of SZ.

PMID: 20457675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Anthropol Anz. 2009 Dec;67(4):439-59.

Leg length, proportion, health and beauty: a review.

Bogin B(1), Varela-Silva MI.

Author information: 
(1)Health & Lifespan Research Centre, School of Sport, Exercise & Health
Sciences, Loughborough University, Loughborough, Leicestershire, UK.
b.a.bogin@lboro.ac.uk

Decomposing stature into its major components is proving to be a useful strategy 
to assess the antecedents of disease, morbidity and death in adulthood. Human leg
length (foot + tibia + femur), sitting height (trunk length + head length) and
their proportions (for example the relative leg length in proportion to stature, 
and the sitting height ratio [sitting height/stature x 100], among others) are
used as epidemiological markers of risk for overweight (fatness), coronary heart 
disease, diabetes and certain cancers. There is also wide support for the use of 
relative leg length as an indicator of the quality of the environment for growth 
during infancy, childhood and the juvenile years of development. Human beings
follow a cephalo-caudal gradient of growth, the pattern of growth common to all
mammals. A special feature of the human pattern is that between birth and puberty
the legs grow relatively faster than other post-cranial body segments. For groups
of children and youth, short stature due to relatively short legs (i.e. a high
sitting height ratio) is generally a marker of an adverse environment. The
development of human body proportions is the product of environmental x genomic
interactions, although few if any specific genes are known. The short stature
homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) is the first genomic region that may be relevant 
to human body proportions. For example, one of the SHOX related disorders is
Turner syndrome. However, in most cases research has been showing that
environment is a more powerful force to shape leg length and body proportions
than genes. Leg length and proportion are important in the perception of human
beauty, which is often considered a sign of health and fertility. There are a
variety of cosmetic, fashion, and surgical interventions to enhance perceived or 
actual leg length.

PMID: 20440962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jan-Feb;23(1-2):159-69.

Unexpected phenotype in a boy with trisomy of the SHOX gene.

Iughetti L(1), Capone L, Elsedfy H, Bertorelli R, Predieri B, Bruzzi P, Forabosco
A, El Kholy M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Modena & Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
iughetti.lorenzo@unimore.it

The assessment that heterozygous SHOX mutations leading to SHOX
haploinsufficiency play a role in patients with idiopathic short stature (ISS) is
already documented in the literature as well as the suggestion that additional
copies of SHOX are strongly implicated in a condition of tall stature. However,
we report the first case of short stature in a male associated with the presence 
of three copies of the SHOX gene. Through chromosomal analysis, using Multiplex
Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification method of SHOX salsa P018B kit and
microsatellite analysis, we identify a new interstitial isolated duplication of
the SHOX gene and its enhancer caused by a larger duplication of the PAR1 region 
in a boy with ISS. Consequently, we propose the hypothesis that this chromosome
re-arrangement disrupts the regular interaction between the enhancer and
promoter, resulting in a transcription block, thus producing a lack of gene
activation, causing the clinical feature of short stature.

PMID: 20432819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 May;152A(5):1206-12. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33334.

Increased number of sex chromosomes affects height in a nonlinear fashion: a
study of 305 patients with sex chromosome aneuploidy.

Ottesen AM(1), Aksglaede L, Garn I, Tartaglia N, Tassone F, Gravholt CH, Bojesen 
A, Sørensen K, Jørgensen N, Rajpert-De Meyts E, Gerdes T, Lind AM, Kjaergaard S, 
Juul A.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Growth and Reproduction, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.

Tall stature and eunuchoid body proportions characterize patients with 47,XXY
Klinefelter syndrome, whereas patients with 45,X Turner syndrome are
characterized by impaired growth. Growth is relatively well characterized in
these two syndromes, while few studies describe the growth of patients with
higher grade sex chromosome aneuploidies. It has been proposed that tall stature 
in sex chromosome aneuploidy is related to an overexpression of SHOX, although
the copy number of SHOX has not been evaluated in previous studies. Our aims were
therefore: (1) to assess stature in 305 patients with sex chromosome aneuploidy
and (2) to determine the number of SHOX copies in a subgroup of these patients (n
= 255) these patients and 74 healthy controls. Median height standard deviation
scores in 46,XX males (n = 6) were -1.2 (-2.8 to 0.3), +0.9 (-2.2 to +4.6) in
47,XXY (n = 129), +1.3 (-1.8 to +4.9) in 47,XYY (n = 44), +1.1 (-1.9 to +3.4) in 
48,XXYY (n = 45), +1.8 (-2.0 to +3.2) in 48,XXXY (n = 9), and -1.8 (-4.2 to -0.1)
in 49,XXXXY (n = 10). Median height standard deviation scores in patients with
45,X (n = 6) were -2.6 (-4.1 to -1.6), +0.7 (-0.9 to +3.2) in 47,XXX (n = 40),
-0.6 (-1.9 to +2.1) in 48,XXXX (n = 13), and -1.0 (-3.5 to -0.8) in 49,XXXXX (n =
3). Height increased with an increasing number of extra X or Y chromosomes,
except in males with five, and in females with four or five sex chromosomes,
consistent with a nonlinear effect on height.

Copyright 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20425825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Eur J Med Genet. 2010 Jul-Aug;53(4):204-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2010.04.003. Epub 
2010 Apr 20.

Identification of the first de novo PAR1 deletion downstream of SHOX in an
individual diagnosed with Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD).

Barroso E(1), Benito-Sanz S, Belinchón A, Yuste-Checa P, Gracia R, Aragones A,
Campos-Barros A, Heath KE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario
La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPaz, Madrid, Spain.

Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD, MIM 127300), is a dominantly inherited
skeletal dysplasia with disproportionate short stature, mesomelic limb
shortening, and the characteristic Madelung deformity. Two regions of the
pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1) have been shown to be involved in LWD, SHOX
(short-stature homeobox-containing gene) and the downstream enhancer region. We
report our genetic findings of a young girl clinically diagnosed with LWD. We
analyzed the proband and her family using MLPA and microsatellite analysis. We
identified a deletion, 726-866 kb in size, of the downstream SHOX enhancer region
in the proband. Neither parent carried the deletion. Microsatellite analysis
showed that the deleted allele was of paternal origin. The mutation is more
likely to have arisen from a de novo event but paternal gonadal mosaicism cannot 
be excluded. In conclusion, we report the clinical and molecular details of the
first case of a de novo deletion of the downstream PAR1 region in an LWD
individual. De novo deletions of SHOX and the downstream enhancer region must be 
therefore considered in cases of isolated LWD.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20412871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Apr;95(4):1487-95. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-0926.

Approach to the patient with Turner syndrome.

Davenport ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
27599-7039, USA. mld@med.unc.edu

Turner syndrome (TS) occurs in about 1:4000 live births and describes females
with a broad constellation of problems associated with loss of an entire sex
chromosome or a portion of the X chromosome containing the tip of its short arm. 
TS is associated with an astounding array of potential abnormalities, most of
them thought to be caused by haploinsufficiency of genes that are normally
expressed by both X chromosomes. A health care checklist is provided that
suggests screening tests at specific ages and intervals for problems such as
strabismus, hearing loss, and autoimmune thyroid disease. Four areas of major
concern in TS are discussed: growth failure, cardiovascular disease, gonadal
failure, and learning disabilities. GH therapy should generally begin as soon as 
growth failure occurs, allowing for rapid normalization of height. Cardiac
imaging, preferably magnetic resonance imaging, should be performed at diagnosis 
and repeated at 5- to 10-yr intervals to assess for congenital heart
abnormalities and the emergence of aortic dilatation, a precursor to aortic
dissection. Hypertension should be aggressively treated. For those with gonadal
dysgenesis, hormonal replacement therapy should begin at a normal pubertal age
and be continued until the age of 50 yr. Transdermal estradiol provides the most 
physiological replacement. Finally, nonverbal learning disabilities marked by
deficits in visual-spatial-organizational skills, complex psychomotor skills, and
social skills are common in TS. Neuropsychological testing should be routine and 
families given support in obtaining appropriate therapy, including special
accommodations at school.

PMID: 20375216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jun;95(6):3010-8. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-2218. Epub
2010 Apr 7.

Improved molecular diagnostics of idiopathic short stature and allied disorders: 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction-based copy number profiling of SHOX and
pseudoautosomal region 1.

D'haene B(1), Hellemans J, Craen M, De Schepper J, Devriendt K, Fryns JP,
Keymolen K, Debals E, de Klein A, de Jong EM, Segers K, De Paepe A, Mortier G,
Vandesompele J, De Baere E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185,
B-9000 Ghent, Belgium.

CONTEXT: Short stature has an incidence of three in 100 in children. Reliable
molecular genetic testing may be crucial in the context of beneficial disease
management. Deletions spanning or surrounding the SHOX gene account for a
significant proportion of patients with idiopathic short stature (ISS) and allied
disorders, such as Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis.
OBJECTIVE: Several shortcomings of current strategies for copy number profiling
of the SHOX region prompted us to develop an improved test for molecular
diagnostics of the SHOX region.
DESIGN AND RESULTS: We introduced a quantitative PCR (qPCR)-based copy number
profiling test, consisting of 11 amplicons targeting clinically relevant regions,
i.e. the SHOX gene and regulatory regions. To ensure an optimal sensitivity and
specificity, this test was validated in 32 controls and 18 probands with
previously identified copy number changes. In addition, 152 probands with
SHOX-associated phenotypes were screened, revealing 10 novel copy number changes.
CONCLUSION: This highly validated qPCR test supersedes other approaches for copy 
number screening of the SHOX region in terms of reliability, accuracy, and cost
efficiency. In addition, another strong point is the fact that it can be easily
implemented in any standard equipped molecular laboratory. Our qPCR-based test is
highly recommended for molecular diagnostics of idiopathic short stature and
allied disorders.

PMID: 20375215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. SHOX Deficiency Disorders.

Binder G, Rappold GA.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2005 Dec 12.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The phenotypic spectrum of SHOX deficiency disorders,
caused by haploinsufficiency of the short stature homeobox-containing gene
(SHOX), ranges from Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) at the severe end of the
spectrum to nonspecific short stature at the mild end of the spectrum. In adults 
with SHOX deficiency, the proportion of LWD versus short stature without features
of LWD is not well defined. In LWD the classic clinical triad is short stature,
mesomelia, and Madelung deformity. Mesomelia, in which the middle portion of a
limb is shorted in relation to the proximal portion, can be evident first in
school-aged children and increases with age in frequency and severity. Madelung
deformity (abnormal alignment of the radius, ulna, and carpal bones at the wrist)
typically develops in mid-to-late childhood and is more common and severe in
females. The phenotype of short stature caused by SHOX deficiency (in the absence
of mesomelia and Madelung deformity) is highly variable, even within the same
family.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SHOX deficiency is established in a proband
with either a SHOX single nucleotide variant or a deletion that can encompass the
SHOX coding region and/or the enhancer region regulating SHOX expression.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: For prepubertal children with short
stature, recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH therapy) (dose 50 µg/kg body
weight/day) should be offered. The therapeutic effect is a gain in final height
of 7 to 10 cm. For painful bilateral Madelung deformity (which is uncommon):
wrist splints and supports during periods of increased discomfort and the use of 
ergonomic devices, such as ergonomic computer key boards. Different operative
procedures have been attempted to decrease pain and restore wrist function.
Surveillance: For children with SHOX deficiency: biannual measurement of growth. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: If Madelung deformity is associated with
discomfort, physical activities such as lifting, gripping, writing, typing, and
sports that strain the wrist should be limited and ergonomic aids sought.
Evaluation of relatives at risk: Presymptomatic diagnosis and treatment are
warranted for sibs at risk for SHOX deficiency in order to identify as early as
possible those who would benefit from recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH)
treatment.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SHOX deficiency disorders are inherited in a pseudoautosomal 
dominant manner. Each child of an individual with a SHOX deficiency disorder has 
a 50% chance of inheriting the SHOX pathogenic variant. If both parents have SHOX
deficiency, the offspring have a 50% chance of having a SHOX deficiency disorder,
a 25% chance of having Langer type of mesomelic dwarfism, and a 25% chance of
having neither condition. If the SHOX pathogenic variant has been identified in
one or both parents, prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk is
possible; however, the phenotype of the SHOX deficiency disorder cannot be
accurately predicted on the basis of prenatal molecular genetic testing results.

PMID: 20301394  [PubMed]


147. Mol Hum Reprod. 2010 Jun;16(6):386-95. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gaq019. Epub 2010 Mar 
12.

Novel genetic aspects of Klinefelter's syndrome.

Tüttelmann F(1), Gromoll J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Münster, Vesaliusweg 12-14, D-48149
Münster, Germany. frank.tuettelmann@ukmuenster.de

Klinefelter's syndrome (KS) is the most common chromosome aneuploidy in males,
characterized by at least one supernumerary X chromosome. Although extensively
studied, the pathophysiology, i.e. the link between the extra X and the
phenotype, largely remains unexplained. The scope of this review is to summarize 
the progress made in recent years on the role of the supernumerary X chromosome
with respect to its putative influence on the phenotype. In principal, the
parental origin of the X chromosome, gene-dosage effects in conjunction with
(possibly skewed) X chromosome inactivation, and--especially concerning
spermatogenesis--meiotic failure may play pivotal roles. One of the X chromosomes
is inactivated to achieve dosage-compensation in females and probably likewise in
KS. Genes from the pseudoautosomal regions and an additional 15% of other genes, 
however, escape X inactivation and are candidates for putatively constituting the
KS phenotype. Examples are the SHOX genes, identified as likely causing the tall 
stature regularly seen in KS. Lessons learned from comparisons with normal males 
and especially females as well as other sex chromosomal aneuploidies are
presented. In addition, genetic topics concerning fertility and counseling are
discussed.

PMID: 20228051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Horm Res Paediatr. 2010;73(3):161-5. doi: 10.1159/000284356. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

Hormones and genes of importance in bone physiology and their influence on bone
mineralization and growth in Turner syndrome.

Andrade AC(1), Baron J, Manolagas SC, Shaw NJ, Rappold GA, Donaldson MD, Gault
EJ, Sävendahl L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. anenisia.andrade@ki.se

This mini review summarizes papers presented in a Joint Symposium between the
Bone, Growth Plate and Turner Syndrome Working Groups of the European Society for
Paediatric Endocrinology (ESPE) that was held on September 9, 2009, in New
York.The program had been composed to give an update on hormones and genes of
importance in bone physiology and their influence on bone mineralization and
growth in Turner syndrome. This paper summarizes the data and highlights the main
topics and discussions related to each presentation.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20197667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Fertil Steril. 2010 Jun;94(1):350.e12-5. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.12.040.
Epub 2010 Feb 1.

Parental origin and mechanism of formation of a
46,X,der(X)(pter-->q21.1::p11.4-->pter)/45,X karyotype in a woman with mild
Turner syndrome.

Binkert F(1), Spreiz A, Höckner M, Miny P, von Dach Leu B, Erdel M, Zschocke J,
Utermann G, Kotzot D.

Author information: 
(1)MCL Medical Laboratories, Bern, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the parental origin and the mechanism of formation of a
46,X,der(X)(pter-->q21.1::p11.4-->pter)[23]/45,X[8] karyotype in a patient with
mild Turner syndrome.
DESIGN: Case report.
SETTING: A university hospital.
PATIENT(S): A 23-year-old woman with normal height, gonadal dysgenesis, and mild 
Turner stigmata.
INTERVENTION(S): Genotype-phenotype correlation, array-based copy number
analysis, fluorescence in situ hybridization with locus-specific probes, and
microsatellite marker-mediated haplotype analysis subsequent to whole genome
amplification of microdissected chromosomes.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Genotype-phenotype correlation, mechanism of formation,
and parental origin.
RESULT(S): Formation in paternal meiosis by refolding in itself and unequal
recombination between Xp and Xq were found as the most likely mechanism of
formation.
CONCLUSION(S): Formation of der(X) chromosomes in females can be more complex
than previously thought. The nearly normal height of this patient could be
explained by a combination of trisomy of the Xp-located SHOX gene and mosaicism
with a 45,X cell line.

Copyright (c) 2010 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20117774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Endocrinol Invest. 2010 Jun;33(6 Suppl):39-43.

SHOX mutation as a rare disease: molecular diagnosis and growth hormone treatment
supported by the Italian public health system.

Lala R(1), Matarazzo P.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology, Regina Margherita Children's Hospital, Turin, Italy. 
info@malattie-rare.org

Short stature homeobox-containing (SHOX) gene deficiency is acknowledged under
the term "dyschondrosteosis", which is included in the family of congenital
osteodystrophies. Under current regulations, the cost of the genetic testing and 
treatment with GH in children with short stature, and SHOX gene deficiency may be
reimbursed. Prescription of costs exemption is subject to the identification of
the regional centers qualified to diagnose congenital osteodystrophies (RNG060). 
The centers qualified to diagnose and treat "dyschondrosteosis" have been
identified in only a few regions, whereas in other regions centers for the
diagnosis and treatment of congenital osteodystrophies have been identified, and 
in still others, no specific centers have been identified yet. Treatment with GH 
as indicated by European Medicines Agency (EMEA) for people with short stature
and evidence of SHOX gene deficiency is governed by Agenzia Italiana del Farmaco 
(AIFA) note number 39. The latest version does not provide for the medication to 
be directly reimbursed by the National Health Service, although it may be
prescribed for patients with well-defined auxological characteristics, subject to
the prior authorization of the regional commission qualified to monitor the use
of the GH. Therefore, a diagnostic/ therapeutic course for patients with short
stature with SHOX gene mutation has been proposed. The healthcare course relating
to such patients has not been thoroughly defined in terms of implementation and
is affected by regional organizational approaches. Implementing specific
healthcare courses for such patients may provide a model for treating other
patients with short stature and rare diseases with GH.

PMID: 21057185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Endocrinol Invest. 2010 Jun;33(6 Suppl):34-8.

Growth hormone therapy in patients with short stature homeobox-gene (SHOX)
deficiency.

Iughetti L(1), Madeo S, Predieri B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena,
Italy. iughetti.lorenzo@unimore.it

Short stature homeobox (SHOX) gene is located in the pseudoautosomal region 1 on 
the distal end of the X and Y chromosomes at Xp22.3 and Yp11.3. The
haploinsufficiency of SHOX is correlated with short stature, Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis, and Langer mesomelic dysplasia. Subjects with Turner syndrome 
(TS) present a SHOX haploinsufficiency that appears to be substantially
responsible for their short stature. Several studies have shown a positive
response to GH therapy in patients with TS. Short children with SHOX
haploinsufficiency do not spontaneously catch up to attain a normal final height.
Considering the positive effects obtained in patients with TS, GH therapy has
been proposed for short stature due to isolated SHOX haploinsufficiency. The aim 
of this paper is to summarize the current data on GH administration in patients
with SHOX haploinsufficiency. The conclusion is that GH therapy, at the same
dosage used in patients with TS, induces a sustained catch-up growth and a height
velocity and adult height gain in short patients with SHOX haploinsufficiency.

PMID: 21057184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Endocrinol Invest. 2010 Jun;33(6 Suppl):30-3.

Different approaches in the molecular analysis of the SHOX gene dysfunctions.

Stuppia L(1), Gatta V, Antonucci I, Giuliani R, Palka G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, G d'Annunzio University, Chieti-Pescara,
Italy. stuppia@unich.it

Deficit of the short stature homeobox containing gene (SHOX) accounts for 2.15%
of cases of idiopathic short stature (ISS) and 50-100% of cases of Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis (LWD). It has been demonstrated that patients with SHOX deficit
show a good response to treatment with GH. Thus, the early identification of SHOX
alterations is a crucial point in order to choose the best treatment for ISS and 
LWD patients. In this study, we analyze the most commonly used molecular
techniques for the detection of SHOX gene alterations. multiple
ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis appears to represent the gold
standard for the detection of deletion involving the SHOX gene or the enhancer
region, being able to show both alterations in a single assay.

PMID: 21057183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Endocrinol Invest. 2010 Jun;33(6 Suppl):26-9.

Bone dysplasias: the A, B, C of radiographic interpretation.

Castriota-Scanderbeg A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Ars Radiologica, Ruffano, Lecce, Italy.
scanderbeg@arsradiologica.it

The skeletal dysplasias are a group of genetic disorders affecting skeletal
development and maintenance, usually manifesting in childhood with
disproportionate short stature. Although individually rare, they are not
infrequent as a group. An accurate diagnosis is crucial for prevention and/or
treatment of complications, estimate of child's growth, and proper genetic
counseling. Radiology is the mainstay of diagnosis. Recognition of single
radiographic signs or patterns of anomalies is required to reach the correct
diagnosis. The radiographic features of Leri-Weill syndrome and Langer mesomelic 
dwarfism, two skeletal dysplasias caused by a defect in the short stature
homeobox-containing gene, are briefly discussed.

PMID: 21057182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Endocrinol Invest. 2010 Jun;33(6 Suppl):19-25.

Auxological and anthropometric evaluation in skeletal dysplasias.

Mazzanti L(1), Matteucci C, Scarano E, Tamburrino F, Ragni MC, Cicognani A.

Author information: 
(1)Rare Disease, Syndromology and Auxology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, S
Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, Via Massarenti 11, 40138
Bologna, Italy. laura.mazzanti@unibo.it

Anthropometry is the technique of expressing body shape in quantitative terms.
The measurements are compared with the standard growth curves for the general
population and expressed as a SD score or percentiles. The comparison of the
different parameters with normal standards requires: standardized landmarks on
the body, standardized methods of taking measurements, and standard equipment.
Skeletal dysplasias generally present with disproportionate short stature, that
may be caused primarily by a short trunk or short limbs. If short limbs are
observed, the reduction may affect the proximal (rhizomelic), the middle
(mesomelic) or distal (acromelic) segments. Anthropometric measurements should
include all the segments of the arms and the legs with a comparison with the
normal standards for height age. Short stature homeobox- containing (SHOX) gene
defects determine a highly variable phenotype, that includes an
osteochondrodysplasia with mesomelic short stature and Madelung deformity, but
also presentations without evident malformations. Anthropometric indicators of
SHOX deficiency are: disproportionate short stature, reduction of lower limb,
reduction of the ratio between arm span and forearm length with respect to
height, increase in the sitting/ height stature ratio, increase in limb
circumference (arm, forearm, thigh, and leg) with respect to height and increased
body mass index. In some forms of skeletal dysplasias and in particular in SHOX
gene anomalies that have many characteristics superimposable to idiopathic short 
stature, only an accurate auxo-anthropometric and dysmorphologic evaluation
enable us to propose, fairly accurately, the subjects for the gene study.

PMID: 21057181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Endocrinol Invest. 2010 Jun;33(6 Suppl):15-8.

The SHOX gene: a new indication for GH treatment.

Cicognani A(1), Pirazzoli P, Nicoletti A, Baronio F, Conti V, Bonetti S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, S Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy. alessandro.cicognani@unibo.it

Short stature homeobox-containing (SHOX) gene mutations causing
haploinsufficiency have been reported in idiopathic short stature, but the real
prevalence of this defect in the population with growth failure is debated. Based
on current data, the prevalence of SHOXdefect (SHOX-D) has been calculated to
have occurred in at least 1 in 2,000 children. This occurrence rate is higher
than that of classic GH deficiency or Turner syndrome. In all probability, the
real prevalence of SHOX-D will increase in the future with the improvement of the
genetic analysis with investigations for point mutations in the enhancer
sequences or for deletions in other parts of this region. A selection criterion
to individuate the most appropriate candidates eligible for the SHOX region
analysis has been suggested based on the evaluation of a disproportional short
stature. The efficacy of GH treatment in these patients has recently been
demonstrated with results that are similar to those observed in Turner syndrome.

PMID: 21057180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Endocrinol Invest. 2010 Jun;33(6 Suppl):11-4.

The SHOX region and its mutations.

Capone L(1), Iughetti L, Sabatini S, Bacciaglia A, Forabosco A.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Research Center, Cante di Montevecchio Association ONLUS, Fano, PU,
Italy.

The short stature homeobox-containing (SHOX) gene lies in the pseudoautosomal
region 1 (PAR1) that comprises 2.6 Mb of the short-arm tips of both the X and Y
chromosomes. It is known that its heterozygous mutations cause Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis (LWD) (OMIM #127300), while its homozygous mutations cause a
severe form of dwarfism known as Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD) (OMIM #249700).
The analysis of 238 LWD patients between 1998 and 2007 by multiple authors shows 
a prevalence of deletions (46.4%) compared to point mutations (21.2%). On the
whole, deletions and point mutations account for about 67% of LWD patients. SHOX 
is located within a 1000 kb desert region without genes. The comparative genomic 
analysis of this region between genomes of different vertebrates has led to the
identification of evolutionarily conserved non-coding DNA elements (CNE). Further
functional studies have shown that one of these CNE downstream of the SHOX gene
is necessary for the expression of SHOX; this is considered to be typical
"enhancer" activity. Including the enhancer, the overall mutation of the SHOX
region in LWD patients does not hold in 100% of cases. Various authors have
demonstrated the existence of other CNE both downstream and upstream of SHOX
regions. The resulting conclusion is that it is necessary to reanalyze all
LWD/LMD patients without SHOX mutations for the presence of mutations in the 5'- 
and 3'-flanking SHOX regions.

PMID: 21057179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Endocrinol Invest. 2010 Jun;33(6 Suppl):7-10.

Epidemiology of SHOX deficiency.

Nicolosi A(1), Caruso-Nicoletti M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.

Deletion of short stature homeobox-containing (SHOX) gene, in the pseudoautosomal
region (PAR1) of X and Y chromosomes, is an important cause of short stature.
Homozygous loss of SHOX results in the more severe Langer mesomelic dysplasia,
while SHOX haploinsufficiency cause a wide spectrum of short stature phenotypes, 
including patients with Turner syndrome, Leri Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), and 
idiopathic short stature (ISS). In Turner syndrome, haploinsufficiency of SHOX
gene, as well as short stature, are present in 100%; nevertheless, SHOX
deficiency accounts for only two-thirds of Turner patients' short stature. In LWD
the prevalence of SHOX gene anomalies varies from 56% to 100%. This wide range
might be due to different factors such as selection criteria of patients, sample 
size, and method used for screening SHOX mutations. The real challenge is to
establish the prevalence of SHOX deficiency in ISS children given that published 
studies have reported this association with a very broad frequency range varying 
from 1.5% to 15%. An important variable in these studies is represented by the
method used for screening SHOX mutations and sometimes by differences in patient 
selection. Short stature is present by definition in 3 out of 100 subjects; if we
consider a frequency of SHOX defects of 3% among ISS, we should expect a
population prevalence of 1 in 1000. This prevalence would be higher than that of 
GH deficiency (1:3,500) and of Turner syndrome (1:2,500 females), suggesting that
SHOX deficiency could be one of the most frequent monogenetic causes of short
stature.

PMID: 21057178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Endocrinol Invest. 2010 Jun;33(6 Suppl):3-6.

A short history of the initial discovery of the SHOX gene.

Bernasconi S(1), Garavelli L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Parma, Parma, Italy. berna@unipr.it

Already in 1981 Davis had reported that small Yp terminal deletion resulted in
short stature and, basing his findings on Davis's results, on the results of
other publications, and on his own observations that Xp terminal deletions
normally result in short stature regardless of the breakpoints, in 1993 Ogata
suggested that a growth gene was located in the pseudoautosomal region (PAR) and 
that haploinsufficiency of the growth gene actually caused short stature as a
dominant phenotype. Rao et al. in 1997 cloned a gene from the distal part of the 
PAR and gave it the name SHOX for "short stature homeobox-containing" gene. SHOX 
is expressed from an inactive X chromosome and an active X and a normal Y
chromosome, indicating that SHOX produces the dosage effect in sex chromosome
aberrations. In the same year, both Ellison and Rao demonstrated that SHOX is
most clearly expressed in bone marrow fibroblasts, thus suggesting that SHOX has 
a particular importance in bone growth and maturation.

PMID: 21057177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Endocrinol Invest. 2010 Jun;33(6 Suppl):1-2.

New insights in the diagnosis and treatment of SHOX-deficiency. The First
National Workshop, Florence, January 15-16, 2010. Foreword.

Loche S(1), Vottero A.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrine Unit, Regional Hospital for Microcitemia, Cagliari, Italy.

PMID: 21057175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 May;18(5):527-32. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.216. Epub 2009 Dec
9.

Enhancer elements upstream of the SHOX gene are active in the developing limb.

Durand C(1), Bangs F, Signolet J, Decker E, Tickle C, Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

Léri-Weill Dyschondrosteosis (LWD) is a dominant skeletal disorder characterized 
by short stature and distinct bone anomalies. SHOX gene mutations and deletions
of regulatory elements downstream of SHOX resulting in haploinsufficiency have
been found in patients with LWD. SHOX encodes a homeodomain transcription factor 
and is known to be expressed in the developing limb. We have now analyzed the
regulatory significance of the region upstream of the SHOX gene. By comparative
genomic analyses, we identified several conserved non-coding elements, which
subsequently were tested in an in ovo enhancer assay in both chicken limb bud and
cornea, where SHOX is also expressed. In this assay, we found three enhancers to 
be active in the developing chicken limb, but none were functional in the
developing cornea. A screening of 60 LWD patients with an intact SHOX coding and 
downstream region did not yield any deletion of the upstream enhancer region.
Thus, we speculate that SHOX upstream deletions occur at a lower frequency
because of the structural organization of this genomic region and/or that SHOX
upstream deletions may cause a phenotype that differs from the one observed in
LWD.

PMCID: PMC2987325
PMID: 19997128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Dec;149A(12):2900-1. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33118.

A duplication encompassing the SHOX gene and the downstream evolutionarily
conserved sequences.

Roos L, Brøndum Nielsen K, Tümer Z.

Comment on
    Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Jul;149A(7):1407-14.

PMID: 19938087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jan;95(1):328-32. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-1577. Epub
2009 Nov 19.

Effectiveness of the combined recombinant human growth hormone and
gonadotropin-releasing hormone analog therapy in pubertal patients with short
stature due to SHOX deficiency.

Scalco RC(1), Melo SS, Pugliese-Pires PN, Funari MF, Nishi MY, Arnhold IJ,
Mendonca BB, Jorge AA.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Laboratorio de Hormonios e
Genetica Molecular LIM/42, Disciplina de Endocrinologia, Hospital das Clinicas da
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, 05403-000 Sao Paulo, Brazil.

CONTEXT: Isolated heterozygous SHOX defects are the most frequent monogenic cause
of short stature, and combined therapy with recombinant human GH (rhGH) and GnRH 
analog (GnRHa) in pubertal patients has been suggested, but there are no data on 
final height.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to analyze adult height after rhGH and GnRHa 
therapy in patients with SHOX haploinsufficiency.
PATIENTS: Ten peripubertal patients with isolated SHOX defects participated in
the study.
INTERVENTION: Five patients were followed without treatment, and five were
treated with rhGH (50 mug/kg/d) and depot leuprolide acetate (3.75 mg/month).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Adult height sd score (SDS) was measured.
RESULTS: All patients followed without treatment had marked downward growth shift
during puberty (height SDS, -1.2 +/- 0.7 at 11.4 +/- 1.4 yr; adult height SDS,
-2.5 +/- 0.5). Conversely, four of five patients treated with rhGH for 2 to 4.9
yr associated to GnRHa for 1.4 to 5.8 yr improved their height SDS from -2.3 +/- 
1.3 at 11.8 +/- 2.1 yr to a final height SDS of -1.7 +/- 1.6. The difference
between the mean height SDS at the first evaluation and final height SDS was
statistically significant in nontreated vs. treated patients (mean height SDS
change, -1.2 +/- 0.4 vs. 0.6 +/- 0.4, respectively; P <0.001).
CONCLUSION: A gain in adult height of patients with isolated SHOX defects treated
with combined rhGH and GnRHa therapy was demonstrated for the first time,
supporting this treatment for children with SHOX defects who have just started
puberty to avoid the loss of growth potential observed in these patients during
puberty.

PMCID: PMC2805492
PMID: 19926713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Dec;94(12):4717-27. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-1502. Epub
2009 Oct 28.

Two short children born small for gestational age with insulin-like growth factor
1 receptor haploinsufficiency illustrate the heterogeneity of its phenotype.

Ester WA(1), van Duyvenvoorde HA, de Wit CC, Broekman AJ, Ruivenkamp CA, Govaerts
LC, Wit JM, Hokken-Koelega AC, Losekoot M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Subdivision of Endocrinology, Erasmus Medical Center
Sophia Children's Hospital, 3015 GE Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
w.ester@erasmusmc.nl

CONTEXT: Small for gestational age (SGA)-born children comprise a heterogeneous
group in which only few genetic causes have been identified.
OBJECTIVE: To determine copy number variations in 18 growth-related genes in 100 
SGA children with persistent short stature.
METHODS: Copy number variations in 18 growth-related genes (SHOX, GH1, GHR, IGF1,
IGF1R, IGF2, IGFBP1-6, NSD1, GRB10, STAT5B, ALS, SOCS2, and SOCS3) were
determined by an "in house" multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification kit.
The deletions were further characterized by single-nucleotide polymorphism array 
analysis.
RESULTS: Two heterozygous de novo insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R)
deletions were found: a deletion of the complete IGF1R gene (15q26.3, exons
1-21), including distally flanking sequences, and a deletion comprising exons
3-21, extending further into the telomeric region. In one case, serum IGF-I was
low (-2.78 sd score), probably because of a coexisting growth hormone (GH)
deficiency. Both children increased their height during GH treatment (1 mg/m(2)
per day). Functional studies in skin fibroblast cultures demonstrated similar
levels of IGF1R autophosphorylation and a reduced activation of protein kinase
B/Akt upon a challenge with IGF-I in comparison with controls.
CONCLUSIONS: IGF1R haploinsufficiency was present in 2 of 100 short SGA children.
GH therapy resulted in moderate catch-up growth in our patients. A review of the 
literature shows that small birth size, short stature, small head size,
relatively high IGF-I levels, developmental delay, and micrognathia are the main 
predictors for an IGF1R deletion.

PMID: 19864454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Dec;94(12):5028-33. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-0679. Epub
2009 Oct 22.

Effect of growth hormone therapy on severe short stature and skeletal deformities
in a patient with combined Turner syndrome and Langer mesomelic dysplasia.

Shah BC(1), Moran ES, Zinn AR, Pappas JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, New York University Medical Center, 550
First Avenue, New York, New York 10016, USA. bina.shah@nyumc.org

BACKGROUND: Homozygous mutation of the short stature homeobox-containing gene,
SHOX, results in Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD). Our case presented with severe
short stature and skeletal deformities with Turner syndrome (TS) and a SHOX gene 
abnormality due to a downstream allele deletion in her normal X chromosome.
Medical literature review did not reveal similar cases that were treated with GH 
therapy.
METHOD: We present an 11-yr-old with combined TS and LMD with severe short
stature and skeletal deformities. She was studied for the effect of GH therapy on
stature and skeletal deformities. Karyotype testing showed 45,X/46,X,idic(X).
Genetic analysis of SHOX gene testing did not detect any exonic mutations.
Interestingly, both alleles of the flanking marker DXYS233, a marker downstream
of the 3' end of SHOX coding sequence, were absent with resultant LMD. GH therapy
in the mean dose of 0.321 mg/kg/wk was administered for 4 yr (0.287, 0.355,
0.317, and 0.327 mg/kg/week in the first, second, third, and fourth years,
respectively). Clinical data were reviewed.
RESULT: The growth rates of 3.46, 3.87, 2.3, and 0.7 cm/yr were observed in the
first, second, third, and fourth years of the GH therapy, respectively. There was
no clinical deterioration of the skeletal deformities.
CONCLUSION: There was a failure to achieve growth improvements with GH therapy
for 4 years, but there was no worsening of the skeletal deformities. We conclude 
that GH therapy may not be beneficial in severe short stature due to combined TS 
and LMD resulting from homozygous SHOX deficiency.

PMID: 19850687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Eur J Endocrinol. 2010 Jan;162(1):169-75. doi: 10.1530/EJE-09-0768. Epub 2009 Oct
7.

Severe XIST hypomethylation clearly distinguishes (SRY+) 46,XX-maleness from
Klinefelter syndrome.

Poplinski A(1), Wieacker P, Kliesch S, Gromoll J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, University Clinics Münster,
Münster, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: 46,XX-maleness affects 1 in 20 000 live male newborns resulting in
infertility and hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism. Although the phenotypes of
XX-males have been well described, the molecular nature of the X chromosomes
remains elusive. We assessed the X inactivation status by DNA methylation
analysis of four informative loci and compared those to Klinefelter syndrome (KS)
and Turner syndrome.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Patient cohort consisted of ten sex-determining region of the
Y (SRY+) XX-males, two (SRY-) XX-males, ten 47,XXY Klinefelter men, six 45,X
Turner females and ten male and female control individuals each. Methylation
analysis was carried out by bisulphite sequencing of DNA from peripheral blood
lymphocytes analysing X-inactive-specific transcript (XIST), phosphoglycerate
kinase 1 (PGK1), ferritin, heavy peptide-like 17 (FTHL17) and short stature
homeobox (SHOX).
RESULTS: XIST methylation was 18% in (SRY+) XX-males, and thus they were severely
hypomethylated compared to (SRY-) XX-males (48%; P<0.01), Klinefelter men (44%;
P<0.01) and female controls (47%; P<0.01). Turner females and male controls
displayed a high degree of XIST methylation of 98 and 94% respectively.
Methylation of PGK1, undergoing X inactivation, was not significantly reduced in 
(SRY+) XX-males compared to female controls in spite of severe XIST
hypomethylation (51 vs 69%; P>0.05). FTHL17, escaping X inactivation, but
undergoing cell-type-specific inactivation was similarly methylated in XX-males
(89%), KS patients (87%) and female controls (90%). SHOX, an X inactivation
escapee located in the pseudoautosomal region, displays similarly low degrees of 
methylation for XX-males (7%), KS patients (7%) and female controls (9%).
CONCLUSIONS: XIST hypomethylation clearly distinguishes (SRY+) XX-males from
Klinefelter men. It does not, however, impair appropriate epigenetic regulation
of representative X-linked loci.

PMID: 19812237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Semin Musculoskelet Radiol. 2009 Sep;13(3):236-54. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1237691.
Epub 2009 Sep 1.

Imaging of SHOX-associated anomalies.

Gahunia HK(1), Babyn PS, Kirsch S, Mendoza-Londono R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. harpal.gahunia@sickkids.ca

Human growth is a multifactorial trait influenced by environmental, hormonal, and
genetic factors. Although it is clear that multiple factors contribute to an
individual's final height and limb development, genetic factors play a crucial
role. One such gene is the short stature homeobox ( SHOX) containing gene.
Knowledge about the SHOX gene has rapidly increased since its discovery in 1997, 
and we now know that SHOX haploinsufficiency affects the development of the
extremities and is an important cause of short stature. Currently, SHOX mutations
occur with an estimated incidence of roughly 1 in 1000 newborns, making mutations
of this gene one of the most common genetic defects associated with growth
failure and skeletal deformities. Heterozygous mutations of SHOX have been
implicated in patients with Madelung's deformity, Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis
(77%), Turner's syndrome (66%), and idiopathic short stature (3%), and homozygous
mutations of SHOX gene have been identified in patients with Langer's mesomelic
dysplasia (100%). Recognition of the early radiographic features encountered in
SHOX haploinsufficiency maybe pivotal for the diagnosis. In this article, we
summarize the genetic and clinical features of the various SHOX
haploinsufficiency-associated disorders. We present the characteristic imaging
features of these disorders and the results of growth hormone treatment trials.

PMID: 19724992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Pediatr Int. 2009 Aug;51(4):574-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1442-200X.2009.02872.x.

Effect of growth hormone therapy in two sisters with SHOX haploinsufficiency.

Urakami T(1), Hasegawa M, Morimoto S, Saitoh H, Mugishima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
turakami@med.nihon-u.ac.jp

PMID: 19674367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Endocrinol Invest. 2010 Apr;33(4):282-3. doi: 10.3275/6478. Epub 2009 Jul 28.

Severe SHOX gene haploinsufficiency in a girl with a novel mutation (M1T)
involving the first codon of coding region.

Wasniewska M, Raiola G, Nicoletti A, Galati MC, Messina MF, Mirabelli S, De Luca 
F.

PMID: 19636220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Androl. 2009 Nov-Dec;30(6):650-4. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.108.006353. Epub 2009
Jul 17.

A case of agonadism associated with y-chromosome rearrangement: cytogenetic and
molecular studies.

Cui YX(1), Shi YC, Liu Q, Xia XY, Lu HY, Shao HF, Jia L, Yao B, Ge YF, Li XJ,
Huang YF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproduction, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University School of
Medicine, Nanjing, PR China.

Testicular regression syndrome (MIM273250) is characterized primarily by absence 
of gonads in a person of XY karyotype. Phenotypes range from complete female
external genitalia (primary or "true" agonadism) to male phenotype with anorchia 
(testicular regression). Phenotypic differences depend on the stage of embryo
development during which testes degenerate. No conclusive mapping can be
concluded for the phenotype. We describe a novel case of primary agonadism with a
karyotype of 46,X,der(Y)(pter-->q11.23::pter-->p11.31 or p11.2:). Transcriptional
analysis revealed little expression of USP9Y and UTY genes on the Y chromosome in
our case, which would explain her phenotypes of agonadism with short stature.

PMID: 19617372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Med Genet. 2009 Dec;46(12):834-9. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.067785. Epub 2009 Jul
2.

Enhancer deletions of the SHOX gene as a frequent cause of short stature: the
essential role of a 250 kb downstream regulatory domain.

Chen J(1), Wildhardt G, Zhong Z, Röth R, Weiss B, Steinberger D, Decker J, Blum
WF, Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Mutations and deletions of the homeobox transcription factor gene
SHOX are known to cause short stature. The authors have analysed SHOX enhancer
regions in a large cohort of short stature patients to study the importance of
regulatory regions in developmentally relevant genes like SHOX.
METHODS: The authors tested for the presence of copy number variations in the
pseudoautosomal region of the sex chromosomes in 735 individuals with idiopathic 
short stature and compared the results to 58 cases with Leri-Weill syndrome and
100 normal height controls, using fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH),
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), microsatellites, and multiplex ligand
dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 31/735 (4.2%) microdeletions were identified in the
pseudoautosomal region in patients with idiopathic short stature; eight of these 
microdeletions (8/31; 26%) involved only enhancer sequences residing a
considerable distance away from the gene. In 58 Leri-Weill syndrome patients, a
total of 29 microdeletions were identified; almost half of these (13/29; 45%)
involve enhancer sequences and leave the SHOX gene intact. These deletions were
absent in 100 control persons.
CONCLUSION: The authors conclude that enhancer deletions in the SHOX gene region 
are a relatively frequent cause of growth failure in patients with idiopathic
short stature and Leri-Weill syndrome. The data highlights the growing
recognition that regulatory sequences are of crucial importance in the genome
when diagnosing and understanding the aetiology of disease.

PMCID: PMC2778764
PMID: 19578035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Jul;149A(7):1407-14. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32914.

Clinical and molecular characterization of duplications encompassing the human
SHOX gene reveal a variable effect on stature.

Thomas NS(1), Harvey JF, Bunyan DJ, Rankin J, Grigelioniene G, Bruno DL, Tan TY, 
Tomkins S, Hastings R.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
UK. simon.thomas@salisbury.nhs.uk

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Dec;149A(12):2900-1.

Deletions of the SHOX gene are well documented and cause disproportionate short
stature and variable skeletal abnormalities. In contrast interstitial SHOX
duplications limited to PAR1 appear to be very rare and the clinical significance
of the only case report in the literature is unclear. Mapping of this duplication
has now shown that it includes the entire SHOX gene but little flanking sequence 
and so will not encompass any of the long-range enhancers required for SHOX
transcription. We now describe the clinical and molecular characterization of
three additional cases. The duplications all included the SHOX coding sequence
but varied in the amount of flanking sequence involved. The probands were
ascertained for a variety of reasons: hypotonia and features of Asperger
syndrome, Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), and a family history of cleft
palate. However, the presence of a duplication did not correlate with any of
these features or with evidence of skeletal abnormality. Remarkably, the proband 
with LWD had inherited both a SHOX deletion and a duplication. The effect of the 
duplications on stature was variable: height appeared to be elevated in some
carriers, particularly in those with the largest duplications, but was still
within the normal range. SHOX duplications are likely to be under ascertained and
more cases need to be identified and characterized in detail in order to
accurately determine their phenotypic consequences.

PMID: 19533800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Genet Couns. 2009;20(1):9-17.

Deletion of Xpter encompassing the SHOX gene and PAR1 region in familial patients
with Leri-Weill Dyschondrosteosis syndrome.

Mutesa L(1), Vanbellinghen JF, Hellin AC, Segers K, Jamar M, Pierquin G, Bours V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, CHU Sart-Tilman, University of Liège, Belgium.

Heterozygote deletions or mutations of pseudoautosomal 1 region (PAR1)
encompassing the short stature homeobox-containing (SHOX) gene cause Leri-Weill
Dyschondrosteosis (LWD), which is a dominantly inherited osteochondroplasia
characterized by short stature with mesomelic shortening of the upper and lower
limbs and Madelung deformity of the wrists. SHOX is expressed by both sex
chromosomes in males and females and plays an important role in bone growth and
development. Clinically, the LWD expression is variable and more severe in
females than males due to sex differences in oestrogen levels. Here, we report
two familial cases of LWD with a large Xp terminal deletion (approximately 943
kb) of distal PAR1 encompassing the SHOX gene. In addition, the proband had
mental retardation which appeared to be from recessive inheritance in the family.

PMID: 19400538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2008 Dec;4(6):1177-83.

Recombinant human growth hormone in the treatment of Turner syndrome.

Spiliotis BE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Patras, School of Medicine, Patras, Greece. besspil@endo.gr

Turner syndrome (TS) is a common chromosomal disorder in women that is associated
with the absence of one of the X chromosomes. Severe short stature and a lack of 
pubertal development characterize TS girls, causing psychosocial problems and
reduced bone mass. The growth impairment in TS seems to be due to multiple
factors including an abnormal growth hormone (GH) - insulin-like growth factor
(IGF) - IGF binding protein axis and haploinsufficiency of the short stature
homeobox-containing gene. Growth hormone and sex steroid replacement therapy has 
enhanced growth, pubertal development, bone mass, and the quality of life of TS
girls. Recombinant human GH (hGH) has improved the height potential of TS girls
with varied results though, depending upon the dose of hGH and the age of
induction of puberty. The best final adult height and peak bone mass achievement 
results seem to be achieved when hGH therapy is started early and puberty is
induced at the normal age of puberty in a regimen mimicking physiologic puberty. 
The initiation of estradiol therapy at an age-appropriate time may also help the 
TS patients avoid osteoporosis during adulthood. Recombinant hGH therapy in TS
seems to be safe. Studies so far show no adverse effects on cardiac function,
glucose metabolism or any association with neoplasms but research is still in
progress to provide conclusive data on long-term safety.

PMCID: PMC2643099
PMID: 19337425  [PubMed]


174. Horm Res. 2009;71(3):167-72. doi: 10.1159/000197874. Epub 2009 Feb 3.

Height gains in response to growth hormone treatment to final height are similar 
in patients with SHOX deficiency and Turner syndrome.

Blum WF(1), Cao D, Hesse V, Fricke-Otto S, Ross JL, Jones C, Quigley CA, Binder
G.

Author information: 
(1)Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly & Co., Bad Homburg, Germany.
blum_werner@lilly.com

BACKGROUND: Patients with mutations or deletions of the Short Stature
Homeobox-containing(SHOX) gene have variable degrees of growth impairment, with
or without mesomelic skeletal dysplasia. If untreated, short patients with SHOX
deficiency remain short in adulthood. Growth hormone (GH) treatment improves
short-term linear growth; however, there are no data on GH treatment effects on
final height.
PATIENTS: In a retrospective study, we assessed the relative effects of GH on
final height gain in patients with SHOX deficiency (n = 14; 12 females) and
Turner syndrome (TS) (n = 158). Patients were included if they fulfilled the
following criteria: genetically-confirmed SHOX deficiency or TS, baseline height 
SDS <1.5, GH treatment started at Tanner stage < or =2, duration of GH treatment 
>2 years, and final height attained.
RESULTS: Both groups of patients were short at baseline (height SDS [mean +/-
SD]: SHOX deficiency, -3.3 +/- 0.9; TS, -2.9 +/- 0.8). Height SDS gain from
baseline to final height was significant for each patient group (SHOX deficiency,
1.1 +/- 0.7; TS, 1.2 +/- 0.8; p < 0.001); however, it was not significantly
different between groups (p = 0.708).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with SHOX deficiency receive similar final height benefit
from GH treatment to those with TS.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19188742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2008 Nov;52(8):1382-7.

Cryptic intragenic deletion of the SHOX gene in a family with Léri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis detected by Multiplex Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification
(MLPA).

Funari MF(1), Jorge AA, Pinto EM, Arnhold IJ, Mendonca BB, Nishi MY.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital das Clínicas, Universidade de São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

LWD is associated to SHOX haploinsufficiency, in most cases, due to gene
deletion. Generally FISH and microsatellite analysis are used to identify SHOX
deletion. MLPA is a new method of detecting gene copy variation, allowing
simultaneous analysis of several regions. Here we describe the presence of a SHOX
intragenic deletion in a family with LWD, analyzed through different
methodologies. Genomic DNA of 11 subjects from one family were studied by
microsatellite analysis, direct sequencing and MLPA. FISH was performed in two
affected individuals. Microsatellite analysis showed that all affected members
shared the same haplotype suggesting the involvement of SHOX. MLPA detected an
intragenic deletion involving exons IV-VIa, which was not detected by FISH and
microsatellite analysis. In conclusion, the MLPA technique was proved to be the
best solution on detecting this small deletion, it has the advantage of being
less laborious also allowing the analysis of several regions simultaneously.

PMID: 19169498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2008 Nov;52(8):1282-7.

Tall stature and poor breast development after estrogen replacement in a
hypergonadotrophic hypogonadic patient with a 45,X/46,X,der(X) karyotype with
SHOX gene overdosage.

Nishi MY(1), Correa RV, Costa EM, Billerbeck AE, Cruzes AL, Domenice S, Carvalho 
LR, Mendonca BB.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital das Clínicas, Universidade de São Paulo, SP, Brasil. minishi@usp.br

SHOX is exclusively expressed in the developing distal limb bones of human
embryos and in the first and second pharyngeal arches. It works as a promoter for
linear growth and as a repressor of growth plate fusion. It was reported,
recently, that SHOX overdosage and gonadal estrogen deficiency have led to tall
stature due to continued growth. We report, in the present study, a female
patient with 45,X/46,X, psu idic(X)(pter-->q21::q21-->pter) karyotype, tall
stature, and hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism without Turner stigmas. She did not 
present breast development even after long term therapy with high estrogen doses.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization depicted the presence of three copies of SHOX 
gene. Microsatellite studies showed paternal origin of der(X). Further studies in
similarly affected patients will clarify if the absence of breast development,
despite previous high-dose estrogen treatment, is associated to triple copy of
SHOX gene.

PMID: 19169482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Clin Calcium. 2008 Dec;18(12):1786-91. doi: CliCa081217861791.

[Bone dysplasia with short limb].

[Article in Japanese]

Kobayashi D(1), Satsuma S.

Author information: 
(1)Kobe Children's Hospital, Department of Orthopaedic surgery, Japan.

We described the condition of the disease, clinical appearance, X-rays
appearance, orthopaedic problems about Achondroplasia, Pseudoachondroplasia,
Metaphyseal Chondrodysplasia (Schmid type) , Mesomelic dysplasia
(Dyschondrosteosis) as a representative bone dysplasia who present a short
stature with short limbs. Clinical features are almost evident at birth in the
patient with Achondroplasia. However, in other cases, there is no specific
finding on clinically and radiologically at birth. Clinical and radiological
findings develop slowly from period for childhood. It is considered that the
diagnosis is not difficult since each of them have characteristic clinical
features and X-rays views, only if examining them carefully. Correct and rapid
diagnosis would be important for having a good relationship with patients.

PMID: 19043194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. An Sist Sanit Navar. 2008;31 Suppl 2:31-53.

[Low height and rare diseases].

[Article in Spanish]

Chueca Guindulain M(1), Berrade S, Oyarzábal M.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona, 31008, Spain.

Low stature is the main reason of consultation in paediatric endocrinology. In a 
high percentage of cases, its etiology is clear and fundamentally answers to
variants of normality. However, in approximately 20% of cases low stature is
pathological and requires exhaustive studies. The association of rare diseases
(RD) with low height is very frequent. In this article we review the etiology of 
low height, describing: - The genetic forms of the growth hormone (GH), whether
isolated or associated with malformations of the average line or others. - Those 
which are of great importance due to their clinical repercussion, such as
Turner's Syndrome, Noonan's Syndrome and Willi-Prader's Syndrome. - The frequent 
osseous dysplasias, in some cases with genetic alterations of the SHOX gene,
situated in the short arm of the Xp chromosome. The importance of these diagnoses
lies in the possibility of carrying out early and efficient treatment, in some of
them, with GH. In conclusion, the diagnosis of rare diseases with low height is a
current and normal challenge in paediatric endocrinology due to the great
advances in molecular genetics and the possibility of treatment in some of them. 
It always involves a multidisciplinary approach due to the frequent association
of pathology it presents, and, in its turn, it offers the possibility of carrying
out timely genetic counselling.

PMID: 18953371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Orthop Res. 2009 Jun;27(6):807-13. doi: 10.1002/jor.20801.

SHOX gene is expressed in vertebral body growth plates in idiopathic and
congenital scoliosis: implications for the etiology of scoliosis in Turner
syndrome.

Day G(1), Szvetko A, Griffiths L, McPhee IB, Tuffley J, LaBrom R, Askin G,
Woodland P, McClosky E, Torode I, Tomlinson F.

Author information: 
(1)University of Queensland, Department of Surgery, Queensland, Australia.
ggandlda@bigpond.net.au

Reduced SHOX gene expression has been demonstrated to be associated with all
skeletal abnormalities in Turner syndrome, other than scoliosis (and kyphosis).
There is evidence to suggest that Turner syndrome scoliosis is clinically and
radiologically similar to idiopathic scoliosis, although the phenotypes are
dissimilar. This pilot gene expression study used relative quantitative real-time
PCR (qRT-PCR) of the SHOX (short stature on X) gene to determine whether it is
expressed in vertebral body growth plates in idiopathic and congenital scoliosis.
After vertebral growth plate dissection, tissue was examined histologically and
RNA was extracted and its integrity was assessed using a Bio-Spec Mini, NanoDrop 
ND-1000 spectrophotometer and standard denaturing gel electrophoresis. Following 
cDNA synthesis, gene-specific optimization in a Corbett RotorGene 6000 real-time 
cycler was followed by qRT-PCR of vertebral tissue. Histological examination of
vertebral samples confirmed that only growth plate was analyzed for gene
expression. Cycling and melt curves were resolved in triplicate for all samples. 
SHOX abundance was demonstrated in congenital and idiopathic scoliosis vertebral 
body growth plates. SHOX expression was 11-fold greater in idiopathic compared to
congenital (n = 3) scoliosis (p = 0.027). This study confirmed that SHOX was
expressed in vertebral body growth plates, which implies that its expression may 
also be associated with the scoliosis (and kyphosis) of Turner syndrome. SHOX
expression is reduced in Turner syndrome (short stature). In this study,
increased SHOX expression was demonstrated in idiopathic scoliosis (tall stature)
and congenital scoliosis.

Copyright 2008 Orthopaedic Research Society

PMID: 19016538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Nov 15;146A(22):2944-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32473.

Contiguous gene syndrome due to a maternally inherited 8.41 Mb distal deletion of
chromosome band Xp22.3 in a boy with short stature, ichthyosis, epilepsy, mental 
retardation, cerebral cortical heterotopias and Dandy-Walker malformation.

van Steensel MA(1), Vreeburg M, Engelen J, Ghesquiere S, Stegmann AP, Herbergs J,
van Lent J, Smeets B, Vles JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The
Netherlands. mauricevansteensel@gmail.com

Microdeletions of Xp22.3 are associated with contiguous gene syndromes, the
extent and nature of which depend on the genes encompassed by the deletion.
Common symptoms include ichthyosis, mental retardation and hypogonadism. We
report on a boy with short stature, ichthyosis, severe mental retardation,
cortical heterotopias and Dandy-Walker malformation. The latter two abnormalities
have so far not been reported in terminal Xp deletions. MLPA showed deletion of
SHOX and subsequent analysis using FISH and SNP-arrays revealed that the patient 
had an 8.41 Mb distal deletion of chromosome region Xp22.31 --> Xpter. This
interval contains several genes whose deletion can partly explain our patient's
phenotype. His cortical heterotopias and DWM suggest that a gene involved in
brain development may be in the deleted interval, but we found no immediately
obvious candidates. Interestingly, further analysis of the family revealed that
the patient had inherited his deletion from his mother, who has a mos
46,X,del(X)(p22)/45,X/46, XX karyotype.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18925676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2008 Jul;52(5):765-73.

[Short stature caused by SHOX gene haploinsufficiency: from diagnosis to
treatment].

[Article in Portuguese]

Jorge AA(1), Nishi MY, Funari MF, Souza SC, Arnhold IJ, Mendonça BB.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Laboratório de Hormônios e
Genética Molecular LIM/42, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, SP, 
Brazil. alexj@pq.cnpq.br

Studies involving patients with short stature and partial deletion of sex
chromosomes identified SHOX gene in the pseudoautosomal region of the X and Y
chromosomes. SHOX haploinsufficiency is an important cause of short stature in a 
diversity of clinical conditions. It explains 2/3 of short stature observed in
Turner syndrome (TS) patients. Heterozygous mutations in SHOX are observed in 77%
of patients with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis, a common dominant inherited
skeletal dysplasia and in 3% of children with idiopathic short stature,
indicating that SHOX defects are the most frequent monogenetic cause of short
stature. The sitting height/height ratio (SH/H) standard deviation score is a
simple way to assess body proportions and together with a careful exam of other
family members, effectively selected a group of patients that presented a high
frequency of SHOX mutations. Growth hormone treatment of short stature due to TS 
is well established and considering the common etiology of short stature in
patients with isolated defects of SHOX gene, this treatment is also proposed for 
these patients. Here, we review clinical, molecular and therapeutic aspects of
SHOX haploinsufficiency.

PMID: 18797583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2008 Jul;52(5):757-64.

[Growth hormone treatment inTurner syndrome: data and reflections].

[Article in Portuguese]

Guedes AD(1), Bianco B, Callou EQ, Gomes AL, Lipay MV, Verreschi IT.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.

Short stature is the major characteristic of Turner syndrome. The statural appeal
is premature and become evident in the puberty. Haploinsufficiency of SHOX gene
has been related as main factor on final height of these patients. Despite the
majority of the patients are not growth hormone deficient, the GHr therapy
improves the final height. Recently, a great number of publications have
described the association between GH and cancer. The cancer risk, in these
patients, is mainly associated with the presence of Y chromosome sequences that
can lead to the gonadoblastoma development. In conclusion, the GHr therapy in ST 
patients deserves caution. The investigation of Y chromosome sequences should be 
performed as well as the prophylactic gonadectomy in the positive cases
conferring confidence to the treatment.

PMID: 18797582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Curr Genomics. 2007 Apr;8(2):129-36.

The Human Pseudoautosomal Region (PAR): Origin, Function and Future.

Helena Mangs A(1), Morris BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Basic & Clinical Genomics Laboratory, School of Medical Sciences and Bosch
Institute, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.

The pseudoautosomal regions (PAR1 and PAR2) of the human X and Y chromosomes pair
and recombine during meiosis. Thus genes in this region are not inherited in a
strictly sex-linked fashion. PAR1 is located at the terminal region of the short 
arms and PAR2 at the tips of the long arms of these chromosomes. To date, 24
genes have been assigned to the PAR1 region. Half of these have a known function.
In contrast, so far only 4 genes have been discovered in the PAR2 region.
Deletion of the PAR1 region results in failure of pairing and male sterility. The
gene SHOX (short stature homeobox-containing) resides in PAR1. SHOX
haploinsufficiency contributes to certain features in Turner syndrome as well as 
the characteristics of Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis. Only two of the human PAR1
genes have mouse homologues. These do not, however, reside in the mouse PAR1
region but are autosomal. The PAR regions seem to be relics of differential
additions, losses, rearrangements and degradation of the X and Y chromosome in
different mammalian lineages. Marsupials have three homologues of human PAR1
genes in their autosomes, although, in contrast to mouse, do not have a PAR
region at all. The disappearance of PAR from other species seems likely and this 
region will only be rescued by the addition of genes to both X and Y, as has
occurred already in lemmings. The present review summarizes the current
understanding of the evolution of PAR and provides up-to-date information about
individual genes residing in this region.

PMCID: PMC2435358
PMID: 18660847  [PubMed]


184. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2008 Jun;84(2):123-30. doi: 10.1002/bdrc.20124.

Transcriptional regulators of chondrocyte hypertrophy.

Solomon LA(1), Bérubé NG, Beier F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.

Coordinated transition from proliferation to terminal differentiation and
hypertrophy of growth plate chondrocytes is required for normal growth of
endochondral bones and thus determines final height in humans. Over the last
decades, transcription factors of the Sox and Runx families have been shown to be
the central regulators of this process. More recently, numerous additional
transcription factors have been identified as positive or negative regulators of 
chondrocyte hypertrophy, such as Shox/Shox2, Dlx5, and MEF2C. These factors do
not only control skeletal development and growth, but might also participate in
ectopic chondrocyte hypertrophy during the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis. This
review focuses on recent advances in our understanding of the transcriptional
regulation of chondrocyte hypertrophy, with particular attention to genes that
have only recently been implicated in cartilage development or received little
attention so far.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18546336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Br Med Bull. 2008;86:77-93. doi: 10.1093/bmb/ldn015. Epub 2008 Apr 9.

Turner syndrome and clinical treatment.

Hjerrild BE(1), Mortensen KH, Gravholt CH.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Department M (Endocrinology and Diabetes), Arhus Kommunehospital,
DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Turner syndrome (TS) is a genetic disorder associated with
abnormalities of the X chromosome, occurring in about 50 per 100,000 liveborn
girls. TS is usually associated with reduced adult height, gonadal dysgenesis and
thus insufficient circulating levels of female sex steroids leading to premature 
ovarian failure and infertility. The average intellectual performance is within
the normal range. New insight into genetics, epidemiology, cardiology,
endocrinology and metabolism from a number of recent studies will be included in 
this review.
SOURCES OF DATA: For this review we concentrated on all papers published on TS
with special emphasis on the most recent literature. Also papers relating to
cardiology, especially aortic dissection, paediatrics and the effects of
estradiol in other conditions were considered. The main source was PubMed and the
major endocrinology and cardiology journals.
AREAS OF AGREEMENT: Treatment with growth hormone (GH) during childhood and
adolescence allows a considerable gain in adult height. SHOX deficiency explains 
some of the phenotypic characteristics in TS, principally short stature. Puberty 
has to be induced in most cases, and female sex hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
is given during adult years. Morbidity and mortality is increased, especially due
to the risk of dissection of the aorta and other cardiovascular (CV) diseases, as
well as the risk of type 2 diabetes, osteoporosis and thyroid disease.
AREAS OF CONTROVERSY: The proper dose of HRT with female sex steroids has not
been established, and, likewise, benefits and/or drawbacks from HRT have not been
thoroughly evaluated. In most countries it seems that the transition period from 
paediatric to adult care is especially vulnerable and the proper framework for
transition has not been established. Today, most treatment recommendations are
based on expert opinion and are unfortunately not evidence based, although more
areas, such as GH treatment for increasing height, are well founded.
GROWING POINTS: The description of adult life with TS has been broadened and
medical, social and psychological aspects are being added at a compelling pace.
AREAS TIMELY FOR DEVELOPING RESEARCH: Proper care during adulthood should be
studied, since most morbidity potentially is amenable to proper care. Especially,
interventional strategy and follow-up with respect to congenital CV
malformations, as well as secondary CV disease, have to be developed and new
treatment algorithms have to be studied. In summary, TS is a condition associated
with a number of diseases and conditions, which need the attention of a
multi-disciplinary team.

PMID: 18400842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 May 1;146A(9):1221-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32265.

A prenatally ascertained X;Y translocation characterized using conventional and
molecular cytogenetics.

Burnside RD(1), Mikhail FM, Cosper PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294-0024, USA.

PMID: 18384143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Pediatr Neurol. 2008 Apr;38(4):289-92. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2007.11.008.

Girl with partial Turner syndrome and absence epilepsy.

Puusepp H(1), Zordania R, Paal M, Bartsch O, Ounap K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.

This report describes a 16-year-old girl with short stature (-5 standard
deviations), normal puberty, panic attacks, absence epilepsy, some stigmata of
Turner syndrome, and a Madelung deformity. Routine chromosomal analysis revealed 
a female karyotype with one abnormal chromosome X, with the suspicion of
additional material on the short arm. With fluorescent in situ hybridization and 
array-multiplex amplifiable probe hybridization methodology, a complex aberration
was detected, with a deletion of the distal part of Xp22.33 (including the
short-stature homeobox gene) and a duplication of Xp22.32-p22.12 proximal to the 
deleted segment. The deletion in our patient involves the Xp22.33 region. Two
genes in this region may contribute to the patient's phenotype: short-stature
homeobox, and visuospatial/perceptual abilities. The duplication in our patient
involves the Xp22.12-p22.32 region, which, according to the Online Mendelian
Inheritance in Man database, contains at least 93 genes, 49 of which are of
unknown function. It is difficult to conjecture which gene overexpression in this
region may have contributed to the phenotype of our patient. To our knowledge,
this small, complex chromosome X aberration was not described previously.

PMID: 18358412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Hum Genet. 2008;53(5):454-9. doi: 10.1007/s10038-008-0269-z. Epub 2008 Mar 6.

Identification and characterization of cryptic SHOX intragenic deletions in three
Japanese patients with Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis.

Fukami M(1), Dateki S, Kato F, Hasegawa Y, Mochizuki H, Horikawa R, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, 2-10-1 Ohkura, Setagaya, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.
mfukami@nch.go.jp

Although short-stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX ) haploinsufficiency is
responsible for Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), the molecular defect has not 
been identified in approximately 20% of Japanese LWD patients. Furthermore,
although high prevalence of microdeletions affecting SHOX is primarily ascribed
to the presence of repeat sequences such as Alu elements around SHOX, it remains 
to be determined whether microdeletions are actually mediated by repeat
sequences. We performed multiple ligation probe amplification (MLPA) assay in six
Japanese LWD patients with apparently normal SHOX, followed by fluorescent in
situ hybridization (FISH) analysis and sequencing for polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) products encompassing the deletion junctions in patients with abnormal MLPA
patterns. Consequently, heterozygous intragenic deletions were identified in
three cases, i.e., a 5,906-bp deletion involving exons 4-5 in case 1, a 5,594-bp 
deletion involving exons 4-6a in case 2, and a 50,199-bp deletion involving exons
4-6b in case 3. The deletion breakpoints of cases 1 and 2 were present in
nonrepeat sequences, whereas those of case 3 resided within Alu elements. The
results suggest that cryptic SHOX intragenic deletions account for a small
fraction of LWD and that microdeletions affecting SHOX can be generated by
repeat-sequence-mediated aberrant recombinations and by nonhomologous end
joining.

PMID: 18322641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Mater Sci Mater Med. 2008 Jun;19(6):2471-6. doi: 10.1007/s10856-008-3386-5.
Epub 2008 Feb 6.

Zirconium oxide regulates RNA interfering of osteoblast-like cells.

Palmieri A(1), Pezzetti F, Brunelli G, Zollino I, Lo Muzio L, Martinelli M,
Scapoli L, Arlotti M, Masiero E, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Histology, University of Bologna and Center of Molecular
Genetics, CARISBO Foundation, Bologna, Italy.

Zirconium oxide (ZO) has outstanding mechanical properties, high biocompatibility
and high resistance to scratching. Since dental implants are made with ZO and the
genetic effects of ZO on osteoblasts are incompletely understood, we used
microRNA microarray techniques to investigate the translation process in
osteoblasts exposed to ZO. By using miRNA microarrays containing 329 probes
designed from Human miRNA sequences, we identified in osteoblast-like cells line 
(MG-63) cultured on ZO disks several miRNA whose expression was significantly
modified. The most notable regulated genes acting on osteoblasts are: NOG, SHOX, 
IGF1, BMP1 and FGFR1. The data reported below represent the first study on
translation regulation in osteoblasts exposed to zirconium and one in which the
effect of ZO on bone formation has been detected.

PMID: 18253813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Anim Biotechnol. 2008;19(1):1-5. doi: 10.1080/10495390701638328.

SNPS in the promoter regions of the canine RMRP and SHOX genes are not associated
with canine chondrodysplasia.

Young AE(1), Bannasch DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Health and Reproduction, University of California,
Davis, School of Veterinary Medicine, Davis, California 95616, USA.

Canine chondrodysplasia is a heritable defect of endochondral ossification
characterized by disproportionately short limbs. It is directly linked to
significant health concerns, such as intervertebral disc disease. Some human
skeletal dysplasias exhibit similar disproportionate dwarfisms and are associated
with mutations in the RMRP and SHOX genes. These phenotypic similarities
indicated RMRP and SHOX as candidate genes in dogs. They were sequenced in three 
chondrodysplastic and three normal-legged breeds. Single nucleotide polymorphisms
in the promoter regions of both genes and in exon 2 of SHOX were found in
affected and unaffected breeds, indicating that they are not associated with
canine chondrodysplasia.

PMID: 18228171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Eur J Med Genet. 2008 Jan-Feb;51(1):68-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2007.11.002. Epub 
2007 Nov 22.

Normal intelligence and social interactions in a male patient despite the
deletion of NLGN4X and the VCX genes.

Mochel F(1), Missirian C, Reynaud R, Moncla A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U679, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

Xp22.3 deletion in males can be associated with short stature (SHOX),
chondrodysplasia punctata (ARSE), mental retardation (MRX49 locus), ichthyosis
(STS), Kallmann syndrome (KAL1) and ocular albinism (OA1), according to the size 
of the deletion. Studies of terminal and interstitial deletions in male patients 
with a partial nullisomy of the X chromosome have led to the identification of
the VCX-3A gene at the MRX49 locus on Xp22.3. The NLGN4X gene has then been
identified less than 350 kb away from VCX-3A. Nonsense mutations in NLGN4X have
been associated with autism and/or moderate mental retardation in males. We
report a 17-year old male patient presenting with severe ichthyosis and Kallmann 
syndrome related to a 3.7 Mb interstitial Xp22.3 deletion, encompassing STS and
KAL1 genes, respectively. However, despite the deletion of NLGN4X and all VCX
genes, including VCX-3A, our patient did not manifest any learning disabilities
or behavioural problems. Therefore, our case argues against a major role of
NLGN4X and the VCX genes alone in cognitive development and/or communication
processes.

PMID: 18194880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Horm Res. 2008;69(2):124-8. Epub 2007 Dec 5.

Novel SHOX gene mutation in a short boy with Becker muscular dystrophy: double
trouble in two adjacent genes.

Messina MF(1), Aguennouz M, Arrigo T, Rodolico C, Valenzise M, Musumeci O, Vita
G, Lanzano N, De Luca F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Psychiatry and Anesthesiology, University of
Messina, Messina, Italy.

Short stature is a well-recognized feature of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, whilst
it has been reported rarely in Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD). Here we report
two brothers with BMD, who exhibited a very different growth pattern. Whereas in 
the short brother (-2.2 SDS) molecular investigation revealed a G367A mutation in
the short stature homeobox containing (SHOX) gene located in the Xp22.3 region,
no abnormality was found in the brother with normal height (-0.1 SDS). Our data
suggest that abnormal growth observed in a boy with BMD may be related to an
additional genetic alteration, already known as correlated with short stature.

(c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 18059093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Dec 1;143A(23):2838-42.

Two distinctive mechanisms leading to disruption of the SHOX transcription unit
in a single family.

Izumi K(1), Nakano M, Kosaki K, Kosaki R, Hosogai N, Matsumoto H, Hasegawa T,
Takahashi T, Kosaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

PMID: 17994568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Dec 1;143A(23):2785-95.

Brachymesomelic dysplasia with Peters anomaly of the eye results from disruptions
of the X chromosome near the SHOX and SOX3 genes.

Bleyl SB(1), Byrne JL, South ST, Dries DC, Stevenson DA, Rope AF, Vianna-Morgante
AM, Schoenwolf GC, Kivlin JD, Brothman A, Carey JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, University of Utah
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84132. steven.bleyl@hsc.utah.edu

We report on a mother and son affected with an unusual skeletal dysplasia and
anterior segment eye abnormalities. Their skeletal phenotype overlaps with the
SHOX-related skeletal dysplasias and is intermediate between Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and Langer Mesomelic dysplasia (LMD). The mother has
bilateral Peters anomaly of the eye and was reported as having a new syndrome;
the son had severe bilateral sclerocornea. Chromosome analysis showed that the
mother has a pericentric inversion of the X chromosome [46,X,inv(X)(p22.3q27)]
and the son, a resultant recombinant X chromosome
[46,Y,rec(X)dup(Xq)inv(X)(p22.3q27)]. The observed skeletal and ophthalmologic
abnormalities in both patients were similar in severity. The additional features 
of developmental delay, growth retardation, agenesis of the corpus callosum,
cryptorchidism and hypoplastic scrotum in the son are consistent with Xq28
duplication. Analysis of the son's recombinant X chromosome showed that the
Xp22.33 breakpoint lies 30-68 kb 5' of the SHOX gene. This finding suggests that 
the skeletal dysplasia in both mother and son is allelic with LWD and LMD and
results from a novel misexpression of SHOX. Analysis of the Xq27.1 breakpoint
localized it to a 90 kb interval 3' of the SOX3 gene, supporting a novel role of 
SOX3 misexpression in the development of Peters anomaly of the eye.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17994562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Hum Reprod. 2008 Jan;23(1):222-6. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

Cryptic Xp duplication including the SHOX gene in a woman with 46,X,
del(X)(q21.31) and premature ovarian failure.

Tachdjian G(1), Aboura A, Portnoï MF, Pasquier M, Bourcigaux N, Simon T, Rousseau
G, Finkel L, Benkhalifa M, Christin-Maitre S.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Biologie et Génétique de la Reproduction, Inserm U782, Université
Paris 11, Hôpital A Béclère, Clamart, France.

BACKGROUND: Premature ovarian failure (POF) is defined as amenorrhoea for >6
months, occurring before the age of 40, with an FSH serum level in the menopausal
range. Although Xq deletions have been known for a long time to be associated
with POF, the mechanisms involved in X deletions in order to explain ovarian
failure remain unknown. In order to look for potentially cryptic chromosomal
imbalance, we used high-resolution genomic analysis to characterize X chromosome 
deletions associated with POF.
METHODS: Three patients with POF presenting terminal Xq deletions detected by
conventional cytogenetics were included in the study. Genome wide microarray
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) at a resolution of 1 Mb and fluorescence 
in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed.
RESULTS: Microarray CGH and FISH studies characterized the three deletions as
del(X)(q21.2), del(X)(q21.31) and del(X)(q22.33). Microarray CGH showed that the 
del(X)(q21.31) was also associated with a Xpter duplication including the SHOX
gene. In these patients with POF, deletions or duplications of autosomes have
been excluded.
CONCLUSION: This study is the first one using microarray in patients with POF. It
demonstrates that putative X chromosome deletions can be associated with other
chromosomal imbalances such as duplications, and therefore illustrates the use of
microarray CGH to screen chromosomal abnormalities in patients with POF.

PMID: 17981816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Clin Genet. 2007 Nov;72(5):490-1.

The homozygous deletion of the 3' enhancer of the SHOX gene causes Langer
mesomelic dysplasia.

Bertorelli R, Capone L, Ambrosetti F, Garavelli L, Varriale L, Mazza V,
Stanghellini I, Percesepe A, Forabosco A.

PMID: 17935511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Arch Physiol Biochem. 2007 Jun;113(3):116-23.

SHOX at a glance: from gene to protein.

Marchini A(1), Rappold G, Schneider KU.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and Inserm U375, Heidelberg, Germany.
a.marchini@dkfz.de

The Short Stature Homeobox-containing Gene SHOX was identified as the genetic
cause of the short stature phenotype in patients with Turner Syndrome and in
certain patients with idiopathic short stature. Shortly after, SHOX mutations
were also associated with the growth failure and skeletal deformities seen in
patients with Léri - Weill dyschondrosteosis and Langer mesomelic dysplasia.
Today it is estimated that SHOX mutations occur with an incidence of roughly
1:1,000 in newborns, making mutations of this gene one of the most common genetic
defects leading to growth failure in humans. This review summarises the
involvement of SHOX in several short stature syndromes and describes recent
advances in our understanding of SHOX functions and regulation. We also discuss
the current evidence in the literature that points to a role of this protein in
growth and bone development. These studies have improved our knowledge of the
SHOX gene and protein functions, and have given insight into the etiopathogenesis
of short stature. However, the exact role of SHOX in bone development still
remains elusive and poses the next major challenge for researchers in this field.

PMID: 17922307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Med Genet. 2007 Oct;44(10):e90; author reply e91.

Anthropometric evaluation of children with SHOX mutations can be used as
indication for genetic studies in children of short stature.

Jorge AA, Arnhold IJ.

Comment on
    J Med Genet. 2007 May;44(5):306-13.

PMCID: PMC2597966
PMID: 17911654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Dec 15;16(24):3081-7. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

BNP is a transcriptional target of the short stature homeobox gene SHOX.

Marchini A(1), Häcker B, Marttila T, Hesse V, Emons J, Weiss B, Karperien M,
Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Ruprecht-Karls-University, Im Neuenheimer Feld
366, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Short stature due to SHOX deficiency represents a common congenital form of
growth failure and is involved in the aetiology of 'idiopathic' short stature and
the growth deficits and skeletal anomalies in Leri-Weill, Langer and Turner
syndromes. Although much is known on the clinical and molecular aspects of SHOX
haploinsufficiency, the integration of SHOX in the signalling pathways regulating
bone growth is currently not defined. Here we identify NPPB encoding the
natriuretic peptide, BNP, a well-known cardiac and natriuretic peptide hormone,
as a transcriptional target of SHOX. The ability of SHOX to transactivate the
NPPB endogenous promoter was demonstrated in luciferase reporter assays using
serial deletions of the NPPB promotor region. Binding of SHOX to the NPPB
promoter was also demonstrated in vivo by chromatin fixation and
immunoprecipitation. We also demonstrate the lack of promoter activation in two
SHOX mutants from patients with Leri-Weill syndrome. In addition,
immunohistochemical analysis of human growth plate sections showed for the first 
time a co-expression of BNP and SHOX in late proliferative and hypertrophic
chondrocytes. Together these data strongly suggest that BNP represents a direct
target of SHOX.

PMID: 17881654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Hum Mutat. 2007 Oct;28(10):933-8.

The novel human SHOX allelic variant database.

Niesler B(1), Röth R, Wilke S, Fujimura F, Fischer C, Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

Short stature due to SHOX deficiency represents the most commonly known form of
growth failure, with a frequency greater than 1:1,000 in the Caucasian
population. As many different mutations can cause SHOX haploinsufficiency, a
comprehensive collection of gene variants represents an essential tool to
distinguish between functional variants and polymorphisms. We have created a
novel and widely extended SHOX database using the "LOVD in a box-solution." This 
database contains not only a larger amount of mutation data (140 novel mutations 
were added), but also reports on phenotypic consequences, mode of inheritance,
and ethnic origin, as well as on functional consequences of mutations
investigated. In addition, the database now includes non-disease-related
polymorphisms to enable researchers to evaluate their diagnostic findings. The
database (Available at:
http://hyg-serv-01.hyg.uni-heidelberg.de/lovd/index.php?select_db=SHOX; Last
accessed: 12 April 2007) contains all presently known 199 intragenic mutations
(SNPs as well as small deletions and insertions), 126 of which are unique. The
remote user is able to search the data and to submit new mutations into the
database. Furthermore, it includes general information about the SHOX gene via
links to other resources such as MIM, GDB, HGMD, and HAPMAP, as well as websites 
of Short Stature Associations.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17726696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Behav Brain Funct. 2007 May 21;3:24.

A Turner syndrome neurocognitive phenotype maps to Xp22.3.

Zinn AR(1), Roeltgen D, Stefanatos G, Ramos P, Elder FF, Kushner H, Kowal K, Ross
JL.

Author information: 
(1)Eugene McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development and Department of
Internal Medicine, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas
TX, USA. andrew.zinn@utsouthwestern.edu

BACKGROUND: Turner syndrome (TS) is associated with a neurocognitive phenotype
that includes selective nonverbal deficits, e.g., impaired visual-spatial
abilities. We previously reported evidence that this phenotype results from
haploinsufficiency of one or more genes on distal Xp. This inference was based on
genotype/phenotype comparisons of individual girls and women with partial Xp
deletions, with the neurocognitive phenotype considered a dichotomous trait. We
sought to confirm our findings in a large cohort (n = 47) of adult women with
partial deletions of Xp or Xq, enriched for subjects with distal Xp deletions.
METHODS: Subjects were recruited from North American genetics and endocrinology
clinics. Phenotype assessment included measures of stature, ovarian function, and
detailed neurocognitive testing. The neurocognitive phenotype was measured as a
quantitative trait, the Turner Syndrome Cognitive Summary (TSCS) score, derived
from discriminant function analysis. Genetic analysis included karyotyping, X
inactivation studies, fluorescent in situ hybridization, microsatellite marker
genotyping, and array comparative genomic hybridization.
RESULTS: We report statistical evidence that deletion of Xp22.3, an interval
containing 31 annotated genes, is sufficient to cause the neurocognitive
phenotype described by the TSCS score. Two other cardinal TS features, ovarian
failure and short stature, as well as X chromosome inactivation pattern and
subject's age, were unrelated to the TSCS score.
CONCLUSION: Detailed mapping suggests that haploinsufficiency of one or more
genes in Xp22.3, the distal 8.3 megabases (Mb) of the X chromosome, is
responsible for a TS neurocognitive phenotype. This interval includes the 2.6 Mb 
Xp-Yp pseudoautosomal region (PAR1). Haploinsufficiency of the short stature gene
SHOX in PAR1 probably does not cause this TS neurocognitive phenotype. Two genes 
proximal to PAR1 within the 8.3 Mb critical region, STS and NLGN4X, are
attractive candidates for this neurocognitive phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1891305
PMID: 17517138  [PubMed]


202. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Jun 1;143A(11):1236-43.

First reported case of intrachromosomal cryptic inv dup del Xp in a boy with
developmental retardation.

Dupont C(1), Lebbar A, Teinturier C, Baverel F, Viot G, Le Tessier D, Le Bozec J,
Cuisset L, Dupont JM.

Author information: 
(1)AP-HP, Hôpital Cochin, Service Histologie Embryologie Cytogénétique,
Université Paris-Descartes, Faculté de Médecine, Unité INSERM U709, Paris,
France. celine.dupont@jvr.aphp.fr

We report here on a 6-year-old boy referred to the laboratory for karyotyping and
SHOX microdeletion testing. The most significant clinical findings in this boy
were small stature, Madelung deformity, facial dysmorphism, mild mental
retardation and behavioral problems. R-, G- and RTBG-banding chromosome analysis 
showed a normal male karyotype. Fine molecular characterization, by FISH, of
terminal Xp microdeletion revealed an associated partial duplication. Further
refinement of the molecular analysis indicated an inverted duplication of the
Xp22.31-Xp22.32 (13.7 Mb) region including the STS, VCX-A and KAL1 genes,
associated with a terminal Xp deletion Xp22.33-Xpter (3.6 Mb) encompassing the
SHOX and ARSE genes. Such rearrangements have been characterized for other
chromosomal pairs, but this is the first reported male patient involving the
short arm of the X chromosome. Molecular analysis of the maternal and patient's
microsatellite markers showed interchromatid mispairing leading to non-allelic
homologous recombination to be the most likely mechanism underlying this
rearrangement. This case highlights the importance of clinically driven FISH
investigations in order to uncover cryptic micro-rearrangements.

Copyright (c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17497716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Dev Biol. 2007 Jun 15;306(2):549-59. Epub 2007 Apr 1.

Shox2 is required for chondrocyte proliferation and maturation in proximal limb
skeleton.

Yu L(1), Liu H, Yan M, Yang J, Long F, Muneoka K, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA
70117, USA.

Mutations in the short stature homeobox gene SHOX lead to growth retardation
associated with Turner, Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis, and Langer mesomelic
dysplasia syndromes, which marked the shortening of the forearms and lower legs. 
We report here that in contrast to the SHOX mutations in humans, Shox2 deficiency
in mice leads to a virtual elimination of the stylopod in the developing limbs,
while the zeugopod and autopod appear relatively normal. This phenotype is
consistent with the restriction of the Shox2 expression to the proximal
mesenchyme in the limb bud and later to chondrocytes associated with the forming 
stylopod. In the Shox2(-/-) embryo, the mesenchymal condensation for the stylopod
initiates normally but the cartilaginous element subsequently fails in growth,
chondrogenesis and endochondral ossification. A dramatic down-regulation of Runx2
and Runx3 could account for the lack of chondrocyte hypertrophy, while a
down-regulation of Ihh expression may be responsible for a significant reduction 
in chondrocyte proliferation in the mutant stylopod. We further demonstrate that 
an enhanced and ectopic Bmp4 expression in the proximal limb of the Shox2 embryo 
may underlie the down-regulation of Runx2, as ectopically applied exogenous BMP4 
represses Runx2 expression in the early limb bud. Moreover, we show that mouse
Shox2, similar to human SHOX, can perform opposite roles on gene expression:
either as a transcription activator or a repressor in different cell types. Our
results establish a key role for Shox2 in regulating the growth of stylopod by
controlling chondrocyte maturation via Runx2 and Runx3.

PMCID: PMC2062576
PMID: 17481601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 May 1;143A(9):933-8.

Compound heterozygosity of SHOX-encompassing and downstream PAR1 deletions
results in Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD).

Campos-Barros A(1), Benito-Sanz S, Ross JL, Zinn AR, Heath KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

We present the clinical and molecular characteristics of a multi-generation
family in which the proband presented with clinical features of Langer mesomelic 
dysplasia (LMD) whilst different family members had a diagnosis of Léri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and/or pseudoachondroplasia (PSACH). In the LMD proband
two different deletions were identified in the pseudoautosomal 1 region (PAR1) of
the X and Y chromosomes: a SHOX-encompassing deletion inherited from his father
and a downstream PAR1 deletion, which did not include SHOX, inherited from his
mother. The individuals with PSACH features presented the previously described
G719D mutation in the C-terminal globular domain of the cartilage oligomeric
matrix protein gene (COMP). The LMD proband described here represents the first
LMD case due to compound heterozygosity for deletions of the two different PAR1
regions, SHOX-encompassing and downstream from SHOX, that have been shown to be
implicated in the pathogenesis of LWD and LMD.

PMID: 17394206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2007 Mar;36(1):131-86.

Growth hormone treatment of non-growth hormone-deficient growth disorders.

Quigley CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lilly Research Laboratories, Drop Code 5015, Lilly Corporate Center,
Indianapolis, IN 46285, USA. qac@lilly.com

Although a large body of data on efficacy and safety of growth hormone (GH)
treatment for various non-growth hormone-deficient (GHD) growth disorders has
accumulated from a combination of clinical trial and postmarketing sources in the
last 20 years or more, there remain limitations. Clinical trial data have the
advantage of direct comparison of well-matched, randomized patient groups
receiving treatment (or not) under comparable conditions and, as such, provide
the highest quality evidence of efficacy. Clinical trials, however, are typically
too small for any statistically valid assessment for safety, which is more
comprehensively addressed using postmarketing data. Consequently, while the
efficacy of GH treatment in children with non-GHD growth disorders has been
solidly established and, based on the combination of the rigor of the clinical
trial data and numerical power of the postmarketing data, no major concerns exist
regarding safety, additional long-term data are required.

PMID: 17336739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Int J Dev Biol. 2007;51(2):167-72.

Gene expression analysis reveals that formation of the mouse anterior secondary
palate involves recruitment of cells from the posterior side.

Li Q(1), Ding J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Craniofacial Biology and Birth Defects
Center, University of Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

Cleft palate is a common birth defect caused by disruptions in secondary palate
development. Anterior-posterior (A-P) regional specification plays a critical
role in palate development and fusion. Previous studies have shown that at the
molecular level, the anterior palate can be defined by the expression of Shox-2
and the posterior palate by Meox-2 expression in certain mouse strains. Here, we 
have extended previous studies by performing a more detailed analysis of these
genes during mouse palate development. We found that the expression patterns of
Shox-2 and Meox-2 are dynamic during palate development. At embryonic day 12.5
(E12.5), Shox-2 expression is localized to the anterior end and its expression
domain covers less than 25% of the length of the palate shelf. The Shox-2
expression domain then gradually expands towards the posterior end and ultimately
occupies more than 60% of the palate shelf by E14.5. The expansion of the Shox-2 
domain may involve induction of Shox2 expression in additional cells.
Reciprocally, the Meox-2 expression domain at E12.5 covers a large portion of the
palate shelf, a region more than 70% of the entire palate, but then regresses to 
the posterior 25% by E14.5. This regression is likely caused by the repression of
Meox-2 expression in certain Meox2 expressing cells, rather than the cessation of
cell proliferation. Therefore, certain Meox-2 positive "primitive posterior
cells" are differentiated/converted into Shox-2 positive "definitive anterior
cells" during A-P regional specification.

PMID: 17294368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Assoc Physicians India. 2006 Nov;54:867.

Madelung's deformity.

Muthukrishnan J, Verma A, Modi KD.

PMID: 17249255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2007 Jan;66(1):130-5.

SHOX mutations in idiopathic short stature and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis:
frequency and phenotypic variability.

Jorge AA(1), Souza SC, Nishi MY, Billerbeck AE, Libório DC, Kim CA, Arnhold IJ,
Mendonca BB.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Laboratorio de Hormonios e
Genetica Molecular LIM/42, Disciplina de Endocrinologia, Hospital das Clinicas,
SP, Brazil. alexj@usp.br

OBJECTIVE: The frequency of SHOX mutations in children with idiopathic short
stature (ISS) has been found to be variable. We analysed the SHOX gene in
children with ISS and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and evaluated the
phenotypic variability in patients harbouring SHOX mutations.
PATIENTS: Sixty-three ISS, nine LWD children and 21 affected relatives.
METHODS: SHOX gene deletion was evaluated by fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH), Southern blotting and segregation study of polymorphic marker. Point
mutations were assessed by direct DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: None of the ISS patients presented SHOX deletions, but two (3.2%)
presented heterozygous point mutations, including the novel R147H mutation.
However, when ISS patients were selected by sitting height : height ratio (SH/H) 
for age > 2 SD, mutation frequency detection increased to 22%. Eight (89%) LWD
patients had SHOX deletions, but none had point mutations. Analysis of the other 
relatives in the families carrying SHOX mutations identified 14 children and 17
adult patients. A broad phenotypic variability was observed in all families
regarding short stature severity and Madelung deformities. However, the presence 
of disproportional height, assessed by SH/H, was observed in all children and 82%
of adult patients, being the most common feature in our patients with SHOX
mutations.
CONCLUSION: Patients with SHOX mutations present a broad phenotypic variability. 
SHOX mutations are very frequent in LWD (89%), in opposition to ISS (3.2%) in our
cohort. The use of SH/H SDS as a selection criterion increases the frequency of
SHOX mutation detection to 22% and should be used for selecting ISS children to
undergo SHOX mutation molecular studies.

PMID: 17201812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Jan 15;16(2):210-22. Epub 2007 Jan 2.

Long-range conserved non-coding SHOX sequences regulate expression in developing 
chicken limb and are associated with short stature phenotypes in human patients.

Sabherwal N(1), Bangs F, Röth R, Weiss B, Jantz K, Tiecke E, Hinkel GK, Spaich C,
Hauffa BP, van der Kamp H, Kapeller J, Tickle C, Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 366, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Defects in long-range regulatory elements have recently emerged as previously
underestimated factors in the genesis of human congenital disorders. Léri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis is a dominant skeletal malformation syndrome caused by
mutations in the short stature homeobox gene SHOX. We have analysed four families
with Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis with deletions in the pseudoautosomal region
but still with an intact SHOX coding region. Using fluorescence in situ
hybridization and single nucleotide polymorphism studies, we identified an
interval of approximately 200 kb that was deleted in all tested affected family
members but retained in the unaffected members and in 100 control individuals.
Comparative genomic analysis of this interval revealed eight highly conserved
non-genic elements between 48 and 215 kb downstream of the SHOX gene. As mice do 
not have a Shox gene, we analysed the enhancer potential in chicken embryos using
a green fluorescent protein reporter construct driven by the beta-globin
promoter, by in ovo electroporation of the limb bud. We observed cis-regulatory
activity in three of the eight non-genic elements in the developing limbs arguing
for an extensive control region of this gene. These findings are consistent with 
the idea that the deleted region in the affected families contains several
distinct elements that regulate Shox expression in the developing limb.
Furthermore, the deletion of these elements in humans generates a phenotype
apparently undistinguishable to those patients identified with mutations in the
SHOX coding region and, for the first time, demonstrates the potential of an in
vivo assay in chicken to monitor putative enhancer activity in relation to human 
disease.

PMID: 17200153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Clin Pediatr Endocrinol. 2007;16(3):69-74. doi: 10.1297/cpe.16.69. Epub 2007 Aug 
8.

Different skeletal phenotypes in a mother and two daughters with short stature
homeobox-containing haploinsufficiency.

Nagasaki K(1), Kikuchi T(1), Uchiyama M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Homeostatic Regulation and Development, 
Niigata University Graduate School of Medicine and Dental Sciences, Niigata,
Japan.

Haploinsufficiency of the short stature homeobox-containing (SHOX) gene causes
Turner skeletal features such as short metacarpals, cubitus valgus, and Madelung 
deformity. We report the clinical findings of a Japanese family consisting of two
daughters with SHOX haploinsufficiency (46, X, del(X) (p.22.3)) and their mother 
with 45,X [9]/ 46, X, del(X) (p22.3) [11] karyotype. Physical and auxological
examinations revealed a mesomelic appearance, cubitus valgus, a short neck and
short stature in the daughters, but on the other hand, only a short neck and
short stature in the mother. Radiological studies indicated markedly curved radii
in the daughters, but only mild curvature of the radii in the mother. Regular
menstruation had taken place since the age of 12 yr in the elder daughter, but
the mother had irregular menstruation and she had received fertility treatment
for pregnancy. The different skeletal phenotypes of the mother and her daughters 
with SHOX haploinsufficiency might be due to the mild gonadal estrogen deficiency
found in the mother, which was caused by mosaic Turner syndrome, and the
phenotypic variability of SHOX haploinsufficiency.

PMCID: PMC4004891
PMID: 24790348  [PubMed]


211. J Med Genet. 2007 May;44(5):306-13. Epub 2006 Dec 20.

Genotypes and phenotypes in children with short stature: clinical indicators of
SHOX haploinsufficiency.

Rappold G(1), Blum WF, Shavrikova EP, Crowe BJ, Roeth R, Quigley CA, Ross JL,
Niesler B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany. gudrun.rappold@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Comment in
    J Med Genet. 2007 Oct;44(10):e90; author reply e91.

BACKGROUND: Short stature affects approximately 2% of children, representing one 
of the more frequent disorders for which clinical attention is sought during
childhood. Despite assumed genetic heterogeneity, mutations or deletions of the
short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) are found quite frequently in
subjects with short stature. Haploinsufficiency of the SHOX gene causes short
stature with highly variable clinical severity, ranging from isolated short
stature without dysmorphic features to Léri-Weill syndrome, and with no
functional copy of the SHOX gene, Langer syndrome.
METHODS: To characterise the clinical and molecular spectrum of SHOX deficiency
in childhood we assessed the association between genotype and phenotype in a
large cohort of children of short stature from 14 countries.
RESULTS: Screening of 1608 unrelated individuals with sporadic or familial short 
stature revealed SHOX mutations or deletions in 68 individuals (4.2%): complete
deletions in 48 (70.6%), partial deletions in 4 (5.9%) and point mutations in 16 
individuals (23.5%). Although mean height standard deviation score (SDS) was not 
different between participants of short stature with or without identified SHOX
gene defects (-2.6 vs -2.6), detailed examination revealed that certain bone
deformities and dysmorphic signs, such as short forearm and lower leg, cubitus
valgus, Madelung deformity, high-arched palate and muscular hypertrophy, differed
markedly between participants with or without SHOX gene defects (p<0.001).
Phenotypic data were also compared for 33 children with Turner syndrome in whom
haploinsufficiency of SHOX is thought to be responsible for the height deficit.
CONCLUSION: A phenotype scoring system was developed that could assist in
identifying the most appropriate subjects for SHOX testing. This study offers a
detailed genotype-phenotype analysis in a large cohort of children of short
stature, and provides quantitative clinical guidelines for testing of the SHOX
gene.

PMCID: PMC2597980
PMID: 17182655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Anat. 2002 Nov;201(5):426.

P1 SHOX and limb development.

Tiecke E, Blaschke R, Tickle C, Rappold G.

PMCID: PMC1570941
PMID: 17103774  [PubMed]


213. J Hum Genet. 2007;52(1):21-7. Epub 2006 Nov 8.

Identification and characterization of different SHOX gene deletions in patients 
with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosys by MLPA assay.

Gatta V(1), Antonucci I, Morizio E, Palka C, Fischetto R, Mokini V, Tumini S,
Calabrese G, Stuppia L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Aging Research Center, Ce.S.I., G.
d'Annunzio University Foundation, Via dei Vestini 35, Chieti-Pescara, 66013,
Italy.

Deletions of the SHOX gene (Xp22-Yp11.3) are associated with Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosys (LWD) and idiopathic short stature. It has been estimated that 
SHOX deletions occur in 1,000-2,000 individuals in the total population,
suggesting that this alteration should be investigated in all cases with
unexplained short stature. SHOX deletions are currently investigated using
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) or molecular analysis of intragenic CA 
repeats. However, both techniques show some limitations. In the present study,
the use of the multiple ligation probe amplification (MLPA) assay for the
identification and characterization of SHOX deletions in 15 LWD patients, 3 of
which carriers of chromosome abnormalities involving the SHOX gene, is reported. 
MLPA analysis demonstrated the heterozygous deletion of SHOX in seven patients
(46.6%), disclosing the presence of two different proximal breakpoints. In
patients with abnormal karyotype, MLPA analysis was able to identify the
chromosomal rearrangement, showing, in addition to the SHOX deletions, the gain
or loss of other genes mapped on the X and Y chromosomes. Since MLPA analysis can
be carried out on a simple buccal swab, avoiding invasive peripheral blood
collection, this technique represents a fast, simple and high throughput approach
in the screening of SHOX deletions, able to provide more information as compared 
to FISH and microsatellite analysis.

PMID: 17091221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Jan;92(1):219-28. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

Growth hormone is effective in treatment of short stature associated with short
stature homeobox-containing gene deficiency: Two-year results of a randomized,
controlled, multicenter trial.

Blum WF(1), Crowe BJ, Quigley CA, Jung H, Cao D, Ross JL, Braun L, Rappold G;
SHOX Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly & Company, Saalburgstrasse 153, D-61350
Bad Homburg, Germany. Blum_Werner@Lilly.com

BACKGROUND: The short stature homeobox-containing gene, SHOX, located on the
distal ends of the X and Y chromosomes, encodes a homeodomain transcription
factor responsible for a significant proportion of long-bone growth. Patients
with mutations or deletions of SHOX, including those with Turner syndrome (TS)
who are haplo-insufficient for SHOX, have variable degrees of growth impairment, 
with or without a spectrum of skeletal anomalies consistent with
dyschondrosteosis.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to determine the efficacy of GH in treating short
stature associated with short stature homeobox-containing gene deficiency
(SHOX-D).
DESIGN AND METHODS: Fifty-two prepubertal subjects (24 male, 28 female; age,
3.0-12.3 yr) with a molecularly proven SHOX gene defect and height below the
third percentile for age and gender (or height below the 10th percentile and
height velocity below the 25th percentile) were randomized to either a
GH-treatment group (n = 27) or an untreated control group (n = 25) for 2 yr. To
compare the GH treatment effect between subjects with SHOX-D and those with TS, a
third study group, 26 patients with TS aged 4.5-11.8 yr, also received GH.
Between-group comparisons of first-year and second-year height velocity, height
sd score, and height gain (cm) were performed using analysis of covariance
accounting for diagnosis, sex, and baseline age.
RESULTS: The GH-treated SHOX-D group had a significantly greater first-year
height velocity than the untreated control group (mean +/- se, 8.7 +/- 0.3 vs.
5.2 +/- 0.2 cm/yr; P < 0.001) and similar first-year height velocity to
GH-treated subjects with TS (8.9 +/- 0.4 cm/yr; P = 0.592). GH-treated subjects
also had significantly greater second-year height velocity (7.3 +/- 0.2 vs. 5.4
+/- 0.2 cm/yr; P < 0.001), second-year height sd score (-2.1 +/- 0.2 vs.-3.0 +/- 
0.2; P < 0.001) and second-year height gain (16.4 +/- 0.4 vs. 10.5 +/- 0.4 cm; P 
< 0.001) than untreated subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: This large-scale, randomized, multicenter clinical trial in subjects
with SHOX-D demonstrates marked, highly significant, GH-stimulated increases in
height velocity and height SDS during the 2-yr study period. The efficacy of GH
treatment in subjects with SHOX-D was equivalent to that seen in subjects with
TS. We conclude that GH is effective in improving the linear growth of patients
with various forms of SHOX-D.

PMID: 17047016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Horm Res. 2007;67(2):61-6. Epub 2006 Oct 6.

Unique deletion in exon 5 of SHOX gene in a patient with idiopathic short
stature.

Shanske AL(1), Puri M, Marshall B, Saenger P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Disorders, Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10467, USA. ashanske@montefiore.org

BACKGROUND/AIM: It is known that haploinsufficiency for the SHOX gene
(short-stature homeobox gene on the X chromosome) is responsible for short
stature in Turner syndrome and Leri-Weill dyschondrogenesis, and it has been
reported that it is responsible for upwards of 1 in 50 cases of idiopathic short 
stature. SHOX haploinsufficiency is also associated with various radiographic
abnormalities, such as coarse trabecular pattern, short metacarpals/metatarsals
with metaphyseal flaring, altered osseous alignment at the wrist, radial/tibial
bowing, triangularization of the radial head, abnormal tuberosity of the humerus,
and an abnormal femoral neck. Shortening and bowing of the radius and dorsal
dislocation of the distal ulna characterize the Madelung deformity. These
characteristic findings led us to do a study assessing the predictive value of
certain radiographic features in association with genetic markers of idiopathic
short stature.
METHODS: Here we describe a case of a Hispanic male with idiopathic short stature
and Madelung deformity with a novel mutation in the SHOX gene.
RESULTS: Additional studies revealed a strong family history of short stature and
the same SHOX mutation segregating from the mother.
CONCLUSION: This case resulted in the description of a novel mutation in exon 5
(M202delA) and suggests the importance of screening for SHOX mutations in
patients with idiopathic short stature with subtle radiographic abnormalities,
including the components of the Madelung deformity in their bone age films.

Copyright (c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17028440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Sep 28;Suppl 3:427-32.

[Leri-Weill syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Ogata T(1), Fukami M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development.

PMID: 17022580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Hum Mutat. 2006 Oct;27(10):1062.

PAR1 deletions downstream of SHOX are the most frequent defect in a Spanish
cohort of Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) probands.

Benito-Sanz S(1), del Blanco DG, Aza-Carmona M, Magano LF, Lapunzina P, Argente
J, Campos-Barros A, Heath KE.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Endocrinology, Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) is a skeletal dysplasia characterized by
disproportionate short stature and Madelung deformity. Mutations or deletions of 
the SHOX gene have been previously identified as the main cause of LWD. We
recently identified the existence of a second class of pseudoautosomal region 1
(PAR1) deletions which do not include SHOX, implicated in the etiopathogenesis of
LWD. The deletions map at least 30-250 kb downstream of SHOX, are variable in
size and clearly cosegregate with the LWD phenotype. In order to determine the
frequency of this new type of deletions in the Spanish population we analyzed the
distribution of PAR1 defects, including the screening of SHOX deletions,
mutations, and PAR1 deletions downstream of SHOX, in a total of 26 LWD probands
by a combination of MLPA, microsatellite analysis, SNP genotyping, dHPLC, and DNA
sequencing. A molecular defect was identified in 16/26 LWD patients (61.5%): 10
PAR1 deletions downstream of SHOX, four SHOX encompassing deletions, and two SHOX
mutations. No apparent phenotypic differences were observed between patients with
SHOX defects and those with PAR1 deletions downstream of SHOX. In the examined
cohort of Spanish LWD probands, PAR1 deletions downstream of SHOX represent the
highest proportion of identified mutations (38%) compared to SHOX deletions (15%)
and mutations (8%). As a consequence of our findings, the screening of this
region should be included in the routine genetic testing of LWD. Also, LWD
patients who tested negative for SHOX defects should be re-evaluated for PAR1
deletions downstream of SHOX.

PMID: 16941489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Dev Biol. 2006 Oct 15;298(2):585-96. Epub 2006 Jul 12.

Expression of the short stature homeobox gene Shox is restricted by proximal and 
distal signals in chick limb buds and affects the length of skeletal elements.

Tiecke E(1), Bangs F, Blaschke R, Farrell ER, Rappold G, Tickle C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences,
University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee, DD1 5EH, UK.

SHOX is a homeobox-containing gene, highly conserved among species as diverse as 
fish, chicken and humans. SHOX gene mutations have been shown to cause idiopathic
short stature and skeletal malformations frequently observed in human patients
with Turner, Leri-Weill and Langer syndromes. We cloned the chicken orthologue of
SHOX, studied its expression pattern and compared this with expression of the
highly related Shox2. Shox is expressed in central regions of early chick limb
buds and proximal two thirds of later limbs, whereas Shox2 is expressed more
posteriorly in the proximal third of the limb bud. Shox expression is inhibited
distally by signals from the apical ectodermal ridge, both Fgfs and Bmps, and
proximally by retinoic acid signaling. We tested Shox functions by overexpression
in embryos and micromass cultures. Shox-infected chick limbs had normal
proximo-distal patterning but the length of skeletal elements was consistently
increased. Primary chick limb bud cell cultures infected with Shox showed an
initial increase in cartilage nodules but these did not enlarge. These results
fit well with the proposed role of Shox in cartilage and bone differentiation and
suggest chick embryos as a useful model to study further the role of Shox in limb
development.

PMID: 16904661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Pituitary. 2006;9(2):145-9.

Acromegaloidism with normal growth hormone secretion associated with X-tetrasomy.

Alvarez-Vázquez P(1), Rivera A, Figueroa I, Páramo C, García-Mayor RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrine, University Hospital of Vigo, 36201 Vigo, Spain.

We reported a case of a 26-year-old female who was referred to our clinic with
the diagnosis of possible acromegaly. She was born from a term pregnancy by
forceps delivery. The patient was diagnosed as having hip luxation at one month
and spoke her first word at 15 months. She had been diagnosed at the age of 9
years old as having perinatal encephalopathy with intellectual and motor
affectation. Since this period of time she has undergone an insidious change in
her appearance, mainly comprising progressive coarsening of the face. For this
reason she was submitted to our clinic with presumed acromegaly. Dynamic tests of
growth hormone secretion ruled out such a diagnosis. The Patient was considered
as having "acromegaloidism", a term used for patients whom manifest clinical
features of acromegaly but do not present a demonstrable growth hormone
hypersecretion. Subsequently cytogenetic evaluation revealed an infrequent
chromosome pattern: X-Tetrasomy. In the present article a differential diagnosis 
of acromegaloidism and the potential role of genes present on X-chromosome
involved in human growth such as SHOX gene are discussed. Overdosification of
SHOX gene might explain tall stature of girls with X-tetrasomy. Our observation
suggested that X-tetrasomy should be considered in the differential diagnosis of 
acromegaloidism. Furthermore, this may lead to the identification of new genes in
the X-chromosome that are important for growth of facial structures.

PMID: 16832583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Aug;79(2):409-14; author reply 414.

Characterization of SHOX deletions in Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) reveals 
genetic heterogeneity and no recombination hotspots.

Benito-Sanz S, Gorbenko del Blanco D, Huber C, Thomas NS, Aza-Carmona M, Bunyan
D, Maloney V, Argente J, Cormier-Daire V, Campos-Barros A, Heath KE.

Comment on
    Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Mar;78(3):523-5.
    Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Jul;77(1):89-96.

PMCID: PMC1559488
PMID: 16826534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Endokrynol Pol. 2005 Nov-Dec;56(6):986-93.

[Turner's syndrome--correlation between karyotype and phenotype].

[Article in Polish]

Lacka K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Medicine, Poznan
University of Medical Science, Poznan, Poland. K_Lacka@wp.pl

Turner's syndrome is defined as a congenital disease determining by quantitative 
and/or structural aberrations of one from two X chromosomes with frequent
presence of mosaicism. Clinically it is characterized by growth and body
proportion abnormalities, gonadal dysgenesis resulting in sexual infantilism,
primary amenorrhoea, infertility, characteristic stigmata, anomalies of heart,
renal and bones and the presence of some diseases like Hashimoto thyroiditis with
hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus type 2, osteoporosis, hypertension. Turner's
syndrome occurs in 1:2000 to 1:2500 female livebirth. The most frequent X
chromosome aberrations in patients with phenotype of Turner syndrome are as
follows: X monosomy - 45,X; mosaicism (50-75%), including 45,X/46,XX (10-15%),
45,X/46,XY (2-6%), 45,X/46,X,i(Xq), 45,X/46,X,del(Xp), 45,X/46,XX/47,XXX;
aberration of X structure: total or partial deletion of short arm of X chromosome
(46,X,del(Xp)) isochromosom of long arm of X chromosome (46,X,(i(Xq)), ring
chromosome (46, X,r(X)), marker chromosome (46,X+m). Searching of X chromosome
and mapping and sequencing of genes located at this chromosome (such as SHOX,
ODG2, VSPA, SOX 3) have made possible to look for linkage between phenotypes and 
adequate genes or regions of X chromosome. In this paper current data concerning 
correlation between phenotype and karyotype in patients with TS have been
presented.

PMID: 16821224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Jun 28;Suppl 2:522-4.

[XXX syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohashi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Saitama Children's Medical Center.

PMID: 16817456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Jun 28;Suppl 2:491-3.

[Turner syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Katsumata N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development.

PMID: 16817448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Hormones (Athens). 2006 Apr-Jun;5(2):107-18.

Short stature and dysmorphology associated with defects in the SHOX gene.

Leka SK(1), Kitsiou-Tzeli S, Kalpini-Mavrou A, Kanavakis E.

Author information: 
(1)Horemis Research Laboratory, Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University
School of Medicine, Aghia Sofia Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece.
sleka@med.uoa.gr

Since its discovery in 1997, knowledge about the SHOX gene ( Short stature
HOmeoboX-containing gene) has rapidly advanced. Although originally described as 
causing idiopathic short stature, SHOX mutations are also responsible for growth 
retardation in Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis, Langer mesomelic dysplasia and
Turner syndrome. Furthermore, SHOX has a broad functional scope and leads to a
variety of different morphological-skeletal stigmata associated with these
syndromes. This article reviews clinical and molecular data associated SHOX gene 
defects. Functional ongoing studies are expected to improve our understanding of 
the SHOX gene as comprising part of a genetic process responsible for normal
growth and bone development.

PMID: 16807223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Clin Pathol. 2006 Jul;59(7):773-4.

Isolated haploinsufficiency of exon 1 of the SHOX gene in a patient with
idiopathic short stature.

Tan YM(1), Loke KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, National University of
Singapore. med0199@nus.edu.sg

This paper reports the case of a 16-year-old woman with idiopathic short stature 
(ISS) who was detected to be haploinsufficient in only exon 1 of the short
stature homeobox-containing (SHOX) gene by RQ-PCR and had two copies of the other
six exons intact. The translation of the SHOX protein and of the SHOX promoter
may be potentially affected if the deletion of exon 1 is extended further
upstream. Further studies may help in determining the significance of partial
exonic deletions of the SHOX gene in relation to ISS.

PMCID: PMC1860432
PMID: 16803952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 May 28;Suppl 1:105-10.

[SHOX haploinsufficiency].

[Article in Japanese]

Ogata T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development.

PMID: 16776105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Orv Hetil. 2006 Apr 16;147(15):697-702.

[Novel approaches to the background of developmental abnormalities: clinical
genetics of transcription factors].

[Article in Hungarian]

Tészás A(1), Kárteszi J, Kosztolányi G.

Author information: 
(1)Pécsi Tudományegyetem, Orvos- es Egészségtudományi Centrum, Orvosi Genetikai
es Gyermekfejlodéstani Intézet, Pécs. alexandrateszas@yahoo.com

Transcription factors are highly conserved proteins with preserved structure and 
function for up to a hundred million years. They regulate protein formation and
function by binding to DNA and controlling gene expression. Mutations are
generally lethal, but can play role in endocrine disorders and tumor genesis.
They are necessary for cell growth, proliferation, differentiation and are
required in tissue and organ development during normal embryogenesis.
Consequently, transcription factors are essential in developmental processes and 
homeostasis. Mutations of genes encoding transcriptional regulators have been
shown to be involved in a number of various genetic diseases, in particular
malformation of the skeletal system, cranium, limbs, as well as some congenital
syndromes with anomalies of these organs and somatic/mental retardation.
Evidences accumulate to support the need of transcription factor mutation
identification in the clinical practice. The present study reviews the most
important congenital malformations and genetic syndromes which are thought to be 
related to mutations in classic transcription factors, and in which determination
of transcription factors might be of clinical significance, even in the near
future, for exact causative diagnosis and genetic counseling in affected
families. In addition, studies of the transcription factors may lead to a better 
understanding of human embryogenesis.

PMID: 16734182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2006 Jun;16(3):233-9. Epub 2006 May 2.

The pseudoautosomal regions, SHOX and disease.

Blaschke RJ(1), Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 366, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The pseudoautosomal regions represent blocks of sequence identity between the
mammalian sex chromosomes. In humans, they reside at the ends of the X and Y
chromosomes and encompass roughly 2.7 Mb (PAR1) and 0.33 Mb (PAR2). As a major
asset of recently available sequence data, our view of their structural
characteristics could be refined considerably. While PAR2 resembles the overall
sequence composition of the X chromosome and exhibits only slightly elevated
recombination rates, PAR1 is characterized by a significantly higher GC content
and a completely different repeat structure. In addition, it exhibits one of the 
highest recombination frequencies throughout the entire human genome and,
probably as a consequence of its structural features, displays a significantly
faster rate of evolution. It therefore represents an exceptional model to explore
the correlation between meiotic recombination and evolutionary forces such as
gene mutation and conversion. At least twenty-nine genes lie within the human
pseudoautosomal regions, and these genes exhibit 'autosomal' rather than
sex-specific inheritance. All genes within PAR1 escape X inactivation and are
therefore candidates for the etiology of haploinsufficiency disorders including
Turner syndrome (45,X). However, the only known disease gene within the
pseudoautosomal regions is the SHORT STATURE HOMEBOX (SHOX) gene, functional loss
of which is causally related to various short stature conditions and disturbed
bone development. Recent analyses have furthermore revealed that the
phosphorylation-sensitive function of SHOX is directly involved in chondrocyte
differentiation and maturation.

PMID: 16650979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Med Genet. 2006 Sep;43(9):735-9. Epub 2006 Apr 5.

High incidence of SHOX anomalies in individuals with short stature.

Huber C(1), Rosilio M, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V; French SHOX GeNeSIS Module.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and INSERM U781, Hôpital Necker Enfants
Malades, 149 rue de Sèvres 75015 Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: To study the SHOX gene and the PAR1 region in individuals with short
stature.
METHODS: The study involved 56 cases of dyschondrosteosis and 84 cases of
idiopathic short stature (ISS). The study was designed to determine the
following: the prevalence of SHOX anomalies in ISS; the frequency of Madelung
deformity in individuals with SHOX anomalies; and the value of a family history
of short stature in deciding whether to test for the SHOX gene.
RESULTS: 54 SHOX anomalies were observed, including 42 (68%) in the
dyschondrosteosis group and 12 (15%) in the ISS group. The high frequency of SHOX
anomalies in the ISS group can be explained by the large proportion of boys in
this group, reflecting the difficulty in diagnosing dyschondrosteosis in young
boys. Clinical evidence of Madelung deformity in six parents of ISS individuals
emphasised the importance of family evaluation. Among the 54 SHOX anomalies, 33
PAR1 deletions were identified encompassing the SHOX gene (62%), one partial
intragenic deletion (2%), nine deletions located downstream of the SHOX gene
(16%), and 11 point mutations (20%).
CONCLUSIONS: These data emphasise the value of using microsatellite markers
located within and downstream of the SHOX gene.

PMCID: PMC2564573
PMID: 16597678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Mar;78(3):523-5.

A second recombination hotspot associated with SHOX deletions.

Zinn AR, Ramos P, Ross JL.

Comment in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Aug;79(2):409-14; author reply 414.

Comment on
    Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Jul;77(1):89-96.

PMCID: PMC1380296
PMID: 16572514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Mar 21;103(12):4511-5. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

A mouse model for human short-stature syndromes identifies Shox2 as an upstream
regulator of Runx2 during long-bone development.

Cobb J(1), Dierich A, Huss-Garcia Y, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology and National Research Center
Frontiers in Genetics, Sciences III, University of Geneva, Quai Ernest Ansermet
30, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Deficiencies or mutations in the human pseudoautosomal SHOX gene are associated
with a series of short-stature conditions, including Turner syndrome, Leri-Weill 
dyschondrosteosis, and Langer mesomelic dysplasia. Although this gene is absent
from the mouse genome, the closely related paralogous gene Shox2 displays a
similar expression pattern in developing limbs. Here, we report that the
conditional inactivation of Shox2 in developing appendages leads to a strong
phenotype, similar to the human conditions, although it affects a different
proximodistal limb segment. Furthermore, using this mouse model, we establish the
cellular etiology of these defects and show that Shox2 acts upstream the Runx2
gene, a key regulator of chondrogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1450202
PMID: 16537395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. An Pediatr (Barc). 2006 Mar;64(3):293-5.

[Stunted growth and radiological bone age findings].

[Article in Spanish]

Rodríguez Dehli AC(1), Rivas Crespo MF, Jiménez Treviño S.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo,
Spain. crdehli@yahoo.es

PMID: 16527108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Jan;78(1):167-70.

Transactivation function of an approximately 800-bp evolutionarily conserved
sequence at the SHOX 3' region: implication for the downstream enhancer.

Fukami M, Kato F, Tajima T, Yokoya S, Ogata T.

Comment on
    Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Oct;77(4):533-44.

PMCID: PMC1380216
PMID: 16385461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Gene. 2006 Mar 1;368:94-100. Epub 2005 Dec 13.

Human polymorphism and human-chimpanzee divergence in pseudoautosomal region
correlate with local recombination rate.

Bussell JJ(1), Pearson NM, Kanda R, Filatov DA, Lahn BT.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Chicago, 920 East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Previous studies have shown widespread correlation between nucleotide
polymorphism and recombination rate, but the cause of this correlation is
unresolved. One explanation is that recombination is associated with point
mutations, potentially through mutagenic effects of meiotic crossover. This
hypothesis predicts that regions of frequent recombination should show both
elevated nucleotide diversity within a species and increased nucleotide
divergence between species. Here we tested this hypothesis by studying the human 
short-arm pseudoautosomal region (PAR1), which recombines between X and Y
chromosomes in men at a rate approximately 20 times the genome average. We
sequenced dispersed intronic loci within PAR1 in a panel of humans and in the
chimpanzee and directly measured sequence variation and recombination rate from
these data. In line with previous reports, we saw a correlation between human
polymorphism level and local recombination rate. Moreover, we also found a highly
significant correlation between human-chimpanzee divergence and recombination
rate. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that recombination is
associated with point mutations, possibly because recombination is mutagenic.

PMID: 16356662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Mol Biol. 2006 Jan 20;355(3):590-603. Epub 2005 Nov 21.

Phosphorylation on Ser106 modulates the cellular functions of the SHOX
homeodomain protein.

Marchini A(1), Daeffler L, Marttila T, Schneider KU, Blaschke RJ, Schnölzer M,
Rommelaere J, Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld
366, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. antonio_marchini@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Mutations within the homeobox SHOX gene have been associated with short stature
and the skeletal deformities found in Léri-Weill, Turner and Langer syndromes
implying an involvement of SHOX in growth and bone formation. Despite its
clinical significance, the precise role of SHOX and the mechanisms that modulate 
its functions remain unknown. We reported previously that SHOX is a nuclear
protein that specifically binds DNA and acts as a transcriptional activator. We
have shown that ectopic expression of SHOX leads to cell-cycle arrest and
apoptosis in osteosarcoma and primary cells. To further characterize SHOX, we
investigated whether the protein could be a target for phosphorylation. Here, we 
report that SHOX is phosphorylated exclusively on serine residues in vivo.
Two-dimensional phospho-peptide mapping showed that SHOX is phosphorylated to
various extents on multiple sites. Site-directed mutagenesis demonstrated that
serine 106 is the major SHOX phosphorylation site. We show also that casein
kinase II phosphorylates SHOX on serine 106 efficiently in vitro and specific
casein kinase II inhibitors reduce SHOX phosphorylation strongly in vivo.
Finally, we provide evidence that phosphorylation may play an important role in
modulating SHOX biological activities, since a S106A SHOX mutant, defective in
phosphorylation, does not activate transcription and fails to induce cell-cycle
arrest and apoptosis.

PMID: 16325853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2005 Dec;14(4):247-9.

Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (RQ-PCR) for the rapid detection
of SHOX haploinsufficiency in Leri-Weill Syndrome.

Tan YM(1), Loke KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
medp0199@nus.edu.sg

The short stature homeobox-containing (SHOX) gene, found on the human sex
chromosomes, has a role in bone growth and height determination.
Haploinsufficiency of the SHOX gene is believed to be responsible for poor growth
such as that observed in ther Leri-Weill syndrome (LWS). This is the first report
of the study of SHOX gene copy number by the technique of quantitative real-time 
polymerase chain reaction (RQ-PCR) in 9 patients with LWS. Only 7 patients (78%) 
of LWS had one copy of the SHOX gene deleted, but 2 patients (12%) have neither a
single copy gene deletion nor point mutation after direct sequencing of all 7
exons. Although the majority of patients with LWS in this study have SHOX gene
haploinsufficiency, there are some patients with both copies of the SHOX gene
intact with absence of any point mutations in the coding region. This may be due 
to abnormalities in the upstream promoter, or to the effect of other candidate
gene mutations. RQ-PCR is a faster and cheaper method of studying SHOX sing-copy 
deletions compared with the conventional fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH), and is recommended for the detection of SHOX gene haploinsufficiency.

PMID: 16319696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Pediatr. 2005 Oct;147(4):499-507.

The phenotype of short stature homeobox gene (SHOX) deficiency in childhood:
contrasting children with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and Turner syndrome.

Ross JL(1), Kowal K, Quigley CA, Blum WF, Cutler GB Jr, Crowe B, Hovanes K, Elder
FF, Zinn AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Comment in
    J Pediatr. 2005 Oct;147(4):422-4.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the growth disorder and phenotype in prepubertal children 
with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), a dominantly inherited skeletal
dysplasia, and to compare the findings from girls with Turner syndrome (TS).
STUDY DESIGN: We studied the auxologic and phenotypic characteristics in 34
prepubertal LWD subjects (ages 1 to 10 years; 20 girls, 14 boys) with confirmed
short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) abnormalities. For comparative
purposes, we evaluated similar physical and growth parameters in 76 girls with TS
(ages 1 to 19 years) and 24 girls with LWD (ages 1 to 15 years) by using data
collected from the postmarketing observational study, GeNeSIS.
RESULTS: In the clinic sample LWD subjects, height standard deviation score
ranged from -5.5 to +0.1 (-2.3 +/- 1.3, girls and -1.8 +/- 0.6, boys). Wrist
changes related to Madelung deformity were present in 18 of 34 (53%) LWD
subjects. In comparing the LWD and TS populations in the GeNeSIS sample, Madelung
deformity, increased carrying angle, and scoliosis were more prevalent in the LWD
population, whereas high arched palate was similarly prevalent in the two
populations.
CONCLUSIONS: Short stature is common in both LWD (girls and boys) and TS (girls).
Clinical clues to the diagnosis of SHOX haploinsufficiency in childhood include
short stature, short limbs, wrist changes, and tibial bowing.

PMID: 16227037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Pediatr. 2005 Oct;147(4):422-4.

All shook up by SHOX deficiency.

Rappold GA, Shanske A, Saenger P.

Comment on
    J Pediatr. 2005 Oct;147(4):499-507.

PMID: 16227022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Oct;77(4):533-44. Epub 2005 Aug 15.

A novel class of Pseudoautosomal region 1 deletions downstream of SHOX is
associated with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis.

Benito-Sanz S(1), Thomas NS, Huber C, Gorbenko del Blanco D, Aza-Carmona M,
Crolla JA, Maloney V, Rappold G, Argente J, Campos-Barros A, Cormier-Daire V,
Heath KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Infantil Universitario Nino Jesus,
Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Dec;77(6):1131. Huber, Celine [corrected to Huber, Céline]; 
Del Blanco, Darya Gorbenko [corrected to Gorbenko del Blanco, Darya]; Rappold,
Gudrun [added]; Argente, Jesus [corrected to Argente, Jesús]; Cormier-Daire,
Valerie [corrected to Cormier-Daire, Valrie].

Comment in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Jan;78(1):167-70.

Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) is a pseudoautosomal dominant disorder
characterized by disproportionate short stature and a characteristic curving of
the radius, known as the "Madelung deformity." SHOX mutations resulting in SHOX
haploinsufficiency have been found in LWD and in a variable proportion of
patients with idiopathic short stature (ISS), whereas homozygous loss of SHOX
results in the more severe Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD). Defects in SHOX have
been identified in approximately 60% of LWD cases, whereas, in the remaining
approximately 40%, the molecular basis is unknown. This suggests either genetic
heterogeneity or the presence of mutations in unanalyzed regions of SHOX, such as
the upstream, intragenic, or downstream regulatory sequences. Therefore, the
pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1) of 80 patients with LWD, in whom SHOX deletions
and mutations had been excluded, was screened for deletions by use of a new panel
of microsatellite markers. We identified 12 patients with LWD who presented with 
a novel class of PAR1 deletions that did not include SHOX. The deletions were of 
variable size and mapped at least approximately 30-530 kb downstream of SHOX. In 
our cohort, this type of deletion accounted for 15% of cases. In all cases, the
deletions cosegregated with the phenotype. No apparent phenotypic differences
were observed between patients with SHOX deletions and those with this new class 
of PAR1 deletions. Thus, we present here the identification of a second PAR1
region implicated in the etiopathogenesis of LWD. Our findings suggest the
presence of distal regulatory elements of SHOX transcription in PAR1 or,
alternatively, the existence of an additional locus apparently involved in the
control of skeletal development. Deletion analysis of this newly identified
region should be included in the mutation screening of patients with LWD, LMD,
and ISS.

PMCID: PMC1275603
PMID: 16175500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Development. 2005 Oct;132(19):4397-406. Epub 2005 Sep 1.

Shox2-deficient mice exhibit a rare type of incomplete clefting of the secondary 
palate.

Yu L(1), Gu S, Alappat S, Song Y, Yan M, Zhang X, Zhang G, Jiang Y, Zhang Z,
Zhang Y, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
and Center for Bioenvironmental Research, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA
70118, USA.

The short stature homeobox gene SHOX is associated with idiopathic short stature 
in humans, as seen in Turner syndrome and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis, while
little is known about its close relative SHOX2. We report the restricted
expression of Shox2 in the anterior domain of the secondary palate in mice and
humans. Shox2-/- mice develop an incomplete cleft that is confined to the
anterior region of the palate, an extremely rare type of clefting in humans. The 
Shox2-/- palatal shelves initiate, grow and elevate normally, but the anterior
region fails to contact and fuse at the midline, owing to altered cell
proliferation and apoptosis, leading to incomplete clefting within the
presumptive hard palate. Accompanied with these cellular alterations is an
ectopic expression of Fgf10 and Fgfr2c in the anterior palatal mesenchyme of the 
mutants. Tissue recombination and bead implantation experiments revealed that
signals from the anterior palatal epithelium are responsible for the restricted
mesenchymal Shox2 expression. BMP activity is necessary but not sufficient for
the induction of palatal Shox2 expression. Our results demonstrate an intrinsic
requirement for Shox2 in palatogenesis, and support the idea that palatogenesis
is differentially regulated along the anteroposterior axis. Furthermore, our
results demonstrate that fusion of the posterior palate can occur independently
of fusion in the anterior palate.

PMID: 16141225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Aug 15;137(1):72-6.

Microdeletion in the SHOX 3' region associated with skeletal phenotypes of Langer
mesomelic dysplasia in a 45,X/46,X,r(X) infant and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis
in her 46,XX mother: implication for the SHOX enhancer.

Fukami M(1), Okuyama T, Yamamori S, Nishimura G, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

It is known that SHOX nullizygosity results in Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD)
and SHOX haploinsufficiency leads to Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWDC). Here,
we report on a microdeletion in the SHOX 3' region identified in a Japanese
infant with LMD-compatible skeletal features and a
45,X[191]/46,X,r(X)(p22.3q24)[9] karyotype and in her mother with LWDC-compatible
skeletal features and a normal 46,XX karyotype. Physical and auxological
examinations revealed mesomelic appearance, ulnarly deviated hands, and
borderline micrognathia in the infant, and relatively short forearms and lower
legs in the mother. Radiological studies indicated mesomelia, markedly curved
radii, hypoplastic ulnas and fibulas, and metaphyseal splaying in the infant, and
borderline to mild curvature of the radii, decreased carpal angles, and
high-normal triangularization index in the mother. Cytogenetic and molecular
studies showed that the ring X chromosome of the infant was missing SHOX and of
paternal origin, whereas the cytogenetically normal X chromosomes of the infant
and one of the two X chromosomes of the mother, though they retained SHOX with
normal coding sequences, had a microdeletion in the SHOX 3' region. The
microdeletion started from a position approximately 200 kb from SHOX coding
sequences, and spanned 240-350 kb in physical length involving DXYS233. The
results, in conjunction with those reported by Flanagan et al. [2002], suggest
that a cis-acting enhancer exists in the SHOX 3' region around DXYS233.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16007631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Eur J Pediatr. 2005 Sep;164(9):539-43. Epub 2005 Jun 10.

Severe, atypical form of dyschondrosteosis (report of two cases).

Bieganski T(1), Bik K, Cormier-Daire V, Huber C, Nowicki G, Kozlowski K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Polish Mother's Memorial Hospital Research Institute,
Lodz, Poland.

We report a mother and her son with unique mesomelic dysplasia. The mesomelic
shortening in the upper extremities presents features of Leri-Weill syndrome
(dyschondrosteosis) (OMIM 127300), that of the lower extremities is consistent
with Langer mesomelic dysplasia (OMIM 249700). Molecular studies showed a
heterozygous short stature homeobox gene ( SHOX)deletion in both patients. A
second genetic defect in the other SHOX allele was not found.CONCLUSION: Our
study broadens the phenotypic spectrum associated with short stature homeobox
gene functional haploinsufficiency.

PMID: 15947998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Hum Mutat. 2005 Jul;26(1):44-52.

Alteration of DNA binding, dimerization, and nuclear translocation of SHOX
homeodomain mutations identified in idiopathic short stature and Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis.

Schneider KU(1), Marchini A, Sabherwal N, Röth R, Niesler B, Marttila T, Blaschke
RJ, Lawson M, Dumic M, Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Germany.

Haploinsufficiency of the short stature homeobox gene SHOX has been found in
patients with idiopathic short stature (ISS) and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis
(LWD). In addition to complete gene deletions and nonsense mutations, several
missense mutations have been identified in both patient groups, leading to amino 
acid substitutions in the SHOX protein. The majority of missense mutations were
found to accumulate in the region encoding the highly conserved homeodomain of
the paired-like type. In this report, we investigated nine different amino acid
exchanges in the homeodomain of SHOX patients with ISS and LWD. We were able show
that these mutations cause an alteration of the biological function of SHOX by
loss of DNA binding, reduced dimerization ability, and/or impaired nuclear
translocation. Additionally, one of the mutations (c.458G>T, p.R153L) is
defective in transcriptional activation even though it is still able to bind to
DNA, dimerize, and translocate to the nucleus. Thus, we demonstrate that single
missense mutations in the homeodomain fundamentally impair SHOX key functions,
thereby leading to the phenotype observed in patients with LWD and ISS.

PMID: 15931687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Jul;77(1):89-96. Epub 2005 Jun 1.

Identification of a major recombination hotspot in patients with short stature
and SHOX deficiency.

Schneider KU(1), Sabherwal N, Jantz K, Röth R, Muncke N, Blum WF, Cutler GB Jr,
Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Aug;79(2):409-14; author reply 414.
    Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Mar;78(3):523-5.

Human growth is influenced not only by environmental and internal factors but
also by a large number of different genes. One of these genes, SHOX, is believed 
to play a major role in growth, since defects in this homeobox-containing gene on
the sex chromosomes lead to syndromal short stature (Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis, Langer mesomelic dysplasia, and Turner syndrome) as well as to
idiopathic short stature. We have analyzed 118 unrelated patients with Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis and >1,500 patients with idiopathic short stature for deletions
encompassing SHOX. Deletions were detected in 34% of the patients with Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis and in 2% of the patients with idiopathic short stature. For 27
patients with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and for 6 with idiopathic short
stature, detailed deletion mapping was performed. Analysis was performed by
polymerase chain reaction with the use of pseudoautosomal polymorphic markers and
by fluorescence in situ hybridization with the use of cosmid clones. Here, we
show that, although the identified deletions vary in size, the vast majority
(73%) of patients tested share a distinct proximal deletion breakpoint. We
propose that the sequence present within this proximal deletion breakpoint
"hotspot" region predisposes to recurrent breaks.

PMCID: PMC1226197
PMID: 15931595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Clin Pediatr Endocrinol. 2005;14(2):45-7. doi: 10.1297/cpe.14.45. Epub 2005 Aug
12.

Short stature and turner skeletal features in an 11-year-old boy with a ring y
chromosome missing the short stature homeobox containing gene.

Tanaka M(1), Ohmizono Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shiga National Hospital, Shiga, Japan.

We report on an 11-yr-old boy with short stature and Turner skeletal features.
Chromosome analysis revealed a 46,X,r(Y)(p11.3q11.2) karyotype, and FISH analysis
showed loss of the Short stature homeobox containing gene (SHOX) from the ring Y 
chromosome. The results are consistent with the association of SHOX
haploinsufficiency with short stature and Turner skeletal features, and suggest
the importance of SHOX analysis in boys with Turner-like skeletal phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4004833
PMID: 24790310  [PubMed]


246. Clin Pediatr Endocrinol. 2005;14(1):11-6. doi: 10.1297/cpe.14.11. Epub 2005 Feb
14.

Longitudinal Observation of a Patient with Leri-Weill Dyschondrosteosis and SHOX 
Haploinsufficiency.

Miyoshi Y(1), Miki K(2), Etani Y(1), Mushiake S(1), Shimizu N(3), Ozono K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka,
Japan. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Itami Municipal Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine,
Osaka, Japan.

Haploinsufficiency of the short stature homeobox-containing (SHOX) gene causes
Turner skeletal features, a certain proportion of idiopathic short stature and
Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD). Here we report a Japanese female with LWD.
Her physical growth, skeletal deformity, and endocrine status were recorded
longitudinally. She exhibited a constant growth rate (average + 6.2 cm/yr) from 6
to 9 yr old, followed by a downward shift at 10 yr old. Her final height was 135 
cm (-4.4 SD for an adult female) and weight was 50.5 kg (-0.3 SD) at 12 yr and 10
mo old. Mesomelia and cubitus valgus were noticed from 2 yr old, and metaphyseal 
lucency and epiphyseal hypoplasia of the medial side of the distal radius were
detected at 6 yr old. Madelung deformity was obvious at 10 yr old, when menarche 
occurred. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis demonstrated a
single copy of the SHOX gene. The short stature of the patient was thought to be 
exaggerated by the combination of SHOX haploinsufficiency and relatively early
puberty.

PMCID: PMC4004926
PMID: 24790304  [PubMed]


247. Rom J Intern Med. 2004;42(2):371-9.

Cardiovascular risk factors in Turner syndrome.

Lichiardopol C(1), Mota M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 4, Petru Rares, Craiova, Romania.

Turner syndrome is due to haploinsufficiency of X chromosome genes that escape
inactivation and associates female phenotype, short stature, gonadal dysgenesis, 
somatic stigmata, cardiovascular and renal anomalies and a large spectrum of
other disorders (autoimmune thyroiditis, osteoporosis, inflammatory bowel
disease, chronic liver diseases). The increased mortality in Turner syndrome is
primarily a result of its cardiovascular complications. Congenital cardiac
anomalies (coarctation of the aorta, bicuspid aortic valve, anomalous venous
drainage) are present in 23-40% of patients; there is an increased risk of aortic
dilation (42%) and dissection, ischemic heart disease and the risk of
hypertension is increased three fold. In addition, insulin resistance may be
present in up to 50% of women with Turner syndrome and an atherogenic lipid
profile (increased cholesterol, triglycerides) favors the development of coronary
artery disease. Our study was aimed to reveal anomalies in Turner syndrome that
may increase cardiovascular risk. We studied a group of 62 Turner patients aged
16-67 years (mean age 26.8 years, SD = 11.1 years) comparatively to 62 age
matched controls. Glycemia over 100 mg% was found in 11.3% of Turner patients vs 
1.6% of controls and cholesterolemia over 200mg% was found in 51.2% of Turner
patients vs 14.5% of controls; 24.2% of Turner patients were overweight vs 17.8% 
of controls and 6.4% were obese vs 4.8% of controls. In the Turner group we found
congenital cardiac anomalies in 17.8%, hypertension in 6.5%, renal anomalies
11.3%, and hypothyroidism 29.2%.

PMID: 15529627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Sep;89(9):4403-8.

SHOX haploinsufficiency and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis: prevalence and growth
failure in relation to mutation, sex, and degree of wrist deformity.

Binder G(1), Renz A, Martinez A, Keselman A, Hesse V, Riedl SW, Häusler G,
Fricke-Otto S, Frisch H, Heinrich JJ, Ranke MB.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Endocrinology, University-Children's Hospital,
Hoppe-Seyler-Strasse 1, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. gdbinder@med.uni-tuebingen.de

SHOX mutations causing haploinsufficiency were reported in Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis (LWD), which is characterized by mesomelic short stature and
Madelung deformity of the wrists. The aim of this study was to determine the
prevalence of SHOX mutations in LWD and to investigate the degree of growth
failure in relation to mutation, sex, age of menarche, and wrist deformity. We
studied 20 families with 24 affected children (18 females) and nine affected
parents (seven females). All patients presented with bilateral Madelung deformity
and shortening of the limbs. Height, sitting height, parental height, birth
length, age of menarche, and presence of minor abnormalities were recorded. The
degree of Madelung deformity was estimated by analysis of left hand radiographs. 
Microsatellite typing of the SHOX locus was used for detection of SHOX deletions 
and PCR direct sequencing for the detection of SHOX point mutations. In 14 of 20 
families (70%), SHOX mutations were detected, with seven deletions (four de novo)
and seven point mutations (one de novo). The latter included five missense
mutations of the SHOX homeodomain, one nonsense mutation (E102X) truncating the
whole homeodomain, and one point mutation (X293R) causing a C-terminal elongation
of SHOX. Median age of the affected children was 13.4 yr (range, 6.1-18.3), mean 
height sd score (SDS) (sd in parentheses) was -2.85 (1.04), and mean sitting
height/height ratio SDS was +3.06 (1.09). Mean birth length SDS was -0.59 (1.26).
Growth failure occurred before school age. Height change during a median
follow-up of 7.4 yr (range, 2.3-11.3) was insignificant with a mean change in
height SDS of -0.10 (0.52). Mean height SDS of affected parents was -2.70 (0.85) 
vs. -0.91 (1.10) in unaffected parents. Height loss due to LWD was estimated
calculating delta height defined by actual height SDS minus target height SDS of 
the unaffected parent(s). In the children, mean delta height SDS was -2.16
(1.06), the loss being greater in girls at -2.30 (1.02) than in boys at -1.72
(1.09) (P = 0.32). In patients with SHOX deletions, it was -2.14 (1.15) vs. -1.67
(0.73) for the SHOX point mutation group (P = 0.38). Mean delta height SDS was
-2.26 (0.68) for the girls with early menarche (<12 yr) vs. -2.08 (0.91) for the 
other postmenarcheal girls (P = 0.72). Height loss in patients with
radiologically severe wrist deformities in comparison with those having milder
radiological signs was -2.81 (1.01) vs. -1.70 (1.04) (P = 0.03). GH treatment in 
five children during a median duration of 3.4 yr (range, 1.5-9.8 yr) with a
median dosage of 0.23 mg/kg.wk (range, 0.14-0.25) resulted in a mean height SDS
gain of +0.82 (0.34). In conclusion, SHOX defects were the main cause of LWD.
Growth failure occurred during the first years of life with a mean height loss of
2.16 SDS whereas pubertal growth may only be mildly or not affected. Children
with a severe degree of wrist deformity were significantly shorter than those
with mild deformities. No statistically significant effects of type of mutation, 
age of menarche, or sex on height were observed. The effect of GH therapy varied 
between individuals and needs to be examined in controlled studies.

PMID: 15356038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Eur J Pediatr. 2004 Nov;163(11):658-63. Epub 2004 Aug 12.

Subterminal deletion/duplication event in an affected male due to maternal X
chromosome pericentric inversion.

Kokalj-Vokac N(1), Marcun-Varda N, Zagorac A, Erjavec-Skerget A, Zagradisnik B,
Todorovic M, Gregoric A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Laboratory, Maribor Teaching Hospital, Ljubljanska 5, 2000,
Maribor, Slovenia, nadja.kokalj-vokac@sb-mb.si

We report a 13-month-old male infant with an apparently normal karyotype, severe 
growth and developmental delay, ichthyosis, hypogonadism, limb shortness,
hypoplasia of the corpus callosum and a round, flat face and thin upper lip as a 
consequence of a subtelomeric del/dup event of the X chromosome. The recombinant 
X chromosome (rec(X)), derived from crossing-over within the inversion, was
identified in a family, in which the mother is a carrier of pericentric inversion
of one X chromosome and pericentric inversion of the heterochromatic region of
chromosome 9. The inv(X) chromosome was also analysed in her sister and daughter.
The rec(X) had a duplication of the segment Xq27.3-->Xqter and deletion of the
Xp22.31-->Xpter and was interpreted as Xqter-Xq27.3::Xp22.31-Xqter. The rec (X)
was characterised by FISH using a number of BAC probes. There are only three
published reports of chromosome rearrangements resulting in a similar
subtelomeric duplication of Xq in males. The proband's phenotype corresponds to
descriptions of contiguous gene syndromes due to deletion of the STS, SHOX, ARSE 
and KAL genes. Despite the loss of the ARSE gene there was no evidence of
chondrodysplasia punctata. Additional conditions associated with duplication of
the Xq28 segment, such as severe growth retardation and developmental delay, a
peculiar head shape, atrophy of the cerebral hemispheres and hypoplasia of the
cerebellum and corpus callosum, were observed.CONCLUSION: Fluorescent in situ
hybridisation techniques using subtelomeric DNA probes are essential tools for
detection of such complex submicroscopic chromosomal rearrangements as the
dup/del event of the X chromosome described in our patient.

PMID: 15309625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Aug;89(8):4130-5.

Expression of SHOX in human fetal and childhood growth plate.

Munns CJ(1), Haase HR, Crowther LM, Hayes MT, Blaschke R, Rappold G, Glass IA,
Batch JA.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Research Unit, Royal Children's Hospital Foundation Research Centre,
and Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Queensland, Royal
Children's Hospital, Brisbane QLD 4029, Australia.

Abnormalities in the growth plate may lead to short stature and skeletal
deformity including Leri Weil syndrome, which has been shown to result from
deletions or mutations in the SHOX gene, a homeobox gene located at the
pseudoautosomal region of the X and Y chromosome. We studied the expression of
SHOX protein, by immunohistochemistry, in human fetal and childhood growth plates
and mRNA by in situ hybridization in childhood normal and Leri Weil growth plate.
SHOX protein was found in reserve, proliferative, and hypertrophic zones of fetal
growth plate from 12 wk to term and childhood control and Leri Weil growth
plates. The pattern of immunostaining in the proliferative zone of childhood
growth plate was patchy, with more intense uniform immunostaining in the
hypertrophic zone. In situ hybridization studies of childhood growth plate
demonstrated SHOX mRNA expression throughout the growth plate. No difference in
the pattern of SHOX protein or mRNA expression was seen between the control and
Leri Weil growth plate. These findings suggest that SHOX plays a role in
chondrocyte function in the growth plate.

PMID: 15292358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Aug 1;128A(4):404-9.

Mesomelic dysplasia, Kantaputra type: clinical report, prenatal diagnosis, no
evidence for SHOX deletion/mutation.

Kwee ML(1), van de Sluijs JA, van Vugt JM, Wijnaendts LC, Gille JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics and Human Genetics, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. ml.kwee@vumc.nl

A grandmother, her three children, and three grandchildren had skeletal
abnormalities consisting of a short stature, bilateral symmetrical very short,
broad and bowed radii, very short and broad ulna, mildly short lower legs, short 
proximal end of fibula, abnormal ankles, abnormal calcaneus and talus and pes
equinus. They had normal craniofacial features, normal intelligence and normal
chromosomes. We concluded that this skeletal dysplasia resembles the autosomal
dominant mesomelic dysplasia, Kantaputra type. Prenatal diagnosis by ultrasound
examination early in the pregnancy was possible. We found no evidence for a SHOX 
gene deletion or point mutation. As far as we know this is the third reported
family with this skeletal dysplasia.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15264287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Jul 15;128A(2):179-84.

SHOX mutations in a family and a fetus with Langer mesomelic dwarfism.

Thomas NS(1), Maloney V, Bass P, Mulik V, Wellesley D, Castle B.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
United Kingdom. simon.thomas@salisbury.nhs.uk

Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD) are
caused by mutations in the SHOX gene. LWD results from haploinsufficiency and is 
dominantly inherited, while the more severe LMD results from the homozygous loss 
of SHOX. We describe a family and fetus with two SHOX mutations. Several
relatives carry an approximately 200 kb interstitial deletion that includes the
whole SHOX gene. Their condition is mild, with no Madelung deformity, and was
originally diagnosed as hypochondroplasia (HCH). This deletion was also
transmitted to a female fetus. However, unlike her carrier relatives, the
ultrasound scan of the fetus and subsequent autopsy were consistent with LMD. The
fetus inherited an additional Xp deletion (Xpter-Xp22.12) that also included the 
SHOX gene from her chromosomally normal father. This represents a unique
molecular condition for LMD: the fetus is a compound heterozygote with two
independent deletions, one inherited and one arising from a de novo event.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15214013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Cell Sci. 2004 Jun 15;117(Pt 14):3041-8. Epub 2004 Jun 1.

Impairment of SHOX nuclear localization as a cause for Léri-Weill syndrome.

Sabherwal N(1), Schneider KU, Blaschke RJ, Marchini A, Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld
366, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

We report the characterization of the nuclear localization signal (NLS) of the
short stature homeobox gene SHOX. Mutations within the SHOX gene cause Léri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LD) as well as idiopathic
short stature (ISS). Furthermore, haploinsufficiency of SHOX has also been
implicated in Turner syndrome. SHOX has been shown to be a cell-type-specific
transcriptional activator that localizes to the nucleus. The SHOX protein
contains a central homeodomain that together with its transactivation domain
regulates the transcription of its target sequences within the nucleus. The
sequences for its nuclear localization have not been identified yet. Experimental
characterization of SHOX-NLS by deletion mapping identified a non-classic type
basic signal, AKCRK, in the recognition helix of the homeodomain. Fusion of this 
stretch of five amino acids to a cytoplasmic reporter protein resulted in its
nuclear translocation. Functional analysis of a missense mutation R173C (C517T)
affecting the identified SHOX-NLS in two families with LWS and LD showed that the
mutated SHOX protein is unable to enter the nucleus. Conversely, we can
demonstrate that insertion of the identified signal adjacent to the mutant site
can restore its nuclear translocation. These results establish impairment of
nuclear localization as a mechanistic basis for SHOX-related diseases.

PMID: 15173321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Med Genet. 2004 Jun;41(6):e83.

A novel point mutation A170P in the SHOX gene defines impaired nuclear
translocation as a molecular cause for Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and Langer
dysplasia.

Sabherwal N(1), Blaschke RJ, Marchini A, Heine-Suner D, Rosell J, Ferragut J,
Blum WF, Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Germany.

PMCID: PMC1735821
PMID: 15173249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Arch Pediatr. 2004 Jun;11(6):555-6.

[Genetics and the SHOX gene].

[Article in French]

Huber C(1), Cormier-Daire V.

Author information: 
(1)Département de génétique et Inserm U 393, hôpital Necker, 149, rue de Sèvres, 
75015 Paris, France.

PMID: 15158831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 27;279(35):37103-14. Epub 2004 May 15.

The short stature homeodomain protein SHOX induces cellular growth arrest and
apoptosis and is expressed in human growth plate chondrocytes.

Marchini A(1), Marttila T, Winter A, Caldeira S, Malanchi I, Blaschke RJ, Häcker 
B, Rao E, Karperien M, Wit JM, Richter W, Tommasino M, Rappold GA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld
328, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Mutations in the homeobox gene SHOX cause growth retardation and the skeletal
abnormalities associated with Léri-Weill, Langer, and Turner syndromes. Little is
known about the mechanism underlying these SHOX-related inherited disorders of
bone formation. Here we demonstrate that SHOX expression in osteogenic stable
cell lines, primary oral fibroblasts, and primary chondrocytes leads to cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis. These events are associated with alterations in the
expression of several cellular genes, including pRB, p53, and the cyclin kinase
inhibitors p21(Cip1) and p27(Kip1). A SHOX mutant, such as seen in Léri-Weill
syndrome patients, does not display these activities of the wild type protein. We
have also shown that endogenous SHOX is mainly expressed in
hypertrophic/apoptotic chondrocytes of the growth plate, strongly suggesting that
the protein plays a direct role in regulating the differentiation of these cells.
This study provides the first insight into the biological function of SHOX as
regulator of cellular proliferation and viability and relates these cellular
events to the phenotypic consequences of SHOX deficiency.

PMID: 15145945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Endocr J. 2004 Apr;51(2):197-200.

Statural growth in 31 Japanese patients with SHOX haploinsufficiency: support for
a disadvantageous effect of gonadal estrogens.

Fukami M(1), Nishi Y, Hasegawa Y, Miyoshi Y, Okabe T, Haga N, Nagai T, Tanaka T, 
Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

Although gonadal estrogens are known to facilitate the development of skeletal
lesion in SHOX haploinsufficiency, controversy exists as to whether gonadal
estrogens are disadvantageous to pubertal growth. To clarify this matter, we
analyzed growth pattern in 31 Japanese patients with a normal karyotype and
molecularly confirmed SHOX haploinsufficiency. The mean height SD score at the
diagnosis of SHOX haploinsufficiency was similar between patients identified in
childhood and those identified in adulthood (-2.7 +/- 0.8 [n = 15] vs. -2.4 +/-
0.7 [n = 16], P = 0.36), and was significantly lower in patients identified by
the studies for short stature than in those ascertained by the familial studies
of the probands both in childhood (-3.0 +/- 0.6 [n = 11] vs. -1.8 +/- 0.5 [n =
4], P = 0.0051) and in adulthood (-3.0 +/- 0.9 [n = 5] vs. -2.2 +/- 0.5 [n = 11],
P = 0.040). Analysis of longitudinal paired growth data obtained in seven females
showed a significantly different mean height SD score between childhood and
adulthood (-2.3 +/- 0.5 vs. -2.9 +/- 0.8, P = 0.0060). The results imply that
gonadal estrogens have a deleterious effect on pubertal growth in SHOX
haploinsufficiency, and that the growth disadvantage is recognizable by
longitudinal rather than cross-sectional growth studies.

PMID: 15118270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Mar 1;125A(2):186-90.

Translocation (Y;22) resulting in the loss of SHOX and isolated short stature.

Borie C(1), Léger J, Dupuy O, Hassan M, Ledu N, Lebbar A, Czernichow P, Eydoux P.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics Unit, Hospital Robert Debre, Paris, France.

Chromosomal rearrangements involving both chromosome Y and chromosome 22 are
rare, and may result in a number of different phenotypes. We report on a
4-year-old child with short stature and a dicentric chromosome with a deletion of
the distal end of chromosome Yp. The pregnancy was uneventful, until
intra-uterine growth retardation was noted. Prenatal karyotyping showed a (Y;22) 
translocation. No structural fetal abnormality was shown at ultrasound
examination, and the pregnancy went to term. A growth-retarded boy with an
otherwise normal physical examination was delivered at 39 weeks. At age 4, the
child had short stature (-3 SD) without mental retardation. Radiological
examination of the wrist was normal. A blood karyotype confirmed the chromosomal 
rearrangement previously seen on the amniotic fluid cells. C-banding showed a
dicentric chromosome, and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with
centromeric probes confirmed the presence of both chromosome Y and 22 centromeres
on the derivative chromosome. The karyotype was thus
45,X,der(Y;22)(p11;q11)del(Y)(p11p11). Our patient's phenotype and chromosomal
rearrangement prompted us to further investigate the distal Yp region. FISH using
a subtelomeric probe showed a deletion of the distal Yp region. This technique
also revealed that this chromosomal rearrangement resulted in the deletion of
SHOX but not SRY. Although haploinsufficiency of SHOX may result in Léri-Weill
Dyschondrosteosis, this diagnosis did not seem obvious in this young patient.
This observation confirms the importance of FISH in the investigation of
chromosomal abnormalities, and further delineates the phenotype of SHOX deleted
patients.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14981722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Horm Res. 2004;61(5):205-10. Epub 2004 Jan 29.

Tall stature, insulin resistance, and disturbed behavior in a girl with the
triple X syndrome harboring three SHOX genes: offspring of a father with mosaic
Klinefelter syndrome but with two maternal X chromosomes.

Kanaka-Gantenbein C(1), Kitsiou S, Mavrou A, Stamoyannou L, Kolialexi A, Kekou K,
Liakopoulou M, Chrousos G.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pediatrics, Aghia Sophia Children's Hospital, University
of Athens, Athens, Greece. ganten@hol.gr

AIMS: To describe the tall stature and its possible underlying mechanism in a
Caucasian girl (age 12 years and 10 months) with 46,XX (28%)/47,XXX (72%)
mosaicism and to identify the parental origin of her extra X chromosome.
METHODS: The fasting glucose-to-insulin ratio was studied. The karyotypes of the 
girl and her parents as well as the presence of SHOX copies and the parental
origin of her extra X chromosome were assessed.
RESULTS: Clinical examination revealed a tall stature and severe acne, and
endocrinological/metabolic assessment revealed insulin resistance. Fluorescence
in situ hybridization cytogenetic analysis depicted the presence of three SHOX
genes in the 47,XXX cell line of the patient. Karyotyping of her parents showed a
normal 46,XX karyotype in the mother and 46,XY(93%)/47,XXY(7%) Klinefelter
mosaicism in the father. However, DNA analysis unequivocally showed maternal
origin of the extra X chromosome of the patient.
CONCLUSIONS: This report suggests that SHOX gene triplication may produce a tall 
stature, even in the presence of preserved ovarian function. X triplication might
predispose to insulin resistance and behavioral disorders.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14752208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Jan 15;124A(2):148-57.

Longterm follow-up in chondrodysplasia punctata, tibia-metacarpal type,
demonstrating natural history.

Savarirayan R(1), Boyle RJ, Masel J, Rogers JG, Sheffield LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Health Services Victoria and Murdoch Childrens Research Institute,
Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
savarirr@cryptic.rch.unimelb.edu.au

We report the longterm clinical and radiological progression in three unrelated
patients with the tibia-metacarpal form of chondrodysplasia punctata (CDP-TM).
The patients were followed for 37, 25, and 32 years, respectively. At follow-up
intellectual function was normal, and physical function was well preserved. There
was also marked resolution of several significant early radiographic features.
The patients attained adult heights of 152, 138, and 148 cm. Two patients had
chronic serous otitis media requiring tympanostomy tubes during childhood. One
patient suffered persisting back pain related to spinal stenosis and required
lumbar laminectomy at the age of 26 years. One patient had hip dysplasia
requiring orthopedic surgical intervention. All patients had recurrent patella
dislocation. Sterol and very long chain fatty acid profiles, FISH analysis for
SHOX gene deletions, blood lymphocyte karyotype, and phytanic acid levels were
normal in those tested, and no mutations in arylsulfatase D and E genes were
detected. These data suggest that the longterm clinical and functional prognosis 
in this condition appears to be better than that expected based on initial
clinical and radiological findings.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14699613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Epilepsia. 2003 Dec;44(12):1529-35.

An Xp; Yq translocation causing a novel contiguous gene syndrome in brothers with
generalized epilepsy, ichthyosis, and attention deficits.

Doherty MJ(1), Glass IA, Bennett CL, Cotter PD, Watson NF, Mitchell AL, Bird TD, 
Farrell DF.

Author information: 
(1)Swedish Epilepsy Center, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, U.S.A.
Michael.Doherty@Swedish.org

PURPOSE: We describe two brothers with generalized epilepsy, attention deficits, 
congenital ichthyosis, and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis who harbor an unusual Xp;
Yq translocation chromosome, resulting in a novel contiguous gene syndrome
because of deletion of genes from the distal short arm of the X chromosome.
METHODS: Physical examination, neuropsychologic testing, EEG, and neuroimaging
studies were performed. Because of their unusual phenotype, karyotyping,
fluorescence in situ hybridization, and further molecular analyses were carried
out to refine the break points of the underlying unbalanced sex chromosome
rearrangement.
RESULTS: The subjects had generalized epilepsy, X-linked ichthyosis, Madelung
deformities, mesomelia, normal intelligence, and attention deficits. The
brothers' karyotype was unbalanced; they inherited a maternal derivative X
chromosome. Deleted distal Xp genes included short-stature homeobox on the X
chromosome (SHOX), aryl sulfatase E (ARSE), variably charged X-chromosome mRNA
gene A (VCX-A), and steroid sulfatase (STS). The final karyotype was
46,Y,der(X)t(X; Y)(p22.3; q11.2).ish der(X) (DXZ1+, KAL+, STS-, SHOX-) mat.
CONCLUSIONS: Loss of distal contiguous Xp genes resulted in a syndrome comprising
bony deformities, ichthyosis, attention problems, and generalized epilepsy.
Candidate epilepsy genes within the deleted segment, such as ASMT, a gene
involved in the final synthesis of melatonin, are discussed. Cytogenetic analyses
should be included in the clinical evaluation of patients with generalized
epilepsy and complex phenotypes.

PMID: 14636323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Gene. 2003 Oct 23;317(1-2):67-77.

High mutation rates in human and ape pseudoautosomal genes.

Filatov DA(1), Gerrard DT.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15
2TT, UK. d.folatov@bham.ac.uk

It has been suggested that recombination may be mutagenic, which, if true, would 
inflate intraspecies diversity and interspecies silent divergence in regions of
high recombination. Here, we test this hypothesis comparing human/orangutan
genome-wide non-coding divergence (K) to that in the pseudoautosomal genes which 
were reported to recombine much more frequently than the rest of the genome. We
demonstrate that, compared to the average human/orangutan non-coding divergence
(K=3%), the substitution rate is significantly elevated in the introns of SHOX
(K=5.7%), PPP2R3L (K=8.7%) and ASMT (K=6.5%) genes located in the human and
orangutan Xp/Yp pseudoautosomal region (p-PAR), where recombination is over
20-fold higher than the genomic average. On the other hand, human/orangutan
non-coding divergence at the Xp/Yp pseudoautosomal boundary (K=3.5%) and in the
SYBL1 gene (K=2.7%), located in the human Xq/Yq pseudoautosomal region (q-PAR),
where recombination is known to be less frequent than in p-PAR, was not
significantly higher than the genome average. The data are consistent with the
hypothesis that recombination may be mutagenic.

PMID: 14604793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Oct;88(10):4891-6.

Auxology is a valuable instrument for the clinical diagnosis of SHOX
haploinsufficiency in school-age children with unexplained short stature.

Binder G(1), Ranke MB, Martin DD.

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
gdbinder@med.uni-tyebingen.de

SHOX (short stature homeobox-containing gene) mutations causing
haploinsufficiency have been reported in some individuals with idiopathic short
stature and in many patients with Leri-Weill-dyschondrosteosis. Around 80% of
SHOX mutations are complete gene deletions, whereas diverse point mutations
account for the rest. The aim of this study was to estimate the prevalence of
SHOX mutations in children with idiopathic short stature and to give an unbiased 
characterization of the haploinsufficiency phenotype of such children. We
recruited 140 children (61 girls), in our clinic, with idiopathic short stature, 
which was defined by the presence of normal IGF-I and free T(4); a normal
karyotype in females; the absence of endomysium antibodies, of chronic organic,
psychological, or syndromatic disease; and by the lack of clear signs of any
osteodysplasia. Height, arm span, and sitting height were recorded, and
subischial leg length was calculated. Two highly polymorphic microsatellite
markers located around the SHOX coding region (CA-SHOX repeat and DXYS233) were
PCR-amplified with fluorescent primers and separated in an automatic sequencing
machine. Analysis of parental DNA was performed in the probands who had only one 
fragment size of each of both markers. SHOX haploinsufficiency caused by a SHOX
deletion was confirmed in three probands (2%), all females, who carried a de novo
deletion through loss of the paternal allele. Their auxological data revealed a
significant shortening of arms and legs in the presence of a low-normal sitting
height, when compared with the other 137 children tested. Therefore, the
extremities-trunk ratio (sum of leg length and arm span, divided by sitting
height) for total height was significantly lower in the three SHOX
haploinsufficient probands, in comparison with the whole group. This observation 
was confirmed with the auxological data of five additional patients (four
females) previously diagnosed with SHOX haploinsufficiency; all but the youngest 
girl had height-adjusted extremities-trunk ratios more than 1 SD below the mean. 
All children with SHOX haploinsufficiency exhibited at least one characteristic
radiological sign of Leri-Weill-dyschondrosteosis in their left-hand radiography,
namely triangularization of the distal radial epiphysis, pyramidalization of the 
distal carpal row, or lucency of the distal ulnar border of the radius. Our
observations suggest that it is rational to limit SHOX mutation screening to
children with an extremities-trunk ratio less than 1.95 + 1/2 height (m) and to
add a critical judgment of the hand radiography.

PMID: 14557470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Horm Res. 2003;60(4):157-65.

Genetic analysis of short stature.

Kant SG(1), Wit JM, Breuning MH.

Author information: 
(1)CHCG Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands. s.g.kant@lumc.nl

Short stature is a major concern for patients and their parents, and represents a
diagnostic challenge to the clinician. A correct diagnosis is of particular
importance in view of the availability of effective, but costly, therapy in a
small subset of cases. Many different genetic etiologies of short stature are
known. Therefore, chromosome as well as molecular analysis are requisite
diagnostic investigations in children with short stature. Particularly in the
group of children with idiopathic short stature, possibilities of molecular
analysis are often underestimated. Important options are UPD7 and the FGFR3,
SHOX, GH1 and GHR genes. Furthermore, analysis of the IGF and IGF1R genes should 
be considered. We propose a flow chart for molecular analysis in short stature.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14530602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Eur J Endocrinol. 2003 Oct;149(4):337-41.

Longitudinal auxological study in a female with SHOX (short stature homeobox
containing gene) haploinsufficiency and normal ovarian function.

Fukami M(1), Matsuo N, Hasegawa T, Sato S, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To report on auxological data in the combination of SHOX (short
stature homeobox containing gene) haploinsufficiency and normal ovarian function.
DESIGN: Longitudinal auxological study in a 14 Year 9 Month old Japanese girl
with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis accompanied by mesomelic short stature, who had
a submicroscopic pseudoautosomal deletion involving SHOX, and pubertal
development of an almost average tempo.
METHODS: Auxological data were assessed by the age-matched standards for Japanese
females.
RESULTS: The standard deviation scores (SDSs) for height, leg length (LL), and
arm span remained below the normal range from childhood and worsened during
puberty, whereas those for sitting height (SH) remained within the normal range
and stayed almost constant throughout the observation period. Consequently, the
SDSs for SH/LL ratio remained above the normal range from childhood and
deteriorated during puberty. The decreased pubertal height gain was caused by a
diminished pubertal height spurt and abrupt growth cessation shortly after
menarche. The SDSs for hand length and palm length remained within the normal
range but decreased during puberty, and those for head circumference remained
within the normal range and stayed almost constant throughout the observation
period.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that, in individuals with SHOX
haploinsufficiency and normal ovarian function, auxological abnormalities related
to mesomelia are evident from childhood and worsen further during puberty because
of the skeletal maturing effects of ovarian estrogens.

PMID: 14514349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Sep;16(7):997-1004.

Effect of 24 months of recombinant growth hormone on height and body proportions 
in SHOX haploinsufficiency.

Munns CF(1), Berry M, Vickers D, Rappold GA, Hyland VJ, Glass IA, Batch JA.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine and Diabetes Research Unit, Royal Children's Hospital Foundation
Research Centre, Brisbane, Australia. cmunns@shriners.mcgill.ca

Leri-Weill syndrome (LWS) is a skeletal dysplasia with mesomelic short stature,
bilateral Madelung deformity (BMD) and SHOX (short stature homeobox-containing
gene) haploinsufficiency. The effect of 24 months of recombinant human growth
hormone (rhGH) therapy on the stature and BMD of two females with SHOX
haploinsufficiency (demonstrated by fluorescence in situ hybridisation) and LWS
was evaluated. Both patients demonstrated an increase in height standard
deviation score (SDS) and height velocity SDS over the 24 months of therapy.
Patient 1 demonstrated a relative increase in arm-span and upper segment
measurements with rhGH while patient 2 demonstrated a relative increase in lower 
limb length. There was appropriate advancement of bone age, no adverse events and
no significant deterioration in BMD. In this study, 24 months of rhGH was a safe 
and effective therapy for the disproportionate short stature of SHOX
haploinsufficiency, with no clinical deterioration of BMD.

PMID: 14513876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Sep;16(7):987-96.

Familial growth and skeletal features associated with SHOX haploinsufficiency.

Munns CF(1), Glass IA, Flanagan S, Hayes M, Williams B, Berry M, Vickers D,
O'Rourke P, Rao E, Rappold GA, Hyland VJ, Batch JA.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine and Diabetes Research Unit, Royal Children's Hospital Foundation
Research Centre, Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia. cmunns@shriners.mcgill.ca

This study was designed to determine the intrafamilial effect of SHOX
haploinsufficiency on stature, by comparing the growth and phenotype of 26 SHOX
haploinsufficient individuals with 45 relatives and population standards. It
confirmed that SHOX haploinsufficiency leads to growth restriction from birth to 
final height. Compared to unaffected siblings, the SHOX haploinsufficient cohort 
was 2.14 SDS (3.8 cm) shorter at birth and 2.1 SDS shorter through childhood. At 
final height females were 2.4 SDS (14.4 cm) shorter and males 0.8 SDS (5.3 cm)
shorter than normal siblings. The family height analysis suggests that the effect
of SHOX haploinsufficiency on growth may have been previously underestimated at
birth and overestimated in males at final height. SHOX haploinsufficiency leads
to short arms in 92%, bilateral Madelung deformity in 73% and short stature in
54%. Females were more severely affected than males. We conclude that SHOX is a
major growth gene and that mutations are associated with a broad range of
phenotype.

PMID: 14513875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 28;278(48):47820-6. Epub 2003 Sep 5.

Transcriptional and translational regulation of the Leri-Weill and Turner
syndrome homeobox gene SHOX.

Blaschke RJ(1), Töpfer C, Marchini A, Steinbeisser H, Janssen JW, Rappold GA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Ruprecht-Karls-University, Im Neuenheimer Feld
328, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Regulation of gene expression is particularly important for gene dosage-dependent
diseases and the phenomenon of clinical heterogeneity frequently associated with 
these phenotypes. We here report on the combined transcriptional and
translational regulatory mechanisms controlling the expression of the Léri-Weill 
and Turner syndrome gene SHOX. We define an alternative promotor within exon 2 of
the SHOX gene by transient transfections of mono- and bicistronic reporter
constructs and demonstrate substantial differences in the translation efficiency 
of the mRNAs transcribed from these alternative promotors by in vitro translation
assays and direct mRNA transfections into different cell lines. Although
transcripts generated from the intragenic promotor (P2) are translated with high 
efficiencies, mRNA originating from the upstream promotor (P1) exhibit
significant translation inhibitory effects due to seven AUG codons upstream of
the main open reading frame (uAUGs). Site-directed mutagenesis of these uAUGs
confers full translation efficiency to reporter mRNAs in different cell lines and
after injection of Xenopus embryos. In conclusion, our data support a model where
functional SHOX protein levels are regulated by a combination of transcriptional 
and translational control mechanisms.

PMID: 12960152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Oct 1;122A(2):139-47.

A familial contiguous gene deletion syndrome at Xp22.3 characterized by severe
learning disabilities and ADHD.

Boycott KM(1), Parslow MI, Ross JL, Miller IP, Bech-Hansen NT, MacLeod PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada. kym.boyocott@calgaryhealthregion.ca

We describe a mother and two sons with a 6-Mb terminal deletion of the short arm 
of the X chromosome. The breakpoint was localized to a region between DXS6837 and
sAJ243947 in Xp22.33. The two boys were shown to be deleted for the SHOX and ARSE
genes on their X chromosome. Both sons were short in stature and showed mild to
moderate skeletal abnormalities. The most significant findings in the younger son
were severe learning disabilities and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD). The older son tested in the mild mental retardation range and was also
affected by ADHD. The VCX-A gene, implicated recently in X-linked nonspecific
mental retardation, was found to be present in both boys. The mother's stature
was greater than one standard deviation below her target height and she had only 
subtle radiographic evidence of Madelung deformity. Our findings indicate that
loss of the Xp22.3 region is not always associated with the classic presentations
of Léri-Weill syndrome, or chondrodysplasia punctata, and that one or more genes 
involved in learning and attention may reside in Xp22.3.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12955766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Aug;88(8):4004.

SHOX deficiency phenotypes.

Roubicek M, Arriazu MC, Isaac G.

PMID: 12915706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2002;99(1-4):252-6.

Evidence that postnatal growth retardation in XO mice is due to
haploinsufficiency for a non-PAR X gene.

Burgoyne PS(1), Ojarikre OA, Turner JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Genetics, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, London, UK. pburgoy@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

XO Turner women, irrespective of the parental source of the X chromosome, are of 
short stature, and this is now thought to be largely a consequence of
haploinsufficiency for the pseudoautosomal region (PAR) gene SHOX. X(p)O mice
(with a paternal X) are developmentally retarded in fetal life, are underweight
at birth, and show reduced weight gain in the first few weeks after birth. X(m)O 
mice, on the other hand, are more developmentally advanced than their XX siblings
in fetal life; their postnatal growth has not hitherto been assessed. Here we
show that X(m)O mice are not underweight at birth, but they nevertheless show
reduced weight gain postnatally. The fact that postnatal growth is affected in
X(p)O and X(m)O mice, means that this must be due to X dosage deficiency. In
order to see if haploinsufficiency for a PAR gene was responsible for this growth
deficit (cf SHOX deficiency in Turner women), X(m)Y*(X) females, in which the
Y*(X) chromosome provides a second copy of the PAR, were compared with XX
females. These X(m)Y*(X) females were also growth-retarded relative to their XX
sibs, suggesting that it may be haploinsufficiency for a non-dosage-compensated X
gene or genes outside the PAR that is responsible for the postnatal growth
deficit in XO mice. The X genes known to escape X inactivation in the mouse have 
closely similar Y homologues. X(m)YSRY-negative females were therefore compared
with XX females to see if the presence of the SRY-negative Y chromosome corrected
the growth deficit; this proved to be the case. The postnatal growth deficit of
XO mice is therefore probably due to haploinsufficiency for a
non-dosage-compensated X gene that has a Y homologue that provides an equivalent 
function in the somatic tissues of males.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12900572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Jun 15;119A(3):293-6.

Deletion of the SHOX gene in patients with short stature of unknown cause.

Morizio E(1), Stuppia L, Gatta V, Fantasia D, Guanciali Franchi P, Rinaldi MM,
Scarano G, Concolino D, Giannotti A, Verrotti A, Chiarelli F, Calabrese G, Palka 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Università "G D'Annunzio", Chieti, Italy.

A fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) study was performed in 56 patients
with short stature of unknown cause in order to establish the role of deletion of
the SHOX gene in this population. FISH analysis was carried out on metaphase
spreads and interphase lymphocytes from blood smears using a probe specific for
the SHOX gene. Deletion of SHOX was found in four patients (7.1%). No skeletal
abnormalities were detected in these patients either at the physical examination 
or at X-rays of the upper and lower limbs. Present results indicate that SHOX
plays an important role also in short stature of unknown cause, and FISH analysis
appears as an easy, appropriate, and inexpensive method for the detection of SHOX
deletion.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12784295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Prenat Diagn. 2003 Apr;23(4):336-9.

A familial Xp+ chromosome detected during fetal karyotyping, which is associated 
with short stature in four generations of a Turkish family.

Karaman B(1), Wollnik B, Ermis H, Yüksel-Apak M, Basaran S.

Author information: 
(1)Istanbul University, Institute of Child Health, Division of Medical Genetics, 
Istanbul, Turkey. birsenkar@isnet.net.tr

The short-stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) on chromosome Xp22.3 was
recently identified as an important determinant of the stature phenotype.
Deletions of the SHOX gene, some of them due to structural chromosome
abnormalities, have been described in patients with idiopathic short stature and 
Leri-Weill syndrome. Additionally, haploinsufficiency of SHOX is a main cause for
short stature seen in patients with Turner syndrome. Here we report an unusual
X-chromosome abnormality, which was detected during a fetal karyotyping performed
because of a previous child with Down syndrome. GTG banding demonstrated an extra
chromosome segment on the terminal part of the short arm of chromosome X in the
index case (karyotype: 46,X,Xp+). The same chromosomal abnormality was found in
the mother and the maternal grandmother. All carriers of this chromosomal
abnormality presented with short stature but no other associated symptoms. Whole 
chromosome painting of X revealed a homogeneous painting of the abnormal X
chromosome indicating that no other chromosome was involved. Additional FISH
studies with probe DXS1140 (Kallmann probe at Xp22.3), Quint-Essential X-Specific
DNA (DMD probe at Xp21.2), XIST (at Xq13.2), and Tel Xq/Yq were performed, and no
abnormality was observed in the intensities or the localizations of the probes
signals. However, applying a specific SHOX gene probe (derived from cosmid
LLNONO3M34F5) showed a loss of signal on the derivative X chromosome. Our results
show that the Xp+ generation led to a deletion of the complete SHOX gene and
caused short stature in the presented family.

Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12673642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2003 Feb;112(2):153-8.

Congenital conductive hearing loss in dyschondrosteosis.

De Leenheer EM(1), Oudesluijs GG, Kuijpers-Jagtman AM, Rappold GA, Sengers RC,
Cremers CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University Medical Center St Radboud,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Conductive hearing loss was detected in a boy with a previous diagnosis of
dyschondrosteosis. Dyschondrosteosis is a rare inherited condition characterized 
by mesomelic dwarfism and Madelung's deformity. The syndrome can be caused by
mutations in the SHOX gene, and in that case, the pattern of inheritance is
pseudoautosomal dominant. Indeed, SHOX mutation analysis in our patient revealed 
a deletion. The combination of dyschondrosteosis and conductive hearing loss has 
been reported in 2 previous cases. In our patient, exploratory tympanotomy
revealed ankylosis of the stapes and a malformed incus. A substantial gain in
hearing threshold was obtained by a stapedectomy in combination with a
malleovestibulopexy.

PMID: 12597288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Med Genet. 2003 Feb;40(2):E11.

SHOX mutations detected by FISH and direct sequencing in patients with short
stature.

Stuppia L, Calabrese G, Gatta V, Pintor S, Morizio E, Fantasia D, Guanciali
Franchi P, Rinaldi MM, Scarano G, Concolino D, Giannotti A, Petreschi F,
Anzellotti MT, Pomilio M, Chiarelli F, Tumini S, Palka G.

PMCID: PMC1735371
PMID: 12566529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Dec;15 Suppl 5:1439-40.

SHOX defects in idiopathic short stature.

Ogata T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, The National Research Institute
for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. tomogata@nch.go.jp

PMID: 12511003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Dec;15 Suppl 5:1289-94.

SHOX haploinsufficiency and its modifying factors.

Ogata T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine and Tokyo
Electric Power Company Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. tomogata@nch.go.jp

SHOX (short stature homeobox-containing gene) is the first gene that has been
shown to be relevant to the development of specific features in Turner's
syndrome. This article reviews clinical findings in patients with SHOX
haploinsufficiency caused by intragenic mutations, pseudoautosomal submicroscopic
deletions, and cytogenetically recognizable Xp deletions. SHOX haploinsufficiency
can result in not only short stature but also Turner skeletal features, such as
cubitus valgus, short metacarpals, Madelung deformity, Léri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis, high arched palate, and short neck. Rare Turner skeletal
features such as Madelung deformity and Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis are
primarily facilitated by the bone-maturing effect of gonadal estrogens. Common
Turner skeletal features such as short metacarpals, cubitus valgus, and various
craniofacial and cervical skeletal stigmata are largely caused by a compressive
effect of distended lymphatics and lymphedema on the developing skeletal tissues.

PMID: 12510982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Jan 1;116A(1):61-5.

Mesomelic and rhizomelic short stature: The phenotype of combined Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis and achondroplasia or hypochondroplasia.

Ross JL(1), Bellus G, Scott CI Jr, Abboudi J, Grigelioniene G, Zinn AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA. judith.ross@mail.tju.edu

We studied two children with combined genetic skeletal disorders. Both had
Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD); one also had achondroplasia and the other had
hypochondroplasia. Both had severe short stature and evidence of rhizomelia and
mesomelia as well as other phenotypic features of their individual genetic
disorders. Achondroplasia was due to the G380R FGF3R mutation and
hypochondroplasia to a N540K mutation in the same gene. The patient with
hypochondroplasia had a heterozygous SHOX deletion; no SHOX mutation was
identified in the child with achondroplasia. The phenotypes of combined LWD and
achondroplasia or hypochondroplasia appeared to be less than additive, suggesting
that SHOX and FGFR3 act on overlapping pathways of bone growth and development.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12476453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Sep;16(3):465-82.

Turner syndrome in childhood and adolescence.

Batch J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Royal Children's Hospital, Herston, Brisbane, Queensland 4029, Australia.

Turner syndrome (TS) is the most common chromosomal disorder causing short
stature in females. The short stature is caused at least in part by
haploinsufficiency of the short stature homeobox (SHOX) gene. Complete
spontaneous puberty may occur in approximately 16% of patients, with spontaneous 
pregnancy in up to 4%. The final height of untreated TS girls is 86-88% of the
mean adult female height. Growth hormone (GH) given alone or with oxandrolone
improves final height. The major factors determining the outcome of GH therapy
are the dose of GH used and the number of years of GH therapy prior to
oestrogenization. Pubertal induction in TS should be individualized bearing in
mind growth optimization and psychological issues. Adolescents and adults with TS
may face a range of medical, fertility and psychosocial issues. Psychological
support for TS individuals and families is important throughout life and should
ideally be provided by both health professionals and TS support groups.

PMID: 12464229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Dec 1;113(3):279-85.

An active ring X and haploinsufficiency of SHOX contribute to short stature,
congenital anomalies, and developmental delay in a female.

Shago M(1), Sgro M, Barozzino T, Antinucci D, Chakraborty P, Chitayat D, Teshima 
I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Laboratory Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children, 555
University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

We report on a female infant with short stature and mesomelic limb shortening,
multiple congenital abnormalities, developmental delay, and Rieger anomaly.
Cytogenetic analysis revealed a complex rearrangement of the sex chromosomes in
this patient. In addition to a normal X chromosome, a derivative Y [der(Y)]
chromosome composed of X and Y material and a ring X [r(X)] were present.
Consistent with the fact that this infant had normal female genitalia, the SRY
gene was not detected in the Y chromosome portion of the der(Y). By fluorescence 
in situ hybridization (FISH), XIST was present on the normal X and the r(X), but 
not on the der(Y). The normal X was late replicating (inactive) and the r(X)
early replicating (active) in all lymphocyte metaphases examined. As the X
chromosome material on the der(Y) cannot be inactivated, the unusual skew of
activation toward the r(X) presumably resulted in the least amount of functional 
disomy of X-linked genes in the cells of this patient. Deletion of one copy of
the SHOX gene was detected in this patient. Haploinsufficiency of this gene is
known to be correlated with short stature and mesomelic limb shortening.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12439897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2002 Dec;3(4):363-7.

SHOX mutations.

Hintz RL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA 94305,
USA. hintz@stanford.edu

PMID: 12424438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Hum Mutat. 2002 Nov;20(5):338-41.

The human SHOX mutation database.

Niesler B(1), Fischer C, Rappold GA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

The human SHOX database has recently been established to provide clinicians and
scientists access to a central source of information about all known SHOX
mutations associated with short stature phenotypes such as idiopathic short
stature, Lèri-Weill dyschondrosteosis, Langer syndrome, and Turner syndrome. So
far, the database contains 29 unique intragenic mutations of the SHOX gene. These
mutations were detected in a total of 39 patients from different families.
Fourteen of these mutations have been found from the SHOX research group at the
Institute of Human Genetics in Heidelberg, Germany; 25 mutations are from data
reported in the literature. Not included in this database are complete SHOX gene 
deletions which represent the majority of all detectable SHOX mutations [Rappold 
et al., 2002]. The database is accessible via the website www.shox.uni-hd.de. It 
contains general information about the SHOX gene, and allows remote users to
search the data and to submit new mutations to the database.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12402330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Nov 15;113(1):29-39.

A whole-genome linkage scan suggests several genomic regions potentially
containing QTLs underlying the variation of stature.

Deng HW(1), Xu FH, Liu YZ, Shen H, Deng H, Huang QY, Liu YJ, Conway T, Li JL,
Davies KM, Recker RR.

Author information: 
(1)Osteoporosis Research Center, Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska 68131,
USA. deng@creighton.edu

Human height is a complex trait under the control of both genetic and environment
factors. In order to identify genomic regions underlying the variation of
stature, we performed a whole-genome linkage analysis on a sample of 53 human
pedigrees containing 1,249 sib pairs, 1,098 grandparent-grandchildren pairs,
1,993 avuncular pairs, and 1,172 first-cousin pairs. Several genomic regions were
suggested by our study to be linked with human height variation. These regions
include 5q31 at 144 cM from pter on chromosome 5 (with a maximum LOD score of
2.14 in multipoint linkage analyses), Xp22 at the marker DXS1060, and Xq25 at
DXS1001 on the X chromosome (with LOD scores of 1.95 and 1.91, respectively, in
two-point linkage analyses). Noticeably, Xp22 happens to be the very region where
a newly identified gene underlying idiopathic short stature, SHOX, maps. Based on
our findings, further confirmation and fine-mapping studies are to be pursued on 
expanded samples and/or with denser markers for eventual identification of major 
functional genes involved in human height variation.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12400063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Med Genet. 2002 Oct;39(10):758-63.

Prevalence of mutations in the short stature homeobox containing gene (SHOX) in
Madelung deformity of childhood.

Flanagan SF, Munns CF, Hayes M, Williams B, Berry M, Vickers D, Rao E, Rappold
GA, Batch JA, Hyland VJ, Glass IA.

PMCID: PMC1734979
PMID: 12362035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Evol Dev. 2002 Sep-Oct;4(5):366-74.

Coincident iterated gene expression in the amphioxus neural tube.

Jackman WR(1), Kimmel CB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene 97403, USA.
william.jackman@colorado.edu

The segmental patterning of the vertebrate hindbrain has been intensely
investigated, yet the evolutionary origin of hindbrain segmentation remains
unclear. In the vertebrate sister group, amphioxus (Cephalochordata), the
embryonic neural tube lacks obvious morphological segmentation, but comparative
Hox gene expression analysis has suggested the presence of a region homologous to
the vertebrate hindbrain. Does this region contain ancient segmental features
shared with the vertebrate hindbrain? To help address this question we cloned the
paired-like amphioxus homeodomain gene shox and found that its expression is
segmental in the amphioxus neural tube. We also uncovered a previously
uncharacterized iterated neural tube expression pattern of the zinc-finger gene
AmphiKrox. We propose that these genes, along with amphioxus islet and AmphiMnx, 
share a one-somite width periodicity of expression in the neural tube, the
coincidence of which may reflect an underlying segmental organization. We
hypothesize that the segmental patterning of neurons in the neural tube was
present in the amphioxus/vertebrate ancestor, but the establishment of a bona
fide segmented hindbrain may indeed have arisen in the vertebrate lineage.

PMID: 12356266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Prenat Diagn. 2002 Aug;22(8):675-80.

Prenatal diagnosis of a 45,X male with a SRY-bearing chromosome 21.

Nataf V(1), Senat MV, Albert M, Bidat L, de Mazancourt P, Roume J, Allard L, Le
Tessier D, Ville Y, Selva J.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Histologie-Embryologie Génétique Biologie de la Reproduction, Centre
Hospitalier Intercommunal Poissy-Saint Germain en Laye, 10 Rue du Champ Gaillard,
78303 Poissy Cédex, France.

Male phenotype associated with a 45,X karyotype is an infrequent finding. We
present a case diagnosed prenatally on amniocentesis performed for maternal age. 
The male phenotype was associated with a translocation of a distal part of Yp
including the pseudoautosomal SHOX gene and SRY gene on the short arm of a
chromosome 21. By DNA analysis we could show that the X chromosome was of
maternal origin and that the breakpoint was in interval 3 of the Y chromosome.
Mechanisms and genetic counselling are discussed based on a review of published
cases of 45,X and XX males.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12210575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Eur J Endocrinol. 2002 Aug;147(2):249-54.

Growth pattern and body proportion in a female with short stature
homeobox-containing gene overdosage and gonadal estrogen deficiency.

Ogata T(1), Inokuchi M, Ogawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
t-ogata@po.iijnet.or.jp

OBJECTIVE: To report on growth pattern and body proportion in the combination of 
short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) overdosage and gonadal estrogen
deficiency.
DESIGN: Auxological studies in a 20-year-old Japanese female with
45,X[28]/46,X,psu idic(X)(q28)[72], gonadal estrogen deficiency, and SHOX
duplication on the idic(X) chromosome, who received sex steroid replacement
therapy from 16 years 8 months of age.
METHODS: Growth pattern and body proportion were assessed by the age-matched
standards for Japanese females.
RESULTS: She continued to grow with a mean height velocity of 5.0 cm/year between
8 and 12 years of age and 4.4 cm/year between 12 and 16 years 8 months of age,
and ceased to grow shortly after the replacement therapy. The standard deviation 
score (SDS) for height was -0.9, -1.4, +0.7 and +0.8 at 8, 12, 16 years 8 months 
and 20 years of age respectively. She showed a unique change in body proportion
in her middle teens. At 8, 12, 16 years 8 months and 20 years of age, the SDS for
sitting height (SH) was -0.8, -1.1, -0.9 and -0.6 respectively, the SDS for leg
length (LL) was -1.2, -1.4, +1.1 and +1.4 respectively, and the SDS for SH/LL
ratio was +0.6, +0.4, -1.6 and -1.7 respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The results provide further support for the notion that the
combination of SHOX overdosage and gonadal estrogen deficiency permits continued 
growth with a roughly constant height velocity throughout the pubertal period of 
normal children, and suggest that the height gain in that period is primarily
ascribed to the LL increase, as expected from SHOX expression in the distal limb 
bones.

PMID: 12153748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Jun 15;110(2):158-63.

Complete SHOX deficiency causes Langer mesomelic dysplasia.

Zinn AR(1), Wei F, Zhang L, Elder FF, Scott CI Jr, Marttila P, Ross JL.

Author information: 
(1)McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development and Department of Internal
Medicine, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas
75390, USA. Andrew.Zinn@UTSouthwestern.edu

The SHOX (short-stature homeobox-containing) gene encodes isoforms of a
homeodomain transcription factor important in human limb development. SHOX
haploinsufficiency has been implicated in three human growth disorders: Turner
syndrome, idiopathic short stature, and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis. Langer
mesomelic dysplasia is thought to be the homozygous form of dyschondrosteosis.
However, complete SHOX deficiency has not been demonstrated for any postnatal
patient with the classic Langer phenotype. We studied four adults and one child
with Langer mesomelic dysplasia. SHOX abnormalities were detected in all five
probands. One was a homozygote or hemizygote and two were compound heterozygotes.
The homozygous or hemizygous mutation was in exon 6a, implying that the SHOXa
isoform is essential for normal skeletal development. These findings confirm
clinical inferences that Langer mesomelic dysplasia is the homozygous form of
Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and add to our understanding of genotype/phenotype
relationships in SHOX deficiency disorders.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12116254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Jun 15;110(2):153-7.

Pseudodominant inheritance of Langer mesomelic dysplasia caused by a SHOX
homeobox missense mutation.

Shears DJ(1), Guillen-Navarro E, Sempere-Miralles M, Domingo-Jimenez R, Scambler 
PJ, Winter RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, Institute of Child Health,
London, UK. dshears@ich.ucl.ac.uk

We report the clinical and molecular analysis in a consanguineous family in which
the skeletal dysplasias Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and Langer mesomelic
dysplasia (LMD) both segregate. A newborn male and his mother, both with Langer
mesomelic dysplasia, are described. A homozygous SHOX homeobox point mutation,
C517T, was identified by direct sequencing in the proband and his mother. The
same mutation was present in the heterozygous state in the proband's father and
in the maternal grandmother, both of whom had features of LWD. This C to T
transition is predicted to cause an arginine to cysteine amino acid change in a
highly conserved region of the recognition helix of the homeodomain, which may
reduce the stability of the interaction between the SHOX protein and its target
DNA. In addition, the mutation may disrupt a nuclear localization signal in SHOX.
This is the first SHOX point mutation identified in a case of LMD, and the first 
case in which parent to child transmission of LMD has been described.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12116253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Nat Genet. 2002 Jul;31(3):272-5. Epub 2002 Jun 24.

Crossover clustering and rapid decay of linkage disequilibrium in the Xp/Yp
pseudoautosomal gene SHOX.

May CA(1), Shone AC, Kalaydjieva L, Sajantila A, Jeffreys AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, University Road, Leicester
LE1 7RH, UK.

Crossover between the human sex chromosomes during male meiosis is restricted to 
the terminal pseudoautosomal pairing regions. An obligatory exchange occurs in
PAR1, an Xp/Yp pseudoautosomal region of 2.6 Mb, which creates a male-specific
recombination 'hot domain' with a recombination rate that is about 20 times
higher than the genome average. Low-resolution analysis of PAR1 suggests that
crossovers are distributed fairly randomly. By contrast, linkage disequilibrium
(LD) and sperm crossover analyses indicate that crossovers in autosomal regions
tend to cluster into 'hot spots' of 1-2 kb that lie between islands of
disequilibrium of tens to hundreds of kilobases. To determine whether at high
resolution this autosomal pattern also applies to PAR1, we have examined linkage 
disequilibrium over an interval of 43 kb around the gene SHOX. Here we show that 
in northern European populations, disequilibrium decays rapidly with physical
distance, which is consistent with this interval of PAR1 being recombinationally 
active in male meiosis. Analysis of a subregion of 9.9 kb in sperm shows,
however, that crossovers are not distributed randomly, but instead cluster into
an intense recombination hot spot that is very similar in morphology to autosomal
hot spots. Thus, PAR1 crossover activity may be influenced by male-specific hot
spots that are highly suitable for characterization by sperm DNA analysis.

PMID: 12089524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Med Genet. 2002 Jun;39(6):E33.

SHOX point mutations and deletions in Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis.

Falcinelli C(1), Iughetti L, Percesepe A, Calabrese G, Chiarelli F, Cisternino M,
De Sanctis L, Pucarelli I, Radetti G, Wasniewska M, Weber G, Stuppia L,
Bernasconi S, Forabosco A.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di Genetica Medica, Università di Modena, Via del Pozzo 71, 41100
Modena, Italy.

PMCID: PMC1735140
PMID: 12070265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2002 May;56(5):671-5.

Trisomy of the short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX), resulting from a
duplication-deletion of the X chromosome.

Adamson KA(1), Cross I, Batch JA, Rappold GA, Glass IA, Ball SG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Medical Sciences, The Medical School, University of
Newcastle, Newcastle NE2 4HH, UK.

The Turner syndrome (TS) is a complex disorder associated with almost invariant
short stature and gonadal dysgenesis, as well as a variety of other major organ
malformations. Recently, a homeobox-containing gene entitled short-stature
homeobox-containing gene (SHOX), was isolated from a minimal short stature gene
interval from the pseudoautosomal region of Xp (and Yp). Together with the
demonstrable escape of SHOX from X-inactivation, this suggested SHOX to be a
strong candidate gene for the short stature component of TS, and as SHOX
haploinsufficiency appears to be the molecular basis of a mesomelic short
statured skeletal dysplasia (Leri-Weill syndrome), this suggested that SHOX
protein expression levels may confer a dosage effect on human stature. However,
in this communication we report a normal statured female with gonadal dysgenesis,
due to the inheritance of a recombinant duplication-deletion X-chromosome. The
karyotype of the proband was 46,X,rec(X)dup(Xp)inv(X)(p11.22q21.2)mat and
fluorescent in situ hybridization of her metaphases with a SHOX cosmid confirmed 
the proband to be trisomic for SHOX. This communication suggests the relationship
between levels of SHOX expression and human stature to be more complex than
envisaged previously. The presence of normal stature in our patient rather than
tall stature is likely to represent the natural variation seen in patients with
transcription factor disorders.

PMID: 12035792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Hum Genet. 2002 Apr;110(4):322-6. Epub 2002 Mar 2.

Molecular characterization of a ring X chromosome in a male with short stature.

Ellison JW(1), Tekin M, Sikes KS, Yankowitz J, Shapiro L, Rappold GA, Neely KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN
55905, USA. ellison.jay@mayo.edu

We report the molecular characterization of a ring X chromosome that was
transmitted from a mother to a male who has short stature and minor dysmorphic
features. This represents only the second reported ring X chromosome in a male.
The ring is derived from breakage within the Xp pseudoautosomal region (PAR) and 
just proximal to the Xq PAR. The total amount of deleted material is 700-900 kb
DNA and includes six known transcribed genes. Interestingly, SHOX, a gene
implicated in short stature, is not deleted from the ring chromosome. Possible
pathogenetic explanations for the patient's clinical features include
insufficient dosage of deleted genes, a position effect on SHOX expression, and
cell death during development because of ring chromosome nondisjunction. The
findings are also relevant to observations made of "complete" ring chromosomes.

PMID: 11941480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Apr;87(4):1911-2; author reply 1912.

SHOX: a geneticist's view.

Rappold G.

Comment on
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Dec;86(12):5672-3.
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Dec;86(12):5674-80.

PMID: 11932348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Winter;106(4):272-4.

Allelic and nonallelic heterogeneity in dyschondrosteosis (Leri-Weill syndrome).

Cormier-Daire V(1), Huber C, Munnich A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Hopital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

Dyschondrosteosis (DCS) is an autosomal dominant form of mesomelic dysplasia that
has been recently ascribed to large-scale deletions and nonsense mutations of the
SHOX gene on the pseudoautosomal region of chromosome X and Y [Belin et al.,
1998: Nat Genet 19:67-69; Shears et al., 1998: Nat Genet 19:70-73]. Here, we
report the molecular analysis of a total of 23 DCS families including 16
previously reported pedigrees [Belin et al., 1998: Nat Genet 19:67-69; Huber et
al., 2001: J Med Genet 38:281-284] and 7 novel DCS families. Linkage analyses in 
21 of 23 families were consistent with linkage to the pseudoautosomal region.
However, in 2 of 23 families, linkage studies excluded SHOX as the
disease-causing gene, suggesting that this condition is genetically
heterogeneous.

PMID: 11891678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Winter;106(4):258-71.

Transcriptional dysregulation in skeletal malformation syndromes.

Hermanns P(1), Lee B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Normal skeletal development requires coordinated temporal and spatial gene
expression patterns that specify the functions of various cell types.
Transcription factors by definition coordinate this process and are themselves
subject to hierarchical levels of regulation. Together they determine the
context-dependent function of each transcription factor. Hence, loss-of-function 
and gain-of-function mutations within specific transcription factors cause
dysregulation of broad transcriptional networks. Consequences are usually
dominantly inherited skeletal malformation syndromes that can be broadly viewed
as consequences of defects of cellular differentiation, proliferation, and
survival versus defects in pattern formation. The study of human phenotypes and
mutations can lead to hypotheses about targets within the respective
transcriptional network. These targets can then be confirmed by combining mouse
genetic and in vitro studies. Although this has been successful in a small group 
of skeletal dysplasias, the majority of transcriptional networks during
skeletogenesis remain to be elucidated.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11891677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Mar;87(3):1402-6.

Deletions of the homeobox gene SHOX (short stature homeobox) are an important
cause of growth failure in children with short stature.

Rappold GA(1), Fukami M, Niesler B, Schiller S, Zumkeller W, Bettendorf M,
Heinrich U, Vlachopapadoupoulou E, Reinehr T, Onigata K, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany. gudrun_rappold@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Short stature, with an incidence of 3 in 100, is a fairly frequent disorder in
children. Idiopathic short stature refers to patients who are short due to
various unknown reasons. Mutations of a human homeobox gene, SHOX (short stature 
homeobox), have recently been shown to be associated with the short stature
phenotype in patients with Turner syndrome and most patients with Léri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis. This study addresses the question of the incidence and type of
SHOX mutations in patients with short stature. We analyzed the SHOX gene for
intragenic mutations by single strand conformation polymorphism, followed by
sequencing, in 750 patients and for complete gene deletions by fluorescence in
situ hybridization in 150 patients (total, 900 patients). This is the largest
group of patients with short stature studied to date for SHOX mutations. All
patients had a normal karyotype, and their height for chronological age were
below the third percentile or minus 2 SD of national height standards. All were
without obvious skeletal features reminiscent of the Leri-Weill syndrome at the
time of diagnosis. Silent, missense, and nonsense mutations and a small deletion 
in the coding region of SHOX were identified in 9 of the 750 patients analyzed
for intragenic mutations. Complete gene deletions were detected in 3 of the 150
patients studied for gene deletions. At least 3 of the 9 intragenic mutations
were judged to be functional based upon the genotype- phenotype relationship for 
the parents and normal control individuals. We conclude that SHOX mutations have 
been detected in 2.4% of children with short stature. The spectrum of SHOX
mutations is biased, with the vast majority leading to complete gene deletions.
The prevalence of short stature due to SHOX gene mutations among children with
short stature appears to be similar to that of GH deficiency or Turner syndrome. 
Family studies of the children with SHOX mutations often reveal older family
members with same mutation who exhibit mild skeletal features reminiscent of the 
Turner syndrome, such as high-arched palate, short neck, abnormal auricular
development, cubitus valgus, genu valgum, short fourth metacarpals, and Madelung 
deformity.

PMID: 11889216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Mar;87(3):1390-4.

SHOX nullizygosity and haploinsufficiency in a Japanese family: implication for
the development of Turner skeletal features.

Ogata T(1), Muroya K, Sasaki G, Nishimura G, Kitoh H, Hattori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, 
Japan. t-ogata@po.iijnet.or.jp

We report on clinical and molecular findings in a Japanese family consisting of a
male infant with SHOX nullizygosity and his four family members with SHOX
haploinsufficiency. The male infant had Langer mesomelic dysplasia, the
prepubertal sister had idiopathic short stature phenotype with no discernible
skeletal features, the father had mild Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWDC), and
the mother and the maternal grandmother had moderate LWDC. The five subjects
lacked clinically recognizable short metacarpals, cubitus valgus, high arched
palate, short neck, and micrognathia, as well as recurrent otitis media and
hearing loss. Fluorescence in situ hybridization and sequence analyses showed
that the proband had a pseudoautosomal microdeletion involving SHOX and a C502T
missense mutation in the homeobox domain at exon 4, and that the father was
heterozygous for the SHOX deletion, and the sister, the mother, and the
grandmother were heterozygous for the C502T mutation. The results, in conjunction
with the previous findings, suggest that mesomelic skeletal features such as
Langer mesomelic dysplasia and LWDC, which are absent or rare in Turner syndrome,
are primarily caused by the SHOX dosage effect and the bone maturing effect of
gonadal estrogens, whereas other skeletal features such as short metacarpals,
cubitus valgus, and various craniofacial and cervical skeletal stigmata, which
are common in Turner syndrome, are largely contributed by a compressive effect of
distended lymphatics and lymphedema on the developing skeletal tissues.

PMID: 11889214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Feb;15(2):139-48.

SHOX intragenic microsatellite analysis in patients with short stature.

Ezquieta B(1), Cueva E, Oliver A, Gracia R.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Bioquímica, Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain. bezqzieta@airtel.net

BACKGROUND: SHOX haplo-insufficiency is considered the molecular basis of short
stature in patients with Turner's syndrome, and gives rise to the short stature
with mesomelic dysplasia and Madelung deformity of patients with Leri-Weill
syndrome.
OBJECTIVE: Analysis of the intragenic SHOX microsatellite to define its utility
in detecting SHOX haplo-insufficiency in patients with short stature.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 207 patients with short stature (57 girls with Turner's
syndrome [TS] [24 mosaicisms]; 73 children with isolated short stature [ISS]; 77 
patients with short stature and skeletal disproportion) and 30 control subjects. 
DNA extraction and PCR amplification of the intragenic SHOX microsatellite, at
the 5'-untranslated region. SSCP and partial sequencing of the SHOX gene in one
patient with Madelung deformity and two SHOX alleles. DXS1055 (Xp) and DXS1192
(Xq) microsatellites were also analyzed, together with DXS233 and DXS234 at 0 and
2 cM of the pseudoautosomal region (PAR), in patients with one SHOX allele.
RESULTS: 1. 93% of patients with TS had a single SHOX allele, and allele
unbalance was detected in the remainder. 2. Patients with ISS were not different 
from the normal population with respect to SHOX heterozygosity (0.92 and 0.93,
respectively; p = 0.997). 3. Patients with short stature and skeletal
disproportion showed a higher frequency of SHOX homo/hemizygosity (0.27 vs 0.08; 
p = 0.027). 4. Five patients with short stature with SHOX haplo-insufficiency
were detected: three had Madelung deformity (inherited Yq;Xp translocation, de
novo PAR deletion, and SHOX microdeletion), and two had de novo/inherited Xp
partial monosomy.
CONCLUSIONS: The SHOX intragenic microsatellite might be a useful molecular
marker to detect TS (including Xp distal deletions). SHOX haplo-insufficiency
seems not to be an important contributor to ISS, but when skeletal disproportion 
is associated with short stature, a significant proportion of patients is found
to have a single SHOX allele. Some of these patients were found to be SHOX
haplo-insufficient upon molecular, cytogenetic and radiological examination.

PMID: 11874178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Jan 1;107(1):48-51.

Meier-Gorlin syndrome (ear-patella-short stature syndrome) in an Italian patient:
clinical evaluation and analysis of possible candidate genes.

Cohen A(1), Mulas R, Seri M, Gaiero A, Fichera G, Marini M, Baffico M, Camera G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Saint-Paul Hospital, Savona, Italy.
cohen.amnon@mail.sirio.it

We report on an Italian boy with the Meier-Gorlin syndrome (ear-patella-short
stature syndrome). This rare autosomal recessive disorder comprises the triad of 
microtia, absent patellae, and growth retardation with prenatal onset. The
patient had also an acute torsion of his left spermatic cord, a condition related
to a congenital defect of the tunica vaginalis. Because this syndrome had been
suggested as the human equivalent of the short ear mouse [Lacombe et al., 1994:
Ann. Genet. 37:184-191], a mutation analysis of the BMP5 gene was performed and
found normal. The LMX1B and the SHOX genes were also evaluated considering the
absent patellae and short stature, respectively, and were found normal as well.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11807867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Dec 15;104(4):307-11.

FISH analysis for apparently simple terminal deletions of the X chromosome:
identification of hidden structural abnormalities.

Ogata T(1), Matsuo N, Fukushima Y, Saito M, Nose O, Miharu N, Uehara S, Ishizuka 
B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. t-ogata@po.iijnet.or.jp

We report on fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis in 30 mosaic or
nonmosaic females diagnosed as having apparently simple terminal X deletions by
standard G-banding analysis. FISH studies for DXZ1, the Xp and Xq telomere
regions, and the whole X chromosome painting were carried out for the 30 females,
indicating rearranged X chromosomes with signal patterns discordant with terminal
deletions in 6 cases: one dic(X)(DXZ1++) chromosome, two der(X)(qtel++)
chromosomes, one Xq- (qtel+) chromosome, and two der(X)(ptel++) chromosomes.
Additional FISH studies were performed for the 6 cases using probes defining 12
loci on the X chromosome, showing large Xp deletion and small Xp duplication in
the dic(X)(DXZ1++) chromosome, partial Xp deletions and partial Xq duplications
in the two der(X)(qtel++) chromosomes, an interstitial Xq deletion in the Xq-
(qtel+) chromosome, and partial Xq deletions and partial Xp duplications in the
two der(X)(ptel++) chromosomes. Clinical assessment of the 6 cases revealed tall 
and normal stature in the two mosaic cases with the der(X)(ptel++) chromosomes
that were shown to be associated with SHOX duplication. The results suggest that 
unusual X chromosome rearrangements are often misinterpreted as simple terminal X
deletions, and that FISH analysis is useful for precise structural determination 
and better genotype-phenotype correlation of the X chromosome aberrations.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11754066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Dec 15;10(26):3083-91.

The Leri-Weill and Turner syndrome homeobox gene SHOX encodes a cell-type
specific transcriptional activator.

Rao E(1), Blaschke RJ, Marchini A, Niesler B, Burnett M, Rappold GA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld
328, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Functional impairment of the human homeobox gene SHOX causes short stature and
Madelung deformity in Leri-Weill syndrome (LWS) and has recently been implicated 
in additional skeletal malformations frequently observed in Turner syndrome. To
enhance our understanding of the underlying mechanism of action, we have
established a cell culture model consisting of four stably transfected cell lines
and analysed the functional properties of the SHOX protein on a molecular level. 
Results show that the SHOX-encoded protein is located exclusively within the
nucleus of a variety of cell lines, including U2Os, HEK293, COS7 and NIH 3T3
cells. In contrast to this cell-type independent nuclear translocation, the
transactivating potential of the SHOX protein on different luciferase reporter
constructs was observed only in the osteogenic cell line U2Os. Since C-terminally
truncated forms of SHOX lead to LWS and idiopathic short stature, we have
compared the activity of wild-type and truncated SHOX proteins. Interestingly,
C-terminally truncated SHOX proteins are inactive with regards to target gene
activation. These results for the first time provide an explanation of
SHOX-related phenotypes on a molecular level and suggest the existence of
qualitative trait loci modulating SHOX activity in a cell-type specific manner.

PMID: 11751690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Dec;86(12):5674-80.

Phenotypes Associated with SHOX Deficiency.

Ross JL(1), Scott C Jr, Marttila P, Kowal K, Nass A, Papenhausen P, Abboudi J,
Osterman L, Kushner H, Carter P, Ezaki M, Elder F, Wei F, Chen H, Zinn AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA. Judith.Ross@mail.tju.edu

Comment in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Dec;86(12):5672-3.
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Apr;87(4):1911-2; author reply 1912.

Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) (MIM 127300) is a dominantly inherited
skeletal dysplasia characterized phenotypically by Madelung wrist deformity,
mesomelia, and short stature. LWD can now be defined genetically by
haploinsufficiency of the SHOX (short stature homeobox-containing) gene. We have 
studied 21 LWD families (43 affected LWD subjects, including 32 females and 11
males, ages 3-56 yr) with confirmed SHOX abnormalities. We investigated the
relationship between SHOX mutations, height deficit, and Madelung deformity to
determine the contribution of SHOX haploinsufficiency to the LWD and Turner
syndrome (TS) phenotypes. Also, we examined the effects of age, gender, and
female puberty (estrogen) on the LWD phenotype. SHOX deletions were present in
affected individuals from 17 families (81%), and point mutations were detected in
4 families (19%). In the LWD subjects, height deficits ranged from -4.6 to +0.6
SD (mean +/- SD = -2.2 +/- 1.0). There were no statistically significant effects 
of age, gender, pubertal status, or parental origin of SHOX mutations on height
z-score. The height deficit in LWD is approximately two thirds that of TS.
Madelung deformity was present in 74% of LWD children and adults and was more
frequent and severe in females than males. The prevalence of the Madelung
deformity was higher in the LWD vs. a TS population. The prevalence of increased 
carrying angle, high arched palate, and scoliosis was similar in the two
populations. In conclusion, SHOX deletions or mutations accounted for all of our 
LWD cases. SHOX haploinsufficiency accounts for most, but not all, of the TS
height deficit. The LWD phenotype shows some gender- and age-related differences.

PMID: 11739418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Dec;86(12):5672-3.

A SHOX to the system.

Rosenfeld RG.

Comment in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Apr;87(4):1911-2; author reply 1912.

Comment on
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Dec;86(12):5674-80.

PMID: 11739417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Hum Genet. 2001 Nov;109(5):551-8. Epub 2001 Oct 19.

Analysis of short stature homeobox-containing gene ( SHOX) and auxological
phenotype in dyschondrosteosis and isolated Madelung deformity.

Grigelioniene G(1), Schoumans J, Neumeyer L, Ivarsson A, Eklöf O, Enkvist O,
Tordai P, Fosdal I, Myhre AG, Westphal O, Nilsson NO, Elfving M, Ellis I,
Anderlid BM, Fransson I, Tapia-Paez I, Nordenskjöld M, Hagenäs L, Dumanski JP.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Endocrinology Unit, Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
Giedre.Grigelioniene@kbh.ki.se

Dyschondrosteosis (DCO; also called Léri-Weill syndrome) is a skeletal dysplasia 
characterised by disproportionate short stature because of mesomelic shortening
of the limbs. Madelung deformity is a feature of DCO that is distinctive,
variable in expressivity and frequently observed. Mutations of the SHOX (short
stature homeobox-containing) gene have been previously described as causative in 
DCO. Isolated Madelung deformity (IMD) without the clinical characteristics of
DCO has also been described in sporadic and a few familial cases but the genetic 
defect underlying IMD is unknown. In this study, we have examined 28 probands
with DCO and seven probands with IMD for mutations in the SHOX gene by using
polymorphic CA-repeat analysis, fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH),
Southern blotting, direct sequencing and fibre-FISH analyses. This was combined
with auxological examination of the probands and their family members. Evaluation
of the auxological data showed a wide intra- and interfamilial phenotype
variability in DCO. Out of 28 DCO probands, 22 (79%) were shown to have mutations
in the SHOX gene. Sixteen unrelated DCO families had SHOX gene deletions. Four
novel DCO-associated mutations were found in different families. In two
additional DCO families, the previously described nonsense mutation (Arg195Stop) 
was detected. We conclude that mutations in the SHOX gene are the major factor in
the pathogenesis of DCO. In a female proband with severe IMD and her unaffected
sister, we detected an intrachromosomal duplication of the SHOX gene.

PMID: 11735031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Endocrinol Invest. 2001 Oct;24(9):737-41.

SHOX gene in Leri-Weill syndrome and in idiopathic short stature.

Bernasconi S(1), Mariani S, Falcinelli C, Milioli S, Iughetti L, Forabosco A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Parma, OORR, Italy.
sbernasconi@ao.pr.it

PMID: 11716161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Nov;86(11):5498-508.

Turner syndrome and Xp deletions: clinical and molecular studies in 47 patients.

Ogata T(1), Muroya K, Matsuo N, Shinohara O, Yorifuji T, Nishi Y, Hasegawa Y,
Horikawa R, Tachibana K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, 
Japan. t-ogata@po.iijnet.or.jp

Although clinical features of Turner syndrome have primarily been explained by
the dosage effects of SHOX (short stature homeobox-containing gene) and the
putative lymphogenic gene together with chromosomal effects leading to
nonspecific features, several matters remain to be determined, including
modifying factors for the effects of SHOX haploinsufficiency, chromosomal
location of the lymphogenic gene, and genetic factors for miscellaneous features 
such as multiple pigmented nevi. To clarify such unresolved issues, we examined
clinical findings in 47 patients with molecularly defined Xp deletion chromosomes
accompanied by the breakpoints on Xp21-22 (group 1; n = 19), those accompanied by
the breakpoints on Xp11 (group 2; n = 16), i(Xq) or idic(X)(p11) chromosomes
(group 3; n = 8), and interstitial Xp deletion chromosomes (group 4; n = 4). The 
deletion size of each patient was determined by fluorescence in situ
hybridization and microsatellite analyses for 38 Xp loci including SHOX, which
was deleted in groups 1-3 and preserved in group 4. The mean GH-untreated adult
height was -2.2 SD in group 1 and -2.7 SD in group 2 (GH-untreated adult heights 
were scanty in group 3). The prevalence of spontaneous breast development in
patients aged 12.8 yr or more (mean +/- 2 SD for B2 stage) was 11 of 11 in group 
1, 7 of 12 in group 2, and 1 of 7 in group 3. The prevalence of wrist abnormality
suggestive of Madelung deformity was 8 of 18 in group 1 and 2 of 23 in groups 2
and 3, and 9 of 18 in patients with spontaneous puberty and 1 of 23 in those
without spontaneous puberty. The prevalence of short neck was 1 of 19 in group 1 
and 7 of 24 in groups 2 and 3. Soft tissue and visceral anomalies were absent in 
group 1 preserving the region proximal to Duchenne muscular dystrophy and were
often present in groups 2 and 3 missing the region distal to monoamine oxidase A 
(MAOA). Multiple pigmented nevi were observed in groups 1-3, with the prevalence 
of 0 of 7 in patients less than 10 yr of age and 15 of 36 in those 10 yr or older
regardless of the presence or absence of spontaneous puberty. Turner phenotype
was absent in group 4, including a fetus aborted at 21 wk gestation who preserved
the region distal to MAOA. The results provide further support for the idea that 
clinical features in X chromosome aberrations are primarily explained by
haploinsufficiency of SHOX and the lymphogenic gene and by the extent of
chromosome imbalance in mitotic cells and pairing failure in meiotic cells.
Furthermore, it is suggested that 1) expressivity of SHOX haploinsufficiency in
the limb and faciocervical regions is primarily influenced by gonadal function
status and the presence or absence of the lymphogenic gene, respectively; 2) the 
lymphogenic gene for soft tissue and visceral stigmata is located between
Duchenne muscular dystrophy and MAOA; and 3) multiple pigmented nevi may
primarily be ascribed to cooperation between a hitherto unknown genetic factor
and an age-dependent factor other than gonadal E.

PMID: 11701728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Hand Surg. 2001 Jul;6(1):13-23.

Histopathological analysis of Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis: disordered growth
plate.

Munns CF(1), Glass IA, LaBrom R, Hayes M, Flanagan S, Berry M, Hyland VJ, Batch
JA, Philips GE, Vickers D.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Research Unit, Royal Children's Hospital Foundation Research Centre,
Royal Children's Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
Craig_Munns@health.qld.gov.au

Leri-Weill syndrome (LWS) is a dominant (pseudoautosomal) skeletal dysplasia with
mesomelic short stature and bilateral Madelung deformity, due to
dyschondrosteosis of the distal radius. It results from the loss of one copy of
the Short Stature Homeobox Gene (SHOX) from the tip of the short arm of the X or 
Y chromosome. SHOX molecular testing enabled us to evaluate the histopathology of
the radial physis in LWS patients with a documented SHOX abnormality. A
widespread disorganisation of physeal anatomy was revealed with disruption of the
normal parallel columnar arrangement of chondrocytes. Tandem stacking of maturing
chondrocytes within columns was replaced by a side-by-side arrangement. The
presence of hypertrophic osteoid with micro-enchondromata in the radial
metaphysis suggests abnormal endochondral ossification. The Vickers' ligament was
confirmed to blend with the triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC). This
histopathological study demonstrates that the zone of dyschondrosteosis in LWS is
characterised by marked disruption of normal physeal chondrocyte processes and
that a generalised physeal abnormality is present.

PMID: 11677662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Eur J Pediatr. 2001 Sep;160(9):561-5.

Short stature homeobox-containing gene deletion screening by fluorescence in situ
hybridisation in patients with short stature.

Musebeck J(1), Mohnike K, Beye P, Tönnies H, Neitzel H, Schnabel D, Grüters A,
Wieacker PF, Stumm M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Otto-von-Guericke-Universität, Magdeburg, Germany.

The short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) on the short arm of the X and Y
chromosomes is an important determining factor of stature phenotype. Absence of
the SHOX gene is a main cause for short stature in patients with Turner syndrome.
Mutations of the SHOX gene can also be responsible for Léri-Weill syndrome
(dyschondrosteosis). The aim of this study was to determine the frequency of SHOX
deletions in short stature children and to delineate indications for SHOX
deletion screening. Out of 50 probands, 35 had idiopathic short stature, 12 cases
showed additional anomalies of the forearms (in particular Madelung deformity)
and three patients were affected by a congenital heart defect. Chromosomal
investigations with fluoresence in situ hybridisation did not reveal a SHOX
deletion in any patient with idiopathic short stature. In five of the 12 patients
(41.7%) with anomalies of the forearms, a SHOX deletion on one sex chromosome
could be detected. No deletion was observed in the three cases with additional
heart defects.CONCLUSION: The frequency of short stature homeobox-containing gene
deletions in patients with idiopathic short stature appears to be very low and
does not require a fluorescence in situ hybridisation analysis. Short stature in 
association with anomalies of the forearms such as Madelung deformity makes a
deletion more probable and therefore screening for such deletions is recommended 
in these cases.

PMID: 11585080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Med Genet. 2001 Sep;38(9):591-8.

Breakpoint analysis of Turner patients with partial Xp deletions: implications
for the lymphoedema gene location.

Boucher CA(1), Sargent CA, Ogata T, Affara NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge
CB2 1QP, UK.

BACKGROUND: Turner syndrome is characterised by a 45,X karyotype and a variety of
skeletal, lymphoedemic, and gonadal anomalies. Genes involved in the Turner
phenotype are thought to be X/Y homologous with the X genes escaping X
inactivation. Haploinsufficiency of the SHOX gene has been reported to cause the 
short stature seen in Turner syndrome patients. More recently, mutations of this 
gene have been shown to be associated with other skeletal abnormalities,
suggesting that haploinsufficiency of SHOX causes all the Turner skeletal
anomalies. No such gene has yet been identified for the lymphoedemic features.
METHODS: Fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) analysis with PAC clones on
nine patients with partially deleted X chromosomes was performed.
RESULTS/DISCUSSION: The Turner syndrome stigmata for each patient are described
and correlation between the breakpoint and the phenotype discussed. A lymphoedema
critical region in Xp11.4 is proposed and its gene content discussed with respect
to that in the previously reported Yp11.2 lymphoedema critical region.

PMCID: PMC1734929
PMID: 11546827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Endocr J. 2001 Jun;48(3):317-22.

Growth hormone and gonadotropin-releasing hormone analog therapy in
haploinsufficiency of SHOX.

Ogata T(1), Onigata K, Hotsubo T, Matsuo N, Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan

We report on GH (0.5 IU or 0.17 mg/kg/week) and GnRH analog (GnRHa, 60 microg/kg,
every 4 weeks) therapy in SHOX haploinsufficiency. Case 1 was a 46,XY boy with
microdeletion of the Y chromosomal pseudoautosomal region. At 7 years of age, he 
exhibited short stature (-3.9 SD) with a reduced growth rate (3.8 cm/year), short
4th metacarpals, and mild Madelung deformity. GH therapy resulted in a marked
increase in height velocity (10.7 cm/year in the first year). Case 2 was a 46,XX 
girl with a heterozygous nonsense mutation of SHOX (C674T). At 6 years of age,
she presented with short stature (-3.3 SD) with a low height velocity (4.0
cm/year). GH therapy caused a moderate increase in height velocity (6.6 cm/year
in the first year and 6.0 cm/year in the second year) before puberty. Because of 
breast development, she received GnRHa from 9 8/12 years of age. At 10 10/12
years of age, she had mild shortening and borderline curvature of radius. Case 3 
was a girl with a 46,X,der(X)t(X;2)(p22.3;p21) karyotype. She was treated with GH
from 6 to 14 years of age, and also with GnRHa from 12 to 15 years of age. Her
height remained around mean -4 SD, with no discernible alteration of height
velocity. At 17 years of age, she had short stature (-4.1 SD), bilateral cubitus 
valgus, Madelung deformity, and full breast development. The results suggest that
GH therapy may have variable statural effects in SHOX haploinsufficiency as in
most disorders including Turner syndrome, and that GnRHa therapy after pubertal
entry may be insufficient to prevent the development of skeletal lesions such as 
Madelung deformity.

PMID: 11523902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Horm Res. 2001;55(2):71-6.

Radiological signs of Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis in Turner syndrome.

Binder G(1), Fritsch H, Schweizer R, Ranke MB.

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital and Growth Research Center, Tübingen, Germany. 
gdbinder@med.uni-tuebingen.de

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), a mesomelic short stature
syndrome with Madelung deformity, was recently reported to be caused by SHOX
(short stature homeobox-containing gene) haploinsufficiency. The loss of SHOX on 
Xp22.32, also called PHOG (pseudoautosomal homeobox-containing osteogenic gene), 
through structural aberrations of the X chromosome was also implicated in the
short stature phenotype and some additional stigmata of Turner syndrome. The aim 
of this study was to systematically examine left-hand radiographs from Turner
girls for the presence of signs of LWD.
METHODS: We retrospectively studied 168 left-hand radiographs from 54 patients
with Turner syndrome (bone age >10.5 years) who were treated with rhGH and seen
during the last 10 years in our clinic. For comparison, we analyzed 7 radiographs
from 5 patients with LWD and 52 radiographs from 20 patients with GH deficiency. 
The shape of the distal radial epiphysis (triangularisation index = TI) and the
carpal angle were quantitatively measured. In addition, we screened for the
presence of a premature cleft fusion or an ulnar deviation of the articular
surface of the distal radial epiphysis and for fourth metacarpal shortening. One 
of 54 Turner girls (2%) was affected with LWD and presented with Madelung
deformity.
RESULTS: No milder forms of Madelung deformity were detected. However, there was 
a significant trend to a triangular shape of the distal radial epiphysis in
Turner syndrome: the median TI was 2.7 in normal controls (range 1.8-3.7), 3.1 in
Turner girls (range 2.0-6.3) (p < 0.001 against controls), and 6.0 in patients
with LWD (range 3.5-11.0) (p < 0.001 against controls).
CONCLUSIONS: The triangularisation index did not correlate with the carpal angle 
(median 122.5

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11509862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2001 Jul 28;145(30):1456-9.

[From gene to disease; from SHOX to Lèri-Weill dyschondrosteosis, Turner syndrome
and idiopathic short stature].

[Article in Dutch]

Kant SG(1), Drop SL.

Author information: 
(1)Leids Universitair Medisch Centrum, afd. Klinische Genetica, Postbus 9000,
2300 RC Leiden. s.g.kant@lumc.nl

Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis is a pseudodominant hereditary skeletal dysplasia
associated with haploinsufficiency of the SHOX gene. The SHOX gene is located on 
the pseudoautosomal region of both the X-chromosome and the Y-chromosome, and
belongs to the homeobox genes, which code for transcription factors involved in
early foetal development. Mutations in the SHOX gene, especially deletions, are
detected in approximately 60% of patients with Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis. The 
SHOX gene is also involved in skeletal abnormalities in Turner syndrome and
possibly plays a role in idiopathic short stature.

PMID: 11503314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Sep 1;102(4):353-8.

A man who inherited his SRY gene and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis from his mother
and neurofibromatosis type 1 from his father.

Wei F(1), Cheng S, Badie N, Elder F, Scott C Jr, Nicholson L, Ross JL, Zinn AR.

Author information: 
(1)McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, UT Southwestern Medical
School, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-8591, USA.

We report on a man with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis (LWD). His father had NF1. His mother had LWD plus additional
findings of Turner syndrome (TS): high arched palate, bicuspid aortic valve,
aortic stenosis, and premature ovarian failure. The proband's karyotype was
46,X,dic(X;Y)(p22.3;p11.32). Despite having almost the same genetic constitution 
as 47,XXY Klinefelter syndrome, he was normally virilized, although slight
elevation of serum gonadotropins indicated gonadal dysfunction. His mother's
karyotype was mosaic 45,X[17 cells]/46,X,dic(X;Y)(p22.3;p11.32)[3 cells].ish
dic(X;Y)(DXZ1 +,DYZ1 + ). The dic(X;Y) chromosome was also positive for Y markers
PABY, SRY, and DYZ5, but negative for SHOX. The dic(X;Y) chromosome was also
positive for X markers DXZ1 and a sequence < 300 kb from PABX, suggesting that
the deletion encompassed only pseudoautosomal sequences. Replication studies
indicated that the normal X and the dic(X;Y) were randomly inactivated in the
proband's lymphocytes. LWD in the proband and his mother was explained by SHOX
haploinsufficiency. The mother's female phenotype was most likely due to 45,X
mosaicism. This family segregating Mendelian and chromosomal disorders
illustrates extreme sex chromosome variation compatible with normal male and
female sexual differentiation. The case also highlights the importance of
karyotyping for differentiating LWD and TS, especially in patients with findings 
such as premature ovarian failure or aortic abnormalities not associated with
isolated SHOX haploinsufficiency.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11503163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Jul 22;102(1):81-5.

Short stature in a mother and daughter caused by familial
der(X)t(X;X)(p22.1-3;q26).

Reinehr T(1), Jauch A, Zoll B, Engel U, Bartels I, Andler W.

Author information: 
(1)Vestische Kinderklinik, University of Witten-Herdecke, Datteln, Germany.
TIReinehr@aol.com

Deletions of the terminal Xp regions, including the short-stature homeobox (SHOX)
gene, were described in families with hereditary Turner syndrome and Léri-Weill
syndrome. We report on a 10-2/12-year-old girl and her 37-year-old mother with
short stature and no other phenotypic symptoms. In the daugther, additional
chromosome material was detected in the pseudoautosomal region of one X
chromosome (46,X,add(Xp.22.3)) by chromosome banding analysis. The elongation of 
the X chromosome consisted of Giemsa dark and bright bands with a length
one-fifth of the size of Xp. The karyotype of the mother demonstrated chromosome 
mosaicism with three cell lines (46,X,add(X)(p22.3) [89]; 45,X [8]; and
47,X,add(X)(p22.3), add(X)(p22.3) [2]). In both daughter and mother, fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH), together with data from G banding, identified the
breakpoints in Xp22.1-3 and Xq26, resulting in a partial trisomy of the terminal 
region of Xq (Xq26-qter) and a monosomy of the pseudoautosomal region (Xp22.3)
with the SHOX gene and the proximal region Xp22.1-3, including the
steroidsulfatase gene (STS) and the Kallmann syndrome region. The derivative X
chromosome was defined as ish.der(X)t(X;X)(p22.1-3;q26)(yWXD2540-, F20cos-, STS-,
60C10-, 959D10-, 2771+, cos9++). In daughter and mother, the monosomy of region
Xp22.1-3 is compatible with fertility and does not cause any other somatic
stigmata of the Turner syndrome or Léri-Weill syndrome, except for short stature 
due to monosomy of the SHOX gene.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11471178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Horm Res. 2001;55 Suppl 1:21-3.

SHOX in short stature syndromes.

Blaschke RJ(1), Rappold GA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Linear growth is a multifactorial trait that is influenced and regulated by a
combination of environmental and internal factors. Among the intrinsic
determinants of final body height, genetic factors have become more and more
prominent, and the list of genes involved in growth-related processes has been
extended accordingly. One of the most exciting additions to this list is
represented by the discovery of the pseudoautosomal gene SHOX. Originally
described as a gene responsible for idiopathic short stature, it has become clear
that SHOX mutations can also cause mesomelic short stature and Madelung deformity
in Léri-Weill syndrome. In addition, recent studies implicate SHOX
haploinsufficiency in a variety of somatic Turner syndrome stigmata.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 11408757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Med Genet. 2001 May;38(5):323.

SHOX point mutations in dyschondrosteosis.

Huber C, Cusin V, Le Merrer M, Mathieu M, Sulmont V, Dagoneau N, Munnich A,
Cormier-Daire V.

PMCID: PMC1734877
PMID: 11403039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Clin Genet. 2001 Feb;59(2):115-21.

Brachytelephalangic dwarfism due to the loss of ARSE and SHOX genes resulting
from an X;Y translocation.

Seidel J(1), Schiller S, Kelbova C, Beensen V, Orth U, Vogt S, Claussen U, Zintl 
F, Rappold GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Friedrich-Schiller-University, Kochstrasse 2,
D-07740 Jena, Germany. joerg.seidel@med.uni-jena.de

Here we report an 8-year-old male patient who had mesomelic shortening of
forearms and legs, brachytelephalangia and ichthyotic skin lesions. Chromosomal
analysis showed an X;Y translocation involving the short arm of the X chromosome 
(Xp). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and molecular studies localized
the breakpoints on Xp22.3 in the immediate vicinity of the KAL gene demonstrating
deletions of steroid sulfatase (STS), arylsulfatase E (ARSE), and short stature
homeo box (SHOX) genes. It was suspected that the patient was suffering from
chondrodysplasia punctata because of a loss of the arylsulfatase E (ARSE) gene.
However, no stippled epiphyses were to be seen in the neonatal radiograph.
Interestingly, this patient is the first case with a proven loss of the ARSE gene
without chondrodysplasia punctata, assuming that chondrodysplasia punctata is not
an obligatory sign of ARSE gene loss. Brachytelephalangia was the only result of 
ARSE gene deletion in this case. The patient's mother also had dwarfism and
showed Madelung deformity of the forearms. She was detected as a carrier of the
same aberrant X chromosome. The male patient did not show Madelung deformity,
demonstrating that Lerri-Weill syndrome phenotype may be still incomplete in
children with SHOX gene deletion. The wide clinical spectrum in the male and the 
Leri-Weill phenotype in his mother are the results of both a deletion involving
several sulfatase genes in Xp22.3 and the SHOX gene located in the
pseudoautosomal region. Nevertheless, there is no explanation for the absence of 
chondrodysplasia punctata despite the total loss of the ARSE gene. Further
studies are necessary to investigate genotype/phenotype correlation in cases with
translocations or microdeletions on Xp22.3, including the ARSE and the SHOX gene 
loci.

PMID: 11260213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Mar 15;99(3):196-9.

Isochromosome consisting of terminal short arm and proximal long arm X in a girl 
with short stature.

Uehara S(1), Hanew K, Harada N, Yamamori S, Nata M, Niikawa N, Okamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tohoku University School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan. uehara@ob-gy.med.tohoku.ac.jp

A 16-year-old girl with short stature, short neck, shield chest, and cubitus
valgus was studied. FISH analyses of her structurally altered X chromosome showed
a der(X)- (wcpX+,TelXp/Yp++,SHOX++,STS++,KAL-,
37A12-,DXZ1+,XIST++,97L7++,300O13-,404F- 18-,417G15-,404F18-,140A-,TelXq/Yq-).
These results, together with the high-resolution banding analysis, indicated her 
karyotype to be 46,X,der(X)(Xpter-->Xp22.3::Xq22.3-->
cen-->Xq22.3::Xp22.3-->Xpter). The der(X) was an isochromosome, consisting of
duplicated terminal short arms and duplicated proximal long arms. This in turn
suggested that the chromosome was formed through pericentric inversion of an X
chromosome, followed by isochromosome formation through sister chromatid exchange
at Xp, close to the centromere. Replication R-banding analysis showed that the
abnormal X chromosome was late replicating. Analysis of digestion patterns with a
methylation-sensitive restriction endonuclease of the phosphoglycerate kinase 1
gene, located in Xq13.3, indicated that its inactivation patterns were completely
skewed.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss. Inc.

PMID: 11241489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Mar;12(2):43-4.

Genotype and phenotype in paediatric endocrine practice.

Donaghue KC(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Sydney, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Locked Bag 4001,
Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia. KimD@chw.edu.au

PMID: 11233527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Ryoikibetsu Shokogun Shirizu. 2000;(32):282-5.

[Turner syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Tanaka T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Children's Hospital.

PMID: 11212718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Med Genet. 2000 Dec;37(12):959-64.

Homozygous deletion of SHOX in a mentally retarded male with Langer mesomelic
dysplasia.

Robertson SP, Shears DJ, Oei P, Winter RM, Scambler PJ, Aftimos S, Savarirayan R.

PMCID: PMC1734489
PMID: 11186941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Am J Med Genet. 2000 Dec 11;95(4):391-5.

Léri-Weill syndrome associated with a pseudodicentric X;Y translocation
chromosome and skewed X-inactivation: implications for genetic counselling.

Baralle D(1), Willatt LR, Shears DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Department, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United
Kingdom. dbaralle@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

A female patient of normal intelligence with short stature and Madelung deformity
is reported with Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and a de novo pseudodicentric X;Y
translocation chromosome. The phenotype is consistent with the observed deletion 
of the SHOX gene by FISH and molecular studies. The Y chromosome breakpoint was
in the short arm but proximal to SRY, consistent with her phenotypic sex.
X-inactivation studies have shown a skewed pattern in favour of the dic (X;Y)
chromosome. The ARSE gene was also deleted on the dic (X;Y) chromosome but
chondrodysplasia punctata was not expressed, as CDP is recessive and ARSE escapes
inactivation on the normal X chromosome. Breakpoint mapping assisted in
karyotype/phenotype correlation and reproductive counselling. In particular,
molecular analysis showed that the putative MRX 49 gene for mental retardation is
unlikely to be deleted in this case.

PMID: 11186896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Pediatr. 2001 Feb;138(2):285-7.

Tall stature, gonadal dysgenesis, and stigmata of Turner's syndrome caused by a
structurally altered X chromosome.

Binder G(1), Eggermann T, Enders H, Ranke MB, Dufke A.

Author information: 
(1)University-Children's Hospital and Growth Research Center, Tübingen, Germany.

Genetic analysis in a tall 14-year-old girl with gonadal dysgenesis and some
stigmata of Turner's syndrome revealed a duplication of the short arm in a
monocentric X chromosome with partial loss of Xq. We suggest that triple gene
dosage of SHOX and estrogen deficiency caused the unique overgrowth.

PMID: 11174634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Med Genet. 2001 Jan;38(1):1-6.

SHOX haploinsufficiency and overdosage: impact of gonadal function status.

Ogata T(1), Matsuo N, Nishimura G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. t-ogata@po.iijnet.or.jp

Since its discovery in 1997, knowledge about the SHOX gene has rapidly increased.
In this review, we summarise clinical features and diagnostic and therapeutic
implications in SHOX haploinsufficiency and overdosage. SHOX haploinsufficiency
usually results in mesomelic short stature and Turner skeletal features,
including Madelung deformity with puberty, in subjects with normal gonadal
function. Thus, identification of early or mild signs of Madelung deformity is
pivotal for the diagnosis, and gonadal suppression therapy may serve to mitigate 
the clinical features. By contrast, SHOX overdosage usually leads to long limbs
and tall stature resulting from continued growth into the late teens in subjects 
with gonadal dysgenesis. Thus, the combination of tall stature and poor pubertal 
development is the key to diagnosis, and oestrogen therapy can help the
prevention of unfavourably tall stature as well as the induction of sexual
development. These findings, in conjunction with skeletal assessment in Turner
syndrome and expression analysis during human embryogenesis, imply that SHOX
functions as a repressor for growth plate fusion and skeletal maturation in the
distal limbs and, thus, counteracts the skeletal maturing effects of oestrogens.

PMCID: PMC1734713
PMID: 11134233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 2000;50(4):237-41.

Association of intrauterine growth retardation with monosomy of the terminal
segment of the short arm of the X chromosome in patients with Turner's syndrome.

Yaegashi N(1), Uehara S, Ogawa H, Hanew K, Igarashi A, Okamura K, Yajima A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tohoku University School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan.

Short stature, which may be a result of intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR),
is a characteristic of Turner's syndrome. However, the loci responsible for IUGR 
have not been well studied. We reviewed the birth records of 74 patients with
Turner's syndrome: 20 with pure X monosomy, 44 with X-mosaicisms, and 10 with
X-structural abnormalities. The overall incidence of IUGR was 39.2% (29 of 74
patients). The SHOX gene is encoded in a terminal segment of the short arm of the
X chromosome. In 39 patients where two copies of the SHOX gene were absent, the
incidence of IUGR was 46.2% (18 of 39 patients). In 14 patients with two copies
of the SHOX gene, the incidence of IUGR was significantly lower at 7.1% (1 of 14 
patients). Our results suggest that SHOX influences in utero growth in Turner's
syndrome.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 11093045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Ryoikibetsu Shokogun Shirizu. 2000;(30 Pt 5):353-4.

[Sex chromosome abnormality].

[Article in Japanese]

Okuyama T(1), Oho Y, Kosuga M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, National Children's Medical Research Center.

PMID: 11057258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Hum Genet. 2000 Aug;107(2):145-9.

Mutations in short stature homeobox containing gene (SHOX) in dyschondrosteosis
but not in hypochondroplasia.

Grigelioniene G(1), Eklöf O, Ivarsson SA, Westphal O, Neumeyer L, Kedra D,
Dumanski J, Hagenäs L.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
Giedre.Grigelioniene@kbh.ki.se

Dyschondrosteosis (DCO) and hypochondroplasia (HCH) are common skeletal
dysplasias characterized by disproportionate short stature. The diagnosis of
these conditions might be difficult to establish especially in early childhood.
Point mutations and deletions of the short stature homeobox containing gene
(SHOX) are detected in DCO and idiopathic short stature with some rhizomelic body
disproportion, whereas mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3
(FGFR3) gene are found in 40-70% of HCH cases. In this study, we performed
mutational analysis of the coding region of the SHOX gene in five DCO and 18 HCH 
patients, all of whom tested negative for the known HCH-associated FGFR3
mutations. The polymorphic CA-repeat analysis, direct sequencing and Southern
blotting were used for detection of deletions and point mutations. The
auxological and radiological phenotype of these patients was carefully
determined. Three novel mutations in DCO patients were found: (1) a deletion of
one base (de1272G) (according to GenBank accession nos. Y11536, Y11535),
resulting in a premature stop codon at position 75 of the amino acid sequence;
(2) the transversion C485G resulting in the substitution Leu132Val; and (3) the
transversion G549T causing an Arg153Leu substitution. These substitutions
segregate with the DCO phenotype and affect evolutionarily conserved homeodomain 
residues, based on a comparison of homeobox containing proteins in 13 species.
Moreover, these changes were not found in 80 unrelated, unaffected individuals.
This strongly suggests that these mutations are pathogenic. The phenotype of our 
patients with DCO and HCH varied from mild to severe shortness and body
disproportion. These results further support clinical and genetic heterogeneity
of dyschondrosteosis and hypochondroplasia.

PMID: 11030412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Aug;85(8):2927-30.

Short stature homeobox-containing gene duplication on the der(X) chromosome in a 
female with 45,X/46,X, der(X), gonadal dysgenesis, and tall stature.

Ogata T(1), Kosho T, Wakui K, Fukushima Y, Yoshimoto M, Miharu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
t-ogata@po.iijnet.or.jp

We report on a Japanese female with 45,X[40]/46,X, der(X)[60], primary
amenorrhea, and tall stature. She was confirmed to have complete gonadal
dysgenesis at 19 yr of age and was placed on hormone replacement therapy. Growth 
assessment revealed that she had a low normal height until her early teens, but
continued to grow with a nearly constant height velocity in her late teens,
attaining a final height of 172 cm (+ 2.9 SD), which surpassed her target height 
range. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis for 10 loci/regions on the
X-chromosome together with the whole X-chromosome and the Xp-specific and
Xq-specific paintings showed that the der(X) chromosome was associated with
duplication of roughly distal half of Xp, including SHOX (short stature
homeobox-containing gene), and deletion of most of Xq. Microsatellite analysis
for eight loci at Xp22 and nine loci at Xq26-28 indicated that the normal
X-chromosome was of maternal origin, and the der(X) chromosome was of paternal
origin. The results, in conjunction with the adult height data in 47,XXX, 46,XX
gonadal dysgenesis, 47,XXY, 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis, and 46,X, idic(Xq-),
suggest that the tall stature of this female is caused by the combined effects of
SHOX duplication on the der(X) chromosome and gonadal estrogen deficiency.
Furthermore, the similarity in the growth pattern between this female and
patients with estrogen resistance or aromatase deficiency implies that the
association of an extra copy of SHOX with gonadal estrogen deficiency may
represent the further clinical entity for tall stature resulting from continued
growth in late teens or into adulthood.

PMID: 10946905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2000 Aug;12(4):400-4.

Genetic studies in idiopathic short stature.

Attie KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Affairs, Genentech, Inc., San Francisco, California
94080, USA.

Idiopathic short stature (ISS) refers to a heterogeneous group of children with
marked growth failure of unknown cause, and encompasses familial short stature
and constitutional delay of growth. It has been postulated that specific genetic 
mutations may explain certain cases of growth failure. Some patients with growth 
hormone (GH) deficiency have mutations in the GH-releasing hormone receptor or GH
gene, whereas patients with GH insensitivity syndrome have mutations in the GH
receptor or insulin-like growth factor-I gene. It appears that heterozygous
mutations of the GH receptor may cause partial GH insensitivity in a subset of
patients with ISS. Defects in the short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX)
in the pseudoautosomal region of the sex chromosomes may cause the growth failure
seen in the Leri-Weill and Turner syndromes, and in some familial cases of ISS.
Further research into stature-related genes will likely contribute to our
understanding of this population.

PMID: 10943824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Clin Genet. 2000 Jun;57(6):449-53.

Short arm rearrangements of sex chromosomes with haploinsufficiency of the SHOX
gene are associated with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis.

Palka G(1), Stuppia L, Guanciali Franchi P, Chiarelli F, Fischetto R, Borrelli P,
Giannotti A, Fioretti G, Rinaldi MM, Mingarelli R, Rappold GA, Calabrese G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Università G D'Annunzio, Chieti, Italy.
gdpalka@unich.it

Twelve patients with different features of Turner syndrome, and with Xp and Yp
rearrangements involving the pseudoautosomal region (PAR1) are described. In all 
patients, FISH analysis showed loss of one copy of the Short Stature Homeobox
(SHOX)-containing gene. Ten patients had short stature and one disproportionate
(mesomelic) normal stature, while the last one had normal stature. Skeletal
abnormalities, including shortened ulna, were detected in nine subjects, and in
six of them Madelung deformity was observed. These clinical data indicated a
genotype phenotype correlation between haploinsufficiency of SHOX, and short
stature and skeletal abnormalities.

PMID: 10905666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Aug;67(2):535-7.

Pseudoautosomal linkage of Hodgkin disease.

Whittemore AS, Shih MC.

Comment on
    Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Nov;65(5):1413-22.

PMCID: PMC1287205
PMID: 10889053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Aug;11(6):227-30.

SHOX: growth, Léri-Weill and Turner syndromes.

Blaschke RJ(1), Rappold GA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld
328, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Linear growth is a multifactorial trait involving environmental, hormonal and
genetic factors. The multitude of growth-affecting genetic factors has recently
been supplemented by the discovery of the homeobox gene SHOX. Although originally
described as causing idiopathic short stature, SHOX mutations are also
responsible for mesomelic growth retardation and Madelung deformity in Léri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis and Langer mesomelic dysplasia. Furthermore, recent studies
implicate SHOX haploinsufficiency in the etiology of additional somatic stigmata 
frequently observed in Turner syndrome. Therefore, SHOX has a broad functional
scope and leads to a variety of different phenotypes upon mutation.

PMID: 10878753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Am J Med Genet. 2000 Jun 5;92(4):256-9.

Structural analysis of a rare rearranged Y chromosome and its bearing on
genotype-phenotype correlation.

Ogata T(1), Wakui K, Kosho T, Muroya K, Yamanouchi Y, Takano T, Fukushima Y,
Rappold G, Suzuki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
t-ogata@po.iijnet.or.jp

We report on a 9-year-old boy with a rare rearranged Y chromosome and borderline 
short stature (-2.0 SD). Standard metaphase chromosome analysis indicated a
46,X,i(Y)(q1O) karyotype, but high resolution G-banding showed an asymmetric band
pattern for the rearranged Y chromosome. FISH and DNA studies for a total of 15
different Y chromosomal loci or regions showed that the rearranged Y chromosome
was accompanied by: 1) a partial deletion of the short arm pseudoautosomal region
(PAR1) involving SHOX, with the breakpoint distal to DXYS85; and 2) a partial
duplication of Yq, with the breakpoint proximal to DAZ. The karyotype was
determined as 46,X,?i(Y)(q1O).ish der(Y)(Yqter-->
Yp11.3::Yq11.2-->Yqter)(DAZ++,DYZ3+,SRY +, SHOX-). The X chromosome and the
autosomes were normal. The results suggest that haploinsufficiency of SHOX is
primarily responsible for the borderline short stature, and that the deletion of 
the PAR1 may result in spermatogenic failure due to defective X-Y pairing and
recombination in the PAR1.

PMID: 10842291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Hum Genet. 2000 Mar;106(3):306-10.

Del(X)(p21.1) in a mother and two daughters: genotype-phenotype correlation of
Turner features.

Adachi M(1), Tachibana K, Asakura Y, Muroya K, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kanagawa Children's Medical
Center, Yokohama, Japan.

We report a mother and two daughters with partial Xp monosomy. Clinical
assessment for Turner phenotype revealed that the three females manifested
low-normal to mild short stature (-1.6 to approximately -2.3 SD) and variable
degrees of skeletal features, such as cubitus valgus, short 4th matacarpals, and 
Madelung deformity, but no soft tissue or visceral anomalies or gonadal
dysfunction. Cytogenetic studies for lymphocytes showed that the karyotype was
45,X[3]/46,X,del(X)(p21.1)[27] in the mother and non-mosaic 46,X,del(X)(p21.1) in
the two daughters. Fluorescence in situ hybridization and microsatellite analyses
for 19 loci/regions on the X chromosome demonstrated that the del(Xp) chromosome 
was missing SHOX and had the breakpoint between DMD and CYBB. The results are
consistent with the recently proposed notion that haploinsufficiency of SHOX
results in not only short stature, but also Turner skeletal features in
association with maturational effects of gonadal estrogens. The lack of soft
tissue or visceral anomalies suggests the presence of the putative lymphogenic
gene on the del(Xp) chromosome; the preservation of ovarian function appears to
be compatible with meiotic pairing failure being relatively mild.

PMID: 10798359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 Mar 22;9(5):695-702.

The short stature homeobox gene SHOX is involved in skeletal abnormalities in
Turner syndrome.

Clement-Jones M(1), Schiller S, Rao E, Blaschke RJ, Zuniga A, Zeller R, Robson
SC, Binder G, Glass I, Strachan T, Lindsay S, Rappold GA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Ridley
Building, Claremont Place, Newcastle NE1 7RU, UK.

Turner syndrome is characterized by short stature and is frequently associated
with a variable spectrum of somatic features including ovarian failure, heart and
renal abnormalities, micrognathia, cubitus valgus, high-arched palate, short
metacarpals and Madelung deformity. Madelung deformity is also a key feature of
Leri-Weill syndrome. Defects of the pseudoautosomal homeobox gene SHOX were
previously shown to lead to short stature and Leri-Weill syndrome, and
haploinsufficiency of SHOX was implicated to cause the short stature phenotype in
Turner syndrome. Despite exhaustive searches, no direct murine orthologue of SHOX
is evident. SHOX is, however, closely related to the SHOX2 homeobox gene on 3q,
which has a murine counterpart, Og12x. We analysed SHOX and SHOX2 expression
during human embryonic development, and referenced the expression patterns
against those of Og12x. The SHOX expression pattern in the limb and first and
second pharyngeal arches not only explains SHOX -related short stature
phenotypes, but also for the first time provides evidence for the involvement of 
this gene in the development of additional Turner stigmata. This is strongly
supported by the presence of Turner-characteristic dysmorphic skeletal features
in patients with SHOX nonsense mutations.

PMID: 10749976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Eur J Hum Genet. 2000 Jan;8(1):54-62.

Phenotypic variation and genetic heterogeneity in Léri-Weill syndrome.

Schiller S(1), Spranger S, Schechinger B, Fukami M, Merker S, Drop SL, Tröger J, 
Knoblauch H, Kunze J, Seidel J, Rappold GA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Ruprecht-Karls University, Heidelberg, Germany.

Léri-Weill syndrome (LWS) or dyschondrosteosis represents a short stature
syndrome characterised by the mesomelic shortening of the forearms and lower legs
and by bilateral Madelung deformity of the wrists. Recently, mutations in the
pseudoautosomal homeobox gene SHOX have been shown to be causative for this
disorder. This gene has previously been described as the short stature gene
implicated in Turner syndrome (TS). We studied 32 Léri-Weill patients from 18
different German and Dutch families and present clinical, radiological and
molecular data. Phenotypic inter- and intrafamilial heterogeneity is a frequent
finding in LWS, and phenotypic manifestations are generally more severe in
females. In males, muscular hypertrophy is a frequent finding. To test for SHOX
mutations we used FISH, Southern blot and SSCP analysis as well as long-range PCR
and sequencing. We identified (sub)microscopic deletions encompassing the SHOX
gene region in 10 out of 18 families investigated. Deletion sizes varied between 
100 kb and 9 Mb and did not correlate with the severity of the phenotype. We did 
not detect SHOX mutations in almost half (41%) the LWS families studied, which
suggests different genetic etiologies.

PMID: 10713888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Jan;85(1):245-9.

Identification of short stature caused by SHOX defects and therapeutic effect of 
recombinant human growth hormone.

Binder G(1), Schwarze CP, Ranke MB.

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital and Growth Research Center, University
Tübingen, Germany.

Point mutations or complete deletions of SHOX, the short-stature
homeobox-containing gene on the pseudoautosomal region of the sex chromosomes
(Xp22 and Yp11.3), were recently reported in one family with idiopathic short
stature and in several families with Leri-Weill syndrome (dyschondrosteosis). The
missing SHOX is also thought to attribute to the growth failure in Turner
syndrome. For testing the frequency of defects of SHOX in unexplained growth
failure and recombinant human GH (rhGH) as a possible growth-promoting agent, we 
selected 68 children with idiopathic short stature. These probands had heights
below -2.0 SD score for age, normal target heights, no significant bone age
retardations, no endocrine abnormalities, no skeletal diseases, and no other
organic diseases. No mutations were detected by single-strand conformational
polymorphism analysis of the PCR-amplified SHOX. The analysis of three
microsatellite DNA markers of the pseudoautosomal region, including one located
on the 5' untranslated region of SHOX-exon 1, identified a 15-yr-old girl who
carried a mutation in the form of a complete SHOX deletion. This girl who had a
normal karyotype presented with mild mesomelic shortening of the forearms and
lower legs. We treated two children with short stature on the basis of a SHOX
point mutation (C674T) with rhGH at a dose of 1.0 IU/kg body weight-week in
accordance with the regimen used in Turner syndrome. During the first 12 months
of treatment, these two children (5.9- and 8.4-yr-old) showed an excellent growth
spurt with a growth rate of 9.5 and 9.4 cm/yr, respectively. Growth of the lower 
extremities was weaker than in the trunk and arms. Our data suggest that short
stature due to SHOX deletions is not a rare entity. Growth-promoting therapy with
rhGH was effective with regard to height gain, but a tendency to disproportionate
growth was apparent. In cases of unexplained growth failure, especially if
associated with any mild skeletal disproportions, genetic analysis of SHOX should
be considered.

PMID: 10634394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Acta Paediatr Suppl. 1999 Dec;88(433):55-9.

SHOX gene mutations and deletions in dyschondrosteosis or Leri-Weill syndrome.

Cormier-Daire V(1), Belin V, Cusin V, Viot G, Girlich D, Toutain A, Moncla A,
Vekemans M, Le Merrer M, Munnich A.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Génétique, INSERM U 393, Hôpital des Enfants Malades, Paris,
France.

Dyschondrosteosis is an autosomal dominant form of mesomelic dysplasia that is
often combined with a deformity of the forearms called Madelung deformity. Based 
on the observation of X-Y translocations (p22,q12) in patients with
dyschondrosteosis, the authors tested the pseudoautosomal region in eight
affected families and showed linkage of the dyschondrosteosis gene to a
microsatellite DNA marker at the DXYS233 locus (Zmax = 6.26 at theta = 0). Since 
the short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) involved in idiopathic growth
retardation and possibly Turner syndrome maps to this region, SHOX was regarded
as a strong candidate gene for dyschondrosteosis. This article reports the
detection of large-scale SHOX deletions in seven of the eight families and a
nonsense mutation of SHOX in the remaining family affected with
dyschondrosteosis. Additional evidence suggests that Langer mesomelic dwarfism
results from homozygous mutations at the genetic locus responsible for
dyschondrosteosis.

PMID: 10626546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Dec;84(12):4613-21.

Skeletal features and growth patterns in 14 patients with haploinsufficiency of
SHOX: implications for the development of Turner syndrome.

Kosho T(1), Muroya K, Nagai T, Fujimoto M, Yokoya S, Sakamoto H, Hirano T,
Terasaki H, Ohashi H, Nishimura G, Sato S, Matsuo N, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

We report on clinical features in 14 Japanese patients (4 males and 10 females)
with partial monosomy of the short arm pseudoautosomal region involving SHOX (n =
11) or total monosomy of the pseudoautosomal region with no involvement of
disease genes on the sex-differential regions (n = 3). Skeletal assessment showed
that three patients had no discernible skeletal abnormalities, one patient
exhibited short 4th metacarpals and borderline cubitus valgus, and the remaining 
10 patients had Madelung deformity and/or mesomelia characteristic of Léri-Weill 
dyschondrosteosis (LWD), together with short 4th metacarpals and/or cubitus
valgus. Skeletal lesions were more severe in females and became obvious with age.
Growth evaluation revealed that patients without LWD grew along by the -2 SD
growth curve before puberty and showed a normal or exaggerated pubertal growth
spurt, whereas those with LWD grew along by the standard growth curves before
puberty but exhibited an attenuated pubertal growth spurt and resultant short
stature. Maturational assessment indicated a tendency of relatively early
maturation in patients with LWD. There was no correlation between the clinical
phenotype and the deletion size. These findings suggest that haploinsufficiency
of SHOX causes not only short stature but also Turner skeletal anomalies (such as
short 4th metacarpals, cubitus valgus, and LWD) and that growth pattern is
primarily dependent on the presence or absence of LWD. Because skeletal lesions
have occurred in a female-dominant and age-influenced fashion, it is inferred
that estrogens exert a maturational effect on skeletal tissues that are
susceptible to premature fusion of growth plates because of haploinsufficiency of
SHOX, facilitating the development of skeletal lesions.

PMID: 10599728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Hear Res. 1999 Dec;138(1-2):163-70.

The influence of karyotype on the auricle, otitis media and hearing in Turner
syndrome.

Barrenäs ML(1), Nylén O, Hanson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Audiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg University,
S-413 45, Göteborg, Sweden. Marie-Louise.Barrens@medicine.orlss.gu.se

The study has investigated the relationship between the chromosomal aberration
and ear and/or hearing disorders in 115 girls/women with Turner syndrome (TS). A 
dose-response relationship was found between the karyotype and hearing function. 
Hearing deteriorated more rapidly with increasing age in TS women lacking the
whole p-arm of chromosome X (i.e. monosomy 45,X, or isochromosome cases
46,X,i(Xq)) as compared to women having a partial deletion of the p-arm
(structural deletions or mosaicism cases), who, in turn, had poorer hearing than 
a female random population sample (46,XX) (P<0.001). Moreover, TS subjects having
total deletion of the p-arm were three times more likely to have auricular
anomalies or conductive hearing loss due to otitis media than subjects with
partial deletion (P<0. 05). The results support the hypothesis that lack of
growth-regulating genes such as the short stature homeobox-containing gene
(SHOX), which is located within the pseudo-autosomal region on the p-arm of the X
chromosome, may increase the occurrence of auricular malformations and otitis
media and also induce an earlier loss of hearing function. Accordingly, the ear
and hearing disorders in TS may be a result of growth disturbances of the
auricle, the mastoid, the Eustachian tube and the organ of Corti during
development. It is suggested that karyotype may be used as a predictor for future
ear and hearing problems in TS.

PMID: 10575123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Growth Horm IGF Res. 1999 Jun;9 Suppl B:53-7; discussion 57-8.

SHOX: pseudoautosomal homeobox containing gene for short stature and
dyschondrosteosis.

Ogata T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
t-ogata@po.iijnet.or.jp

A growth gene has been postulated, on the basis of genotype-phenotype
correlations in patients with sex chromosome aberrations, to exist on the
short-arm pseudoautosomal region (PAR1) of the sex chromosomes. Recently, Rao et 
al. have identified a novel homeobox containing gene, SHOX (short stature
homeobox containing gene), from the distal part of PAR1, by means of a positional
cloning method. SHOX is most strongly expressed in bone marrow fibroblasts,
implying that SHOX plays a positive role in bone growth and development. In
addition, SHOX is expressed from an inactive X chromosome, as well as an active X
and a normal Y chromosome, suggesting that SHOX escapes X-inactivation and exerts
the dosage effect in sex chromosome aberrations. Mutational analysis of SHOX was 
done in about 400 patients with idiopathic short stature, identifying three types
of heterozygous nonsense and missense mutations. Furthermore, fluorescence in
situ hybridization analysis of SHOX was performed in six Japanese families with
dyschondrosteosis, demonstrating microdeletions involving SHOX in all the
patients. The results indicate that SHOX is responsible for short stature and
dyschondrosteosis.

PMID: 10549307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Hum Genet. 1999 Oct;105(4):367-8.

X/Y translocation in a family with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis.

Calabrese G(1), Fischetto R, Stuppia L, Capodiferro F, Mingarelli R, Causio F,
Rocchi M, Rappold GA, Palka G.

Author information: 
(1)Dip. Scienze Biomediche, Sezione di Genetica Medica, Università di Chieti, and
Servizio Genetica Medica, Pescara, Italy.

An X/Y translocation associated with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) was
detected in a boy and in his mother. FISH analysis with specific probes for SHOX 
and SRY displayed no signal on the der(X), while one signal for SHOX was detected
on the normal X chromosome in the mother, and one signal each for SHOX and SRY
was detected on the normal Y chromosome in the proband.

PMID: 10543407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Nov;65(5):1413-22.

Pseudoautosomal linkage of Hodgkin disease.

Horwitz M(1), Wiernik PH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. horwitz@u.washington.edu

Comment in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Aug;67(2):535-7.

Heritable factors appear to account for much of the risk for Hodgkin disease
(HD). There is evidence for an HLA-linked gene, but other predisposing loci
remain unaccounted for. The observation of a family coinheriting both HD and
Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) suggests that a gene conferring risk for HD
resides adjacent to the LWD locus. The gene responsible for LWD, SHOX, localizes 
to the short-arm pseudoautosomal region (PAR) of the X and Y chromosomes. A
unique segregation pattern for PAR-linked genes has been predicted-that affected 
sibs will tend to be same sex. An excess of sex-concordant affected sib pairs
with HD has been noted but has been attributed to an environmental etiology.
These two observations-sex concordance in sib pairs with HD and cosegregation of 
HD and LWD-impelled a test of the hypothesis that there is a PAR-localized gene
for HD. By first scoring recombinations dissociating sex from phenotype in
individuals from pedigrees with LWD, we determined a male maximum recombination
frequency (thetamax) of.405. This places SHOX near the short-arm telomeres of the
sex chromosome and supports the prediction that PAR recombination is obligatory
for spermatogenesis. By inferring recombinations between HD and sexual phenotype 
in sib pairs, we predict, for the postulated HD gene, a male thetamax as high as 
.254, which places it in proximity to SHOX. Morton's nonparametric
affected-sib-pair "beta" model was used in the evaluation of linkage between HD
and phenotypic sex and gave a LOD score of 2.41. Using this approach, we
reevaluated evidence for HLA linkage in HD in haplotyped sib pairs and found a
LOD score of 2.00. The resulting beta values indicate that the putative PAR- and 
HLA-linked loci account for 29% and 40%, respectively, of the heritability of HD 
in an American population.

PMCID: PMC1288295
PMID: 10521308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Med Genet. 1999 Sep;36(9):711-3.

Loss of the SHOX gene associated with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis in a 45,X
male.

Stuppia L(1), Calabrese G, Borrelli P, Gatta V, Morizio E, Mingarelli R, Di Gilio
MC, Crinò A, Giannotti A, Rappold GA, Palka G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Università di Chieti, Italy.

A male patient is reported with a 45,X karyotype and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis
(LWD). FISH analysis with SHOX and SRY gene probes was carried out. One copy of
both SHOX and SRY was detected in interphase nuclei, clarifying the origin of LWD
and the male phenotype. Molecular results suggested that the 45,X karyotype arose
through two independent events. The first occurred at paternal meiosis leading to
an unequal crossing over between the short arms of the X and Y chromosomes. As a 
consequence, the SRY gene was translocated onto Xp, thereby explaining the male
phenotype of the patient. The second event probably occurred at maternal meiosis 
or at the early stages of the zygote resulting in the loss of the maternal X
chromosome.

PMCID: PMC1734422
PMID: 10507731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Oct;8(11):2071-8.

Transposition of SRY into the ancestral pseudoautosomal region creates a new
pseudoautosomal boundary in a progenitor of simian primates.

Gläser B(1), Myrtek D, Rumpler Y, Schiebel K, Hauwy M, Rappold GA, Schempp W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, University of Freiburg,
Breisacher Strasse 33, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.

We have isolated the prosimian lemur homologues for STS and SRY. FISH
unambiguously co-localized STS with SHOX, IL3RA, ANT3 and PRK into the meiotic
X-Y pairing region (PAR) of lemurs. In contrast to the close proximity of SRY to 
the pseudoautosomal boundary (PAB) on the Y chromosome in simian primates, SRY
maps distant from the PAR in lemurs. Most interestingly, we were able to
determine a DNA sequence divergence of 12.5% between the human and lemur SRY HMG 
box. This divergence directs to a 52 million year period of separate evolution of
human and lemur SRY genes. Phylogenetically, this time period falls in between
the times that prosimians and New World monkeys branched from the human lineage. 
Thus, we conclude that approximately 52 million years ago a transposition of SRY 
into the ancestral eutherian PAR distal to STS and PRK defined a new PAB in a
simian progenitor. By this event, STS and PRK, amongst other genes, were excluded
from the X-Y crossover process and thus became susceptible to rearrangements
and/or deterioration on the Y chromosome in simian primates.

PMID: 10484777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Am J Med Genet. 1999 Apr 23;83(5):367-71.

Léri-Weill syndrome as part of a contiguous gene syndrome at Xp22.3.

Spranger S(1), Schiller S, Jauch A, Wolff K, Rauterberg-Ruland I, Hager D,
Tariverdian G, Tröger J, Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Genetic Counseling, University of Bremen,
Germany. Spranger@nwn.de

We report on a mother and her 5-year old son, both with a terminal deletion of
the short arm of the X chromosome. By molecular genetic analysis the breakpoint
was located distal to steroid sulfatase gene. The boy manifested, due to
nullisomy of this region, short stature (SHOX), chondrodysplasia punctata (ARSE),
and mental retardation (putative mental retardation gene MRX 49). Short stature
is present in mother and son, but both also had bilateral Madelung deformity, a
key finding in the Léri-Weill syndrome. We discuss the phenotype in relationship 
to hitherto published cases with chromosomal aberrations and contiguous gene
syndromes of Xp22.3.

PMID: 10232745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Am J Med Genet. 1999 Jan 1;82(1):34-9.

Deletion of the pseudoautosomal region in a male with a unique Y;13 translocation
and short stature.

Shanske A(1), Ellison J, Vuguin P, Dowling P, Wasserman E, Heinrich J, Saenger P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Congenital Disorders, Montefiore Medical Center/Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10467, USA.

Short stature is a common finding in patients with Ullrich-Turner syndrome.
Structural abnormalities involving the terminal short arms of the X and Y
chromosomes have been shown to lead to short stature. A putative locus affecting 
height called PHOG/SHOX has been localized to a 170-kb critical region within the
pseudoautosomal region (PAR). It contains a homeodomain and functions as a
transcription factor. We have studied a 10-year-old boy with idiopathic short
stature who was found to have a unique Y;13 translocation. Southern blot analysis
using cDNA probes indicated that most of the PAR, including PHOG/SHOX, was lost
as a result of this translocation. We conclude that haploinsufficiency for this
gene is responsible for the growth failure in our patient. Treatment with
recombinant growth hormone has resulted in greatly improved growth velocity.

PMID: 9916840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Nat Genet. 1998 May;19(1):70-3.

Mutation and deletion of the pseudoautosomal gene SHOX cause Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis.

Shears DJ(1), Vassal HJ, Goodman FR, Palmer RW, Reardon W, Superti-Furga A,
Scambler PJ, Winter RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

Leri-Weill Dyschondrosteosis (LWD; OMIM 127300) is a dominantly inherited
skeletal dysplasia characterized by disproportionate short stature with
predominantly mesomelic limb shortening. Expression is variable and consistently 
more severe in females, who frequently display the Madelung deformity of the
forearm (shortening and bowing of the radius with dorsal subluxation of the
distal ulna). The rare Langer Mesomelic Dysplasia (LD; OMIM 249700),
characterized by severe short stature with hypoplasia/aplasia of the ulna and
fibula, has been postulated to be the homozygous form of LWD (refs 4-6). In a
six-generation pedigree with LWD, we established linkage to the marker DXYS6814
in the pseudoautosomal region (PAR1) of the X and Y chromosomes (Z max=6.28;
theta=0). Linkage analysis of three smaller pedigrees increased the lod score to 
8.68 (theta=0). We identified submicroscopic PAR1 deletions encompassing the
recently described short stature homeobox-containing gene SHOX (refs 7,8)
segregating with the LWD phenotype in 5 families. A point mutation leading to a
premature stop in exon 4 of SHOX was identified in one LWD family.

PMID: 9590293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Nat Genet. 1998 May;19(1):67-9.

SHOX mutations in dyschondrosteosis (Leri-Weill syndrome).

Belin V(1), Cusin V, Viot G, Girlich D, Toutain A, Moncla A, Vekemans M, Le
Merrer M, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Génétique et Unité de Recherches sur les Handicaps Génétiques
de l'Enfant INSERM U393, Hôpital des Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

Dyschondrosteosis (DCS) is an autosomal dominant form of mesomelic dysplasia with
deformity of the forearm (Madelung deformity; ref. 3). Based on the observation
of XY translocations (p22,q12; refs 4-6) in DCS patients, we tested the
pseudoautosomal region in eight families with DCS and showed linkage of the DCS
gene to a microsatellite DNA marker at the DXYS233 locus (Zmax=6.26 at theta=0). 
The short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX), involved in idiopathic growth 
retardation and possibly Turner short stature, maps to this region and was
therefore regarded as a strong candidate gene in DCS. Here, we report large-scale
deletions (in seven families) and a nonsense mutation (in one family) of SHOX in 
patients with DCS and show that Langer mesomelic dwarfism results from homozygous
mutations at the DCS locus.

PMID: 9590292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Mar;7(3):415-22.

A new human homeobox gene OGI2X is a member of the most conserved homeobox gene
family and is expressed during heart development in mouse.

Semina EV(1), Reiter RS, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Biological Sciences, The University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Homeodomain (HD) proteins are transcription regulators controlling a variety of
cell fates. The HD region characterizing this protein family is a domain of 60
amino acid residues that recognizes and binds a site in the regulatory region of 
the target gene. It has been suggested that regions outside the HD may determine 
the specific functions of the various HD proteins by forming additional contacts 
with DNA sequences or by interactions with other proteins. We have identified a
14 amino acid motif within the C-terminal region of the protein encoded by the
RIEG1 gene that is conserved among several HD proteins. Overlapping expression of
the genes encoding these proteins during craniofacial development suggested that 
they might interact with a common factor. In order to identify additional genes
possessing this motif we screened a human craniofacial cDNA library with
oligoprobes. A novel gene was identified, exhibiting the most homology to murine 
Og12x (formerly OG12) and the recently reported human SHOX gene. Human OG12X and 
murine Og12x are highly homologous and the OG12X and Og12x proteins are 100%
identical. In situ hybridization on mouse embryos ranging from 9 to 16 days
post-coitum localized murine Og12x mRNA in the heart, otic region, maxillary and 
mandibular components of the first branchial arch, nasal processes, eyelid,
midbrain, medulla oblongata, limbs, dorsal root ganglia and genital tubercle.
OG12X was mapped to human chromosome 3q22-26 and murine Og12x to the syntenic
region on mouse chromosome 3. Based upon the expression pattern of its mouse
cognate, OG12X represents a candidate for the blepharophimosis (BPES) and
Cornelia de Lange syndromes previously mapped to this region.

PMID: 9466998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 3;95(5):2406-11.

SHOT, a SHOX-related homeobox gene, is implicated in craniofacial, brain, heart, 
and limb development.

Blaschke RJ(1), Monaghan AP, Schiller S, Schechinger B, Rao E, Padilla-Nash H,
Ried T, Rappold GA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Im Neuenheimer Feld 328,
69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Deletion of the SHOX region on the human sex chromosomes has been shown to result
in idiopathic short stature and proposed to play a role in the short stature
associated with Turner syndrome. We have identified a human paired-related
homeobox gene, SHOT, by virtue of its homology to the human SHOX and mouse OG-12 
genes. Two different isoforms were isolated, SHOTa and SHOTb, which have
identical homeodomains and share a C-terminal 14-amino acid residue motif
characteristic for craniofacially expressed homeodomain proteins. Differences
between SHOTa and b reside within the N termini and an alternatively spliced exon
in the C termini. In situ hybridization of the mouse equivalent, OG-12, on
sections from staged mouse embryos detected highly restricted transcripts in the 
developing sinus venosus (aorta), female genitalia, diencephalon, mes- and
myelencephalon, nasal capsula, palate, eyelid, and in the limbs. SHOT was mapped 
to human chromosome 3q25-q26 and OG-12 within a syntenic region on chromosome 3. 
Based on the localization and expression pattern of its mouse homologue during
embryonic development, SHOT represents a candidate for the Cornelia de Lange
syndrome.

PMCID: PMC19357
PMID: 9482898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Nov 25;94(24):12987-92.

Ol-Prx 3, a member of an additional class of homeobox genes, is unimodally
expressed in several domains of the developing and adult central nervous system
of the medaka (Oryzias latipes).

Joly JS(1), Bourrat F, Nguyen V, Chourrout D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique des Poissons, Domaine de Vilvert, Institut National
de la Recherche Agronomique, Jouy-en-Josas, France. joly@jouy.inra.fr

Large-scale genetic screens for mutations affecting early neurogenesis of
vertebrates have recently been performed with an aquarium fish, the zebrafish.
Later stages of neural morphogenesis have attracted less attention in small fish 
species, partly because of the lack of molecular markers of developing structures
that may facilitate the detection of discrete structural alterations. In this
context, we report the characterization of Ol-Prx 3 (Oryzias latipes-Prx 3). This
gene was isolated in the course of a large-scale screen for brain cDNAs
containing a highly conserved DNA binding region, the homeobox helix-three.
Sequence analysis revealed that this gene belongs to another class of homeobox
genes, together with a previously isolated mouse ortholog, called OG-12
[Rovescalli, A. C., Asoh, S. & Nirenberg, M. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
93, 10691-10696] and with the human SHOX gene [Rao, E., Weiss, B., Fukami, M.,
Rump, A., Niesler, B., et al. (1997) Nat. Genet. 16, 54-62], thought to be
involved in the short-stature phenotype of Turner syndrome patients. These three 
genes exhibit a moderate level of identity in the homeobox with the other genes
of the paired-related (PRX) gene family. Ol-Prx 3, as well as the PRX genes, are 
expressed in various cartilaginous structures of head and limbs. These genes
might thus be involved in common regulatory pathways during the morphogenesis of 
these structures. Moreover, this paper reports a complex and monophasic pattern
of Ol-Prx 3 expression in the central nervous system, which differs markedly from
the patterns reported for the PRX genes, Prx 3 excluded: this gene begins to be
expressed in a variety of central nervous system territories at late neurula
stage. Strikingly, it remains turned on in some of the derivatives of each
territory during the entire life of the fish. We hope this work will thus help
identify common features for the PRX 3 family of homeobox genes.

PMCID: PMC24250
PMID: 9371787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Hum Mol Genet. 1997 Aug;6(8):1341-7.

PHOG, a candidate gene for involvement in the short stature of Turner syndrome.

Ellison JW(1), Wardak Z, Young MF, Gehron Robey P, Laig-Webster M, Chiong W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco 94143, USA. 
ellison@cgl.ucsf.edu

The abnormalities seen in Turner syndrome (monosomy X) presumably result from
haploinsufficiency of certain genes on the X chromosome. Gene dosage
considerations lead to the prediction that the culpable genes escape X
inactivation and have functional homologs on the Y chromosome. Among the genes
with these characteristics are those residing in the pseudoautosomal regions
(PAR) of the sex chromosomes. A pseudoautosomal location for a dosage-sensitive
locus involved in stature has been suggested based on the analyses of patients
with deletions of a specific segment of the short arm PAR; hemizygosity for this 
putative locus probably also contributes to the short stature in Turner
individuals. We have isolated a gene from the critical deleted region that
encodes a novel homeodomain-containing transcription factor and is expressed at
highest levels in osteogenic cells. We have named the gene PHOG, for
pseudoautosomal homeobox-containing osteogenic gene. Its deletion in patients
with short stature, the predicted altered dosage in 45,X individuals, along with 
the nature of the encoded protein and its expression pattern, make PHOG an
attractive candidate for involvement in the short stature of Turner syndrome. We 
have also found that the mouse homolog of PHOG is autosomal, which may help to
explain the lack of a growth abnormality in mice with monosomy X.

PMID: 9259282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Nat Genet. 1997 May;16(1):54-63.

Pseudoautosomal deletions encompassing a novel homeobox gene cause growth failure
in idiopathic short stature and Turner syndrome.

Rao E(1), Weiss B, Fukami M, Rump A, Niesler B, Mertz A, Muroya K, Binder G,
Kirsch S, Winkelmann M, Nordsiek G, Heinrich U, Breuning MH, Ranke MB, Rosenthal 
A, Ogata T, Rappold GA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1997 May;16(1):3-4.

Growth retardation resulting in short stature is a major concern for parents and 
due to its great variety of causes, a complex diagnostic challenge for
clinicians. A major locus involved in linear growth has been implicated within
the pseudoautosomal region (PAR1) of the human sex chromosomes. We have
determined an interval of 170 kb of DNA within PAR1 which was deleted in 36
individuals with short stature and different rearrangements on Xp22 or Yp11.3.
This deletion was not detected in any of the relatives with normal stature or in 
a further 30 individuals with rearrangements on Xp22 or Yp11.3 with normal
height. We have isolated a homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) from this region,
which has at least two alternatively spliced forms, encoding proteins with
different patterns of expression. We also identified one functionally significant
SHOX mutation by screening 91 individuals with idiopathic short stature. Our data
suggest an involvement of SHOX in idiopathic growth retardation and in the short 
stature phenotype of Turner syndrome patients.

PMID: 9140395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Anat Rec. 1991 Jun;230(2):169-74.

Rapid determination of cancellous bone mineral loss in ovariectomized rats by a
subtraction technique.

Eskandar E(1), Kimmel DB, Wronski TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska.

We present a rapid technique for determining cancellous bone mineral changes in
small experimental animals. We used the distal centimeter of the right femur from
ovariectomized (OX) (N = 30) and shamovariectomized (ShOX) (N = 28) rats, aged 90
days at surgery and killed at times from 125-540 days postsurgery. We used dual
photon absorptiometry to scan the segment three times: intact, after parasagittal
splitting, and after removing all cancellous bone. We equated the difference
between the second and third scans to cancellous bone mineral content (Cn.BMC).
To validate this, we compared it with histomorphometrically determined bone
volume (BV/TV) of the proximal tibial metaphysis of the same rat. Parasagittally 
splitting the segment removed no detectable mineral. OX rats had 40% less Cn.BMC 
than ShOX rats. However, OX rats had 80% lower BV/TV than ShOX rats. The
subtraction technique not only makes a rapid, reasonable assessment of cancellous
bone loss in OX rats but permits a smaller sample size than histomorphometry. The
histomorphometric technique finds a greater difference between OX and ShOX rats
because it examines a region where cancellous bone loss is more marked than does 
the scanning technique. The current technique measures bone of not only the
central secondary spongiosa but also the juxtacortical region and the primary
spongiosa, where OX-related differences are less prominent. The principles of
this subtraction technique proved workable. However, for the future, we recommend
a two-scan technique using a dual energy X-ray scanner. It is likely to take only
20-30 min per specimen to assess cancellous bone mineral.

PMID: 1867393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Calcif Tissue Int. 1990 Feb;46(2):101-10.

Nondestructive measurement of bone mineral in femurs from ovariectomized rats.

Kimmel DB(1), Wronski TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska 68131.

One hundred ninety-eight rats were ovariectomized (OX) or sham-ovariectomized
(shOX) at 100 days of age. Groups were killed at 35, 70, 100, 125, 180, 270, 360,
and 540 days postsurgery. Bone mineral content (BMC) of the right femur was
assayed on a dual photon absorptiometer (DPA) optimized for human spine and whole
body measurements. Three regions were studied: the distal measuring 0.8 cm, the
proximal measuring 0.88 cm, and the diaphysis, the remainder. The DPA technique
accurately showed the ash content (r = 0.96), with a precision error of 3-5%.
Whole femoral BMC was 4.3-11.1% lower in OX than shOX rats, with significant
differences from 35-180 days. By 35 days, distal femoral BMC declined 6% in OX
rats and rose 12% in shOX rats. Distal femoral BMC was 11.3-17.5% lower in OX
than shOX rats, with significant differences at all times except 540 days.
Femoral diaphyseal BMC of OX and shOX rats did not differ at any time. The
relative distal femoral osteopenia which appeared by 35 days in OX rats did not
worsen during the next 17 months. A DPA suited for human BMC studies is also
accurate for BMC determination in bones with 250-500 mg of mineral. It is less
precise for this purpose than dedicated instruments using single photon
absorptiometry. However, enough precision exists to monitor the development of
relative osteopenia in OX rats. Osteopenia in OX rats is confined to a region
containing appreciable cancellous bone. Its self-limiting nature suggests the
existence of an estrogen-dependent quantum of cancellous bone in female rats. The
adult rat model is accurate for cancellous bone of the adult human, but
inaccurate for cortical bone.

PMID: 2105147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


