
1. Development. 2015 Aug 1;142(15):2641-52. doi: 10.1242/dev.126318. Epub 2015 Jul
2.

Evf2 lncRNA/BRG1/DLX1 interactions reveal RNA-dependent inhibition of chromatin
remodeling.

Cajigas I(1), Leib DE(1), Cochrane J(2), Luo H(1), Swyter KR(1), Chen S(1), Clark
BS(1), Thompson J(3), Yates JR 3rd(3), Kingston RE(2), Kohtz JD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology and Department of Pediatrics, Stanley Manne Children's
Research Institute and Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Box 
204, 2430 N. Halsted, Chicago, IL 60614, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biology,
Harvard University, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (3)The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (4)Developmental Biology and Department of Pediatrics,
Stanley Manne Children's Research Institute and Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Box 204, 2430 N. Halsted, Chicago, IL 60614, USA
j-kohtz@northwestern.edu.

Transcription-regulating long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have the potential to
control the site-specific expression of thousands of target genes. Previously, we
showed that Evf2, the first described ultraconserved lncRNA, increases the
association of transcriptional activators (DLX homeodomain proteins) with key DNA
enhancers but represses gene expression. In this report, mass spectrometry shows 
that the Evf2-DLX1 ribonucleoprotein (RNP) contains the SWI/SNF-related chromatin
remodelers Brahma-related gene 1 (BRG1, SMARCA4) and Brahma-associated factor
(BAF170, SMARCC2) in the developing mouse forebrain. Evf2 RNA colocalizes with
BRG1 in nuclear clouds and increases BRG1 association with key DNA regulatory
enhancers in the developing forebrain. While BRG1 directly interacts with DLX1
and Evf2 through distinct binding sites, Evf2 directly inhibits BRG1 ATPase and
chromatin remodeling activities. In vitro studies show that both RNA-BRG1 binding
and RNA inhibition of BRG1 ATPase/remodeling activity are promiscuous, suggesting
that context is a crucial factor in RNA-dependent chromatin remodeling
inhibition. Together, these experiments support a model in which RNAs convert an 
active enhancer to a repressed enhancer by directly inhibiting chromatin
remodeling activity, and address the apparent paradox of RNA-mediated
stabilization of transcriptional activators at enhancers with a repressive
outcome. The importance of BRG1/RNA and BRG1/homeodomain interactions in
neurodevelopmental disorders is underscored by the finding that mutations in
Coffin-Siris syndrome, a human intellectual disability disorder, localize to the 
BRG1 RNA-binding and DLX1-binding domains.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4529037 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26138476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Sep 9;3(3):460-74. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.07.004.
Epub 2014 Aug 14.

Transcriptional repression by the BRG1-SWI/SNF complex affects the pluripotency
of human embryonic stem cells.

Zhang X(1), Li B(1), Li W(1), Ma L(1), Zheng D(1), Li L(2), Yang W(3), Chu M(1), 
Chen W(1), Mailman RB(4), Zhu J(3), Fan G(5), Archer TK(6), Wang Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai
200241, China. (2)Biostatistics Branch, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human
Services, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. (3)Systems Biology Center,
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)Department
of Pharmacology, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033-0850, USA.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095-7088, USA. (6)Chromatin and Gene
Expression Group, Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Department of
Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. (7)Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences and School of 
Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China. Electronic
address: ywang@bio.ecnu.edu.cn.

The SWI/SNF complex plays an important role in mouse embryonic stem cells
(mESCs), but it remains to be determined whether this complex is required for the
pluripotency of human ESCs (hESCs). Using RNAi, we demonstrated that depletion of
BRG1, the catalytic subunit of the SWI/SNF complex, led to impaired self-renewing
ability and dysregulated lineage specification of hESCs. A unique composition of 
the BRG1-SWI/SNF complex in hESCs was further defined by the presence of BRG1,
BAF250A, BAF170, BAF155, BAF53A, and BAF47. Genome-wide expression analyses
revealed that BRG1 participated in a broad range of biological processes in hESCs
through pathways different from those in mESCs. In addition, chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) demonstrated that BRG1 played a
repressive role in transcriptional regulation by modulating the acetylation
levels of H3K27 at the enhancers of lineage-specific genes. Our data thus provide
valuable insights into molecular mechanisms by which transcriptional repression
affects the self-renewal and differentiation of hESCs.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4266000
PMID: 25241744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Toxicol Lett. 2014 Sep 2;229(2):327-32. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.06.034. Epub
2014 Jun 25.

Genetic variants in SMARC genes are associated with DNA damage levels in Chinese 
population.

Gong J(1), Zhu M(1), Chu M(1), Sun C(1), Chen W(2), Jin G(1), Yuan J(2), Dai
J(1), Wang M(3), Pan Y(1), Song Y(2), Ding X(3), Du M(3), Zhang Z(3), Hu Z(4), Wu
T(2), Shen H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics and Ministry of Education (MOE)
Key Lab for Modern Toxicology, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. (2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for 
Environment and Health, School of Public Health, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China. (3)Department of
Genetic Toxicology, The Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Ministry of
Education, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu,
China. (4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics and Ministry of Education 
(MOE) Key Lab for Modern Toxicology, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China; Section of Clinical Epidemiology, Jiangsu
Key Laboratory of Cancer Biomarkers, Prevention and Treatment, Cancer Center,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China; State Key Laboratory of
Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(5)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics and Ministry of Education (MOE)
Key Lab for Modern Toxicology, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China; Section of Clinical Epidemiology, Jiangsu
Key Laboratory of Cancer Biomarkers, Prevention and Treatment, Cancer Center,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China; State Key Laboratory of
Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
Electronic address: hbshen@njmu.edu.cn.

The switching defective/sucrose nonfermenting (SWI/SNF) related, matrix
associated, actin dependent regulators of chromatin (SMARC) are components of
human SWI/SNF like chromatin remodeling protein complexes, which are essential in
the process of DNA damage repair. In this study, we hypothesized that genetic
variants in SMARC genes may modify the capacity of DNA repair to damage. To test 
this hypothesis, we genotyped a total of 20 polymorphisms in five key SMARC genes
(SMARCA5, SMARCC2, SMARCD1, SMARCD2, SMARCD3) to evaluate their associations with
DNA damage levels in 307 subjects. The DNA damage levels were measured with comet
assay. The multiple linear regression was used to assess the relationship between
each polymorphism and DNA damage levels in additive model. We found that the
genotypes of rs6857360 (ß=0.23, 95% CI=0.06-0.40, P=0.008) in SMARCA5, rs6919
(ß=0.20, 95% CI=0.05-0.34, P=0.008) and rs2727280 (ß=0.18, 95% CI=0.04-0.33,
P=0.013) in SMARCD2, and rs17173769 (ß=-0.27, 95% CI=-0.52 to -0.01, P=0.045) in 
SMARCD3 were significantly associated with DNA damage levels. After combining
these four polymorphisms, we found that the more unfavorable alleles the subjects
carried, the heavier DNA damage they suffered, suggesting a locus-dosage effect
between combined genotypes and DNA damage levels (P for trend=0.006). These
findings suggest that genetic variants in SMARC genes may contribute the
individual variations of DNA damage levels in Chinese population. Further larger 
and functional studies are warranted to confirm our findings.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 24973491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cell Cycle. 2013 Sep 15;12(18):2953-9. doi: 10.4161/cc.25999. Epub 2013 Aug 13.

BAF chromatin remodeling complex: cortical size regulation and beyond.

Tuoc TC(1), Narayanan R, Stoykova A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroanatomy; Universitätsmedizin Göttingen; Göttingen, Germany.

The multi-subunit chromatin remodeling BAF complex controls different
developmental processes. Using cortex-specific conditional knockout and
overexpression mouse models, we have recently reported that BAF170, a subunit of 
the vertebrate BAF chromatin remodeling complex, interacts with transcription
factor (TF) Pax6 to control cortical size and volume. The mechanistic basis
includes suppression of the expression of Pax6 target genes, which are required
for genesis of cortical intermediate progenitors (IPs) and specification of late 
neuronal subtype identity. In addition, we showed that a dynamic competition
between BAF170 and BAF155 subunits within the BAF complex during progression of
neurogenesis is a primary event in modulating the size of the mammalian cortex.
Here, we present additional insights into the interaction between the BAF complex
and TF Pax6 in the genesis of IPs of the developing cortex. Furthermore, we show 
that such competition between BAF170 and BAF155 is involved as well in the
determination of the size of the embryonic body. Our results add new insights
into a cell-intrinsic mechanism, mediated by the chromatin remodeling BAF complex
that controls vertebrate body shape and size.

PMCID: PMC3875669
PMID: 23974113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Sep;40(9):5381-95. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2637-9. Epub 2013
May 11.

ZRANB2 localizes to supraspliceosomes and influences the alternative splicing of 
multiple genes in the transcriptome.

Yang YH(1), Markus MA, Mangs AH, Raitskin O, Sperling R, Morris BJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW,
2006, Australia.

Alternative splicing is a major source of protein diversity in humans. The human 
splicing factor zinc finger, Ran-binding domain containing protein 2 (ZRANB2) is 
a splicing protein whose specific endogenous targets are unknown. Its
upregulation in grade III ovarian serous papillary carcinoma could suggest a role
in some cancers. To determine whether ZRANB2 is part of the supraspliceosome,
nuclear supernatants from human embryonic kidney 293 cells were prepared and then
fractioned on a glycerol gradient, followed by Western blotting. The same was
done after treatment with a tyrosine kinase to induce phosphorylation. This
showed for the first time that ZRANB2 is part of the supraspliceosome, and that
phosphorylation affects its subcellular location. Studies were then performed to 
understand the splicing targets of ZRANB2 at the whole-transcriptome level. HeLa 
cells were transfected with a vector containing ZRANB2 or with a vector-only
control. RNA was extracted, converted to cDNA and hybridized to Affymetrix
GeneChip(®) Human Exon 1.0 ST Arrays. At the FDR =1.3 significance level we found
that ZRANB2 influenced the alternative splicing of primary transcripts of CENTB1,
WDR78, C10orf18, CABP4, SMARCC2, SPATA13, OR4C6, ZNF263, CAPN10, SALL1, ST18 and 
ZP2. Several of these have been implicated in tumor development. In conclusion
ZRANB2 is part of the supraspliceosome and causes differential splicing of
numerous primary transcripts, some of which might have a role in cancer.

PMID: 23666063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Psychiatry. 2013 Oct;18(10):1054-6. doi: 10.1038/mp.2012.148. Epub 2012 Nov
13.

Combined analysis of exome sequencing points toward a major role for
transcription regulation during brain development in autism.

Ben-David E(1), Shifman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, The Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University 
of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

PMID: 23147383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. APMIS. 2013 Feb;121(2):168-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2012.02953.x. Epub 2012
Jul 27.

Frameshift mutations of a chromatin-remodeling gene SMARCC2 in gastric and
colorectal cancers with microsatellite instability.

Kim SS, Kim MS, Yoo NJ, Lee SH.

PMID: 23030715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Mol Biol. 2011 Aug 19;411(3):581-96. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.06.001. Epub 2011 
Jun 15.

Varying modulation of HIV-1 LTR activity by Baf complexes.

Van Duyne R(1), Guendel I, Narayanan A, Gregg E, Shafagati N, Tyagi M, Easley R, 
Klase Z, Nekhai S, Kehn-Hall K, Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Microbiology, National Center for Biodefense and
Infectious Diseases, George Mason University, Manassas, VA 20110, USA.

The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) long terminal repeat is present
on both ends of the integrated viral genome and contains regulatory elements
needed for transcriptional initiation and elongation. Post-integration, a highly 
ordered chromatin structure consisting of at least five nucleosomes, is found at 
the 5' long terminal repeat, the location and modification state of which control
the state of active viral replication as well as silencing of the latent HIV-1
provirus. In this context, the chromatin remodeling field rapidly emerges as
having a critical role in the control of viral gene expression. In the current
study, we focused on unique Baf subunits that are common to the most highly
recognized of chromatin remodeling proteins, the SWI/SNF
(switching-defective-sucrose non-fermenting) complexes. We find that at least two
Baf proteins, Baf53 and Baf170, are highly regulated in HIV-1-infected cells.
Previously, studies have shown that the depletion of Baf53 in uninfected cells
leads to the expansion of chromosomal territories and the decompaction of the
chromatin. Baf53, in the presence of HIV-1 infection, co-elutes off of a
chromatographic column as a different-sized complex when compared to uninfected
cells and appears to be predominantly phosphorylated. The innate function of
Baf53-containing complexes appears to be transcriptionally suppressive, in that
knocking down Baf53 increases viral gene expression from cells both transiently
and chronically infected with HIV-1. Additionally, cdk9/cyclin T in the presence 
of Tat is able to phosphorylate Baf53 in vitro, implying that this
posttranslationally modified form relieves the suppressive effect and allows for 
viral transcription to proceed.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3146592
PMID: 21699904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mamm Genome. 2011 Jun;22(5-6):353-60. doi: 10.1007/s00335-011-9325-7. Epub 2011
Apr 5.

Targeted analysis of four breeds narrows equine Multiple Congenital Ocular
Anomalies locus to 208 kilobases.

Andersson LS(1), Lyberg K, Cothran G, Ramsey DT, Juras R, Mikko S, Ekesten B,
Ewart S, Lindgren G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural
Sciences, Undervisningsplan 4A, PO Box 7023, 750 07 Uppsala, Sweden.

The syndrome Multiple Congenital Ocular Anomalies (MCOA) is the collective name
ascribed to heritable congenital eye defects in horses. Individuals homozygous
for the disease allele (MCOA phenotype) have a wide range of eye anomalies, while
heterozygous horses (Cyst phenotype) predominantly have cysts that originate from
the temporal ciliary body, iris, and/or peripheral retina. MCOA syndrome is
highly prevalent in the Rocky Mountain Horse but the disease is not limited to
this breed. Affected horses most often have a Silver coat color; however, a
pleiotropic link between these phenotypes is yet to be proven. Locating and
possibly isolating these traits would provide invaluable knowledge to scientists 
and breeders. This would favor maintenance of a desirable coat color while
addressing the health concerns of the affected breeds, and would also provide
insight into the genetic basis of the disease. Identical-by-descent mapping was
used to narrow the previous 4.6-Mb region to a 264-kb interval for the MCOA
locus. One haplotype common to four breeds showed complete association to the
disease (Cyst phenotype, n = 246; MCOA phenotype, n = 83). Candidate genes from
the interval, SMARCC2 and IKZF4, were screened for polymorphisms and genotyped,
and segregation analysis allowed the MCOA syndrome region to be shortened to 208 
kb. This interval also harbors PMEL17, the gene causative for Silver coat color. 
However, by shortening the MCOA locus by a factor of 20, 176 other genes have
been unlinked from the disease and only 15 genes remain.

PMCID: PMC3098992
PMID: 21465164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Leukemia. 2009 Nov;23(11):2018-26. doi: 10.1038/leu.2009.144. Epub 2009 Jul 30.

Gene knockdown studies revealed CCDC50 as a candidate gene in mantle cell
lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Farfsing A(1), Engel F, Seiffert M, Hartmann E, Ott G, Rosenwald A, Stilgenbauer 
S, Döhner H, Boutros M, Lichter P, Pscherer A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany.

The two B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma entities, chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL) and mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), show recurrent chromosomal gains of
3q25-q29, 12q13-q14 and 18q21-q22. The pathomechanisms affected by these
aberrations are not understood. The aim of this study was to identify genes,
located within these gained regions, which control cell death and cell survival
of MCL and CLL cancer cells. Blood samples collected from 18 patients with CLL
and 6 patients with MCL, as well as 6 cell lines representing both malignancies
were analyzed by gene expression profiling. By a comparison of genomic DNA and
gene expression, 72 candidate genes were identified. We performed a limited RNA
interference screening with these candidates to identify genes affecting cell
survival. CCDC50 (coiled coil domain containing protein 50), SERPINI2 and SMARCC2
mediated a reduction of cell viability in primary CLL cells as well as in cell
lines. Gene knockdown and a nuclear factor kappa B (NFkappaB) reporter gene assay
revealed that CCDC50 is required for survival in MCL and CLL cells and controls
NFkappaB signaling.

PMID: 19641524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Nat Cell Biol. 2009 Jul;11(7):865-72. doi: 10.1038/ncb1895. Epub 2009 Jun 14.

BRIT1/MCPH1 links chromatin remodelling to DNA damage response.

Peng G(1), Yim EK, Dai H, Jackson AP, Burgt Iv, Pan MR, Hu R, Li K, Lin SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, 77054, USA.

To detect and repair damaged DNA, DNA-damage-response proteins need to overcome
the barrier of condensed chromatin to gain access to DNA lesions. ATP-dependent
chromatin remodelling is one of the fundamental mechanisms used by cells to relax
chromatin in DNA repair. However, the mechanism mediating their recruitment to
DNA lesions remains largely unknown. BRIT1 (also known as MCPH1) is an early
DNA-damage-response protein that is mutated in human primary microcephaly. Here
we report a previously unknown function of BRIT1 as a regulator of the
ATP-dependent chromatin remodelling complex SWI-SNF in DNA repair. After damage
to DNA, BRIT1 increases its interaction with SWI-SNF through ATM/ATR-dependent
phosphorylation on the BAF170 subunit. This increase in binding affinity provides
a means by which SWI-SNF can be specifically recruited to and maintained at DNA
lesions. Loss of BRIT1 causes impaired chromatin relaxation as a result of
decreased association of SWI-SNF with chromatin. This explains the decreased
recruitment of repair proteins to DNA lesions and the reduced efficiency of
repair in BRIT1-deficient cells, resulting in impaired cell survival after DNA
damage. Our findings therefore identify BRIT1 as a key molecule that links
chromatin remodelling with response to DNA damage in the control of DNA repair,
and its dysfunction contributes to human disease.

PMCID: PMC2714531
PMID: 19525936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Neurochem. 2009 May;109(3):807-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06005.x. Epub 
2009 Feb 20.

N-terminally truncated BAF57 isoforms contribute to the diversity of SWI/SNF
complexes in neurons.

Kazantseva A(1), Sepp M, Kazantseva J, Sadam H, Pruunsild P, Timmusk T, Neuman T,
Palm K.

Author information: 
(1)Protobios LLC, Tallinn, Estonia.

The SWItch/Sucrose NonFermentable, a nucleosome remodeling complex (SWI/SNF)
chromatin-remodelling complexes act upon the nucleosomal structure and regulate
transcription, replication, repair of chromatin and splicing. In this study, we
present evidence that human, mouse and rat genes encoding one of the SWI/SNF
complex subunits, BAF57, undergo neuron-specific splicing of exons II, III and
IV. Alternative splicing yields in at least three isoforms of BAF57 protein that 
have truncated N-termini (N-BAF57s). The transcripts encoding N-BAF57 isoforms
are predominantly expressed in the nervous system. The biochemical fractionation 
data supported by the results of the co-immunoprecipitation analysis show that
N-BAF57 isoforms associate into protein complexes together with Brg1, Brm, BAF155
and BAF170. Transient over-expression of N-BAF57 isoforms in non-neural cells
affects the level of expression of certain neuron-restrictive silencer
element-containing genes. Together these data suggest that neuronal isoforms of
BAF57 contribute to functional SWI/SNF complexes regulating neurogenesis.

PMID: 19245665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Stem Cells. 2008 May;26(5):1155-65. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0846. Epub 2008
Mar 6.

BAF250B-associated SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex is required to maintain
undifferentiated mouse embryonic stem cells.

Yan Z(1), Wang Z, Sharova L, Sharov AA, Ling C, Piao Y, Aiba K, Matoba R, Wang W,
Ko MS.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Instability and Chromatin-Remodeling Section, National Institute on
Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Whether SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes play roles in embryonic stem (ES) 
cells remains unknown. Here we show that SWI/SNF complexes are present in mouse
ES cells, and their composition is dynamically regulated upon induction of ES
cell differentiation. For example, the SWI/SNF purified from undifferentiated ES 
cells contains a high level of BAF155 and a low level of BAF170 (both of which
are homologs of yeast SWI3 protein), whereas that from differentiated cells
contains nearly equal amounts of both. Moreover, the levels of BAF250A and
BAF250B decrease during the differentiation of ES cells, whereas that of BRM
increases. The altered expression of SWI/SNF components hinted that these
complexes could play roles in ES cell maintenance or differentiation. We
therefore generated ES cells with biallelic inactivation of BAF250B and found
that these cells display a reduced proliferation rate and an abnormal cell cycle.
Importantly, these cells are deficient in the self-renewal capacity of
undifferentiated ES cells and exhibit certain phenotypes of differentiated cells,
including reduced expression of several pluripotency-related genes and increased 
expression of some differentiation-related genes. These data suggest that the
BAF250B-associated SWI/SNF is essential for mouse ES cells to maintain their
normal proliferation and pluripotency. The work presented here underscores the
importance of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes in pluripotent stem cells.

PMCID: PMC2409195
PMID: 18323406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Thalamus Relat Syst. 2008 Mar;4(1):59-77.

Anterior thalamic lesions produce chronic and profuse transcriptional
de-regulation in retrosplenial cortex: A model of retrosplenial hypoactivity and 
covert pathology.

Poirier GL(1), Shires KL, Sugden D, Amin E, Thomas KL, Carter DA, Aggleton JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Wales, UK.

Anterior thalamic lesions are thought to produce 'covert pathology' in
retrosplenial cortex, but the causes are unknown. Microarray analyses tested the 
hypothesis that thalamic damage causes a chronic, hypo-function of metabolic and 
plasticity-related pathways (Experiment 1). Rats with unilateral, anterior
thalamic lesions were exposed to a novel environment for 20 minutes, and granular
retrosplenial tissue sampled from both hemispheres 30 minutes, 2h, or 8h later.
Complementary statistical approaches (analyses of variance, predictive patterning
and gene set enrichment analysis) revealed pervasive gene expression differences 
between retrosplenial cortex ipsilateral to the thalamic lesion and contralateral
to the lesion. Selected gene differences were validated by QPCR,
immunohistochemistry (Experiment 1), and in situ hybridisation (Experiment 2).
Following thalamic lesions, the retrosplenial cortex undergoes profuse cellular
transcriptome changes including lower relative levels of specific mRNAs involved 
in energy metabolism and neuronal plasticity. These changes in functional gene
expression may be largely driven by decreases in the expression of multiple
transcription factors, including brd8, c-fos, fra-2, klf5, nfix, nr4a1, smad3,
smarcc2, and zfp9, with a much smaller number (nfat5, neuroD1, RXR<U+03B3>) showing
increases. These findings have implications for conditions such as diencephalic
amnesia and Alzheimer's disease, where both anterior thalamic pathology and
retrosplenial cortex hypometabolism are prominent.

PMCID: PMC3031093
PMID: 21289865  [PubMed]


15. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 23;282(47):34448-56. Epub 2007 Sep 18.

Activity-dependent neuroprotective protein constitutes a novel element in the
SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex.

Mandel S(1), Gozes I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

Complete deficiency in activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP), a
heterochromatin 1-binding protein, results in dramatic changes in gene
expression, neural tube closure defects, and death at gestation day 9 in mice. To
further understand the cellular roles played by ADNP, the HEK293 human embryonic 
kidney cell line that allows efficient transfection with recombinant DNA was used
as a model for the identification of ADNP-interacting proteins. Recombinant green
fluorescent protein (GFP)-ADNP was localized to cell nuclei. When nuclear
extracts were subjected to immunoprecipitation with specific GFP antibodies
followed by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, several minor protein bands were 
observed in addition to GFP-ADNP. In-gel protein digests followed by mass
spectrometry identified BRG1, BAF250a, and BAF170, all components of the SWI/SNF 
(mating type switching/sucrose nonfermenting) chromatin remodeling complex, as
proteins that co-immunoprecipitate with ADNP. These results were verified
utilizing BRG1 antibodies. ADNP short hairpin RNA down-regulation resulted in
microtubule reorganization and changes in cell morphology including reduction in 
cell process formation and cell number. These morphological changes are closely
associated with the SWI/SNF complex multifunctionality. Taken together, the
current study uncovers a molecular basis for the essential function of the ADNP
gene and protein.

PMID: 17878164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Oncogene. 2007 Nov 1;26(50):7153-7. Epub 2007 May 7.

Reprogramming of the SWI/SNF complex for co-activation or co-repression in
prohibitin-mediated estrogen receptor regulation.

Zhang B(1), Chambers KJ, Faller DV, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02118, USA.

The SWI/SNF complex participates as a co-activator in the transcriptional
regulation of certain genes. Conversely, we and others have recently established 
that Brg1 and Brm, the central components of SWI/SNF, act instead as
co-repressors for E2F-mediated transcriptional repression, and for the
transcription of certain other promoters. We report here that Brg-1 and Brm can
switch their mode of function at same promoter between activation and repression 
by ligand-directed differential coordination with BAF155, BAF170, HDAC1, p300 and
prohibitin. This ligand and context-dependent reprogramming of the SWI/SNF
complex allows it to differentially serve as either a co-repressor or a
co-activator of transcription at the same promoter.

PMID: 17486062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Mol Biol. 2007 May 25;369(1):222-38. Epub 2007 Mar 19.

Structural and functional differences of SWIRM domain subtypes.

Yoneyama M(1), Tochio N, Umehara T, Koshiba S, Inoue M, Yabuki T, Aoki M, Seki E,
Matsuda T, Watanabe S, Tomo Y, Nishimura Y, Harada T, Terada T, Shirouzu M,
Hayashizaki Y, Ohara O, Tanaka A, Kigawa T, Yokoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi, Yokohama 230-0045,
Japan.

SWIRM is a conserved domain found in several chromatin-associated proteins. Based
on their sequences, the SWIRM family members can be classified into three
subfamilies, which are represented by Swi3, LSD1, and Ada2. Here we report the
SWIRM structure of human MYb-like, Swirm and Mpn domain-containing protein-1
(MYSM1). The MYSM1 SWIRM structure forms a compact HTH-related fold comprising
five alpha-helices, which best resembles the Swi3 SWIRM structure, among the
known SWIRM structures. The MYSM1 and Swi3 SWIRM structures are more similar to
the LSD1 structure than the Ada2alpha structure. The SWIRM domains of MYSM1 and
LSD1 lacked DNA binding activity, while those of Ada2alpha and the human Swi3
counterpart, SMARCC2, bound DNA. The dissimilarity in the DNA-binding ability of 
the MYSM1 and SMARCC2 SWIRM domains might be due to a couple of amino acid
differences in the last helix. These results indicate that the SWIRM family has
indeed diverged into three structural subfamilies (Swi3/MYSM1, LSD1, and Ada2
types), and that the Swi3/MYSM1-type subfamily has further diverged into two
functionally distinct groups. We also solved the structure of the SANT domain of 
MYSM1, and demonstrated that it bound DNA with a similar mode to that of the
c-Myb DNA-binding domain.

PMID: 17428495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Pathol. 2006 Dec;210(4):441-9.

Novel epigenetically deregulated genes in testicular cancer include homeobox
genes and SCGB3A1 (HIN-1).

Lind GE(1), Skotheim RI, Fraga MF, Abeler VM, Esteller M, Lothe RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Prevention, Institute for Cancer Research,
Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway.

Testicular germ cell tumours (TGCTs) are classified into two main histological
subgroups: seminomas and non-seminomas. The latter comprise several subtypes:
embryonal carcinomas, yolk sac tumours, choriocarcinomas, and teratomas. These
embryonal and extra-embryonal-like differentiation lineages represent a
caricature of early normal development, and inactivation of gene expression
through promoter hypermethylation may therefore be of particular importance in
germ cell tumourigenesis. The promoter methylation status of ten candidate
genes-CDH13, DLX6, EMX2, HOXA9, HOXB5, MSX1, MSX2, RASSF1A, RUNX3, and SCGB3A1
(alias HIN-1)-was assessed by methylation-specific PCR in seven intratubular germ
cell neoplasias and 55 primary TGCTs. Furthermore, by a discovery-based global
approach, comparing cDNA microarray expression profiles of two germ cell tumour
cell lines before and after treatment with the demethylating agent
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, a gene list of potentially epigenetic targets was
identified, from which CGGBP1, CGRRF1, SMARCC2, SORBS1, and XPA were analysed
further. Overall, the non-seminomas were significantly more often methylated than
were seminomas (p < 0.001). The three most frequently methylated genes among this
subtype were SCGB3A1 (54%), RASSF1A (29%), and HOXA9 (26%). CDH13 and HOXB5 were 
methylated at low frequencies (10-15%), and EMX2, MSX1, RUNX3, SORBS1, and XPA
only rarely (<10%). In conclusion, this study has identified several novel
epigenetically deregulated target genes in TGCT development, including homeobox
genes and SCGB3A1, suggesting that epigenetic inactivation of key genes in normal
development also has an important role in TGCTs.

PMID: 17029216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;25(20):9016-27.

Regulating SWI/SNF subunit levels via protein-protein interactions and
proteasomal degradation: BAF155 and BAF170 limit expression of BAF57.

Chen J(1), Archer TK.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Section, Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC
27709, USA.

The mammalian SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex, whose function is of critical
importance in transcriptional regulation, contains approximately 10 protein
components. The expression levels of the core SWI/SNF subunits, including
BRG1/Brm, BAF155, BAF170, BAF60, hSNF/Ini1, and BAF57, are stoichiometric, with
few to no unbound molecules in the cell. Here we report that exogenous expression
of the wild type or certain deletion mutants of BAF57, a key subunit that
mediates the interaction between the remodeling complex and transcription
factors, results in diminished expression of endogenous BAF57. This
down-regulation process is mediated by an increase in proteasome-dependent
degradation of the BAF57 protein. Furthermore, the protein levels of BAF155/170
dictate the maximum cellular amount of BAF57. We mapped the domains responsible
for the interaction between BAF57 and BAF155 and demonstrated that
protein-protein interactions between them play an important role in this
regulatory process. These findings provide insights into the physiological
mechanisms responsible for maintaining the proper stoichiometric levels of the
protein components comprising multimeric enzyme complexes.

PMCID: PMC1265786
PMID: 16199878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2005 Feb;24(1):55-7.

Monoclonal antibodies reactive with the BAF155 (SMARCC1) and BAF170 (SMARCC2)
components of human SWI/SNF-related complexes.

Wang X(1), Liao DW, Scoy MV, Pacchione S, Yaciuk P, Moran E.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

Mammalian SWI/SNF-related chromatin remodeling complexes are required for
transcription controls that underlie differentiation, development, and tumor
suppression. The complexes each consist of an ATPase of the SWI2/SNF2 family and 
approximately seven stably associated non-catalytic subunits. In spite of the
importance of these complexes to biological processes, monoclonal antibodies to
the various subunits have not been readily available. Mammalian complexes can
vary in subunit composition, but the BAF155 (SMARCC1) subunit and a closely
related protein, BAF170 (SMARCC2), appear to be ubiquitous components. Here we
report the development of antibodies raised against a BAF155-derived peptide. The
antibodies were raised against a single peptide of 18 amino acids. However,
hybridomas expressing antibodies of two different specificities were isolated.
One, designated DXD7, is specific for BAF155. The other, designated DXD12, is
reactive with both BAF155 and BAF170. The antibodies are reactive against both
native and denatured proteins, and are suitable for immunoprecipitation and
Western blots. The DXD7 antibody is suitable additionally for immunofluorescence 
assays.

PMID: 15785210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Int J Oncol. 2005 Jan;26(1):247-58.

Identification by means of cDNA microarray analyses of gene expression
modifications in squamous non-small cell lung cancers as compared to normal
bronchial epithelial tissue.

Remmelink M(1), Mijatovic T, Gustin A, Mathieu A, Rombaut K, Kiss R, Salmon I,
Decaestecker C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Erasmus University Hospital, Brussels, Belgium.

The present work analyzed the gene pattern profiles in 6 squamous non-small cell 
lung cancers (NSCLCs) versus 4 normal lung epithelial tissues by means of cDNA
microarrays. In addition to cDNA microarray analyses, quantitative RT-PCR and
immunohisto-chemical analyses were used to validate some of the results obtained.
Our data enabled 7 genes to be selected by looking at the genes which were
detected as being expressed in all the tumors and not expressed in all the normal
samples, or inversely. Additionally, 19 genes were detected as being
overexpressed in the tumors when compared to the normal tissue specimens. Of
these 26 genes, 16 are not yet suspected of influencing NSCLC biology. These
genes are involved in cell proliferation (G2 cyclin), signal transduction
(SMARCC2, TM4SF3), apoptosis (CFLAR/FLIP), cell cytoskeleton (cytokeratins-14 and
16, alpha-tubulin isoform 1 and S100A10), cell adhesion (JUP), invasion
(cathepsins H and O) and other biological processes (OAZ1, IGHG3, SCYA5/RANTES,
beta-sarcoglycan and transcobalamin I). In conclusion, we identified a number of 
genes as being differentially expressed in squamous NSCLCs as compared to normal 
lung epithelial tissue. Some of these genes (such as those involved in invasion) 
could be used as new prognostic markers and others, like CFLAR/FLIP, could even
constitute new therapeutic targets.

PMID: 15586247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Sep;23(17):6210-20.

BAF60a mediates critical interactions between nuclear receptors and the BRG1
chromatin-remodeling complex for transactivation.

Hsiao PW(1), Fryer CJ, Trotter KW, Wang W, Archer TK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina 27709, USA.

Nuclear hormone receptors are ligand-dependent transcriptional regulators that
modulate chromatin structure. However, the precise molecular mechanisms by which 
receptors recruit chromatin-remodeling activity are not fully elucidated. We show
that in the absence of its ligand-binding domain, the glucocorticoid receptor
(GR) is able to interact with both nuclear receptor coactivators and the BRG1
chromatin-remodeling complex in vivo. Individually, the GR makes direct
interactions with BRG1-associated factor 60a (BAF60a) and BAF57, but not with
BRG1, BAF155, or BAF170. Further, BAF60a possesses at least two interaction
surfaces, one for GR and BRG1 and a second for BAF155 and BAF170. A GR mutant,
GR(R488Q), that fails to interact with BAF60a in vitro has reduced
chromatin-remodeling activity and reduced transcriptional activity from the
promoter assembled as chromatin in vivo. Stable expression of a BAF60a truncation
mutant, BAF60a4-140, caused chromatin-specific loss of GR functions in vivo. In
the presence of the BAF60a mutant, the GR fails to interact with the BRG1 complex
and consequently is also deficient in its ability to activate transcription from 
chromatin. Thus, in addition to previously identified BAF250, BAF60a may provide 
another critical and direct link between nuclear receptors and the BRG1 complex
that is required for promoter recruitment and subsequent chromatin remodeling.

PMCID: PMC180928
PMID: 12917342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jun;22(12):4113-23.

Proteasomal inhibition enhances glucocorticoid receptor transactivation and
alters its subnuclear trafficking.

Deroo BJ(1), Rentsch C, Sampath S, Young J, DeFranco DB, Archer TK.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Section, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina 27709, USA.

The ubiquitin-proteasome pathway regulates the turnover of many transcription
factors, including steroid hormone receptors such as the estrogen receptor and
progesterone receptor. For these receptors, proteasome inhibition interferes with
steroid-mediated transcription. We show here that proteasome inhibition with
MG132 results in increased accumulation of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR),
confirming that it is likewise a substrate for the ubiquitin-proteasome
degradative pathway. Using the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter
integrated into tissue culture cells, we found that proteasome inhibition
synergistically increases GR-mediated transactivation. This increased activation 
was observed in a number of cell lines and on various MMTV templates, either as
transiently transfected reporters or stably integrated into chromatin. These
observations suggest that the increase in GR-mediated transcription due to
proteasome inhibition may occur downstream of the initial chromatin remodeling
step. In support of this concept, the increase in transcription did not correlate
with an increase in chromatin remodeling, as measured by restriction enzyme
hypersensitivity, or transcription factor loading, as exemplified by nuclear
factor 1. To investigate the relationship between GR turnover, transcription, and
subnuclear trafficking, we examined the effect of proteasome inhibition on the
mobility of the GR within the nucleus and association of the GR with the nuclear 
matrix. Blocking GR turnover reduced the mobility of the GR within the nucleus,
and this correlated with increased association of the receptor with the nuclear
matrix. As a result of proteasome inhibition, GR mobility within the nucleus was 
reduced while its association with the nuclear matrix was increased. Thus, while 
altered nuclear mobility of steroid receptors may be a common feature of
proteasome inhibition, GR is unique in its enhanced transactivation activity that
results when proteasome function is compromised. Proteasomes may therefore impact
steroid receptor action at multiple levels and exert distinct effects on
individual receptor types.

PMCID: PMC133869
PMID: 12024025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Nov 1;10(23):2651-60.

Fanconi anemia protein, FANCA, associates with BRG1, a component of the human
SWI/SNF complex.

Otsuki T(1), Furukawa Y, Ikeda K, Endo H, Yamashita T, Shinohara A, Iwamatsu A,
Ozawa K, Liu JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Jichi Medical School, Yakushiji 3311-1,
Minamikawachi, Kawachi, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a genetic disorder that predisposes to hematopoietic
failure, birth defects and cancer. We identified an interaction between the FA
protein, FANCA and brm-related gene 1 (BRG1) product. BRG1 is a subunit of the
SWI/SNF complex, which remodels chromatin structure through a DNA-dependent
ATPase activity. FANCA was demonstrated to associate with the endogenous SWI/SNF 
complex. We also found a significant increase in the molecular chaperone,
glucose-regulated protein 94 (GRP94) among BRG1-associated factors isolated from 
a FANCA-mutant cell line, which was not seen in either a normal control cell line
or the mutant line complemented by wild-type FANCA. Despite this specific
difference, FANCA did not appear to be absolutely required for in vitro chromatin
remodeling. Finally, we demonstrated co-localization in the nucleus between
transfected FANCA and BRG1. The physiological action of FANCA on the SWI/SNF
complex remains to be clarified, but our work suggests that FANCA may recruit the
SWI/SNF complex to target genes, thereby enabling coupled nuclear functions such 
as transcription and DNA repair.

PMID: 11726552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cell. 2000 Jul 21;102(2):257-65.

BRCA1 is associated with a human SWI/SNF-related complex: linking chromatin
remodeling to breast cancer.

Bochar DA(1), Wang L, Beniya H, Kinev A, Xue Y, Lane WS, Wang W, Kashanchi F,
Shiekhattar R.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Germline mutations in the tumor suppressor gene, BRCA1, predispose individuals to
breast and ovarian cancers. Using a combination of affinity- and conventional
chromatographic techniques, we have isolated a predominant form of a multiprotein
BRCA1-containing complex from human cells displaying chromatin-remodeling
activity. Mass spectrometric sequencing of components of this complex indicated
that BRCA1 is associated with a SWI/SNF-related complex. We show that BRCA1 can
directly interact with the BRG1 subunit of the SWI/SNF complex. Moreover,
p53-mediated stimulation of transcription by BRCA1 was completely abrogated by
either a dominant-negative mutant of BRG1 or the cancer-causing deletion in exon 
11 of BRCA1. These findings reveal a direct function for BRCA1 in transcriptional
control through modulation of chromatin structure.

PMID: 10943845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Cell. 1999 Feb;3(2):247-53.

Reconstitution of a core chromatin remodeling complex from SWI/SNF subunits.

Phelan ML(1), Sif S, Narlikar GJ, Kingston RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114,
USA.

Protein complexes of the SWI/SNF family remodel nucleosome structure in an
ATP-dependent manner. Each complex contains between 8 and 15 subunits, several of
which are highly conserved between yeast, Drosophila, and humans. We have
reconstituted an ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complex using a subset of
conserved subunits. Unexpectedly, both BRG1 and hBRM, the ATPase subunits of
human SWI/SNF complexes, are capable of remodeling mono-nucleosomes and
nucleosomal arrays as purified proteins. The addition of INI1, BAF155, and BAF170
to BRG1 increases remodeling activity to a level comparable to that of the whole 
hSWI/SNF complex. These data define the functional core of the hSWI/SNF complex.

PMID: 10078207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cell. 1998 Oct 2;95(1):93-104.

A SWI/SNF-related chromatin remodeling complex, E-RC1, is required for
tissue-specific transcriptional regulation by EKLF in vitro.

Armstrong JA(1), Bieker JJ, Emerson BM.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF) is necessary for stage-specific expression
of the human beta-globin gene. We show that EKLF requires a SWI/SNF-related
chromatin remodeling complex, EKLF coactivator-remodeling complex 1 (E-RC1), to
generate a DNase I hypersensitive, transcriptionally active beta-globin promoter 
on chromatin templates in vitro. E-RC1 contains BRG1, BAF170, BAF155, and INI1
(BAF47) homologs of yeast SWI/SNF subunits, as well as a subunit unique to higher
eukaryotes, BAF57, which is critical for chromatin remodeling and transcription
with EKLF. E-RC1 displays functional selectivity toward transcription factors,
since it cannot activate expression of chromatin-assembled HIV-1 templates with
the E box-binding protein TFE-3. Thus, a member of the SWI/SNF family acts
directly in transcriptional activation and may regulate subsets of genes by
selectively interacting with specific DNA-binding proteins.

PMID: 9778250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Genomics. 1998 Jul 1;51(1):140-3.

Five SWI/SNF-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of chromatin
(SMARC) genes are dispersed in the human genome.

Ring HZ(1), Vameghi-Meyers V, Wang W, Crabtree GR, Francke U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, 94305, USA.

The SWI/SNF-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulators of chromatin
(SMARC), also called BRG1-associated factors, are components of human
SWI/SNF-like chromatin-remodeling protein complexes. We mapped five human SMARC
genes toregions on four different human chromosomes, SMARCC1 to 3p23-p21, SMARCC2
to 12q13-q14, SMARCD1 to 12q13-q14, SMARCD2 to 17q23-q24, and SMARCD3 to
7q35-q36. SMARCC1, SMARCC2, and SMARCD1 are assigned to chromosomal regions that 
are frequently involved in somatic rearrangements in human cancers. SMARCD1 was
mapped to the critical region of Allgrove syndrome; however, no mutation was
identified in one Allgrove syndrome family studied.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9693044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jun;18(6):3596-603.

p300/CREB binding protein-related protein p270 is a component of mammalian
SWI/SNF complexes.

Dallas PB(1), Cheney IW, Liao DW, Bowrin V, Byam W, Pacchione S, Kobayashi R,
Yaciuk P, Moran E.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

p300 and the closely related CREB binding protein (CBP) are transcriptional
adaptors that are present in intracellular complexes with TATA binding protein
(TBP) and bind to upstream activators including p53 and nuclear hormone
receptors. They have intrinsic and associated histone acetyltransferase activity,
suggesting that chromatin modification is an essential part of their role in
regulating transcription. Detailed characterization of a panel of antibodies
raised against p300/CBP has revealed the existence of a 270-kDa cellular protein,
p270, distinct from p300 and CBP but sharing at least two independent epitopes
with p300. The subset of p300/CBP-derived antibodies that cross-reacts with p270 
consistently coprecipitates a series a cellular proteins with relative molecular 
masses ranging from 44 to 190 kDa. Purification and analysis of various proteins 
in this group reveals that they are components of the human SWI/SNF complex and
that p270 is an integral member of this complex.

PMCID: PMC108941
PMID: 9584200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Genes Dev. 1996 Sep 1;10(17):2117-30.

Diversity and specialization of mammalian SWI/SNF complexes.

Wang W(1), Xue Y, Zhou S, Kuo A, Cairns BR, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford
University, California 94305-5428, USA.

The SWI/SNF complex in yeast facilitates the function of transcriptional
activators by opposing chromatin-dependent repression of transcription. We
demonstrate that in mammals SWI/SNF complexes are present in multiple forms made 
up of 9-12 proteins that we refer to as BRG1-associated factors (BAFs) ranging
from 47 to 250 kD. We have isolated cDNAs for human BAF155, BAF170, and BAF60.
BAF155 and BAF170 are encoded by separate genes that are both homologs of yeast
SWI3. Both contain a region of similarity to the DNA binding domain of myb, but
lack the basic residues known to be necessary for interaction with DNA. The two
SWI3 homologs copurify on antibody columns specific for either BAF155 or BAF170, 
indicating that they are in the same complex. BAF60 is encoded by a novel gene
family. An open reading frame from yeast, which is highly homologous, encodes the
previously uncharacterized 73-kD subunit of the yeast SWI/SNF complex required
for transcriptional activation by the glucocorticoid receptor (Cairns et al.,
this issue). BAF60a is expressed in all tissues examined, whereas BAF60b and
BAF60c are expressed preferentially in muscle and pancreas, respectively. BAF60a 
is present within the 2000-kD BRG1 complex, whereas BAF60b is in a distinct
complex that shares some but not all subunits with the BRG1 complex. The observed
similarity between mammalian BAF190, BAF170, BAF155, BAF60, and BAF47 and yeast
SNF2/SWI2, SWI3, SWI3, SWP73, and SNF5, respectively, underscores the similarity 
of the mammalian and yeast complexes. However, the complexes in mammals are more 
diverse than the SWI/SNF complex in yeast and are likely dedicated to
developmentally distinct functions.

PMID: 8804307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


