
1. Int J Cancer. 2016 Mar 2. doi: 10.1002/ijc.30068. [Epub ahead of print]

Exome sequencing of oral squamous cell carcinoma in users of Arabian snuff
reveals novel candidates for driver genes.

Al-Hebshi NN(1), Li S(2), Nasher AT(3), El-Setouhy M(4), Alsanosi R(4), Blancato 
J(5), Loffredo C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Dentistry, College of Dentistry, , Jazan University, 
Jazan, Saudi Arabia. (2)Beijing Genome Institute (BGI), Shenzhen, Republic of
China. (3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Faculty of Dentistry,
Sana'a University, Yemen. (4)Substance Abuse Research Center (SARC), Jazan
University, Jazan, Saudi Arabia. (5)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA.

The study sought to identify genetic aberrations driving oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) development among users of shammah, an Arabian preparation of
smokeless tobacco. Twenty archival OSCC samples, 15 of which with a history of
shammah exposure, were whole-exome sequenced at an average depth of 127x. Somatic
mutations were identified using a novel, matched controls-independent filtration 
algorithm. CODEX and Exomedepth coupled with a novel, Database of Genomic
Variant-based filter were employed to call somatic gene-CNVs. Significantly
mutated genes (SMGs) were identified with Oncodrive FM and the Youn and Simon's
method. Candidate driver genes were nominated based on Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis (GSEA). The observed mutational spectrum was similar to that reported by
the TCGA project. In addition to confirming known genes of OSCC (TP53, CDKNA2,
CASP8, PIK3CA, HRAS, FAT1, TP63, CCND1 and FADD) the analysis identified several 
candidate novel driver events including mutations of NOTCH3, CSMD3, CRB1, CLTCL1,
OSMR and TRPM2, amplification of the proto-oncogenes FOSL1, RELA, TRAF6, MDM2,
FRS2 and BAG1, and deletion of the recently described tumor suppressor SMARCC1.
Analysis also revealed significantly altered pathways not previously implicated
in OSCC including Oncostatin-M signalling pathways, AP-1 and C-MYB transcription 
networks and endocytosis. There was a trend for higher number of mutations,
amplifications and driver events in samples with history of shammah exposure
particularly those that tested EBV positive, suggesting an interaction between
tobacco exposure and EBV. The work provides further evidence for the genetic
heterogeneity of oral cancer, and suggests shammah-associated OSCC is
characterized by extensive amplification of oncogenes. This article is protected 
by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 UICC.

PMID: 26934577  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 26;11(1):e0147372. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147372.
eCollection 2016.

Early-Stage Induction of SWI/SNF Mutations during Esophageal Squamous Cell
Carcinogenesis.

Nakazato H(1,)(2,)(3), Takeshima H(1), Kishino T(1), Kubo E(1), Hattori N(1),
Nakajima T(4), Yamashita S(1), Igaki H(2), Tachimori Y(2), Kuniyoshi Y(3),
Ushijima T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epigenomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan. (2)Esophageal Surgery Division, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan. (3)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan. (4)Endoscopy Division,
National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

The SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex is frequently inactivated by somatic
mutations of its various components in various types of cancers, and also by
aberrant DNA methylation. However, its somatic mutations and aberrant methylation
in esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (ESCCs) have not been fully analyzed. In
this study, we aimed to clarify in ESCC, what components of the SWI/SNF complex
have somatic mutations and aberrant methylation, and when somatic mutations of
the SWI/SNF complex occur. Deep sequencing of components of the SWI/SNF complex
using a bench-top next generation sequencer revealed that eight of 92 ESCCs
(8.7%) had 11 somatic mutations of 7 genes, ARID1A, ARID2, ATRX, PBRM1, SMARCA4, 
SMARCAL1, and SMARCC1. The SMARCA4 mutations were located in the Forkhead
(85Ser>Leu) and SNF2 family N-terminal (882Glu>Lys) domains. The PBRM1 mutations 
were located in a bromodomain (80Asn>Ser) and an HMG-box domain (1,377Glu>Lys).
For most mutations, their mutant allele frequency was 31-77% (mean 61%) of the
fraction of cancer cells in the same samples, indicating that most of the cancer 
cells in individual ESCC samples had the SWI/SNF mutations on one allele, when
present. In addition, a BeadChip array analysis revealed that a component of the 
SWI/SNF complex, ACTL6B, had aberrant methylation at its promoter CpG island in
18 of 52 ESCCs (34.6%). These results showed that genetic and epigenetic
alterations of the SWI/SNF complex are present in ESCCs, and suggested that
genetic alterations are induced at an early stage of esophageal squamous cell
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4728064
PMID: 26812616  [PubMed - in process]


3. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 16;5:17985. doi: 10.1038/srep17985.

Proteome Analysis of Ground State Pluripotency.

Taleahmad S(1), Mirzaei M(2), Parker LM(2,)(3), Hassani SN(4), Mollamohammadi
S(4), Sharifi-Zarchi A(4), Haynes PA(2), Baharvand H(3,)(5), Salekdeh GH(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Cell Science Research Center, Royan
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular sciences, Macquarie University,
Sydney, NSW, 2109, Australia. (3)ARC Centre of Excellence for Nanoscale
BioPhotonics (CNBP), Macquarie University, NSW, 2109, Sydney, Australia.
(4)Department of Stem Cells and Developmental Biology, Cell Science Research
Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran,
Iran. (5)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Science and Culture, 
ACECR, Tehran, Iran. (6)Department of Systems Biology, Agricultural Biotechnology
Research Institute of Iran, Karaj, Iran.

The differentiation potential of pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESCs) can be
manipulated via serum and medium conditions for direct cellular development or to
maintain a naïve ground state. The self-renewal state of ESCs can thus be induced
by adding inhibitors of mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) and glycogen
synthase kinase-3 (Gsk3), known as 2 inhibitors (2i) treatment. We have used a
shotgun proteomics approach to investigate differences in protein expressions
between 2i- and serum-grown mESCs. The results indicated that 164 proteins were
significantly upregulated and 107 proteins downregulated in 2i-grown cells
compared to serum. Protein pathways in 2i-grown cells with the highest enrichment
were associated with glycolysis and gluconeogenesis. Protein pathways related to 
organ development were downregulated in 2i-grown cells. In serum-grown ESCs,
protein pathways involved in integrin and focal adhesion, and signaling proteins 
involved in the actin cytoskeleton regulation were enriched. We observed a number
of nuclear proteins which were mostly involved in self-renewal maintenance and
were expressed at higher levels in 2i compared to serum - Dnmt1, Map2k1, Parp1,
Xpo4, Eif3g, Smarca4/Brg1 and Smarcc1/Baf155. Collectively, the results provided 
an insight into the key protein pathways used by ESCs in the ground state or
metastable conditions through 2i or serum culture medium, respectively.

PMCID: PMC4680864
PMID: 26671762  [PubMed - in process]


4. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):10924-39.

Quantitative phosphoproteome analysis of embryonic stem cell differentiation
toward blood.

Piazzi M(1), Williamson A(2), Lee CF(2), Pearson S(3), Lacaud G(4), Kouskoff
V(3), McCubrey JA(5), Cocco L(1), Whetton AD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signaling Laboratory, Department of Biomedical Science (DIBINEM),
University of Bologna, Italy. (2)Stem Cell and Leukaemia Proteomics Laboratory,
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK. (3)Stem Cell Research Group, Manchester Academic Health Science
Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. (4)Stem Cell Biology Group
Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Manchester Academic Health Science
Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. (5)Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University, Greenville,
NC, USA.

Murine embryonic stem (ES) cells can differentiate in vitro into three germ
layers (endodermic, mesodermic, ectodermic). Studies on the differentiation of
these cells to specific early differentiation stages has been aided by an ES cell
line carrying the Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) targeted to the Brachyury (Bry)
locus which marks mesoderm commitment. Furthermore, expression of the Vascular
Endothelial Growth Factor receptor 2 (Flk1) along with Bry defines hemangioblast 
commitment. Isobaric-tag for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ(TM)) and
phosphopeptide enrichment coupled to liquid chromatography separation and mass
spectrometry allow the study of phosphorylation changes occurring at different
stages of ES cell development using Bry and Flk1 expression respectively. We
identified and relatively quantified 37 phosphoentities which are modulated
during mesoderm-induced ES cells differentiation, comparing epiblast-like, early 
mesoderm and hemangioblast-enriched cells. Among the proteins differentially
phosphorylated toward mesoderm differentiation were: the epigenetic regulator
Dnmt3b, the protein kinase GSK3b, the chromatin remodeling factor Smarcc1, the
transcription factor Utf1; as well as protein specifically related to stem cell
differentiation, as Eomes, Hmga2, Ints1 and Rif1. As most key factors regulating 
early hematopoietic development have also been implicated in various types of
leukemia, understanding the post-translational modifications driving their
regulation during normal development could result in a better comprehension of
their roles during abnormal hematopoiesis in leukemia.

PMCID: PMC4484429
PMID: 25890499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Oncol Rep. 2015 May;33(5):2567-74. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3824. Epub 2015 Feb 27.

Genome-wide analysis of histone modifications by ChIP-chip to identify silenced
genes in gastric cancer.

Zhu X(1), Liu J(1), Xu X(1), Zhang C(1), Dai D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital, China 
Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110032, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to identify novel histone modification markers in gastric
cancer (GC) by chromatin immunoprecipitation microarray (ChIP-chip) analysis and 
to determine whether these markers were able to discriminate between normal and
GC cells. We also tested for correlations with DNA methylation. We probed a human
CpG island microarray with DNA from a GC cell line (MKN45) by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP). ChIP-reverse-transcriptase quantitative polymerase
chain reaction PCR (RT-qPCR) was used to validate the microarray results.
Additionally, mRNA expression levels and the DNA methylation of potential target 
genes were evaluated by RT-qPCR and methylation-specific PCR (MSP). The moults
showed that 134 genes exhibited the highest signal-to-noise ratio of H3-K9
trimethylation over acetylation and 46 genes exhibited the highest
signal-to-noise ratio of H3-K9 trimethylation over H3-K4 trimethylation in MKN45 
cells. The ChIP-qPCR results agreed with those obtained from the ChIP-chip
analysis. Aberrant DNA methylation status and mRNA expression levels were also
identified for selected genes (PSD, SMARCC1 and Vps37A) in the GC cell lines. The
results suggest that CpG island microarray coupled with ChIP (ChIP-chip) can
identify novel targets of gene silencing in GC. Additionally, ChIP-chip is the
best approach for assessing the genome-wide status of epigenetic regulation,
which may allow for a broader genomic understanding compared to the knowledge
that has been accumulated from single-gene studies.

PMID: 25738530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Sep 9;3(3):460-74. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.07.004.
Epub 2014 Aug 14.

Transcriptional repression by the BRG1-SWI/SNF complex affects the pluripotency
of human embryonic stem cells.

Zhang X(1), Li B(1), Li W(1), Ma L(1), Zheng D(1), Li L(2), Yang W(3), Chu M(1), 
Chen W(1), Mailman RB(4), Zhu J(3), Fan G(5), Archer TK(6), Wang Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai
200241, China. (2)Biostatistics Branch, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human
Services, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. (3)Systems Biology Center,
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)Department
of Pharmacology, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033-0850, USA.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095-7088, USA. (6)Chromatin and Gene
Expression Group, Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Department of
Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. (7)Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences and School of 
Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China. Electronic
address: ywang@bio.ecnu.edu.cn.

The SWI/SNF complex plays an important role in mouse embryonic stem cells
(mESCs), but it remains to be determined whether this complex is required for the
pluripotency of human ESCs (hESCs). Using RNAi, we demonstrated that depletion of
BRG1, the catalytic subunit of the SWI/SNF complex, led to impaired self-renewing
ability and dysregulated lineage specification of hESCs. A unique composition of 
the BRG1-SWI/SNF complex in hESCs was further defined by the presence of BRG1,
BAF250A, BAF170, BAF155, BAF53A, and BAF47. Genome-wide expression analyses
revealed that BRG1 participated in a broad range of biological processes in hESCs
through pathways different from those in mESCs. In addition, chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) demonstrated that BRG1 played a
repressive role in transcriptional regulation by modulating the acetylation
levels of H3K27 at the enhancers of lineage-specific genes. Our data thus provide
valuable insights into molecular mechanisms by which transcriptional repression
affects the self-renewal and differentiation of hESCs.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4266000
PMID: 25241744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Hum Pathol. 2014 Nov;45(11):2247-54. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.06.027. Epub
2014 Aug 5.

Concurrent loss of INI1, PBRM1, and BRM expression in epithelioid sarcoma:
implications for the cocontributions of multiple SWI/SNF complex members to
pathogenesis.

Li L(1), Fan XS(2), Xia QY(2), Rao Q(2), Liu B(2), Yu B(2), Shi QL(2), Lu ZF(2), 
Zhou XJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University School of
Medicine, Nanjing, China; Department of Pathology, Anhui Medical University,
Hefei, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University
School of Medicine, Nanjing, China. (3)Department of Pathology, Jinling Hospital,
Nanjing University School of Medicine, Nanjing, China. Electronic address:
zhouxj3456@126.com.

The loss of INI1 (SMARCB1) expression, caused by SMARCB1 (INI1, SNF5L4, BAF47)
inactivation, frequently occurs in epithelioid sarcoma (ES) and could aid in
confirming the diagnosis. Except for INI1, the expression of switch in mating
type/sucrose nonfermentation complex members in ES has never been examined. In
this study, the expression of key subunits of this complex-INI1, BRG1 (SMARCA4), 
BRM (SNF2L2, SMARCA2), PBRM1 (hPB1, BAF180), and BAF155 (SMARCC1)-was analyzed in
23 ES cases: 15 conventional and 8 proximal type. All of the cases were reviewed 
and reclassified by hematoxylin-eosin staining and immunostaining for cytokeratin
AE1/3, epithelial membrane antigen, CD34, vimentin, and INI1 expression. Of the
23 ES cases, 19 (82.6%) showed a loss of PBRM1, and 18 (78.3%), a loss of INI1.
In most cases (17, 73.9%), loss of INI1 and PBRM1 expression was observed. The
pattern of PBRM1 expression was similar to that of INI1, that is, not correlated 
with changes in cellular morphology. The concurrent loss of BRM, PBRM1, and
INI1expression was detected in 2 cases with pure rhabdoid tumor features. The
frequent observation of concurrent loss of INI1 and PBRM1 suggests that certain
switch in mating type/sucrose nonfermentation complex components might act
synergistically in the pathogenesis of ES by unknown mechanisms and that these
components could provide new targets for therapy. The usefulness of PBRM1 as a
biomarker of ES and its mechanism in ES require further investigation. Loss of
BRM in ES with pure rhabdoid features suggests that BRM might be involved in the 
underlying mechanisms of this type of ES.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25200863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Hum Reprod. 2014 Aug;29(8):1818-27. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deu149. Epub 2014 Jun 17.

Identification of a duplication within the GDF9 gene and novel candidate genes
for primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) by a customized high-resolution array
comparative genomic hybridization platform.

Norling A(1), Hirschberg AL(2), Rodriguez-Wallberg KA(3), Iwarsson E(4), Wedell
A(5), Barbaro M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm 171 76, Sweden Department of Women's
and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital,
Stockholm 171 76, Sweden Centre for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden ameli.norling@ki.com. (2)Department of Women's and Children's
Health, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm 171 76, 
Sweden. (3)Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology, Section
for Obstetrics and Gynaecology and Fertility Unit, Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery,
Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm 171 76, Sweden
Centre for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Centre for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Science for Life Laboratory,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases 
(CMMS), Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm 171 76, Sweden. (6)Department
of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm 171 76, Sweden Centre for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases (CMMS),
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm 171 76, Sweden.

STUDY QUESTION: Can high-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH)
analysis of DNA samples from women with primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)
improve the diagnosis of the condition and identify novel candidate genes for
POI?
SUMMARY ANSWER: A mutation affecting the regulatory region of growth
differentiation factor 9 (GDF9) was identified for the first time together with
several novel candidate genes for POI.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Most patients with POI do not receive a molecular
diagnosis despite a significant genetic component in the pathogenesis.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: We performed a case-control study. Twenty-six
patients were analyzed by array CGH for identification of copy number variants.
Novel changes were investigated in 95 controls and in a separate population of 28
additional patients with POI. The experimental procedures were performed during a
1-year period.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: DNA samples from 26 patients with POI
were analyzed by a customized 1M array-CGH platform with whole genome coverage
and probe enrichment targeting 78 genes in sex development. By PCR amplification 
and sequencing, the breakpoint of an identified partial GDF9 gene duplication was
characterized. A multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) probe
set for specific identification of deletions/duplications affecting GDF9 was
developed. An MLPA probe set for the identification of additional cases or
controls carrying novel candidate regions identified by array-CGH was developed. 
Sequencing of three candidate genes was performed.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Eleven unique copy number changes were
identified in a total of 11 patients, including a tandem duplication of 475 bp,
containing part of the GDF9 gene promoter region. The duplicated region contains 
three NOBOX-binding elements and an E-box, important for GDF9 gene regulation.
This aberration is likely causative of POI. Fifty-four patients were investigated
for copy number changes within GDF9, but no additional cases were found. Ten
aberrations constituting novel candidate regions were detected, including a
second DNAH6 deletion in a patient with POI. Other identified candidate genes
were TSPYL6, SMARCC1, CSPG5 and ZFR2.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: This is a descriptive study and no functional
experiments were performed.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The study illustrates the importance of
analyzing small copy number changes in addition to sequence alterations in the
genetic investigation of patients with POI. Also, promoter regions should be
included in the investigation.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: The study was supported by grants from the
Swedish Research council (project no 12198 to A.W. and project no 20324 to
A.L.H.), Stockholm County Council (E.I., A.W. and K.R.W.), Foundation Frimurare
Barnhuset (A.N., A.W. and M.B.), Karolinska Institutet (A.N., A.L.H., E.I., A.W. 
and M.B.), Novo Nordic Foundation (A.W.) and Svenska Läkaresällskapet (M.B.). The
funding sources had no involvement in the design or analysis of the study. The
authors have no competing interests to declare.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Not applicable.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology.

PMCID: PMC4093997
PMID: 24939957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Int J Cancer. 2015 Feb 1;136(3):560-71. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29015. Epub 2014 Jun 19.

Biallelic germline and somatic mutations in malignant mesothelioma: multiple
mutations in transcription regulators including mSWI/SNF genes.

Yoshikawa Y(1), Sato A, Tsujimura T, Otsuki T, Fukuoka K, Hasegawa S, Nakano T,
Hashimoto-Tamaoki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan.

We detected low levels of acetylation for histone H3 tail lysines in malignant
mesothelioma (MM) cell lines resistant to histone deacetylase inhibitors. To
identify the possible genetic causes related to the low histone acetylation
levels, whole-exome sequencing was conducted with MM cell lines established from 
eight patients. A mono-allelic variant of BRD1 was common to two MM cell lines
with very low acetylation levels. We identified 318 homozygous protein-damaging
variants/mutations (18-78 variants/mutations per patient); annotation analysis
showed enrichment of the molecules associated with mammalian SWI/SNF (mSWI/SNF)
chromatin remodeling complexes and co-activators that facilitate initiation of
transcription. In seven of the patients, we detected a combination of variants in
histone modifiers or transcription factors/co-factors, in addition to variants in
mSWI/SNF. Direct sequencing showed that homozygous mutations in SMARCA4, PBRM1
and ARID2 were somatic. In one patient, homozygous germline variants were
observed for SMARCC1 and SETD2 in chr3p22.1-3p14.2. These exhibited extended
germline homozygosity and were in regions containing somatic mutations, leading
to a loss of BAP1 and PBRM1 expression in MM cell line. Most protein-damaging
variants were heterozygous in normal tissues. Heterozygous germline variants were
often converted into hemizygous variants by mono-allelic deletion, and were
rarely homozygous because of acquired uniparental disomy. Our findings imply that
MM might develop through the somatic inactivation of mSWI/SNF complex subunits
and/or histone modifiers, including BAP1, in subjects that have rare germline
variants of these transcription regulators and/or transcription
factors/co-factors, and in regions prone to mono-allelic deletion during
oncogenesis.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 24916674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 May;13(5):1286-98. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M112.026856. Epub
2014 Mar 12.

Identification of importin a 7 specific transport cargoes using a proteomic
screening approach.

Hügel S(1), Depping R, Dittmar G, Rother F, Cabot R, Sury MD, Hartmann E, Bader
M.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center of Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, Germany;

The importin a:ß complex is responsible for the nuclear import of proteins
bearing classical nuclear localization signals. In mammals, several importin a
subtypes are known to exist that are suggested to have individual functions.
Importin a 7 was shown to play a crucial role in early embryonic development in
mice. Embryos from importin a 7-depleted females stop at the two-cell stage and
show disturbed zygotic genome activation. As there is evidence that individual
importin a subtypes possess cargo specificities, we hypothesized that importin a 
7 binds a unique set of intracellular proteins. With the use of a collection of
in vitro and in vivo binding assays, importin a 7 interaction partners were
identified that differed from proteins found to bind to importin a 2 and 3. One
of the proteins preferentially binding importin a 7 was the maternal effect
protein Brg1. However, Brg1 was localized in oocyte nuclei in importin a
7-deficient embryos, albeit in reduced amounts, suggesting additional modes of
nuclear translocation of this factor. An additional SILAC-based screening
approach identified Ash2l, Chd3, Mcm3, and Smarcc1, whose nuclear import seems to
be disturbed in importin a 7-deficient fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC4014285
PMID: 24623588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 Jun;53(6):475-86. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22159. Epub
2014 Mar 3.

Consistent SMARCB1 homozygous deletions in epithelioid sarcoma and in a subset of
myoepithelial carcinomas can be reliably detected by FISH in archival material.

Le Loarer F(1), Zhang L, Fletcher CD, Ribeiro A, Singer S, Italiano A, Neuville
A, Houlier A, Chibon F, Coindre JM, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY;
Pathology Department, Institut Bergonié Cancer Center, Bordeaux, France.

Epithelioid sarcomas (ES) are mesenchymal neoplasms subclassified into distal and
proximal subtypes based on their distinct clinical presentations and histologic
features. Consistent loss of SMARCB1 nuclear expression has been considered as
the hallmark abnormality for both subtypes, a feature shared with atypical
teratoid/rhabdoid tumor of infancy (ATRT). While virtually all ATRTs harbor
underlying SMARCB1 somatic or germline alterations, mechanisms of SMARCB1
inactivation in ES are less well defined. To further define mechanisms of SMARCB1
inactivation a detailed molecular analysis was performed on 40 ES (25 proximal
and 15 distal ES, with classic morphology and negative SMARCB1 expression) for
their genomic status of SMARCB1 and related genes encoding the SWI/SNF subunits
(PBRM1, BRG1, BRM, SMARCC1/2 and ARID1A) by FISH using custom BAC probes. An
additional control group was included spanning a variety of 41 soft tissue
neoplasms with either rhabdoid/epithelioid features or selected histotypes
previously shown to lack SMARCB1 by IHC. Furthermore, 12 ES were studied by array
CGH (aCGH) and an independent TMA containing 50 additional ES cases was screened 
for Aurora Kinase A (AURKA) and cyclin D1 immunoexpression. Homozygous SMARCB1
deletions were found by FISH in 36/40 ES (21/25 proximal-type). One of the
distal-type ES displayed homozygous SMARCB1 deletion in the tumor cells, along
with a heterozygous deletion within normal tissue, finding confirmed by array
CGH. None of the proximal ES lacking homozygous SMARCB1 deletions displayed
alterations in other SWI/SNF subunits gene members. Among controls, only the
SMARCB1-immunonegative myoepithelial carcinomas displayed SMARCB1 homozygous
deletions in 3/5 cases, while no gene specific abnormalities were seen among all 
other histologic subtypes of sarcomas tested regardless of the SMARCB1 protein
status. There was no consistent pattern of AURKA and Cyclin D1 expression. The
array CGH was successful in 9/12 ES, confirming the SMARCB1 and other SWI/SNF
genes copy numbers detected by FISH. Our study confirms the shared pathogenesis
of proximal and distal ES, showing consistent SMARCB1 homozygous deletions.
Additionally we report the first ES case associated with a SMARCB1 constitutional
deletion, establishing a previously undocumented link with ATRT. Alternative
mechanisms of SMARCB1 inactivation in SMARCB1-disomic ES remain to be identified,
but appear unrelated to large genomic abnormalities in other SWI/SNF subunits.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4226650
PMID: 24585572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cancer Cell. 2014 Jan 13;25(1):21-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.12.007.

CARM1 methylates chromatin remodeling factor BAF155 to enhance tumor progression 
and metastasis.

Wang L(1), Zhao Z(1), Meyer MB(2), Saha S(3), Yu M(3), Guo A(4), Wisinski KB(5), 
Huang W(6), Cai W(7), Pike JW(2), Yuan M(8), Ahlquist P(9), Xu W(10).

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53706, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics and
Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(4)Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA 01923, USA. (5)Department of Medicine, 
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. (6)Department of
Pathology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. (7)Department
of Radiology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(8)Morgridge Institute for Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA; Department of Statistics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
WI 53706, USA. (9)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA; Morgridge Institute for Research,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. (10)McArdle
Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA. Electronic address: wxu@oncology.wisc.edu.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Jan 13;25(1):3-4.
    Breast Cancer Res. 2014;16(3):307.

Coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1), a coactivator for
various cancer-relevant transcription factors, is overexpressed in breast cancer.
To elucidate the functions of CARM1 in tumorigenesis, we knocked out CARM1 from
several breast cancer cell lines using Zinc-Finger Nuclease technology, which
resulted in drastic phenotypic and biochemical changes. The CARM1 KO cell lines
enabled identification of CARM1 substrates, notably the SWI/SNF core subunit
BAF155. Methylation of BAF155 at R1064 was found to be an independent prognostic 
biomarker for cancer recurrence and to regulate breast cancer cell migration and 
metastasis. Furthermore, CARM1-mediated BAF155 methylation affects gene
expression by directing methylated BAF155 to unique chromatin regions (e.g.,
c-Myc pathway genes). Collectively, our studies uncover a mechanism by which
BAF155 acquires tumorigenic functions via arginine methylation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4004525
PMID: 24434208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cancer Cell. 2014 Jan 13;25(1):3-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.12.017.

CARMA: CARM1 methylation of SWI/SNF in breast cancer.

Wang X(1), Roberts CW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA; Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA. (2)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
charles_roberts@dfci.harvard.edu.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Jan 13;25(1):21-36.

In this issue of Cancer Cell, Wang and colleagues report that CARM1, a protein
arginine methyltransferase, specifically methylates BAF155/SMARCC1, a core
subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling/tumor suppressor complex. This
modification facilitates the targeting of BAF155 to genes of the c-Myc pathway
and enhances breast cancer progression and metastasis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3954702
PMID: 24434203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jan 17;443(3):1048-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.12.089. Epub 2013 Dec 21.

Wwp2 targets SRG3, a scaffold protein of the SWI/SNF-like BAF complex, for
ubiquitination and degradation.

Luo X(1), Wang B(2), Tang F(1), Zhang J(3), Zhao Y(3), Li H(4), Jin Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Stem Cell Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China; Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute 
of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences/Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025,
China. (2)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences/Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. (3)Department of
Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA. (4)Shanghai Stem Cell Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China; Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute 
of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences/Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025,
China. Electronic address: biolihui@163.com. (5)Shanghai Stem Cell Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China; Key
Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences/Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. Electronic address:
yjin@sibs.ac.cn.

SRG3 plays essential roles both in early mouse embryogenesis and in
extra-embryonic vascular development. As one of the core components of the
SWI/SNF-like BAF complex, SRG3 serves as the scaffold protein and its protein
level controls the stability of the BAF complex, which controls diverse
physiological processes through transcriptional regulation. However, little is
known about how the protein level of SRG3 is regulated in mammalian cells.
Previously, we identified a murine ubiquitin ligase (Wwp2) and demonstrated that 
it interacts with pluripotency-associated key transcription factor Oct4 and RNA
polymerase II large subunit Rpb1, promoting their ubiquitination and degradation.
Here, we report that Wwp2 acts as a ubiquitin ligase of SRG3. Our results show
that Wwp2 and SRG3 form protein complexes and co-localize in the nucleus in
mammalian cells. The interaction is mediated through the WW domain of Wwp2 and
the PPPY motif of SRG3, respectively. Importantly, Wwp2 promotes ubiquitination
and degradation of SRG3 through the ubiquitin-proteasome system. The expression
of a catalytically inactive mutant of Wwp2 abolishes SRG3 ubiquitination.
Collectively, our study opens up a new avenue to understand how the protein level
of SRG3 is regulated in mammalian cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24365151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Dev Neurobiol. 2014 May;74(5):483-97. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22142. Epub 2014 Jan 9.

A unique missense allele of BAF155, a core BAF chromatin remodeling complex
protein, causes neural tube closure defects in mice.

Harmacek L(1), Watkins-Chow DE, Chen J, Jones KL, Pavan WJ, Salbaum JM, Niswander
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Graduate Program in Molecular Biology, Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, 80045.

Failure of embryonic neural tube closure results in the second most common class 
of birth defects known as neural tube defects (NTDs). While NTDs are likely the
result of complex multigenic dysfunction, it is not known whether polymorphisms
in epigenetic regulators may be risk factors for NTDs. Here we characterized
Baf155(msp3) , a unique ENU-induced allele in mice. Homozygous Baf155(mps3)
embryos exhibit highly penetrant exencephaly, allowing us to investigate the
roles of an assembled, but malfunctional BAF chromatin remodeling complex in vivo
at the time of neural tube closure. Evidence of defects in proliferation and
apoptosis were found within the neural tube. RNA-Seq analysis revealed that
surprisingly few genes showed altered expression in Baf155 mutant neural tissue, 
given the broad epigenetic role of the BAF complex, but included genes involved
in neural development and cell survival. Moreover, gene expression changes
between individual mutants were variable even though the NTD was consistently
observed. This suggests that inconsistent gene regulation contributes to failed
neural tube closure. These results shed light on the role of the BAF complex in
the process of neural tube closure and highlight the importance of studying
missense alleles to understand epigenetic regulation during critical phases of
development.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4670623
PMID: 24170322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Oct 3;13(4):373-4. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.09.013.

A foot in the door: how the chromatin modifier Brg1 and Pax6 jointly potentiate
adult neurogenesis.

Jaglin XH(1), Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Institute, Smilow Neuroscience Program, Department of
Neuroscience and Physiology, New York University, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Comment on
    Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Oct 3;13(4):403-18.

Transcription factors and chromatin modifiers are known to contribute to cell
specification. However, whether and how they jointly act is poorly understood. In
this issue of Cell Stem Cell, Ninkovic et al. show that Pax6 and Brg1 cooperate
to modulate gene expression in order to direct neurogenic fate in the olfactory
bulb.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24094315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cells. 2013 Oct;36(4):333-9. doi: 10.1007/s10059-013-0119-5. Epub 2013 Aug
29.

1H, 15N, and 13C resonance assignments and secondary structure of the SWIRM
domain of human BAF155, a chromatin remodeling complex component.

Moon S(1), Shin J, Lee D, Seong RH, Lee W.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics Laboratory, Department of
Biochemistry, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei University,
Seoul, 120-740, Korea.

Mammalian SWI/SNF complexes are evolutionary conserved, ATP-dependent chromatin
remodeling units. BAF155 in the SWI/SNF complex contains several highly conserved
domains, including SANT, SWIRM, and leucine zipper domains. The biological roles 
of the SWIRM domain remain unclear; however, both structural and biochemical
analyses of this domain have suggested that it could mediate protein-protein or
protein-DNA interactions during the chromatin remodeling process. The human
BAF155 SWIRM domain was cloned into the Escherichia coli expression vector
pMAL-c2X and purified using affinity chromatography for structural analysis. We
report the backbone (1)H, (15)N, and (13)C resonance assignments and secondary
structure of this domain using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and 
the TALOS+ program. The secondary structure consists of five a-helices that form 
a typical histone fold for DNA interactions. Our data suggest that the BAF155
SWIRM domain interacts with nucleosome DNA (Kd = 0.47 µM).

PMCID: PMC3887986
PMID: 23996527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Cell Cycle. 2013 Sep 15;12(18):2953-9. doi: 10.4161/cc.25999. Epub 2013 Aug 13.

BAF chromatin remodeling complex: cortical size regulation and beyond.

Tuoc TC(1), Narayanan R, Stoykova A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroanatomy; Universitätsmedizin Göttingen; Göttingen, Germany.

The multi-subunit chromatin remodeling BAF complex controls different
developmental processes. Using cortex-specific conditional knockout and
overexpression mouse models, we have recently reported that BAF170, a subunit of 
the vertebrate BAF chromatin remodeling complex, interacts with transcription
factor (TF) Pax6 to control cortical size and volume. The mechanistic basis
includes suppression of the expression of Pax6 target genes, which are required
for genesis of cortical intermediate progenitors (IPs) and specification of late 
neuronal subtype identity. In addition, we showed that a dynamic competition
between BAF170 and BAF155 subunits within the BAF complex during progression of
neurogenesis is a primary event in modulating the size of the mammalian cortex.
Here, we present additional insights into the interaction between the BAF complex
and TF Pax6 in the genesis of IPs of the developing cortex. Furthermore, we show 
that such competition between BAF170 and BAF155 is involved as well in the
determination of the size of the embryonic body. Our results add new insights
into a cell-intrinsic mechanism, mediated by the chromatin remodeling BAF complex
that controls vertebrate body shape and size.

PMCID: PMC3875669
PMID: 23974113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Oct 3;13(4):403-18. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.07.002. Epub
2013 Aug 8.

The BAF complex interacts with Pax6 in adult neural progenitors to establish a
neurogenic cross-regulatory transcriptional network.

Ninkovic J(1), Steiner-Mezzadri A, Jawerka M, Akinci U, Masserdotti G, Petricca
S, Fischer J, von Holst A, Beckers J, Lie CD, Petrik D, Miller E, Tang J, Wu J,
Lefebvre V, Demmers J, Eisch A, Metzger D, Crabtree G, Irmler M, Poot R, Götz M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Research, Helmholtz Centre Munich German Research
Center for Environmental Health (GmbH), 85764 Neuherberg, Germany; Physiological 
Genomics, Medical Faculty, University of Munich, Schillerstrasse 46, 80633
Munich, Germany.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Oct 3;13(4):373-4.

Numerous transcriptional regulators of neurogenesis have been identified in the
developing and adult brain, but how neurogenic fate is programmed at the
epigenetic level remains poorly defined. Here, we report that the transcription
factor Pax6 directly interacts with the Brg1-containing BAF complex in adult
neural progenitors. Deletion of either Brg1 or Pax6 in the subependymal zone
(SEZ) causes the progeny of adult neural stem cells to convert to the ependymal
lineage within the SEZ while migrating neuroblasts convert to different glial
lineages en route to or in the olfactory bulb (OB). Genome-wide analyses reveal
that the majority of genes downregulated in the Brg1 null SEZ and OB contain Pax6
binding sites and are also downregulated in Pax6 null SEZ and OB. Downstream of
the Pax6-BAF complex, we find that Sox11, Nfib, and Pou3f4 form a transcriptional
cross-regulatory network that drives neurogenesis and can convert postnatal glia 
into neurons. Taken together, elements of our work identify a tripartite effector
network activated by Pax6-BAF that programs neuronal fate.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4098720
PMID: 23933087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 11;8(7):e67552. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067552. Print 2013.

Reconstruction of an integrated genome-scale co-expression network reveals key
modules involved in lung adenocarcinoma.

Bidkhori G(1), Narimani Z, Hosseini Ashtiani S, Moeini A, Nowzari-Dalini A,
Masoudi-Nejad A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Systems Biology and Bioinformatics (LBB), Institute of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran.

Our goal of this study was to reconstruct a "genome-scale co-expression network" 
and find important modules in lung adenocarcinoma so that we could identify the
genes involved in lung adenocarcinoma. We integrated gene mutation, GWAS, CGH,
array-CGH and SNP array data in order to identify important genes and loci in
genome-scale. Afterwards, on the basis of the identified genes a co-expression
network was reconstructed from the co-expression data. The reconstructed network 
was named "genome-scale co-expression network". As the next step, 23 key modules 
were disclosed through clustering. In this study a number of genes have been
identified for the first time to be implicated in lung adenocarcinoma by
analyzing the modules. The genes EGFR, PIK3CA, TAF15, XIAP, VAPB, Appl1, Rab5a,
ARF4, CLPTM1L, SP4, ZNF124, LPP, FOXP1, SOX18, MSX2, NFE2L2, SMARCC1, TRA2B,
CBX3, PRPF6, ATP6V1C1, MYBBP1A, MACF1, GRM2, TBXA2R, PRKAR2A, PTK2, PGF and MYO10
are among the genes that belong to modules 1 and 22. All these genes, being
implicated in at least one of the phenomena, namely cell survival, proliferation 
and metastasis, have an over-expression pattern similar to that of EGFR. In few
modules, the genes such as CCNA2 (Cyclin A2), CCNB2 (Cyclin B2), CDK1, CDK5,
CDC27, CDCA5, CDCA8, ASPM, BUB1, KIF15, KIF2C, NEK2, NUSAP1, PRC1, SMC4, SYCE2,
TFDP1, CDC42 and ARHGEF9 are present that play a crucial role in cell cycle
progression. In addition to the mentioned genes, there are some other genes (i.e.
DLGAP5, BIRC5, PSMD2, Src, TTK, SENP2, PSMD2, DOK2, FUS and etc.) in the modules.

PMCID: PMC3708931
PMID: 23874428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Br J Cancer. 2013 Jul 23;109(2):502-11. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.320. Epub 2013 Jun 
25.

miR-320c regulates gemcitabine-resistance in pancreatic cancer via SMARCC1.

Iwagami Y(1), Eguchi H, Nagano H, Akita H, Hama N, Wada H, Kawamoto K, Kobayashi 
S, Tomokuni A, Tomimaru Y, Mori M, Doki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University,
Yamadaoka 2-2, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Gemcitabine-based chemotherapy is the standard treatment for
pancreatic cancer. However, the issue of resistance remains unresolved. The aim
of this study was to identify microRNAs (miRNAs) that govern the resistance to
gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: miRNA microarray analysis using gemcitabine-resistant clones of MiaPaCa2
(MiaPaCa2-RGs), PSN1 (PSN1-RGs), and their parental cells (MiaPaCa2-P, PSN1-P)
was conducted. Changes in the anti-cancer effects of gemcitabine were studied
after gain/loss-of-function analysis of the candidate miRNA. Further assessment
of the putative target gene was performed in vitro and in 66 pancreatic cancer
clinical samples.
RESULTS: miR-320c expression was significantly higher in MiaPaCa2-RGs and
PSN1-RGs than in their parental cells. miR-320c induced resistance to gemcitabine
in MiaPaCa2. Further experiments showed that miR-320c-related resistance to
gemcitabine was mediated through SMARCC1, a core subunit of the switch/sucrose
nonfermentable (SWI/SNF) chromatin remodeling complex. In addition, clinical
examination revealed that only SMARCC1-positive patients benefited from
gemcitabine therapy with regard to survival after recurrence (P=0.0463).
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that miR-320c regulates the resistance of
pancreatic cancer cells to gemcitabine through SMARCC1, suggesting that
miR-320c/SMARCC1 could be suitable for prediction of the clinical response and
potential therapeutic target in pancreatic cancer patients on gemcitabine-based
therapy.

PMCID: PMC3721395
PMID: 23799850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Dev Cell. 2013 May 13;25(3):256-69. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.04.005. Epub 2013 
May 2.

Chromatin regulation by BAF170 controls cerebral cortical size and thickness.

Tuoc TC(1), Boretius S, Sansom SN, Pitulescu ME, Frahm J, Livesey FJ, Stoykova A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group of Molecular Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Molecular Cell Biology, Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, 37077
Göttingen, Germany.

Increased cortical size is essential to the enhanced intellectual capacity of
primates during mammalian evolution. The mechanisms that control cortical size
are largely unknown. Here, we show that mammalian BAF170, a subunit of the
chromatin remodeling complex mSWI/SNF, is an intrinsic factor that controls
cortical size. We find that conditional deletion of BAF170 promotes indirect
neurogenesis by increasing the pool of intermediate progenitors (IPs) and results
in an enlarged cortex, whereas cortex-specific BAF170 overexpression results in
the opposite phenotype. Mechanistically, BAF170 competes with BAF155 subunit in
the BAF complex, affecting euchromatin structure and thereby modulating the
binding efficiency of the Pax6/REST-corepressor complex to Pax6 target genes that
regulate the generation of IPs and late cortical progenitors. Our findings reveal
a molecular mechanism mediated by the mSWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex that 
controls cortical architecture.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23643363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Mar 1;41(5):2857-68. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1462. Epub 2013 
Jan 15.

Nucleosome mapping across the CFTR locus identifies novel regulatory factors.

Yigit E(1), Bischof JM, Zhang Z, Ott CJ, Kerschner JL, Leir SH, Buitrago-Delgado 
E, Zhang Q, Wang JP, Widom J, Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Children's Memorial Research Center,
Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine
Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

Nucleosome positioning on the chromatin strand plays a critical role in
regulating accessibility of DNA to transcription factors and chromatin modifying 
enzymes. Hence, detailed information on nucleosome depletion or movement at
cis-acting regulatory elements has the potential to identify predicted binding
sites for trans-acting factors. Using a novel method based on enrichment of
mononucleosomal DNA by bacterial artificial chromosome hybridization, we mapped
nucleosome positions by deep sequencing across 250 kb, encompassing the cystic
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. CFTR shows tight
tissue-specific regulation of expression, which is largely determined by
cis-regulatory elements that lie outside the gene promoter. Although multiple
elements are known, the repertoire of transcription factors that interact with
these sites to activate or repress CFTR expression remains incomplete. Here, we
show that specific nucleosome depletion corresponds to well-characterized binding
sites for known trans-acting factors, including hepatocyte nuclear factor 1,
Forkhead box A1 and CCCTC-binding factor. Moreover, the cell-type selective
nucleosome positioning is effective in predicting binding sites for novel
interacting factors, such as BAF155. Finally, we identify transcription factor
binding sites that are overrepresented in regions where nucleosomes are depleted 
in a cell-specific manner. This approach recognizes the glucocorticoid receptor
as a novel trans-acting factor that regulates CFTR expression in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3597660
PMID: 23325854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Mar 1;22(5):695-706. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0461. Epub 2013
Jan 5.

A hierarchy in reprogramming capacity in different tissue microenvironments: what
we know and what we need to know.

Liebau S(1), Mahaddalkar PU, Kestler HA, Illing A, Seufferlein T, Kleger A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany.

Ectopic expression of certain transcription factors induces reprogramming of
somatic cells to a pluripotent state. A number of studies have shed light on the 
reprogramming capacity of various cell populations. As a result, it has been
shown that stem/progenitor cells derived from organs of all germ layers exhibit a
superior reprogramming efficiency compared to their differentiated progeny.
Although proliferative capacity and endogenous expression levels of pluripotency 
factors are likely to be involved in this superiority, the detailed molecular
understanding remains elusive so far. Recently, we have shown that the
BAF-complex (BAF155 and Brg1), mediating epigenetic changes during reprogramming,
is critical for the increased reprogramming efficiency of liver progenitor cells.
In this review, we summarize recently acquired findings of the increased
reprogramming capacity of adult stem/progenitor cell populations compared to
their differentiated counterparts and discuss the potential mechanisms involved.

PMID: 23167697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Genomics. 2013 Jan;101(1):12-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2012.09.006. Epub 2012 Oct
2.

Transcription factors expressed in embryonic and adult olfactory bulb neural stem
cells reveal distinct proliferation, differentiation and epigenetic control.

Marei HE(1), Ahmed AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytology and Histology, Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt.
hany800@yahoo.com

TF genomic markers associated with neurogenesis, proliferation, differentiation, 
and epigenetic control in human embryonic neural stem cells (hENSC(, and adult
human olfactory bulb neural stem cells (OBNSC) were studied by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and DNA microarray. The biological impact of TF gene
changes in the examined cell types was estimated using DAVID to specify a
different GO class and signaling pathway based on KEGG database. Eleven, and
twenty eight TF genes were up-regulated (fold change=2-39) in OBNSC, and hENSC
respectively. KEGG pathway analysis for the up-regulated TF genes revealed
significant enrichments for the basal transcription factor pathway, and Notch
signaling pathway in OBNSCs, and hENSCs, respectively. Immunofluorescence
analysis revealed a significantly greater number of ß-tubulin III (TUBB3), MAP,
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), and O4 in hENSC when compared to those in
OBNSC. Furthermore, the expression of epigenetic-related TF-genes SMARCC1, TAF12,
and UHRF1 increased significantly in OBNSC when compared with hENSC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23041222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Proteome Res. 2012 Oct 5;11(10):4863-72. doi: 10.1021/pr300307h. Epub 2012 Aug 
29.

Comprehensive proteomic analysis of nonintegrin laminin receptor interacting
proteins.

Venticinque L(1), Meruelo D.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Therapy Center, Cancer Institute and Department of Pathology, New York
University School of Medicine, 550 First Avenue, New York, New York 10016, United
States.

Human nonintegrin laminin receptor is a multifunctional protein acting as an
integral component of the ribosome and a cell surface receptor for laminin-1. The
laminin receptor is overexpressed in several human cancers and is also the cell
surface receptor for several viruses and pathogenic prion proteins, making it a
pathologically significant protein. This study focused on the proteomic
characterization of laminin receptor interacting proteins from Mus musculus. The 
use of affinity chromatography with immobilized recombinant laminin receptor
coupled with mass spectrometry analysis identified 45 proteins with high
confidence. Following validation through coimmunoprecipitation, the proteins were
classified based on predicted function into ribosomal, RNA processing, signal
transduction/metabolism, protein processing, cytoskeleton/cell anchorage,
DNA/chromatin, and unknown functions. A significant portion of the identified
proteins is related to functions or localizations previously described for
laminin receptor. This work represents a comprehensive proteomic approach to
studying laminin receptor and provides an essential stepping stone to a better
mechanistic understanding of this protein's diverse functions.

PMCID: PMC3495180
PMID: 22909348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e33542. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033542. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

Gene expression profile of adult human olfactory bulb and embryonic neural stem
cell suggests distinct signaling pathways and epigenetic control.

Marei HE(1), Ahmed AE, Michetti F, Pescatori M, Pallini R, Casalbore P,
Cenciarelli C, Elhadidy M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytology and Histology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Mansoura
University, Mansoura, Egypt. hany800@mans.edu.eg

Global gene expression profiling was performed using RNA from human embryonic
neural stem cells (hENSC), and adult human olfactory bulb-derived neural stem
cells (OBNSCs), to define a gene expression pattern and signaling pathways that
are specific for each cell lineage. We have demonstrated large differences in the
gene expression profile of human embryonic NSC, and adult human OBNSCs, but less 
variability between parallel cultures. Transcripts of genes involved in neural
tube development and patterning (ALDH1A2, FOXA2), progenitor marker genes (LMX1a,
ALDH1A1, SOX10), proliferation of neural progenitors (WNT1 and WNT3a),
neuroplastin (NPTN), POU3F1 (OCT6), neuroligin (NLGN4X), MEIS2, and NPAS1 were
up-regulated in both cell populations. By Gene Ontology, 325 out of 3875
investigated gene sets were scientifically different. 41 out of the 307
investigated Cellular Component (CC) categories, 45 out of the 620 investigated
Molecular Function (MF) categories, and 239 out of the 2948 investigated
Biological Process (BP) categories were significant. KEGG Pathway Class
Comparison had revealed that 75 out of 171 investigated gene sets passed the
0.005 significance threshold. Levels of gene expression were explored in three
signaling pathways, Notch, Wnt, and mTOR that are known to be involved in NS cell
fates determination. The transcriptional signature also deciphers the role of
genes involved in epigenetic modifications. SWI/SNF DNA chromatin remodeling
complex family, including SMARCC1 and SMARCE1, were found specifically
up-regulated in our OBNSC but not in hENSC. Differences in gene expression
profile of transcripts controlling epigenetic modifications, and signaling
pathways might indicate differences in the therapeutic potential of our examined 
two cell populations in relation to in cell survival, proliferation, migration,
and differentiation following engraftments in different CNS insults.

PMCID: PMC3317670
PMID: 22485144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Immunol. 2012 Apr 15;188(8):3791-803. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103390. Epub 2012 
Mar 16.

The SWI/SNF-like BAF complex is essential for early B cell development.

Choi J(1), Ko M, Jeon S, Jeon Y, Park K, Lee C, Lee H, Seong RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Institute of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, Research Center for Functional Cellulomics, Seoul National University, 
Seoul 151-742, Korea.

During the process of B cell development, transcription factors, such as E2A and 
Ebf1, have been known to play key roles. Although transcription factors and
chromatin regulators work in concert to direct the expression of B
lineage-specific genes, little is known about the involvement of regulators for
chromatin structure during B lymphopoiesis. In this article, we show that
deletion of Srg3/mBaf155, a scaffold subunit of the SWI/SNF-like BAF complex, in 
the hematopoietic lineage caused defects at both the common lymphoid progenitor
stage and the transition from pre-pro-B to early pro-B cells due to failures in
the expression of B lineage-specific genes, such as Ebf1 and Il7ra, and their
downstream target genes. Moreover, mice that were deficient in the expression of 
Brg1, a subunit of the complex with ATPase activity, also showed defects in early
B cell development. We also found that the expression of Ebf1 and Il7ra is
directly regulated by the SWI/SNF-like BAF complex. Thus, our results suggest
that the SWI/SNF-like BAF complex facilitates early B cell development by
regulating the expression of B lineage-specific genes.

PMID: 22427636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Nov;227(11):3678-92. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24076.

Nanog regulates molecules involved in stemness and cell cycle-signaling pathway
for maintenance of pluripotency of P19 embryonal carcinoma stem cells.

Choi SC(1), Choi JH, Park CY, Ahn CM, Hong SJ, Lim DS.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Center, Department of Cardiology, Korea University Anam
Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

To identify potential downstream targets of Nanog, a key transcription factor in 
the maintenance of pluripotency of embryonic stem (ES) and embryonal carcinoma
(EC) cells, global gene expression profiles in Nanog small interfering RNA
(siRNA)-transfected P19 EC stem cells were performed using cDNA, 60-mer, and
30-mer microarray platforms. The putative Nanog target genes identified by Nanog 
silencing were verified using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
after Nanog overexpression. Downregulation of Nanog in P19 cells resulted in
reduction of pluripotency markers, such as Fgf4, Klf2, Mtf2, Oct-4, Rex1, Sox1,
Yes, and Zfp143, whereas overexpression of Nanog in P19 cells reversely
upregulated their expression. However, expressions of pluripotency markers
Cripto, germ cell nuclear factor, Sox2, and Zfp57 as well as leukemia inhibitory 
factor (LIF)/Stat3 pathway molecules LIF, IL6st, and Stat3 were not affected
after 48 h transfection with Nanog siRNA or construct. Nanog silencing also
downregulated expression of molecules involved in the p53- and cell
cycle-signaling pathway (Atf3, Jdp2, Cul3, Hist1hic, and Bcl6), whereas
expression of E2f1, Tob1, Lyn, and Smarcc1 was upregulated by Nanog silencing.
Expressions of cyclins D1, D2, D3, and E1 as well as cyclin-dependent kinase
(Cdk) 1 and Cdk6 were downregulated by Nanog silencing in P19 cells, whereas
Nanog overexpression reversely increased their expressions. Taken together,
examination of global transcriptional changes after Nanog silencing followed by
verification by Nanog overexpression has revealed new molecules involved in the
maintenance of self-renewal and in the regulation of the p53- and cell
cycle-pathway of P19 cells.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22378194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Proteome Res. 2012 Apr 6;11(4):2091-102. doi: 10.1021/pr300155r. Epub 2012 Mar 
15.

Quantitative proteomic analysis of mouse embryonic fibroblasts and induced
pluripotent stem cells using 16O/18O labeling.

Huang X(1), Tian C, Liu M, Wang Y, Tolmachev AV, Sharma S, Yu F, Fu K, Zheng J,
Ding SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics
Core Facility, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198,
United States.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) hold great promise for regenerative
medicine as well as for investigations into the pathogenesis and treatment of
various diseases. Understanding of key intracellular signaling pathways and
protein targets that control development of iPSC from somatic cells is essential 
for designing new approaches to improve reprogramming efficiency. Here, we report
the development and application of an integrated quantitative proteomics platform
for investigating differences in protein expressions between mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEF) and MEF-derived iPSC. This platform consists of 16O/18O
labeling, multidimensional peptide separation coupled with tandem mass
spectrometry, and data analysis with UNiquant software. With this platform, a
total of 2481 proteins were identified and quantified from the 16O/18O-labeled
MEF-iPSC proteome mixtures with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Among them, 218
proteins were significantly upregulated, while 247 proteins were significantly
downregulated in iPSC compared to MEF. Many nuclear proteins, including Hdac1,
Dnmt1, Pcna, Ccnd1, Smarcc1, and subunits in DNA replication and RNA polymerase
II complex, were found to be enhanced in iPSC. Protein network analysis revealed 
that Pcna functions as a hub orchestrating complicated mechanisms including DNA
replication, epigenetic inheritance (Dnmt1), and chromatin remodeling (Smarcc1)
to reprogram MEF and maintain stemness of iPSC.

PMID: 22375802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Feb 17;418(3):512-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.01.057. Epub 2012 Jan 20.

SRG3/mBAF155 stabilizes the SWI/SNF-like BAF complex by blocking CHFR mediated
ubiquitination and degradation of its major components.

Jung I(1), Sohn DH, Choi J, Kim JM, Jeon S, Seol JH, Seong RH.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Functional Cellulomics, Department of Biological Sciences,
Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Republic of Korea.

The murine SWI/SNF-like BAF complex is an ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling
complex that functions as a transcriptional regulator in cell proliferation,
differentiation and development. The SWI/SNF-like BAF complex consists of several
components including core subunits such as BRG1, BAF155/SRG3, BAF47/SNF5/INI1,
and BAF170. We have previously shown that the interaction between SRG3/mBAF155
and other components of the complex stabilizes them by attenuating their
proteasomal degradation. However, it has not been known how the major components 
of the SWI/SNF-like BAF complex such as BRG1, SNF5, and BAF60a are targeted for
the ubiquitination and degradation, and how SRG3/mBAF155 protects them from the
degradation process. Here we report that CHFR interacts with BRG1, SNF5, and
BAF60a of the SWI/SNF-like BAF complex and ubiquitinates them to target for
degradation through a proteasome-mediated pathway, and that SRG3/mBAF155
stabilizes these components by blocking their interaction with CHFR.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22285184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Gastroenterology. 2012 Apr;142(4):907-17. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2012.01.004. Epub
2012 Jan 12.

Increased reprogramming capacity of mouse liver progenitor cells, compared with
differentiated liver cells, requires the BAF complex.

Kleger A(1), Mahaddalkar PU, Katz SF, Lechel A, Joo JY, Loya K, Lin Q, Hartmann
D, Liebau S, Kraus JM, Cantz T, Kestler HA, Zaehres H, Schöler H, Rudolph KL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Max-Planck-Research Department on Stem
Cell Aging, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany. alexander.kleger@uni-ulm.de

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Ectopic expression of certain transcription factors can
reprogram somatic cells to a pluripotent state. Hematopoietic and muscle stem
cells can be more efficiently reprogrammed than differentiated blood or muscle
cells, yet similar findings have not been shown in other primary organ systems.
Moreover, molecular characteristics of the cellular hierarchy of tissues that
influence reprogramming capacities need to be delineated. We analyzed the effect 
of differentiation stage of freshly isolated, mouse liver cells on the
reprogramming efficiency.
METHODS: Liver progenitor cell (LPC)-enriched cell fractions were isolated from
adult (6-8 wk) and fetal (embryonic day 14.5) livers of mice and reprogrammed to 
become induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. Different transcription factors were
expressed in liver cells, and markers of pluripotency were examined, along with
the ability of iPS cells to differentiate, in vitro and in vivo, into different
germ layers.
RESULTS: Fetal and adult LPCs had significantly greater reprogramming efficiency 
after transduction with 3 or 4 reprogramming factors. Transduction
efficiency-corrected reprogramming rates of fetal LPCs were 275-fold higher,
compared with unsorted fetal liver cells, when 3 reprogramming factors were
transduced. The increased reprogramming efficiency of LPCs, compared with
differentiated liver cells, occurred independently of proliferation rates, but
was associated with endogenous expression of reprogramming factors (Klf4 and
c-Myc) and BAF (Brg1/Brm associated factor)-complex members Baf155 and Brg1,
which mediate epigenetic changes during reprogramming. Knockdown of BAF complex
members negated the increased reprogramming efficiency of LPCs, compared with
non-LPCs.
CONCLUSIONS: LPCs have intrinsic, cell proliferation-independent characteristics 
resulting in an increased reprogramming capacity compared to differentiated liver
cells.

Copyright © 2012 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22245845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Epigenetics. 2011 Dec;6(12):1444-53. doi: 10.4161/epi.6.12.18492.

Identification of a core member of the SWI/SNF complex, BAF155/SMARCC1, as a
human tumor suppressor gene.

DelBove J(1), Rosson G, Strobeck M, Chen J, Archer TK, Wang W, Knudsen ES,
Weissman BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Recent studies have established that two core members of the SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling complex, BRG1 and SNF5/INI1, possess tumor-suppressor activity in
human and mouse cancers. While the third core member, BAF155, has been implicated
by several studies as having a potential role in tumor development, direct
evidence for its tumor suppressor activity has remained lacking. Therefore, we
screened for BAF155 deficiency in a large number of human tumor cell lines. We
identified 2 cell lines, the SNUC2B colon carcinoma and the SKOV3 ovarian
carcinoma, displaying a complete loss of protein expression while maintaining
normal levels of mRNA expression. The SKOV3 cell line possesses a heterozygous
4bp deletion that results in an 855AA truncated protein, while the cause of the
loss of BAF155 expression in the SNUC2B cell line appears due to a
post-transcriptional error. However, the lack of detectable BAF155 expression did
not affect sensitivity to RB-mediated cell cycle arrest. Re-expression of full
length but not a truncated form of BAF155 in the two cancer cell lines leads to
reduced colony forming ability characterized by replicative senescence but not
apoptosis. Collectively, these data suggest that loss of BAF155 expression
represents another mechanism for inactivation of SWI/SNF complex activity in the 
development in human cancer. Our results further indicate that the c-terminus
proline-glutamine rich domain plays a critical role in the tumor suppressor
activity of this protein.

PMCID: PMC3256333
PMID: 22139574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22484. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022484. Epub 2011 Jul 19.

EphB6 receptor modulates micro RNA profile of breast carcinoma cells.

Bhushan L(1), Kandpal RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Western University of Health Sciences,
Pomona, California, United States of America.

Breast carcinoma cells have a specific pattern of expression for Eph receptors
and ephrin ligands. EphB6 has previously been characterized as a signature
molecule for invasive breast carcinoma cells. The transcription of EphB6 is
silenced in breast carcinoma cells and its re-expression leads to decreased
invasiveness of MDA-MB-231 cells. Such differences in phenotypes of native and
EphB6 expressing MDA-MB-231 cells relate to an altered profile of micro RNAs.
Comparative hybridization of total RNA to slides containing all known miRNAs by
using locked nucleic acid (LNA) miRCURY platform yielded a significantly altered 
profile of miRNAs in MDA-MB-231 cells stably transfected with EphB6. After
applying a threshold of change and a p-value of <0.001, the list of significantly
altered miRNAs included miR-16, miR-23a, miR-24, miR-26a, miR-29a, miR-100,
miRPlus-E1172 and miRPlus-E1258. The array-based changes were validated by
real-time qPCR of miR-16, miR-23a, miR-24 and miR-100. Except miRPlus-E1172 and
miRPlus-E1258, the remaining six miRNAs have been observed in a variety of
cancers. The biological relevance of target mRNAs was predicted by using a
common-target selection approach that allowed the identification of SMARCA5,
SMARCC1, eIF2C2, eIF2C4, eIF4EBP2, FKABP5, FKBP1A, TRIB1, TRIB2, TRIB3, BMPR2,
BMPR1A and BMPR1B as important targets of a subset of significantly altered
miRNAs. Quantitative PCR revealed that the levels of SMARCC1, eIFC4, eIF4EB2,
FKBP1a, FKBP5, TRIB1, TRIB3, BMPR1a and BMPR2 transcripts were significantly
decreased in MDA-MB-231 cells transfected with EphB6. These observations confirm 
targeting of specific mRNAs by miR-100, miR-23a, miR-16 and miR-24, and suggest
that the kinase-deficient EphB6 receptor is capable of initiating signal
transduction from the cell surface to the nucleus resulting in the altered
expression of a variety of genes involved in tumorigenesis and invasion. The
alterations in miRNAs and their target mRNAs also suggest indirect involvement of
EphB6 in PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways.

PMCID: PMC3139643
PMID: 21811619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biomed Sci. 2011 Jun 22;18:45. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-18-45.

Stromal upregulation of lateral epithelial adhesions: gene expression analysis of
signalling pathways in prostate epithelium.

Chambers KF(1), Pearson JF, Pellacani D, Aziz N, Guvic M, Klein CA, Lang SH.

Author information: 
(1)Yorkshire Cancer Research Unit, Dept, Biology, University of York, Heslington,
York YO10 5YW, UK.

BACKGROUND: Stromal signalling increases the lateral cell adhesions of prostate
epithelial cells grown in 3D culture. The aim of this study was to use microarray
analysis to identify significant epithelial signalling pathways and genes in this
process.
METHODS: Microarray analysis was used to identify genes that were differentially 
expressed when epithelial cells were grown in 3D Matrigel culture with stromal
co-culture compared to without stroma. Two culture models were employed: primary 
epithelial cells (ten samples) and an epithelial cell line (three experiments). A
separate microarray analysis was performed on each model system and then compared
to identify tissue-relevant genes in a cell line model.
RESULTS: TGF beta signalling was significantly ranked for both model systems and 
in both models the TGF beta signalling gene SOX4 was significantly down
regulated. Analysis of all differentially expressed genes to identify genes that 
were common to both models found several morphology related gene clusters; actin 
binding (DIAPH2, FHOD3, ABLIM1, TMOD4, MYH10), GTPase activator activity (BCR,
MYH10), cytoskeleton (MAP2, MYH10, TMOD4, FHOD3), protein binding (ITGA6, CD44), 
proteinaceous extracellular matrix (NID2, CILP2), ion channel/ ion transporter
activity (CACNA1C, CACNB2, KCNH2, SLC8A1, SLC39A9) and genes associated with
developmental pathways (POFUT1, FZD2, HOXA5, IRX2, FGF11, SOX4, SMARCC1).
CONCLUSIONS: In 3D prostate cultures, stromal cells increase lateral epithelial
cell adhesions. We show that this morphological effect is associated with gene
expression changes to TGF beta signalling, cytoskeleton and anion activity.

PMCID: PMC3141633
PMID: 21696611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Scand J Urol Nephrol. 2011 Mar;45(2):91-6. doi: 10.3109/00365599.2010.530295.
Epub 2010 Nov 18.

Smarcc1 expression: a significant predictor of disease-specific survival in
patients with clinically localized prostate cancer treated with no intention to
cure.

Hansen RL(1), Heeboll S, Ottosen PD, Dyrskjøt L, Borre M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Aarhus University Hospital, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: The clinical outcome of prostate cancer (PC) is extremely variable and
therefore difficult to predict at the early stage of the disease. Since
curative-intended therapies are bound up with the risk of severe adverse events, 
identification of new prognostic markers in PC is essential in individualized
clinical treatment. The Smarcc1 protein, a part of the intranuclear SWI/SNF
complex, is up-regulated in PC, and has been suggested to be implicated in tumour
dedifferentiation, progression and biochemical recurrence. This makes Smarcc1 a
possible candidate marker for PC survival.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was used to measure protein expression
levels of Smarcc1in on a tissue microarray containing specimens from 100 patients
suffering from clinically localized PC treated with no intention to cure and
followed to death.
RESULTS: The median age at diagnosis was 75.5 years (55-95 years) and the median 
survival time was 5 years (0.01-15 years). In total, 41 patients (41%) died of
PC. Statistically, there was no significant association between Smarcc1
immunostaining (negative/positive) and Gleason score (p = 0.7/0.8) or the
clinical T stage (p = 0.9). Positive staining for Smarcc1 in patients with
clinically localized PC correlated with a prolonged disease-free survival as
opposed to negative staining (p = 0.025).
CONCLUSION: In patients with clinically localized PC treated without intention of
cure, Smarcc1 expression was a statistically significant and independent
predictor of disease-specific survival.

PMID: 21087120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Oncogene. 2011 Jan 27;30(4):445-56. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.424. Epub 2010 Oct 11.

Srg3, a mouse homolog of BAF155, is a novel p53 target and acts as a tumor
suppressor by modulating p21(WAF1/CIP1) expression.

Ahn J(1), Ko M, Lee C, Kim J, Yoon H, Seong RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Institute of Molecular Biology &
Genetics, Research Center for Functional Cellulomics, Seoul National University, 
Seoul, Korea.

Some subunits of the SWI/SNF complex function as tumor suppressors. However,
underlying mechanisms are still incompletely defined. Here, we show that Srg3, a 
mouse homolog of BAF155 that function as a core subunit of this complex,
suppresses tumorigenesis in vivo. DNA damage signals promoted Srg3 degradation by
inducing p53. Deficiency of Srg3 promoted G1 cell-cycle arrest, but antagonized
apoptotic response to DNA damage by robustly inducing p53 and p21 proteins. Srg3 
heterozygous mice were prone to sarcoma formation, which was further enhanced by 
haploinsufficiency of p53. These tumors highly expressed p53 and p21 but lacked
Srg3 expression. Our results establish a novel function of Srg3 in tumor
suppression and provide insights into genetic pathways dictating tumor
suppression by the SWI/SNF complex.

PMID: 20935679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Biol Chem. 2010 Nov 12;285(46):35665-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.173997. Epub
2010 Sep 9.

Ubiquitin-dependent and ubiquitin-independent control of subunit stoichiometry in
the SWI/SNF complex.

Keppler BR(1), Archer TK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, NIEHS, National Institutes of Health, 
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

The mammalian SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex is a key player in multiple
chromatin transactions. Core subunits of this complex, including the ATPase,
Brg-1, and various Brg-1-associated factors (BAFs), work in concert to maintain a
functional remodeling complex. This intra-complex regulation is supervised by
protein-protein interactions, as stoichiometric levels of BAF proteins are
maintained by proteasomal degradation. We show that the mechanism of
BAF155-mediated stabilization of BAF57 involves blocking its ubiquitination by
preventing interaction with TRIP12, an E3 ubiquitin ligase. Consequently, as
opposed to complexed BAF57, whose principal lysines are unavailable for
ubiquitination, uncomplexed BAF57 can be freely ubiquitinated and degraded by the
proteasome. Additionally, a BAF57 mutant, which contains no lysine residues, was 
found to retain its ability to be stabilized by interaction with BAF155,
suggesting that in addition to the ubiquitin-dependent mechanism of BAF57
degradation, there exists a ubiquitin-independent mechanism that may involve the 
direct interaction of BAF57 with the proteasome. We propose that this regulatory 
mechanism exists to ensure functional fidelity of the complex and prevent the
accumulation of uncomplexed proteins, which may disrupt the normal activity of
the complex.

PMCID: PMC2975191
PMID: 20829358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cell. 2010 Jun 11;141(6):943-55. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.04.037.

Chromatin-Remodeling Components of the BAF Complex Facilitate Reprogramming.

Singhal N(1), Graumann J, Wu G, Araúzo-Bravo MJ, Han DW, Greber B, Gentile L,
Mann M, Schöler HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstrasse 20, D-48149 Münster, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Aug;11(8):540-1.

Reprogramming of somatic cells achieved by combination of the four transcription 
factors Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc has very low efficiency. To increase the
reprogramming efficiency and better understand the process, we sought to identify
factors that mediate reprogramming with higher efficiency. We established an
assay to screen nuclear fractions from extracts of pluripotent mouse cells based 
on Oct4 reactivation. Using proteomics, we identified components of the
ATP-dependent BAF chromatin-remodeling complex, which significantly increases
reprogramming efficiency when used together with the four factors. The
reprogrammed cells could transmit to the germline and exhibited pluripotency.
Reprogramming remained highly efficient when c-Myc was not present but BAF
components were overexpressed. BAF complex components mediate this effect by
facilitating enhanced Oct4 binding to target promoters during reprogramming.
Thus, somatic cell reprogramming using chromatin-remodeling molecules represents 
an efficient method of generating reprogrammed cells.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20550931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 22;285(4):2340-50. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.026997. Epub 2009 
Nov 12.

The SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex modulates peripheral T cell activation
and proliferation by controlling AP-1 expression.

Jeong SM(1), Lee C, Lee SK, Kim J, Seong RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Institute of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, and Research Center for Functional Cellulomics, Seoul National
University, 599 Gwanangno, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

The SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex has been implicated in the activation
and proliferation of T cells. After T cell receptor signaling, the SWI/SNF
complex rapidly associates with chromatin and controls gene expression in T
cells. However, the process by which the SWI/SNF complex regulates peripheral T
cell activation has not been elucidated. In this study, we show that the SWI/SNF 
complex regulates cytokine production and proliferation of T cells. During T cell
activation, the SWI/SNF complex is recruited to the promoter of the transcription
factor AP-1, and it increases the expression of AP-1. Increased expression of the
SWI/SNF complex resulted in enhanced AP-1 activity, cytokine production, and
proliferation of peripheral T cells, whereas knockdown of the SWI/SNF complex
expression impaired the AP-1 expression and reduced the activation and
proliferation of T cells. Moreover, mice that constitutively expressed the
SWI/SNF complex in T cells were much more susceptible to experimentally induced
autoimmune encephalomyelitis than the normal mice were. These results suggest
that the SWI/SNF complex plays a critical role during T cell activation and
subsequent immune responses.

PMCID: PMC2807292
PMID: 19910461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Stem Cells. 2009 Dec;27(12):2979-91. doi: 10.1002/stem.223.

Smarcc1/Baf155 couples self-renewal gene repression with changes in chromatin
structure in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Schaniel C(1), Ang YS, Ratnakumar K, Cormier C, James T, Bernstein E, Lemischka
IR, Paddison PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Black Family Stem Cell Institute, Department of Gene and Cell Medicine, New
York, New York 10029, USA.

Little is known about the molecular mechanism(s) governing differentiation
decisions in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). To identify factors critical for ESC
lineage formation, we carried out a functional genetic screen for factors
affecting Nanog promoter activity during mESC differentiation. We report that
members of the PBAF chromatin remodeling complex, including Smarca4/Brg1,
Smarcb1/Baf47, Smarcc1/Baf155, and Smarce1/Baf57, are required for the repression
of Nanog and other self-renewal gene expression upon mouse ESC (mESC)
differentiation. Knockdown of Smarcc1 or Smarce1 suppressed loss of Nanog
expression in multiple forms of differentiation. This effect occurred in the
absence of self-renewal factors normally required for Nanog expression (e.g.,
Oct4), possibly indicating that changes in chromatin structure, rather than loss 
of self-renewal gene transcription per se, trigger differentiation. Consistent
with this notion, mechanistic studies demonstrated that expression of Smarcc1 is 
necessary for heterochromatin formation and chromatin compaction during
differentiation. Collectively, our data reveal that Smarcc1 plays important roles
in facilitating mESCs differentiation by coupling gene repression with global and
local changes in chromatin structure.

PMID: 19785031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Anticancer Res. 2009 Jun;29(6):1859-66.

Differentially regulated genes in MEN1-transfected BON cells using
RT-differential display and oligonucleotide microarrays.

Lopez-Egido JR(1), Wang Y, Grönberg M, Grimfjärd P, Wang S, Stålberg P, Skogseid 
B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, University Hospital, 751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Apart from inactivation of the MEN1 gene, the molecular mechanisms
involved in tumorigenesis of the endocrine organs and MEN1-associated
non-endocrine lesions remain unknown.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In order to learn more about down-stream effects upon MEN1
gene inactivation BON1 cells were transfected with a MEN1 gene construct
(BON/M1C), and both RT-differential display and oligonucleotide microarrays were 
performed.
RESULTS: Three genes (SMARCC1, OVCA2 and SRp55) found to be differentially
regulated on differential display were corroborated by northern blots on cell
line RNA when comparing MEN1 transfected cells with control (empty vector
transfection). When comparing two different passages of BON/M1C with two passages
of vector control using oligonucleotide microarrays, 25 up-regulated genes and 64
down-regulated genes could be found using a cut-off of >or=1.6 times.
CONCLUSION: These findings might contribute to the understanding of the molecular
pathways involved in MEN1 tumorigenesis, and may also provide knowledge of genes 
involved in sporadic endocrine tumorigenesis.

PMID: 19528440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Mar 31;106(13):5181-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0812889106. Epub 2009 Mar 11.

An embryonic stem cell chromatin remodeling complex, esBAF, is essential for
embryonic stem cell self-renewal and pluripotency.

Ho L(1), Ronan JL, Wu J, Staahl BT, Chen L, Kuo A, Lessard J, Nesvizhskii AI,
Ranish J, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.

Mammalian SWI/SNF [also called BAF (Brg/Brahma-associated factors)] ATP-dependent
chromatin remodeling complexes are essential for formation of the totipotent and 
pluripotent cells of the early embryo. In addition, subunits of this complex have
been recovered in screens for genes required for nuclear reprogramming in Xenopus
and mouse embryonic stem cell (ES) morphology. However, the mechanism underlying 
the roles of these complexes is unclear. Here, we show that BAF complexes are
required for the self-renewal and pluripotency of mouse ES cells but not for the 
proliferation of fibroblasts or other cells. Proteomic studies reveal that ES
cells express distinctive complexes (esBAF) defined by the presence of Brg
(Brahma-related gene), BAF155, and BAF60A, and the absence of Brm (Brahma),
BAF170, and BAF60C. We show that this specialized subunit composition is required
for ES cell maintenance and pluripotency. Our proteomic analysis also reveals
that esBAF complexes interact directly with key regulators of pluripotency,
suggesting that esBAF complexes are specialized to interact with ES cell-specific
regulators, providing a potential explanation for the requirement of BAF
complexes in pluripotency.

PMCID: PMC2654396
PMID: 19279220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Br J Cancer. 2009 Feb 10;100(3):511-23. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604884. Epub 2009
Jan 20.

Dysregulation of the transcription factors SOX4, CBFB and SMARCC1 correlates with
outcome of colorectal cancer.

Andersen CL(1), Christensen LL, Thorsen K, Schepeler T, Sørensen FB, Verspaget
HW, Simon R, Kruhøffer M, Aaltonen LA, Laurberg S, Ørntoft TF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Aarhus
University Hospital, Aarhus N DK8200, Denmark.

The aim of this study was to identify deregulated transcription factors (TFs) in 
colorectal cancer (CRC) and to evaluate their relation with the recurrence of
stage II CRC and overall survival. Microarray-based transcript profiles of 20
normal mucosas and 424 CRC samples were used to identify 51 TFs displaying
differential transcript levels between normal mucosa and CRC. For a subset of
these we provide in vitro evidence that deregulation of the Wnt signalling
pathway can lead to the alterations observed in tissues. Furthermore, in two
independent cohorts of microsatellite-stable stage II cancers we found that high 
SOX4 transcript levels correlated with recurrence (HR 2.7; 95% CI, 1.2-6.0;
P=0.01). Analyses of approximately 1000 stage I-III adenocarcinomas, by
immunohistochemistry, revealed that patients with tumours displaying high levels 
of CBFB and SMARCC1 proteins had a significantly better overall survival rate
(P=0.0001 and P=0.0275, respectively) than patients with low levels. Multivariate
analyses revealed that a high CBFB protein level was an independent predictor of 
survival. In conclusion, several of the identified TFs seem to be involved in the
progression of CRC.

PMCID: PMC2658541
PMID: 19156145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Histol Histopathol. 2008 Sep;23(9):1069-76.

SMARCC1 expression is upregulated in prostate cancer and positively correlated
with tumour recurrence and dedifferentiation.

Heebøll S(1), Borre M, Ottosen PD, Andersen CL, Mansilla F, Dyrskjøt L, Orntoft
TF, Tørring N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Aarhus
University Hospital - Skejby, Aarhus, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: The identification of new prognostic markers in prostate cancer (PC) 
is essential to improve patient treatment and management. Data suggest that
SMARCC1 protein, a part of the intranuclear SWI/SNF complex which enhances the
transactivation of the androgen receptor, is upregulated in PC and therefore a
possible candidate marker for PC progression.
MATERIALS: Expression of SMARCC1 immunostaining was analysed on a tissue
microarray containing specimens from 327 patients with prostate cancer and
clinical follow-up information. Furthermore, 30 specimens from patients with
benign prostate hyperplasia were included as controls as well as 30 specimens of 
benign prostate tissue from PC patients. Also, 18 specimens from lymph node
metastases were analysed.
RESULTS: All benign specimens showed no or minimal staining for SMARCC1. In
contrast, 20% of the specimens from patients with non-metastatic and
non-recurrent disease showed moderate to marked staining. In 31% of the patients 
with recurrent disease and in 31% of the patients with metastatic disease we
found moderate to strong SMARCC1 immunostaining. In total, 23% of lymph node
metastases expressed SMARCC1. SMARCC1 expression was also positively correlated
to Gleason score (p<0.05), clinical T stage (p<0.01) and time to recurrence
(p<0.001). In a logistic regression analysis, patients with a marked SMARCC1
immunostaining had a significantly elevated odds ratio (OR) of 16 for recurrent
cancer and an OR of 4.5 for metastatic disease. Conclusions. Our present results 
demonstrate an increased expression of SMARCC1 protein in prostate cancer and
reveal a positive correlation with tumour dedifferentiation, progression,
metastasis and time to recurrence.

PMID: 18581278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Stem Cells. 2008 May;26(5):1155-65. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0846. Epub 2008
Mar 6.

BAF250B-associated SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex is required to maintain
undifferentiated mouse embryonic stem cells.

Yan Z(1), Wang Z, Sharova L, Sharov AA, Ling C, Piao Y, Aiba K, Matoba R, Wang W,
Ko MS.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Instability and Chromatin-Remodeling Section, National Institute on
Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Whether SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes play roles in embryonic stem (ES) 
cells remains unknown. Here we show that SWI/SNF complexes are present in mouse
ES cells, and their composition is dynamically regulated upon induction of ES
cell differentiation. For example, the SWI/SNF purified from undifferentiated ES 
cells contains a high level of BAF155 and a low level of BAF170 (both of which
are homologs of yeast SWI3 protein), whereas that from differentiated cells
contains nearly equal amounts of both. Moreover, the levels of BAF250A and
BAF250B decrease during the differentiation of ES cells, whereas that of BRM
increases. The altered expression of SWI/SNF components hinted that these
complexes could play roles in ES cell maintenance or differentiation. We
therefore generated ES cells with biallelic inactivation of BAF250B and found
that these cells display a reduced proliferation rate and an abnormal cell cycle.
Importantly, these cells are deficient in the self-renewal capacity of
undifferentiated ES cells and exhibit certain phenotypes of differentiated cells,
including reduced expression of several pluripotency-related genes and increased 
expression of some differentiation-related genes. These data suggest that the
BAF250B-associated SWI/SNF is essential for mouse ES cells to maintain their
normal proliferation and pluripotency. The work presented here underscores the
importance of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes in pluripotent stem cells.

PMCID: PMC2409195
PMID: 18323406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. BMC Genomics. 2008 Feb 4;9:64. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-64.

Up regulation in gene expression of chromatin remodelling factors in cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia.

Shadeo A(1), Chari R, Lonergan KM, Pusic A, Miller D, Ehlen T, Van Niekerk D,
Matisic J, Richards-Kortum R, Follen M, Guillaud M, Lam WL, MacAulay C.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics & Developmental Biology, British Columbia Cancer Research
Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada. ashadeo@bccrc.ca.

BACKGROUND: The highest rates of cervical cancer are found in developing
countries. Frontline monitoring has reduced these rates in developed countries
and present day screening programs primarily identify precancerous lesions termed
cervical intraepithelial neoplasias (CIN). CIN lesions described as mild
dysplasia (CIN I) are likely to spontaneously regress while CIN III lesions
(severe dysplasia) are likely to progress if untreated. Thoughtful consideration 
of gene expression changes paralleling the progressive pre invasive neoplastic
development will yield insight into the key casual events involved in cervical
cancer development.
RESULTS: In this study, we have identified gene expression changes across 16
cervical cases (CIN I, CIN II, CIN III and normal cervical epithelium) using the 
unbiased long serial analysis of gene expression (L-SAGE) method. The 16 L-SAGE
libraries were sequenced to the level of 2,481,387 tags, creating the largest
SAGE data collection for cervical tissue worldwide. We have identified 222 genes 
differentially expressed between normal cervical tissue and CIN III. Many of
these genes influence biological functions characteristic of cancer, such as cell
death, cell growth/proliferation and cellular movement. Evaluation of these genes
through network interactions identified multiple candidates that influence
regulation of cellular transcription through chromatin remodelling (SMARCC1,
NCOR1, MRFAP1 and MORF4L2). Further, these expression events are focused at the
critical junction in disease development of moderate dysplasia (CIN II)
indicating a role for chromatin remodelling as part of cervical cancer
development.
CONCLUSION: We have created a valuable publically available resource for the
study of gene expression in precancerous cervical lesions. Our results indicate
deregulation of the chromatin remodelling complex components and its influencing 
factors occur in the development of CIN lesions. The increase in SWI/SNF
stabilizing molecule SMARCC1 and other novel genes has not been previously
illustrated as events in the early stages of dysplasia development and thus not
only provides novel candidate markers for screening but a biological function for
targeting treatment.

PMCID: PMC2277413
PMID: 18248679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Dev Biol. 2008 Mar 1;315(1):136-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.12.024. Epub 2007
Dec 27.

SRG3, a core component of mouse SWI/SNF complex, is essential for extra-embryonic
vascular development.

Han D(1), Jeon S, Sohn DH, Lee C, Ahn S, Kim WK, Chung H, Seong RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Institute of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, and Research Center for Functional Cellulomics, Seoul National
University, San 56-1, Shillim-dong, Kwanak-gu, Seoul, 151-742, Korea.

The SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex functions as a transcriptional regulator
and plays a significant role in cell proliferation, differentiation and embryonic
development. SRG3, a homologue of human BAF155, is a core component of the mouse 
SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex. Mutant mice deficient in Srg3 expression
are peri-implantation lethal. To investigate the role of SRG3 in the
post-implantation stage, we generated SRG3 transgene-rescued (Srg3-/-Tg+) embryos
by inducing exogenous gene expression. These Srg3-/-Tg+ embryos overcame early
embryonic lethality and extended the life span until mid-gestation. However, the 
embryos displayed significant defects in blood vessel formation and fetal
circulation within the yolk sac around embryonic day 10.5, which led to
developmental retardation and death. We found that SRG3 expression was absent in 
the visceral endoderm of Srg3-/-Tg+ yolk sacs, while SRG3 was normally expressed 
in wild-type embryos. In addition, expression of angiogenesis-related genes,
including Angiopoietin1, Tie2, EphrinB2, Ihh and Notch1, was markedly reduced in 
Srg3-/-Tg+ yolk sacs. During normal angiogenesis, maturation of the visceral
endoderm development is observed in the yolk sac. However, in Srg3-/-Tg+ yolk
sacs, the visceral endoderm did not develop normally. Our results indicate that
SRG3 is required for angiogenesis and visceral endoderm development in the yolk
sac.

PMID: 18206867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Oncogene. 2007 Nov 1;26(50):7153-7. Epub 2007 May 7.

Reprogramming of the SWI/SNF complex for co-activation or co-repression in
prohibitin-mediated estrogen receptor regulation.

Zhang B(1), Chambers KJ, Faller DV, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02118, USA.

The SWI/SNF complex participates as a co-activator in the transcriptional
regulation of certain genes. Conversely, we and others have recently established 
that Brg1 and Brm, the central components of SWI/SNF, act instead as
co-repressors for E2F-mediated transcriptional repression, and for the
transcription of certain other promoters. We report here that Brg-1 and Brm can
switch their mode of function at same promoter between activation and repression 
by ligand-directed differential coordination with BAF155, BAF170, HDAC1, p300 and
prohibitin. This ligand and context-dependent reprogramming of the SWI/SNF
complex allows it to differentially serve as either a co-repressor or a
co-activator of transcription at the same promoter.

PMID: 17486062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Zygote. 2007 May;15(2):129-38.

Expression of SRG3, a chromatin-remodelling factor, in the mouse oocyte and early
preimplantation embryos.

Sun F(1), Tang F, Yan AY, Fang HY, Sheng HZ.

Author information: 
(1)Programme for Graduation Studies, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, PR China.

SRG3 (Smarcc1) is a core subunit of the SWI/SNF complex. In the absence of SRG3, 
embryonic development ceases during peri-implantation stages, indicating that
SRG3, as well as the chromatin-remodelling process, plays an essential role in
early mouse development. To gain a better understanding of chromatin remodelling 
during the early stages of development, we examined SRG3 expression during
oogenesis and preimplantation stages using immunofluorescence and western blot
assays. SRG3 was detected in nuclei of oocytes during growth and maturation.
Following fertilization, SRG3 was detected in pronuclei shortly after their
formation. Nuclear concentrations of SRG3 increased in a time-dependent fashion
and were found to be greater in the male pronucleus than in the female
pronucleus. The increase in nuclear SRG3 was partially inhibited by a protein
synthesis inhibitor, but not by a transcriptional inhibitor. Expression of SRG3
is accompanied by expression of Brg1 and Ini1, two other core subunits of the
SWI/SNF complex. The expression of these three remodelling factors parallels that
of SP1 and TBP, both spatially and temporally, in the mouse embryo, suggesting a 
role for remodelling factors in chromatin structure and function during early
development.

PMID: 17462105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Biol Chem. 2007 Apr 6;282(14):10614-24. Epub 2007 Jan 24.

SRG3 interacts directly with the major components of the SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling complex and protects them from proteasomal degradation.

Sohn DH(1), Lee KY, Lee C, Oh J, Chung H, Jeon SH, Seong RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Institute of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, and Research Center for Functional Cellulomics, Seoul National
University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea.

The mammalian SWI/SNF complex is an evolutionarily conserved ATP-dependent
chromatin remodeling complex that consists of nine or more components. SRG3, a
murine homologue of yeast SWI3, Drosophila MOIRA, and human BAF155, is a core
component of the murine SWI/SNF complex required for the regulation of
transcriptional processes associated with development, cellular differentiation, 
and proliferation. Here we report that SRG3 interacts directly with other
components of the mammalian SWI/SNF complex such as SNF5, BRG1, and BAF60a. The
SWIRM domain and the SANT domain were required for SRG3-SNF5 and SRG3-BRG1
interactions, respectively. In addition, SRG3 stabilized SNF5, BRG1, and BAF60a
by attenuating their proteasomal degradation, suggesting its general role in the 
stabilization of the SWI/SNF complex. Such a stabilization effect of SRG3 was not
only observed in the in vitro cell system, but also in cells isolated from SRG3
transgenic mice or knock-out mice haploinsufficient for the Srg3 gene. Taken
together, these results suggest the critical role of SRG3 in the
post-transcriptional stabilization of the major components of the SWI/SNF
complex.

PMID: 17255092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jan;27(2):438-52. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

Chromatin remodeling complex interacts with ADD1/SREBP1c to mediate
insulin-dependent regulation of gene expression.

Lee YS(1), Sohn DH, Han D, Lee HW, Seong RH, Kim JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, San 56-1,
Sillim-Dong, Kwanak-Gu, Seoul 151-742, South Korea.

Insulin plays a critical role in whole-body energy homeostasis by regulating
lipid and glucose metabolism. In fat and liver tissues, ADD1/SREBP1c is a key
transcription factor to mediate insulin-dependent regulation of gene expression. 
Although transcriptional and proteolytic activation of ADD1/SREBP1c has been
studied intensively, the mechanism by which insulin regulates expression of its
target genes with ADD1/SREBP1c at the chromatin level is unclear. Here, we reveal
that SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling factors interact with the ADD1/SREBP1c and
actively regulate insulin-dependent gene expression. Insulin enhanced recruitment
of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling factors to its target gene promoters with
concomitant changes in the chromatin structures as well as gene expression.
Furthermore, in vivo overexpression of BAF155/SRG3, a component of the SWI/SNF
complex, substantially promoted insulin target gene expression and insulin
sensitivity. Taken together, our results suggest that the SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling complexes confer not only insulin-dependent gene expression but also
insulin sensitivity in vivo via interaction with ADD1/SREBP1c.

PMCID: PMC1800793
PMID: 17074803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Oncogene. 2006 Aug 3;25(33):4605-12. Epub 2006 Mar 27.

Members of the hSWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex associate with and are
phosphorylated by protein kinase B/Akt.

Foster KS(1), McCrary WJ, Ross JS, Wright CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

In an adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-dependent process, the hSWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling complex functions to alter chromatin structure, thereby regulating
transcription factor access to DNA. In addition to interactions with
transcription factors and recognition of acetylated histone residues, the
chromatin remodeling activity of hSWI/SNF has also been shown to respond to a
variety of cell signaling pathways. Our results demonstrate a novel interaction
between the serine/threonine kinase Akt and members of the hSWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling complex. Activation of Akt in HeLa cells resulted in its association
with hSWI/SNF subunits: INI1, BAF155 and BAF170, as well as actin. BAF155 became 
preferentially recognized by an antibody that detects phosphorylated Akt
substrates upon activation of Akt, suggesting that BAF155 may be an in vivo
target for phosphorylation by Akt. Glutathione-S-transferase (GST) pulldown
experiments demonstrated that INI1 and BAF155 were both capable of directly
interacting with Akt. Finally, in vitro kinase assays provided additional
evidence that BAF155 and potentially INI1 are substrates for Akt phosphorylation.
These data provide the first evidence that Akt signaling may modulate function of
the hSWI/SNF complex.

PMID: 16568092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Dec 23;338(3):1435-46. Epub 2005 Oct 26.

Expression of SRG3, a core component of mouse SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling
complex, is regulated by cooperative interactions between Sp1/Sp3 and Ets
transcription factors.

Ahn J(1), Ko M, Lee K, Oh J, Jeon SH, Seong RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Institute of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, Research Center for Functional Cellomics, Seoul National University,
Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea.

SRG3, a mouse homolog of yeast SWI3 and human BAF155, is known to be a core
component of SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex. We have previously shown that 
SRG3 plays essential roles in early mouse embryogenesis, brain development, and
T-cell development. SRG3 gene expression was differentially regulated depending
on the developmental stages and exhibited tissue-specific pattern. In this study,
we showed that the functional interactions between Sp and Ets family
transcription factors are crucial for the SRG3 expression. Sp1 and Sp3
specifically bound to the two canonical Sp-binding sites (GC boxes) at -152 and
-114, and a non-canonical Sp-binding site (CCTCCT motif) at -108 in the SRG3
promoter. Using Drosophila SL2 cells, we found that various Sp or Ets family
members activate the SRG3 promoter through these Sp- or Ets-binding sites,
respectively, in a dose-dependent manner. Intriguingly, different combinatorial
expression of Ets and Sp factors in SL2 cells resulted in either strong
synergistic activation or repression of the SRG3 promoter activity. Moreover, the
Sp-mediated activation of SRG3 promoter required the intact Ets-binding element. 
Taken together, these results suggest that diverse interactions between Sp1/Sp3
and Ets factors are crucial for the SRG3 gene expression.

PMID: 16288722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;25(20):9016-27.

Regulating SWI/SNF subunit levels via protein-protein interactions and
proteasomal degradation: BAF155 and BAF170 limit expression of BAF57.

Chen J(1), Archer TK.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Section, Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC
27709, USA.

The mammalian SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex, whose function is of critical
importance in transcriptional regulation, contains approximately 10 protein
components. The expression levels of the core SWI/SNF subunits, including
BRG1/Brm, BAF155, BAF170, BAF60, hSNF/Ini1, and BAF57, are stoichiometric, with
few to no unbound molecules in the cell. Here we report that exogenous expression
of the wild type or certain deletion mutants of BAF57, a key subunit that
mediates the interaction between the remodeling complex and transcription
factors, results in diminished expression of endogenous BAF57. This
down-regulation process is mediated by an increase in proteasome-dependent
degradation of the BAF57 protein. Furthermore, the protein levels of BAF155/170
dictate the maximum cellular amount of BAF57. We mapped the domains responsible
for the interaction between BAF57 and BAF155 and demonstrated that
protein-protein interactions between them play an important role in this
regulatory process. These findings provide insights into the physiological
mechanisms responsible for maintaining the proper stoichiometric levels of the
protein components comprising multimeric enzyme complexes.

PMCID: PMC1265786
PMID: 16199878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jun;25(12):4841-52.

Modulation of androgen receptor transactivation by the SWI3-related gene product 
(SRG3) in multiple ways.

Hong CY(1), Suh JH, Kim K, Gong EY, Jeon SH, Ko M, Seong RH, Kwon HB, Lee K.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center and School of Biological Sciences and Technology,
Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

The SWI3-related gene product (SRG3), a component of the mouse SWI/SNF complex,
has been suggested to have an alternative function. Here, we demonstrate that in 
the prostate transactivation of the androgen receptor (AR) is modulated by SRG3
in multiple ways. The expression of SRG3, which is developmentally regulated in
the prostate, is induced by androgen through AR. SRG3 in turn enhances the
transactivation of AR, providing a positive feedback regulatory loop. The SRG3
coactivation of AR transactivation is achieved through the recruitment of
coactivator SRC-1, the protein level of which is upregulated by SRG3, providing
another pathway of positive regulation. Interestingly, SRG3 coactivation of AR
transactivation is fully functional in BRG1/BRM-deficient C33A cells and the
AR/SRG3/SRC-1 complex formed in vivo contains neither BRG1 nor BRM protein,
suggesting the possibility of an SRG3 function independent of the SWI/SNF
complex. Importantly, the AR/SRG3/SRC-1 complex occupies androgen response
elements on the endogenous SRG3 and PSA promoter in an androgen-dependent manner 
in mouse prostate and LNCaP cells, respectively, inducing gene expression. These 
results suggest that the multiple positive regulatory mechanisms of AR
transactivation by SRG3 may be important for the rapid proliferation of prostate 
cells during prostate development and regeneration.

PMCID: PMC1140583
PMID: 15923603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Neurosci. 2005 Mar 30;25(13):3350-7.

Retinoic acid-induced chromatin remodeling of mouse kappa opioid receptor gene.

Park SW(1), Huq MD, Loh HH, Wei LN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

The mouse kappa opioid receptor (KOR) gene is constitutively expressed in P19
embryonic stem cells but is first suppressed and reactivated during retinoic acid
(RA)-induced neuronal differentiation. However, no RA response element (RARE) can
be found in this gene regulatory region. The suppression and reactivation of the 
KOR gene in this neuronal differentiation model suggested chromatin remodeling
occurred on this gene promoter triggered by RA induction. This study asks whether
RA induces alteration in the nucleosomal structure of this gene promoter that has
no apparent RARE and, if so, how RA remodels chromatin of this promoter. The
results revealed two loose nucleosomes, N1 at -44 (3' boundary) from the
transcription initiation site and N2 spanning the transcription initiation site, 
that are relevant to active transcription. RA formed a repressive chromatin
configuration of this promoter by compacting nucleosome N1, followed by
nucleosome N2 condensation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated RA
induced replacement of the c-Myc/Max complex with the Max/Mad1 complex on the E
box located within nucleosome N1, coinciding with reduced Sp1 binding to GC boxes
located within nucleosome N2 and recruitment of chromatin remodeling factor
Brahma-related gene 1 (BRG-1) to this promoter. Consistently, histone
deacetylation, Lys9 methylation, and hypophosphorylation of RNA polymerase II
C-terminal domain were detected on this promoter after RA treatment. It is
concluded that RA induces KOR gene suppression, as early neuronal differentiation
marker, by inducing substitution of c-Myc/Max with Max/Mad on the E box and by
BRG-1 involved nucleosome recruitment and chromatin condensation, thereby
abolishing Sp1 binding.

PMID: 15800190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2005 Feb;24(1):55-7.

Monoclonal antibodies reactive with the BAF155 (SMARCC1) and BAF170 (SMARCC2)
components of human SWI/SNF-related complexes.

Wang X(1), Liao DW, Scoy MV, Pacchione S, Yaciuk P, Moran E.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

Mammalian SWI/SNF-related chromatin remodeling complexes are required for
transcription controls that underlie differentiation, development, and tumor
suppression. The complexes each consist of an ATPase of the SWI2/SNF2 family and 
approximately seven stably associated non-catalytic subunits. In spite of the
importance of these complexes to biological processes, monoclonal antibodies to
the various subunits have not been readily available. Mammalian complexes can
vary in subunit composition, but the BAF155 (SMARCC1) subunit and a closely
related protein, BAF170 (SMARCC2), appear to be ubiquitous components. Here we
report the development of antibodies raised against a BAF155-derived peptide. The
antibodies were raised against a single peptide of 18 amino acids. However,
hybridomas expressing antibodies of two different specificities were isolated.
One, designated DXD7, is specific for BAF155. The other, designated DXD12, is
reactive with both BAF155 and BAF170. The antibodies are reactive against both
native and denatured proteins, and are suitable for immunoprecipitation and
Western blots. The DXD7 antibody is suitable additionally for immunofluorescence 
assays.

PMID: 15785210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Clin Oncol. 2005 Mar 1;23(7):1491-9.

Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (ATRT): improved survival in children 3 years
of age and older with radiation therapy and high-dose alkylator-based
chemotherapy.

Tekautz TM(1), Fuller CE, Blaney S, Fouladi M, Broniscer A, Merchant TE, Krasin
M, Dalton J, Hale G, Kun LE, Wallace D, Gilbertson RJ, Gajjar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Mail Stop 260, St Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, 332 N Lauderdale St, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

PURPOSE: To describe clinical features, therapeutic approaches, and prognostic
factors in pediatric patients with atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (ATRT)
treated at St Jude Children's Research Hospital (SJCRH).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Primary tumor samples from patients diagnosed with ATRT at 
SJCRH between July 1984 and June 2003 were identified. Pathology review included 
histologic, immunohistochemical analysis, and fluorescence in situ hybridization 
for SMARCB1 (also known as hSNF5/INI1) deletion. Clinical records of patients
with pathologic confirmation of ATRT were reviewed.
RESULTS: Thirty-seven patients were diagnosed with ATRT at SJCRH during the
19-year study interval. Six patients were excluded from this clinical review
based on pathologic or clinical criteria. Of the remaining 31 patients, 22 were
younger than 3 years. Posterior fossa primary lesions and metastatic disease at
diagnosis were more common in younger patients with ATRT. All patients underwent 
surgical resection; 30 received subsequent chemotherapy. The majority of patients
aged 3 years or older received postoperative craniospinal radiation. Two-year
event-free (EFS) and overall survival (OS) of children aged 3 years or older
(EFS, 78% + 14%; OS, 89% +/- 11%) were significantly better than those for
younger patients (EFS, 11% +/- 6%; OS, 17% +/- 8%); EFS, P = .009 and OS, P =
.0001. No other clinical characteristics were predictive of survival. Three of
four patients 3 years or older with progressive disease were successfully rescued
with ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide therapy.
CONCLUSION: Children presenting with ATRT before the age of 3 years have a dismal
prognosis. ATRT presenting in older patients can be cured using a combination of 
radiation and high-dose alkylating therapy. Older patients with relapsed ATRT can
have salvage treatment using ICE chemotherapy.

PMID: 15735125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 13;279(33):34373-9. Epub 2004 Jun 8.

Nitric oxide inhibits glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis of thymocytes by
repressing the SRG3 expression.

Jeong SM(1), Lee KY, Shin D, Chung H, Jeon SH, Seong RH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences and Institute of Molecular Biology & Genetics,
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

Nitric oxide (NO) plays many roles in the immune system. It has been known that
NO rescues thymocytes from glucocorticoid (GC)-induced apoptosis. However, the
downstream target of NO in the protection from GC-induced thymocyte apoptosis has
yet to be identified. We previously reported that GC sensitivity of developing
thymocytes is dependent on the expression level of SRG3. In the present report,
we found that NO repressed the SRG3 expression in both primary thymocytes and
16610D9 thymoma cells. Specifically, NO down-regulated the transcription of SRG3 
via the inactivation of the transcription factor Sp1 DNA-binding activity to the 
SRG3 promoter. In addition, overexpression of SRG3 by a heterologous promoter
reduced NO-mediated rescue of thymocytes from GC-induced apoptosis. These
observations strongly suggest that NO may be involved in protecting immature
thymocytes from GC-induced apoptosis by repressing the SRG3 expression in thymus.

PMID: 15187086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Sep;23(17):6210-20.

BAF60a mediates critical interactions between nuclear receptors and the BRG1
chromatin-remodeling complex for transactivation.

Hsiao PW(1), Fryer CJ, Trotter KW, Wang W, Archer TK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina 27709, USA.

Nuclear hormone receptors are ligand-dependent transcriptional regulators that
modulate chromatin structure. However, the precise molecular mechanisms by which 
receptors recruit chromatin-remodeling activity are not fully elucidated. We show
that in the absence of its ligand-binding domain, the glucocorticoid receptor
(GR) is able to interact with both nuclear receptor coactivators and the BRG1
chromatin-remodeling complex in vivo. Individually, the GR makes direct
interactions with BRG1-associated factor 60a (BAF60a) and BAF57, but not with
BRG1, BAF155, or BAF170. Further, BAF60a possesses at least two interaction
surfaces, one for GR and BRG1 and a second for BAF155 and BAF170. A GR mutant,
GR(R488Q), that fails to interact with BAF60a in vitro has reduced
chromatin-remodeling activity and reduced transcriptional activity from the
promoter assembled as chromatin in vivo. Stable expression of a BAF60a truncation
mutant, BAF60a4-140, caused chromatin-specific loss of GR functions in vivo. In
the presence of the BAF60a mutant, the GR fails to interact with the BRG1 complex
and consequently is also deficient in its ability to activate transcription from 
chromatin. Thus, in addition to previously identified BAF250, BAF60a may provide 
another critical and direct link between nuclear receptors and the BRG1 complex
that is required for promoter recruitment and subsequent chromatin remodeling.

PMCID: PMC180928
PMID: 12917342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Nov 1;10(23):2651-60.

Fanconi anemia protein, FANCA, associates with BRG1, a component of the human
SWI/SNF complex.

Otsuki T(1), Furukawa Y, Ikeda K, Endo H, Yamashita T, Shinohara A, Iwamatsu A,
Ozawa K, Liu JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Jichi Medical School, Yakushiji 3311-1,
Minamikawachi, Kawachi, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a genetic disorder that predisposes to hematopoietic
failure, birth defects and cancer. We identified an interaction between the FA
protein, FANCA and brm-related gene 1 (BRG1) product. BRG1 is a subunit of the
SWI/SNF complex, which remodels chromatin structure through a DNA-dependent
ATPase activity. FANCA was demonstrated to associate with the endogenous SWI/SNF 
complex. We also found a significant increase in the molecular chaperone,
glucose-regulated protein 94 (GRP94) among BRG1-associated factors isolated from 
a FANCA-mutant cell line, which was not seen in either a normal control cell line
or the mutant line complemented by wild-type FANCA. Despite this specific
difference, FANCA did not appear to be absolutely required for in vitro chromatin
remodeling. Finally, we demonstrated co-localization in the nucleus between
transfected FANCA and BRG1. The physiological action of FANCA on the SWI/SNF
complex remains to be clarified, but our work suggests that FANCA may recruit the
SWI/SNF complex to target genes, thereby enabling coupled nuclear functions such 
as transcription and DNA repair.

PMID: 11726552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Genes Dev. 2000 Oct 1;14(19):2441-51.

Functional selectivity of recombinant mammalian SWI/SNF subunits.

Kadam S(1), McAlpine GS, Phelan ML, Kingston RE, Jones KA, Emerson BM.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The SWI/SNF family of chromatin-remodeling complexes plays a key role in
facilitating the binding of specific transcription factors to nucleosomal DNA in 
diverse organisms from yeast to man. Yet the process by which SWI/SNF and other
chromatin-remodeling complexes activate specific subsets of genes is poorly
understood. We show that mammalian SWI/SNF regulates transcription from
chromatin-assembled genes in a factor-specific manner in vitro. The DNA-binding
domains (DBDs) of several zinc finger proteins, including EKLF, interact directly
with SWI/SNF to generate DNase I hypersensitivity within the chromatin-assembled 
beta-globin promoter. Interestingly, we find that two SWI/SNF subunits (BRG1 and 
BAF155) are necessary and sufficient for targeted chromatin remodeling and
transcriptional activation by EKLF in vitro. Remodeling is achieved with only the
BRG1-BAF155 minimal complex and the EKLF zinc finger DBD, whereas transcription
requires, in addition, an activation domain. In contrast, the BRG1-BAF155 complex
does not interact or function with two unrelated transcription factors, TFE3 and 
NF-kappaB. We conclude that specific domains of certain transcription factors
differentially target SWI/SNF complexes to chromatin in a gene-selective manner
and that individual SWI/SNF subunits play unique roles in transcription
factor-directed nucleosome remodeling.

PMCID: PMC316972
PMID: 11018012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cell. 2000 Jul 21;102(2):257-65.

BRCA1 is associated with a human SWI/SNF-related complex: linking chromatin
remodeling to breast cancer.

Bochar DA(1), Wang L, Beniya H, Kinev A, Xue Y, Lane WS, Wang W, Kashanchi F,
Shiekhattar R.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Germline mutations in the tumor suppressor gene, BRCA1, predispose individuals to
breast and ovarian cancers. Using a combination of affinity- and conventional
chromatographic techniques, we have isolated a predominant form of a multiprotein
BRCA1-containing complex from human cells displaying chromatin-remodeling
activity. Mass spectrometric sequencing of components of this complex indicated
that BRCA1 is associated with a SWI/SNF-related complex. We show that BRCA1 can
directly interact with the BRG1 subunit of the SWI/SNF complex. Moreover,
p53-mediated stimulation of transcription by BRCA1 was completely abrogated by
either a dominant-negative mutant of BRG1 or the cancer-causing deletion in exon 
11 of BRCA1. These findings reveal a direct function for BRCA1 in transcriptional
control through modulation of chromatin structure.

PMID: 10943845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Mol Cell. 1999 Feb;3(2):247-53.

Reconstitution of a core chromatin remodeling complex from SWI/SNF subunits.

Phelan ML(1), Sif S, Narlikar GJ, Kingston RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114,
USA.

Protein complexes of the SWI/SNF family remodel nucleosome structure in an
ATP-dependent manner. Each complex contains between 8 and 15 subunits, several of
which are highly conserved between yeast, Drosophila, and humans. We have
reconstituted an ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complex using a subset of
conserved subunits. Unexpectedly, both BRG1 and hBRM, the ATPase subunits of
human SWI/SNF complexes, are capable of remodeling mono-nucleosomes and
nucleosomal arrays as purified proteins. The addition of INI1, BAF155, and BAF170
to BRG1 increases remodeling activity to a level comparable to that of the whole 
hSWI/SNF complex. These data define the functional core of the hSWI/SNF complex.

PMID: 10078207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;19(2):1460-9.

Cyclin E associates with BAF155 and BRG1, components of the mammalian SWI-SNF
complex, and alters the ability of BRG1 to induce growth arrest.

Shanahan F(1), Seghezzi W, Parry D, Mahony D, Lees E.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signaling Department, DNAX Research Institute, Palo Alto, California
94304, USA.

SWI-SNF complexes have been implicated in transcriptional regulation by chromatin
remodeling. We have identified an interaction between two components of the
mammalian SWI-SNF complex and cyclin E, an essential cell cycle regulatory
protein required for G1/S transition. BRG1 and BAF155, mammalian homologs of
yeast SWI2 and SWI3, respectively, are found in cyclin E complexes and are
phosphorylated by cyclin E-associated kinase activity. In this report, we show
that overexpression of BRG1 causes growth arrest and induction of
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase activity, which can be overcome by
cyclin E. Our results suggest that cyclin E may modulate the activity of the
SWI-SNF apparatus to maintain the chromatin in a transcriptionally permissive
state.

PMCID: PMC116074
PMID: 9891079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cell. 1998 Oct 2;95(1):93-104.

A SWI/SNF-related chromatin remodeling complex, E-RC1, is required for
tissue-specific transcriptional regulation by EKLF in vitro.

Armstrong JA(1), Bieker JJ, Emerson BM.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF) is necessary for stage-specific expression
of the human beta-globin gene. We show that EKLF requires a SWI/SNF-related
chromatin remodeling complex, EKLF coactivator-remodeling complex 1 (E-RC1), to
generate a DNase I hypersensitive, transcriptionally active beta-globin promoter 
on chromatin templates in vitro. E-RC1 contains BRG1, BAF170, BAF155, and INI1
(BAF47) homologs of yeast SWI/SNF subunits, as well as a subunit unique to higher
eukaryotes, BAF57, which is critical for chromatin remodeling and transcription
with EKLF. E-RC1 displays functional selectivity toward transcription factors,
since it cannot activate expression of chromatin-assembled HIV-1 templates with
the E box-binding protein TFE-3. Thus, a member of the SWI/SNF family acts
directly in transcriptional activation and may regulate subsets of genes by
selectively interacting with specific DNA-binding proteins.

PMID: 9778250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Genomics. 1998 Jul 1;51(1):140-3.

Five SWI/SNF-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of chromatin
(SMARC) genes are dispersed in the human genome.

Ring HZ(1), Vameghi-Meyers V, Wang W, Crabtree GR, Francke U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, 94305, USA.

The SWI/SNF-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulators of chromatin
(SMARC), also called BRG1-associated factors, are components of human
SWI/SNF-like chromatin-remodeling protein complexes. We mapped five human SMARC
genes toregions on four different human chromosomes, SMARCC1 to 3p23-p21, SMARCC2
to 12q13-q14, SMARCD1 to 12q13-q14, SMARCD2 to 17q23-q24, and SMARCD3 to
7q35-q36. SMARCC1, SMARCC2, and SMARCD1 are assigned to chromosomal regions that 
are frequently involved in somatic rearrangements in human cancers. SMARCD1 was
mapped to the critical region of Allgrove syndrome; however, no mutation was
identified in one Allgrove syndrome family studied.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9693044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jun;18(6):3596-603.

p300/CREB binding protein-related protein p270 is a component of mammalian
SWI/SNF complexes.

Dallas PB(1), Cheney IW, Liao DW, Bowrin V, Byam W, Pacchione S, Kobayashi R,
Yaciuk P, Moran E.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

p300 and the closely related CREB binding protein (CBP) are transcriptional
adaptors that are present in intracellular complexes with TATA binding protein
(TBP) and bind to upstream activators including p53 and nuclear hormone
receptors. They have intrinsic and associated histone acetyltransferase activity,
suggesting that chromatin modification is an essential part of their role in
regulating transcription. Detailed characterization of a panel of antibodies
raised against p300/CBP has revealed the existence of a 270-kDa cellular protein,
p270, distinct from p300 and CBP but sharing at least two independent epitopes
with p300. The subset of p300/CBP-derived antibodies that cross-reacts with p270 
consistently coprecipitates a series a cellular proteins with relative molecular 
masses ranging from 44 to 190 kDa. Purification and analysis of various proteins 
in this group reveals that they are components of the human SWI/SNF complex and
that p270 is an integral member of this complex.

PMCID: PMC108941
PMID: 9584200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Exp Med. 1997 May 19;185(10):1827-36.

A new mouse gene, SRG3, related to the SWI3 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is
required for apoptosis induced by glucocorticoids in a thymoma cell line.

Jeon SH(1), Kang MG, Kim YH, Jin YH, Lee C, Chung HY, Kwon H, Park SD, Seong RH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics and Department of Molecular
Biology, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

We isolated a new mouse gene that is highly expressed in thymocytes, testis, and 
brain. This gene, SRG3, showed a significant sequence homology to SWI3, a yeast
transcriptional activator, and its human homolog BAF155. SRG3 encodes 1,100 amino
acids and has 33-47% identity with SWI3 protein over three regions. The SRG3
protein contains an acidic NH2 terminus, a myb-like DNA binding domain, a
leucine-zipper motif, and a proline- and glutamine-rich region at its COOH
terminus. Rabbit antiserum raised against a COOH-terminal polypeptide of the SRG3
recognized a protein with an apparent molecular mass of 155 kD. The serum also
detected a 170-kD protein that seems to be a mouse homologue of human BAF170.
Immunoprecipitation of cell extract with the antiserum against the mouse SRG3
also brought down a 195-kD protein that could be recognized by an antiserum
raised against human SWI2 protein. The results suggest that the SRG3 protein
associates with a mouse SWI2. The SRG3 protein is expressed about three times
higher in thymocytes than in peripheral lymphocytes. The expression of anti-sense
RNA to SRG3 mRNA in a thymoma cell line, S49.1, reduced the expression level of
the SRG3 protein, and decreased the apoptotic cell death induced by
glucocorticoids. These results suggest that the SRG3 protein is involved in the
glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis in the thymoma cell line. This implicates that
the SRG3 may play an important regulatory role during T cell development in
thymus.

PMCID: PMC2196310
PMID: 9151708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Genes Dev. 1996 Sep 1;10(17):2117-30.

Diversity and specialization of mammalian SWI/SNF complexes.

Wang W(1), Xue Y, Zhou S, Kuo A, Cairns BR, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford
University, California 94305-5428, USA.

The SWI/SNF complex in yeast facilitates the function of transcriptional
activators by opposing chromatin-dependent repression of transcription. We
demonstrate that in mammals SWI/SNF complexes are present in multiple forms made 
up of 9-12 proteins that we refer to as BRG1-associated factors (BAFs) ranging
from 47 to 250 kD. We have isolated cDNAs for human BAF155, BAF170, and BAF60.
BAF155 and BAF170 are encoded by separate genes that are both homologs of yeast
SWI3. Both contain a region of similarity to the DNA binding domain of myb, but
lack the basic residues known to be necessary for interaction with DNA. The two
SWI3 homologs copurify on antibody columns specific for either BAF155 or BAF170, 
indicating that they are in the same complex. BAF60 is encoded by a novel gene
family. An open reading frame from yeast, which is highly homologous, encodes the
previously uncharacterized 73-kD subunit of the yeast SWI/SNF complex required
for transcriptional activation by the glucocorticoid receptor (Cairns et al.,
this issue). BAF60a is expressed in all tissues examined, whereas BAF60b and
BAF60c are expressed preferentially in muscle and pancreas, respectively. BAF60a 
is present within the 2000-kD BRG1 complex, whereas BAF60b is in a distinct
complex that shares some but not all subunits with the BRG1 complex. The observed
similarity between mammalian BAF190, BAF170, BAF155, BAF60, and BAF47 and yeast
SNF2/SWI2, SWI3, SWI3, SWP73, and SNF5, respectively, underscores the similarity 
of the mammalian and yeast complexes. However, the complexes in mammals are more 
diverse than the SWI/SNF complex in yeast and are likely dedicated to
developmentally distinct functions.

PMID: 8804307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


