
1. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2016 Mar 10. pii: S1063-4584(16)01065-7. doi:
10.1016/j.joca.2016.03.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Gene expression changes in damaged osteoarthritic cartilage identify a signature 
of non-chondrogenic and mechanical responses.

Dunn SL(1), Soul J(2), Anand S(3), Schwartz JM(4), Boot-Handford RP(5),
Hardingham TE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, UK. 
Electronic address: sara.dunn@manchester.ac.uk. (2)Wellcome Trust Centre for
Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, UK. Electronic address:
jamie.soul@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk. (3)Stockport NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester, UK. Electronic address: sanjayanand@doctors.org.uk. (4)Wellcome Trust
Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, UK. Electronic
address: jean-marc.Schwartz@manchester.ac.uk. (5)Wellcome Trust Centre for
Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, UK. Electronic address:
ray.boothandford@manchester.ac.uk. (6)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix
Research, University of Manchester, UK. Electronic address:
tim.hardingham@manchester.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVES: Joint degeneration in osteoarthritis (OA) is characterised by damage 
and loss of articular cartilage. The pattern of loss is consistent with damage
occurring only where the mechanical loading is high. We have investigated using
RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) and systems analyses the changes that occur in damaged
OA cartilage by comparing it with intact cartilage from the same joint.
METHODS: Cartilage was obtained from eight OA patients undergoing total knee
replacement. RNA was extracted from cartilage on the damaged distal medial
condyle (DMC) and the intact posterior lateral condyle (PLC). RNA-seq was
performed to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and systems analyses 
applied to identify dysregulated pathways.
RESULTS: In the damaged OA cartilage, there was decreased expression of
chondrogenic genes SOX9, SOX6, COL11A2, COL9A1/2/3, ACAN and HAPLN1; increases in
non-chondrogenic genes COL1A1, COMP and FN1; an altered pattern of secreted
proteinase expression; but no expression of major inflammatory cytokines. Systems
analyses by PhenomeExpress revealed significant sub-networks of DEGs including
mitotic cell cycle, Wnt signalling, apoptosis and matrix organisation that were
influenced by a core of altered transcription factors (TFs), FOSL1, AHR, E2F1 and
FOXM1.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene expression changes in damaged cartilage suggested a signature
non-chondrogenic response of altered matrix protein and secreted proteinase
expression. There was evidence of a damage response in this late OA cartilage,
which surprisingly showed features detected experimentally in the early response 
of cartilage to mechanical overload. PhenomeExpress analysis identified a hub of 
DEGs linked by a core of four differentially regulated TFs.

Copyright © 2016 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26973327  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Bone Miner Res. 2016 Mar 11. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2833. [Epub ahead of print]

Rare EN1 Variants and Pediatric Bone Mass.

Mitchell JA(1,)(2), Chesi A(3), McCormack SE(2,)(4), Roy SM(4), Cousminer DL(3), 
Kalkwarf HJ(5), Lappe JM(6), Gilsanz V(7), Oberfield SE(8), Shepherd JA(9), Kelly
A(2,)(4), Zemel BS(1,)(2), Grant SF(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, The Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. (3)Division of
Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia. (4)Division of
Endocrinology and Diabetes, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia. (5)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati. (6)Division of
Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Creighton University, Omaha. (7)Department
of Radiology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles. (8)Division of
Pediatric Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics,
Columbia University Medical Center, New York. (9)Department of Radiology,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco.

A recent whole-genome sequencing study in search of variation associated with
adult areal bone mineral density (aBMD) identified rare variants near EN1, with
markedly large effect sizes, and a common variant near SOX6. To understand the
developmental effects of these loci, we sought to determine if they were
associated with pediatric dual energy X-ray absorptiometry-derived aBMD and bone 
mineral content (BMC), and if the associations were modified by sex. Our sample
comprised 733 females and 685 males of European ancestry enrolled in the
longitudinal 'Bone Mineral Density in Childhood Study' (up to 7 annual study
visits). Sex and age-specific Z-scores, adjusted for height, were calculated for 
the total hip, femoral neck, spine and distal radius. Total body less head (TBLH)
BMC Z-scores were also calculated. The previously reported single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) near EN1 and SOX6 were derived from our imputed dataset.
Linear mixed effects models were used to test associations between each SNP and
bone Z-scores plus interactions with sex were explored. The rare T allele of lead
EN1 SNP rs11692564 was associated with higher aBMD Z-score for total hip
(beta<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.62, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>9.0<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-4) ) and femoral neck (beta<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.53, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.010). In
sex-stratified analyses, this variant was associated with higher bone Z-scores in
females only, with the associations being strongest for total hip (sex
interaction P<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.9<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-4) ; beta females<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.86, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>6.6<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-6) ) and
femoral neck (sex interaction P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.016; beta females<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.73, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001). The
common G allele of SOX6 SNP rs11024028 was associated with higher aBMD Z-score
for total hip (beta<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.12, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009), femoral neck (beta<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.13, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003) and
TBLH-BMC (beta<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.09, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007); furthermore this association strengthened in
males in the sex stratified analyses. Our findings reveal that rare genetic
variation near EN1 and common variation near SOX6 operates in childhood and has
implications for the lifelong risk of osteoporosis and fracture. The sex
differences observed need to be independently replicated. This article is
protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26970088  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Cell Rep. 2016 Mar 8;14(9):2224-37. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.02.021. Epub 2016 
Feb 25.

Yap1 Regulates Multiple Steps of Chondrocyte Differentiation during Skeletal
Development and Bone Repair.

Deng Y(1), Wu A(2), Li P(3), Li G(4), Qin L(5), Song H(2), Mak KK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Regeneration Thematic Research Program, School of Biomedical
Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)Life Sciences Institute and Innovation Center for Cell Signaling Network,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. (3)Transgenic Core, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China. (4)Stem Cells and
Regeneration Medicine Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedics & Traumatology, Li
Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China. (5)Musculoskeletal
Research Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedics & Traumatology, Faculty of
Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(6)Ministry of Education Key Laboratories for Regenerative Medicine, School of
Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China; Stem Cell and Regeneration Thematic Research
Program, School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China; School of Biomedical Sciences Core Laboratory,
Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen 518057, China. Electronic address: kmak@cuhk.edu.hk.

Hippo signaling controls organ size and tissue regeneration in many organs, but
its roles in chondrocyte differentiation and bone repair remain elusive. Here, we
demonstrate that Yap1, an effector of Hippo pathway inhibits skeletal
development, postnatal growth, and bone repair. We show that Yap1 regulates
chondrocyte differentiation at multiple steps in which it promotes early
chondrocyte proliferation but inhibits subsequent chondrocyte maturation both
in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, we find that Yap1 requires Teads binding
for direct regulation of Sox6 expression to promote chondrocyte proliferation. In
contrast, Yap1 inhibits chondrocyte maturation by suppression of Col10a1
expression through interaction with Runx2. In addition, Yap1 also governs the
initiation of fracture repair by inhibition of cartilaginous callus tissue
formation. Taken together, our work provides insights into the mechanism by which
Yap1 regulates endochondral ossification, which may help the development of
therapeutic treatment for bone regeneration.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26923596  [PubMed - in process]


4. Development. 2016 Mar 15;143(6):950-61. doi: 10.1242/dev.131573. Epub 2016 Feb
18.

The transcription factor SOX6 contributes to the developmental origins of obesity
by promoting adipogenesis.

Leow SC(1), Poschmann J(2), Too PG(1), Yin J(3), Joseph R(1), McFarlane C(1),
Dogra S(1), Shabbir A(4), Ingham PW(5), Prabhakar S(2), Leow MK(6), Lee YS(7), Ng
KL(8), Chong YS(9), Gluckman PD(10), Stünkel W(11).

Author information: 
(1)Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science
Technology and Research (A*STAR), 30 Medical Drive, Singapore, Singapore 117609. 
(2)Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science Technology and Research
(A*STAR), Singapore, Singapore 138672. (3)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore 636921. (4)Department of
Surgery, National University Hospital, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 119074. (5)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore, Singapore 636921 Developmental and Biomedical Genetics
Laboratory, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore, Singapore 138673. (6)Singapore
Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science Technology and
Research (A*STAR), 30 Medical Drive, Singapore, Singapore 117609 Department of
Endocrinology, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore, Singapore 308433. (7)Singapore 
Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science Technology and
Research (A*STAR), 30 Medical Drive, Singapore, Singapore 117609 Department of
Paediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 119228. (8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Yong Loo Lin
School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119228.
(9)Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science
Technology and Research (A*STAR), 30 Medical Drive, Singapore, Singapore 117609
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 119228. (10)Singapore Institute for
Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science Technology and Research (A*STAR), 30
Medical Drive, Singapore, Singapore 117609 Liggins Institute, University of
Auckland, Auckland 1142, New Zealand. (11)Singapore Institute for Clinical
Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science Technology and Research (A*STAR), 30 Medical 
Drive, Singapore, Singapore 117609 walter_stunkel@sics.a-star.edu.sg.

An association between impaired fetal growth and the postnatal development of
obesity has been established. Here, by comparing adipocytes differentiated from
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) taken from the umbilical cord and derived from
normal and growth-restricted neonates, we identified the transcription factor
SOX6 as highly expressed only in growth-restricted individuals. We found that
SOX6 regulates adipogenesis in vertebrate species by activating adipogenic
regulators including PPAR<U+03B3>, C/EBPa and MEST. We further show that SOX6 interacts 
with ß-catenin in adipocytes, suggesting an inhibition of WNT/ß-catenin
signaling, thereby promoting adipogenesis. The upstream regulatory region of the 
MEST gene in MSCs from growth-restricted subjects harbors hypomethylated CpGs
next to SOX6 binding motifs, and we found that SOX6 binding is impaired by
adjacent CpG methylation. In summary, we report that SOX6 is a novel regulator of
adipogenesis synergizing with epigenetic mechanisms.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26893351  [PubMed - in process]


5. Int Angiol. 2016 Feb 11. [Epub ahead of print]

SOX6 gene polymorphism (rs16933090) and markers of subclinical atherosclerosis in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Pleskovic A(1), Santl Letonja M, Cokan Vujkovac A, Kruzliak P, Petrovic D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of cardiology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia - daniel.petrovic@mf.uni-lj.si.

BACKGROUND: The present study was designed to investigate the association between
the polymorphism of the SOX6 gene (rs16933090) and subclinical markers of carotid
atherosclerosis, such as carotid intima media thickness (CIMT), the number of
affected segments of carotid arteries and the sum of plaque thickness in patients
with T2DM. The second aim of the study was to demonstrate an association between 
the rs16933090 and subclinical markers of coronary artery disease in the same
subset of patients with T2DM.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 595 T2DM subjects were enrolled in the cross- sectional
study. Markers of carotid atherosclerosis were assessed ultrasonographically.
Additionally, in a subset of subjects with T2DM a coronary computed tomography
angiography (CCTA) was performed for diagnostic purposes. Genotyping of SOX6 gene
(rs16933090) was performed using KASPar assays.
RESULTS: In our study we demonstrated the effect of the rs16933090 on coronary
calcium score obtained at CCTA, whereas we did not demonstrate any association
between the tested polymorphism (rs16933090) and the presence of more than 50%
stenotic lesions in coronary arteries, the sum of plaque thickness, the number of
involved carotid segments, hsCRP, the presence of carotid plaques, and the
presence of unstable carotid plaques.
CONCLUSIONS: In our study we demonstrated the effect of the rs16933090 on
coronary calcium score obtained at CCTA, whereas we did not demonstrate an
important effect of the rs16933090 on either subclinical markers of carotid
atherosclerosis or the presence of more than 50% stenotic lesions in coronary
arteries in Caucasians with T2DM. We presume that the s16933090 plays a minor
role in the development of subclinical atherosclerosis in subjects with T2DM.

PMID: 26868133  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Int J Dev Biol. 2015;59(10-12):471-8. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.150192ao.

Expression of Sox genes in tooth development.

Kawasaki K(1), Kawasaki M, Watanabe M, Idrus E, Nagai T, Oommen S, Maeda T,
Hagiwara N, Que J, Sharpe PT, Ohazama A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Anatomy, Department of Oral Biological Science, Niigata
University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.

Members of the Sox gene family play roles in many biological processes including 
organogenesis. We carried out comparative in situ hybridization analysis of
seventeen sox genes (Sox1-14, 17, 18, 21) during murine odontogenesis from the
epithelial thickening to the cytodifferentiation stages. Localized expression of 
five Sox genes (Sox6, 9, 13, 14 and 21) was observed in tooth bud epithelium.
Sox13 showed restricted expression in the primary enamel knots. At the early bell
stage, three Sox genes (Sox8, 11, 17 and 21) were expressed in pre-ameloblasts,
whereas two others (Sox5 and 18) showed expression in odontoblasts. Sox genes
thus showed a dynamic spatio-temporal expression during tooth development.

PMID: 26864488  [PubMed - in process]


7. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Oct 15;8(10):17757-64. eCollection 2015.

MiR-202 promotes endometriosis by regulating SOX6 expression.

Zhang D(1), Li Y(1), Tian J(1), Zhang H(1), Wang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics and Gynecology of The Huaihe Hospital, Henan University Kaifeng
475000, Henan, China.

OBJECTIVES: This study is to investigate the role and mechanism of microRNA-202
(miR-202) in endometriosis.
METHODS: Forty-five cases of ectopic endometrial tissues, 25 cases of eutopic
endometrial tissues and 26 cases of normal endometrial tissues were collected.
MiR-202 expression was detected by quantitative RT-PCR. The protein expressions
of SOX6 (sex determining region Y-box 6) and its downstream proteins (p21, cyclin
D1 and pRb (retinoblastoma protein)) were detected by immunochemistry and western
blot. MTT and transwell assays were used to examine cell proliferation and cell
migration. The dual luciferase assay was applied to validate whether miR-202 can 
directly target SOX6 gene.
RESULTS: MiR-202 was highly expressed in eutopic and ectopic endometrial tissues 
than normal endometrial tissues (P < 0.05), and the expression was higher in
tissues with III/IV stages than I/II stages (P < 0.05). The expression of SOX6
protein was lower in ectopic endometrial tissues than in normal endometrial
tissues. In ectopic endometrial tissues, the expression of p21 was decreased
while cyclin D1 and pRb was up-regulated than in normal endometrial tissues (P < 
0.05). In cultured endometrial cells, miR-202 down-regulation induced
up-regulation of SOX6 and p21 whereas down-regulation of cyclin D1 and pRb.
MiR-202 promoted the proliferation and metastasis of endometrial cells. And,
miR-202 could complementary bind to SOX6 3'UTR to regulate the expression of
SOX6.
CONCLUSION: MiR-202 was up-regulated in the endometriosis. Through targeting SOX6
and its downstream proteins (p21, cyclin D1 and pRb), miR-202 can promote the
progression of endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC4694266
PMID: 26770366  [PubMed]


8. Am J Transl Res. 2015 Oct 15;7(10):2091-8. eCollection 2015.

Hsa-mir-1269 genetic variant contributes to hepatocellular carcinoma
susceptibility through affecting SOX6.

Xiong G(1), Wang Y(1), Ding Q(1), Yang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Medical Center for Digestive Diseases of The Second Affiliated Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University Nanjing 210011, Jiangsu Province, P.R. China.

MiR-1269 is an essential oncogene that plays crucial roles in regulating the
development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In this study, we mainly focused
on the polymorphisms (rs73239138) in miR-1069 to explore its potential role in
regulation of target genes in liver cancer. We detected increased level of
miR-1269 in 80 HCC patients. SOX6 was predicted as a potential target gene of
miR-as. Notably, Pearson correlation analysis indicated that patients harbored
with miR-1269 wild type (rs73239138, GG genotype), positively correlated with
SOX6 expression. Over-expression of miR-1269 with GG genotype promoted cell
proliferation comparing with AA genotype, which is acompanied by a decreased
level of SOX6. Further dual luciferase reporter assay showed that miR-1269 with
GG genotype have a stronger binding ability with SOX6. SNP rs73239138 in miR-1269
was very likey to be involved in the development of HCC by acting as a protective
factor, as the carriers of GA and GG genotype resulted in a smaller tumor size.
In conclusion, our results support that SNP rs73239138 in miR-1269 is a
protective factor which prevents binding to 3'UTR of SOX6 and there by suppresses
tumor growth in HCC.

PMCID: PMC4656786
PMID: 26692953  [PubMed]


9. Blood. 2016 Mar 17;127(11):1481-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-09-667923. Epub 2015 
Dec 17.

Pomalidomide reverses <U+03B3>-globin silencing through the transcriptional
reprogramming of adult hematopoietic progenitors.

Dulmovits BM(1), Appiah-Kubi AO(1), Papoin J(2), Hale J(3), He M(4), Al-Abed
Y(4), Didier S(2), Gould M(5), Husain-Krautter S(2), Singh SA(5), Chan KW(6),
Vlachos A(5), Allen SL(7), Taylor N(8), Marambaud P(9), An X(3), Gallagher
PG(10), Mohandas N(3), Lipton JM(11), Liu JM(12), Blanc L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Erythropoiesis, The Feinstein Institute for
Medical Research, Manhasset, NY; Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine,
Hempstead, NY; (2)Laboratory of Developmental Erythropoiesis, The Feinstein
Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY; (3)Red Cell Physiology Laboratory,
New York Blood Center, New York, NY; (4)Center for Molecular Innovation, The
Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY; (5)Hofstra North
Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY; (6)BioTheryX Inc, San Diego, CA;
(7)Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY; North Shore-LIJ
Cancer Institute, Lake Success, NY; (8)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de
Montpellier, Unité Mixte de Recherche 5535, Montpellier, France; (9)Litwin Zucker
Research Center, The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY;
(10)Yale Center for Excellence in Molecular Hematology, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven CT; and. (11)Laboratory of Developmental Erythropoiesis, The 
Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY; Hofstra North Shore-LIJ 
School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY; Les Nelkin Memorial Pediatric Oncology
Laboratory, The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY.
(12)Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY; Les Nelkin
Memorial Pediatric Oncology Laboratory, The Feinstein Institute for Medical
Research, Manhasset, NY.

Current therapeutic strategies for sickle cell anemia are aimed at reactivating
fetal hemoglobin. Pomalidomide, a third-generation immunomodulatory drug, was
proposed to induce fetal hemoglobin production by an unknown mechanism. Here, we 
report that pomalidomide induced a fetal-like erythroid differentiation program, 
leading to a reversion of <U+03B3>-globin silencing in adult human erythroblasts.
Pomalidomide acted early by transiently delaying erythropoiesis at the
burst-forming unit-erythroid/colony-forming unit-erythroid transition, but
without affecting terminal differentiation. Further, the transcription networks
involved in <U+03B3>-globin repression were selectively and differentially affected by
pomalidomide including BCL11A, SOX6, IKZF1, KLF1, and LSD1. IKAROS (IKZF1), a
known target of pomalidomide, was degraded by the proteasome, but was not the key
effector of this program, because genetic ablation of IKZF1 did not phenocopy
pomalidomide treatment. Notably, the pomalidomide-induced reprogramming was
conserved in hematopoietic progenitors from individuals with sickle cell anemia. 
Moreover, multiple myeloma patients treated with pomalidomide demonstrated
increased in vivo <U+03B3>-globin levels in their erythrocytes. Together, these data
reveal the molecular mechanisms by which pomalidomide reactivates fetal
hemoglobin, reinforcing its potential as a treatment for patients with
ß-hemoglobinopathies.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4797024 [Available on 2017-03-17]
PMID: 26679864  [PubMed - in process]


10. Apoptosis. 2016 Feb;21(2):174-83. doi: 10.1007/s10495-015-1201-6.

SOX6 and PDCD4 enhance cardiomyocyte apoptosis through LPS-induced miR-499
inhibition.

Jia Z(1), Wang J(2), Shi Q(1), Liu S(3), Wang W(1), Tian Y(1), Lu Q(1), Chen
P(1), Ma K(1), Zhou C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Beijing Key Laboratory of Protein Posttranslational Modifications and
Cell Function, Key Laboratory of Molecular Cardiovascular Sciences, Ministry of
Education of China, Peking University, No. 38, Xueyuan Road, Haidian District,
Beijing, China. (2)Beijing Jianhua Experimental School, Yuquan Road 66, Haidian
District, Beijing, China. (3)Department of Epidemiology, Rollins School of Public
Health, Emory University, 1518 Clifton Road NE, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Beijing Key Laboratory of Protein Posttranslational Modifications and
Cell Function, Key Laboratory of Molecular Cardiovascular Sciences, Ministry of
Education of China, Peking University, No. 38, Xueyuan Road, Haidian District,
Beijing, China. chunyanzhou@bjmu.edu.cn.

Sepsis-induced cardiac apoptosis is one of the major pathogenic factors in
myocardial dysfunction. As it enhances numerous proinflammatory factors,
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is considered the principal mediator in this
pathological process. However, the detailed mechanisms involved are unclear. In
this study, we attempted to explore the mechanisms involved in LPS-induced
cardiomyocyte apoptosis. We found that LPS stimulation inhibited microRNA
(miR)-499 expression and thereby upregulated the expression of SOX6 and PDCD4 in 
neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. We demonstrate that SOX6 and PDCD4 are target genes 
of miR-499, and they enhance LPS-induced cardiomyocyte apoptosis by activating
the BCL-2 family pathway. The apoptosis process enhanced by overexpression of
SOX6 or PDCD4, was rescued by the cardiac-abundant miR-499. Overexpression of
miR-499 protected the cardiomyocytes against LPS-induced apoptosis. In brief, our
results demonstrate the existence of a miR-499-SOX6/PDCD4-BCL-2 family pathway in
cardiomyocytes in response to LPS stimulation.

PMCID: PMC4712245
PMID: 26659076  [PubMed - in process]


11. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 10;5:18011. doi: 10.1038/srep18011.

Cartilage development requires the function of Estrogen-related receptor alpha
that directly regulates sox9 expression in zebrafish.

Kim YI(1), No Lee J(1), Bhandari S(1), Nam IK(1), Yoo KW(1), Kim SJ(1), Oh GS(1),
Kim HJ(1), So HS(1), Choe SK(1,)(2), Park R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Center for Metabolic Function Regulation,
Iksan, Jeonbuk, 570-749, South Korea. (2)Integrated Omics Institute, Wonkwang
University School of Medicine, Iksan, Jeonbuk, 570-749, South Korea.

Estrogen-related receptor alpha (ESRRa) regulates a number of cellular processes 
including development of bone and muscles. However, direct evidence regarding its
involvement in cartilage development remains elusive. In this report, we
establish an in vivo role of Esrra in cartilage development during embryogenesis 
in zebrafish. Gene expression analysis indicates that esrra is expressed in
developing pharyngeal arches where genes necessary for cartilage development are 
also expressed. Loss of function analysis shows that knockdown of esrra impairs
expression of genes including sox9, col2a1, sox5, sox6, runx2 and col10a1 thus
induces abnormally formed cartilage in pharyngeal arches. Importantly, we
identify putative ESRRa binding elements in upstream regions of sox9 to which
ESRRa can directly bind, indicating that Esrra may directly regulate sox9
expression. Accordingly, ectopic expression of sox9 rescues defective formation
of cartilage induced by the knockdown of esrra. Taken together, our results
indicate for the first time that ESRRa is essential for cartilage development by 
regulating sox9 expression during vertebrate development.

PMCID: PMC4675082
PMID: 26657540  [PubMed - in process]


12. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Feb;1859(2):280-93. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.12.001.
Epub 2015 Dec 3.

Role of microRNA-21 in the formation of insulin-producing cells from pancreatic
progenitor cells.

Bai C(1), Li X(1), Gao Y(1), Wang K(1), Fan Y(1), Zhang S(1), Ma Y(2), Guan W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing
100193, China. (2)Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Beijing 100193, China. Electronic address: yuehui_ma@hotmail.com.
(3)Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing
100193, China. Electronic address: weijunguan301@gmail.com.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate insulin secretion, pancreas development, and beta
cell differentiation. In this study, to screen for miRNAs and their targets that 
function during insulin-producing cells (IPCs) formation, we examined the
messenger RNA and microRNA expression profiles of pancreatic progenitor cells
(PPCs) and IPCs using microarray and deep sequencing approaches, respectively.
Combining our data with that from previous reports, we found that miR-21 and its 
targets play an important role in the formation of IPCs. However, the function of
miR-21 in the formation of IPCs from PPCs is poorly understood. Therefore, we
over-expressed or inhibited miR-21 and expressed small interfering RNAs of miR-21
targets in PPCs to investigate their functions in IPCs formation. We found that
miR-21 acts as a bidirectional switch in the formation of IPCs by regulating the 
expression of target and downstream genes (SOX6, RPBJ and HES1). Small
interfering RNAs were used to knock down these genes in PPCs to investigate their
effects on IPCs formation. Single expression of si-RBPJ, si-SOX6 and si-HES1 in
PPCs showed that si-RBPJ was an inhibitor, and that si-SOX6 and si-HES1 were
promoters of IPCs formation, although si-HES1 induced formation of IPCs at higher
rates than si-SOX6. These results suggest that endogenous miRNAs involved in the 
formation of IPCs from PPCs should be considered in the development of an
effective cell transplant therapy for diabetes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26655730  [PubMed - in process]


13. Exp Ther Med. 2015 Sep;10(3):921-926. Epub 2015 Jul 17.

High expression of microRNA-208 is associated with cardiac hypertrophy via the
negative regulation of the sex-determining region Y-box 6 protein.

Huang X(1), Li Z(2), Bai B(1), Li X(1), Li Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Zhumadian Central Hospital, Zhumadian, Henan 463000,
P.R. China. (2)Department of Neurology, Zhumadian Central Hospital, Zhumadian,
Henan 463000, P.R. China.

The aim of this study was to investigate the expression levels of microRNA-208
(miR-208) and sex-determining region Y-box 6 (SOX6) in patients with progressive 
cardiac hypertrophy. A total of 50 patients with essential hypertension
accompanied by left ventricular hypertrophy, and 30 healthy individuals were
enrolled. Peripheral blood samples were collected in order to compare miR-208
expression levels between the cardiac hypertrophy patients and healthy
individuals. In addition, an in vitro cellular model of cardiac hypertrophy was
established to determine the association between miR-208 and SOX6 expression. Rat
cardiomyocytes were treated with phenylephrine (PE) to induce cardiac
hypertrophy. Some of the hypertrophic cardiomyocytes were subsequently
transfected with antagomiR-208, an miR-208 antagonist, in order to determine the 
effects of silencing miR-208 expression. Differences between healthy and
hypertrophic cardiomyocyte morphology were evaluated using immunofluorescence
staining. The mRNA expression levels of the hypertrophy-associated genes ß-myosin
heavy chain, a-sarcomeric actin and atrial natriuretic peptide were determined
using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). The mRNA and protein
expression levels of miR-208 and SOX6 in peripheral blood and cardiomyocytes were
detected using qPCR and western blot analysis, respectively. The expression
levels of miR-208 were significantly increased in the peripheral blood of
patients with left ventricular hypertrophy (P<0.05). PE-stimulated cardiomyocytes
were significantly increased in size compared with normal cardiomyocytes. In the 
PE-stimulated cardiomyocytes, miR-208 expression levels were significantly
increased (P<0.05). However, SOX6 expression levels were significantly decreased 
compared with those in normal cardiomyocytes (P<0.05). Following transfection
with antagomiR-208, SOX6 expression levels in the PE-stimulated cardiomyocytes
significantly increased, while the total mRNA and protein expression levels of
hypertrophy-associated genes significantly decreased (P<0.05). miR-208 expression
levels are increased in the peripheral blood of patients with cardiac
hypertrophy. Therefore, the results of this study suggest that the expression
levels of miR-208 are associated with cardiac hypertrophy by the negative
regulation of SOX6.

PMCID: PMC4533156
PMID: 26622415  [PubMed]


14. Mol Cell Biochem. 2016 Jan;412(1-2):49-57. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2607-8. Epub
2015 Nov 20.

Sox6 suppression induces RA-dependent apoptosis mediated by BMP-4 expression
during neuronal differentiation in P19 cells.

Hamada-Kanazawa M(1), Ogawa D(2), Takano M(2), Miyake M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kobe-Gakuin University, Minatojima, Chuo-Ku, Kobe, 650-8586, Japan.
hamada@pharm.kobegakuin.ac.jp. (2)Division of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kobe-Gakuin University, Minatojima, Chuo-Ku, Kobe,
650-8586, Japan.

Sox6 is a transcription factor that induces neuronal differentiation in P19
cells; its suppression not only inhibits neuronal differentiation but also
induces retinoic acid (RA)-dependent apoptosis of P19 cells. In the present
study, we found that Sox6 suppression-induced apoptosis was mediated by
activation of caspase 9 and 3. Moreover, we noted a weak leakage of cytochrome c 
into the cytoplasm from the mitochondria, indicating that apoptosis occurs
through a mitochondrial pathway in Sox6-suppressed P19 (P19[anti-Sox6]) cells.
Sox6 suppression in the presence of RA also induced the expression and secretion 
of bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP-4). Addition of an anti-BMP-4 antibody for
neutralization increased cell viability and led to RA-dependent death of
P19[anti-Sox6] cells. Our results indicate that Sox6 suppression induces
RA-dependent cell death of P19 cells, mediated by BMP-4 expression and secretion.
Normally, high Sox6 expression leads to RA-mediated neuronal differentiation in
P19 cells; however, Sox6 deficiency induces production and secretion of BMP-4,
which mediates selective cell death. Our findings suggest that Sox6 contributes
to cell survival by suppressing BMP-4 transcription during neuronal
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4718955
PMID: 26590087  [PubMed - in process]


15. BMC Genomics. 2015 Nov 18;16:973. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2142-8.

Gene expression analysis at the onset of sex differentiation in turbot
(Scophthalmus maximus).

Robledo D(1), Ribas L(2), Cal R(3), Sánchez L(4), Piferrer F(5), Martínez P(6),
Viñas A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Biología, Universidade de Santiago de
Compostela, 15782, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. diego.robledo@usc.es.
(2)Institut de Ciències del Mar, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas 
(CSIC), 08003, Barcelona, Spain. lribas@icm.csic.es. (3)Instituto Español de
Oceanografía, Centro Oceanográfico de Vigo, 36390, Vigo, Spain.
rosa.cal@vi.ieo.es. (4)Departamento de Genética. Facultad de Veterinaria,
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Campus de Lugo, 27002, Lugo, Spain.
lauraelena.sanchez@usc.es. (5)Institut de Ciències del Mar, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), 08003, Barcelona, Spain.
piferrer@icm.csic.es. (6)Departamento de Genética. Facultad de Veterinaria,
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Campus de Lugo, 27002, Lugo, Spain.
paulino.martinez@usc.es. (7)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Biología,
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, 15782, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
anamaria.vinas@usc.es.

BACKGROUND: Controlling sex ratios is essential for the aquaculture industry,
especially in those species with sex dimorphism for relevant productive traits,
hence the importance of knowing how the sexual phenotype is established in fish. 
Turbot, a very important fish for the aquaculture industry in Europe, shows one
of the largest sexual growth dimorphisms amongst marine cultured species, being
all-female stocks a desirable goal for the industry. Although important knowledge
has been achieved on the genetic basis of sex determination (SD) in this species,
the master SD gene remains unknown and precise information on gene expression at 
the critical stage of sex differentiation is lacking. In the present work, we
examined the expression profiles of 29 relevant genes related to sex
differentiation, from 60 up to 135 days post fertilization (dpf), when gonads are
differentiating. We also considered the influence of three temperature regimes on
sex differentiation.
RESULTS: The first sex-related differences in molecular markers could be observed
at 90 days post fertilization (dpf) and so we have called that time the onset of 
sex differentiation. Three genes were the first to show differential expression
between males and females and also allowed us to sex turbot accurately at the
onset of sex differentiation (90 dpf): cyp19a1a, amh and vasa. The expression of 
genes related to primordial germ cells (vasa, gsdf, tdrd1) started to increase
between 75-90 dpf and vasa and tdrd1 later presented higher expression in females
(90-105 dpf). Two genes placed on the SD region of turbot (sox2, fxr1) did not
show any expression pattern suggestive of a sex determining function. We also
detected changes in the expression levels of several genes (ctnnb1, cyp11a, dmrt2
or sox6) depending on culture temperature.
CONCLUSION: Our results enabled us to identify the first sex-associated genetic
cues (cyp19a1a, vasa and amh) at the initial stages of gonad development in
turbot (90 dpf) and to accurately sex turbot at this age, establishing the
correspondence between gene expression profiles and histological sex.
Furthermore, we profiled several genes involved in sex differentiation and found 
specific temperature effects on their expression.

PMCID: PMC4652359
PMID: 26581195  [PubMed - in process]


16. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Oct 20;8:2981-8. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S89459. eCollection
2015.

MicroRNA-766 targeting regulation of SOX6 expression promoted cell proliferation 
of human colorectal cancer.

Li YC(1), Li CF(2), Chen LB(2), Li DD(2), Yang L(2), Jin JP(2), Zhang B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin
University, Changchun, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Endoscopy
Center, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, People's
Republic of China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have emerged as important regulators of cancer-cell biological
processes. Previous studies have shown that miR-766 plays an important role in a 
variety of biological processes in various human cancers. However, the underlying
mechanism of miR-766 in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells remains unclear. In this
study, we investigated miR-766's role in CRC cell proliferation. Polymerase chain
reaction results showed that miR-766 expression was significantly upregulated in 
CRC tissues and cells. Ectopic expression of miR-766 promoted cell growth and
anchorage-independent growth in CRC cells. Bioinformatic analysis predicted SOX6,
a potential target of miR-766, acting as a tumor suppressor. Luciferase reporter 
assay results demonstrated that miR-766 directly bound to the 3'-untranslated
region of SOX6. Overexpression of miR-766 suppressed SOX6 expression, resulting
in the downregulation of p21 and upregulation of cyclin D1. In a further
experiment, SOX6-silenced SW480 cells transfected with miR-766 promoted cell
growth, suggesting that downregulation of SOX6 was required for miR-766-induced
CRC cell proliferation. Taken together, these results suggested that miR-766
represents an onco-miRNA and participates in the development of CRC by modulating
SOX6 expression.

PMCID: PMC4622090
PMID: 26543373  [PubMed]


17. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 3;10(11):e0141967. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141967.
eCollection 2015.

Differential microRNA Expression in Fast- and Slow-Twitch Skeletal Muscle of
Piaractus mesopotamicus during Growth.

Duran BO(1), Fernandez GJ(1), Mareco EA(1), Moraes LN(1), Salomão RA(2),
Gutierrez de Paula T(1), Santos VB(3), Carvalho RF(1), Dal-Pai-Silva M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology, Institute of Biosciences of Botucatu, São Paulo
State University, Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Aquaculture Center, São Paulo
State University, Jaboticabal, São Paulo, Brazil. (3)São Paulo Agency for
Agribusiness Technology, Presidente Prudente, São Paulo, Brazil.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(12):e0144481. Dal-Pai-Silvca, Maeli [corrected to
Dal-Pai-Silva, Maeli].

Pacu (Piaractus mesopotamicus) is a Brazilian fish with a high economic value in 
pisciculture due to its rusticity and fast growth. Postnatal growth of skeletal
muscle in fish occurs by hyperplasia and/or hypertrophy, processes that are
dependent on the proliferation and differentiation of myoblasts. A class of small
noncoding RNAs, known as microRNAs (miRNAs), represses the expression of target
mRNAs, and many studies have demonstrated that miR-1, miR-133, miR-206 and
miR-499 regulate different processes in skeletal muscle through the mRNA
silencing of hdac4 (histone deacetylase 4), srf (serum response factor), pax7
(paired box 7) and sox6 ((sex determining region Y)-box 6), respectively. The aim
of our work was to evaluate the expression of these miRNAs and their putative
target mRNAs in fast- and slow-twitch skeletal muscle of pacu during growth. We
used pacus in three different development stages: larval (aged 30 days), juvenile
(aged 90 days and 150 days) and adult (aged 2 years). To complement our study, we
also performed a pacu myoblast cell culture, which allowed us to investigate
miRNA expression in the progression from myoblast proliferation to
differentiation. Our results revealed an inverse correlation between the
expression of the miRNAs and their target mRNAs, and there was evidence that
miR-1 and miR-206 may regulate the differentiation of myoblasts, whereas miR-133 
may regulate the proliferation of these cells. miR-499 was highly expressed in
slow-twitch muscle, which suggests its involvement in the specification of the
slow phenotype in muscle fibers. The expression of these miRNAs exhibited
variations between different development stages and between distinct muscle
twitch phenotypes. This work provides the first identification of miRNA
expression profiles in pacu skeletal muscle and suggests an important role of
these molecules in muscle growth and in the maintenance of the muscle phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4631509
PMID: 26529415  [PubMed - in process]


18. J Cell Sci. 2016 Feb 15;129(4):717-28. doi: 10.1242/jcs.169623. Epub 2015 Nov 2.

ATF6a, a Runx2-activable transcription factor, is a new regulator of chondrocyte 
hypertrophy.

Guo F(1), Han X(2), Wu Z(2), Cheng Z(2), Hu Q(2), Zhao Y(3), Wang Y(4), Liu C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Core Facility of Development Biology,
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China guo.fengjin@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Core Facility of Development Biology,
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. (3)Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan 250012, China.
(4)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing,
400016 China. (5)Departments of Orthopaedic Surgery and Cell Biology, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, 10016 NY, USA.

Our previous research has shown that the spliced isoform of XBP1 (XBP1s) is an
important downstream mediator of BMP2 and is involved in BMP2-stimulated
chondrocyte differentiation. Herein, we report that ATF6 and its cleaved
N-terminal cytoplasmic domain (known as ATF6a) are expressed in growth plate
chondrocytes. We find that these proteins are differentially induced during
BMP2-triggered chondrocyte differentiation. This differential expression probably
results from the activation of the ATF6 gene by Runx2 and its repression by the
Sox6 transcription factor. Runx2 and Sox6 act through their respective binding
elements on the ATF6 gene. When overexpressed, ATF6 and ATF6a intensify
chondrogenesis; our studies demonstrate that under the stimulation of ATF6 and
ATF6a, chondrocytes tend to be hypertrophied and mineralized, a process leading
to bone formation. By contrast, lowering expression of ATF6a by use of its
specific siRNA suppresses chondrocyte differentiation. Moreover, ATF6a interacts 
with Runx2 and augments the Runx2-mediated hypertrophication of chondrocytes.
Importantly, overexpression and knockdown of ATF6a during the chondrocyte
hypertrophy process also led to altered expressions of IHH and PTHrP (also known 
as PTHLH). Taken together, these findings indicate that ATF6a favorably controls 
chondrogenesis and bone formation (1) by acting as a co-factor of Runx2 and
enhancing Runx2-incited hypertrophic chondrocyte differentiation, and (2) by
affecting IHH and PTHrP signaling.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26527399  [PubMed - in process]


19. J Neurochem. 2015 Nov 3. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13414. [Epub ahead of print]

Sox13 functionally complements the related Sox5 and Sox6 as important
developmental modulators in mouse spinal cord oligodendrocytes.

Baroti T(1), Schillinger A(1), Wegner M(1), Claus Stolt C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Emil-Fischer-Zentrum, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

The role of transcription factor Sox13, which together with Sox5 and Sox6 belongs
to the SoxD family, is only poorly characterised in central nervous system
development. Therefore, we analysed whether Sox13 expression and function
overlaps with or differs from that of its close relatives Sox5 and Sox6. In the
developing mouse spinal cord, we found Sox13 predominantly expressed in
neuroepithelial precursors, oligodendroglial and astroglial cells. The
substantially overlapping expression with Sox5 and Sox6 in oligodendroglial cells
prompted us to study potential roles during specification, lineage progression
and differentiation of oligodendrocytes. In contrast to Sox5 and Sox6, Sox13
expression continues after differentiation and even increases in myelinating
oligodendrocytes. Sox13 deletion did not interfere with oligodendroglial
development, which was normal in Sox13-deficient mice. However, the premature
differentiation of oligodendrocyte precursors triggered by loss of Sox6 was
slightly more prominent in Sox6/Sox13 double-deficient mice. Sox13 can bind to
the same sites in myelin gene promoters as Sox5 and Sox6 in vitro. Reporter gene 
assays furthermore reveal a similar antagonizing effect on Sox10-dependent
transactivation of myelin gene promoters as previously shown for Sox5 and Sox6.
This argues that Sox13 is functionally redundant with the other SoxD proteins and
complements Sox5 and Sox6 in their role as important modulators of
oligodendrocyte development. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26525805  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. Lab Invest. 2016 Jan;96(1):16-24. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2015.124. Epub 2015 Oct 
26.

Transcription factors related to chondrogenesis in pleomorphic adenoma of the
salivary gland: a mechanism of mesenchymal tissue formation.

Matsumoto Y(1,)(2), Sato S(1), Maeda T(3), Kishino M(1), Toyosawa S(1), Usami
Y(4), Iwai S(2), Nakazawa M(2), Yura Y(2), Ogawa Y(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, Osaka University Graduate School of Dentistry,
Osaka, Japan. (2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery II, Osaka
University Graduate School of Dentistry, Osaka, Japan. (3)Department of Anatomy
and Cell Biology, Osaka University Graduate School of Dentistry, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Clinical Laboratory, Osaka University Dental Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(5)Department of Oral Health Sciences, Faculty of Nursing and Health Care, Baika 
Women's University, Osaka, Japan.

In salivary gland pleomorphic adenoma, expression of extracellular matrix (ECM)
substances indicates that tumor epithelial cells are becoming chondrogenic and
will produce cartilage-like mesenchymal tissues. Sox9, the master transcription
factor of chondrogenesis, is expressed in mouse salivary gland cells. To clarify 
the mechanism behind chondrogenesis in tumor epithelial cells, we examined the
expression of transcription factors related to chondrogenesis in tumors and
salivary glands. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR),
quantitative real-time RT-PCR, and immunostaining were performed on pleomorphic
adenoma tissues, salivary gland tissues, and human submandibular gland (HSG)
cells. The mRNAs of essential transcription factors for chondrogenesis-Sox9,
Sox6, and Sox5-were detected in both tumor and salivary gland tissues. The mRNAs 
of aggrecan and type II collagen-cartilage-specific ECM substances-were detected 
only in tumors. Sox9 and Sox6 proteins were colocalized in many epithelial cells 
in tumors and salivary glands. Tumor epithelial cells also possessed aggrecan
protein and occasionally type II collagen protein. Moreover, mRNAs for
transcription repressors of chondrogenesis dEF1 and AP-2a were detected in both
tumors and salivary glands, whereas Twist1 mRNA was detected only in salivary
glands and was at significantly low-to-undetectable levels in tumors. Twist1
protein was localized in the Sox9-expressing salivary gland cells. HSG cells
expressed Sox9, Sox6, and Twist1, but not aggrecan or type II collagen, and thus 
were similar to salivary gland cells. Twist1 depletion by Twist1 siRNA led to the
upregulation of aggrecan and type II collagen mRNA expression in HSG cells. In
contrast, forced expression of Twist1, using Twist1 cDNA, resulted in the
downregulation of both these genes. Taken together, these results indicate that
salivary gland cells have a potential for chondrogenesis, and Twist1 depletion
concomitant with neoplastic transformation, which would permit tumor epithelial
cells to produce cartilage-like mesenchymal tissues in salivary gland pleomorphic
adenoma.

PMID: 26501866  [PubMed - in process]


21. Ann Biomed Eng. 2015 Sep 9. [Epub ahead of print]

Bioimaging: An Useful Tool to Monitor Differentiation of Human Embryonic Stem
Cells into Chondrocytes.

Suchorska WM(1), Lach MS(2,)(3), Richter M(4), Kaczmarczyk J(4), Trzeciak T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Radiobiology Lab, Greater Poland Cancer Centre, Garbary 15th Street, 61-866,
Poznan, Poland. (2)Radiobiology Lab, Greater Poland Cancer Centre, Garbary 15th
Street, 61-866, Poznan, Poland. michal.lach@wco.pl. (3)Postgraduate School of
Molecular Medicine, Warsaw University of Medical Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
michal.lach@wco.pl. (4)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

To improve the recovery of damaged cartilage tissue, pluripotent stem cell-based 
therapies are being intensively explored. A number of techniques exist that
enable monitoring of stem cell differentiation, including immunofluorescence
staining. This simple and fast method enables changes to be observed during the
differentiation process. Here, two protocols for the differentiation of human
embryonic stem cells into chondrocytes were used (monolayer cell culture and
embryoid body formation). Cells were labeled for markers expressed during the
differentiation process at different time points (pluripotent: NANOG, SOX2,
OCT3/4, E-cadherin; prochondrogenic: SOX6, SOX9, Collagen type II; extracellular 
matrix components: chondroitin sulfate, heparan sulfate; beta-catenin, CXCR4, and
Brachyury). Comparison of the signal intensity of differentiated cells to control
cell populations (articular cartilage chondrocytes and human embryonic stem
cells) showed decreased signal intensities of pluripotent markers, E-cadherin and
beta-catenin. Increased signal intensities of prochondrogenic markers and
extracellular matrix components were observed. The changes during chondrogenic
differentiation monitored by evaluation of pluripotent and chondrogenic markers
signal intensity were described. The changes were similar to several studies over
chondrogenesis. These results were confirmed by semi-quantitative analysis of IF 
signals. In this research we indicate a bioimaging as a useful tool to monitor
and semi-quantify the IF pictures during the differentiation of hES into
chondrocyte-like.

PMID: 26354117  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Glia. 2016 Jan;64(1):122-38. doi: 10.1002/glia.22919. Epub 2015 Sep 8.

Transcription factors Sox5 and Sox6 exert direct and indirect influences on
oligodendroglial migration in spinal cord and forebrain.

Baroti T(1), Zimmermann Y(1), Schillinger A(1), Liu L(1), Lommes P(1), Wegner
M(1), Stolt CC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Emil-Fischer-Zentrum, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Transcription factors of the SoxD protein family have previously been shown to
prevent precocious specification and terminal differentiation of oligodendrocyte 
progenitor cells in the developing spinal cord. Using mice with specific deletion
of the SoxD proteins Sox5 and Sox6 in the central nervous system, we now show
that SoxD proteins additionally influence migration of oligodendrocyte
progenitors in the spinal cord as well as in the forebrain. In mutant mice,
emigration of oligodendrocyte progenitors from the ventricular zone and
colonization of the mantle zone are significantly delayed probably because of
reduced expression of Pdgf receptor alpha and decreased responsiveness toward
Pdgf-A as a main migratory cue. In addition to this direct cell-autonomous effect
on Pdgf receptor alpha expression, SoxD proteins furthermore promote
oligodendroglial migration by keeping the cells in an undifferentiated state and 
preventing a premature loss of their migratory capacity. This indirect effect
becomes particularly important during late embryonic and early postnatal phases
of oligodendroglial development. Finally, we show that Sox5 and Sox6 cooperate
with Sox9 and Sox10 to activate Pdgf receptor alpha expression and thereby
maintain oligodendrocyte progenitors in the immature state. This contrasts with
their behavior on myelin genes where they antagonize the function of SoxE
proteins. It argues that SoxD proteins can function either as repressors or as
co-activators of SoxE proteins thereby modulating their function in a
stage-specific manner. GLIA 2016;64:122-138.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26345464  [PubMed - in process]


23. Sci Rep. 2015 Aug 12;5:13024. doi: 10.1038/srep13024.

Inhibition of ZEB1 expression induces redifferentiation of adult human ß cells
expanded in vitro.

Sintov E(1), Nathan G(1), Knoller S(1), Pasmanik-Chor M(2), Russ HA(1), Efrat
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. (2)Bioinformatics Unit, George
Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

In-vitro expansion of functional adult human ß-cells is an attractive approach
for generating insulin-producing cells for transplantation. However, human islet 
cell expansion in culture results in loss of ß-cell phenotype and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). This process activates expression of
ZEB1 and ZEB2, two members of the zinc-finger homeobox family of E-cadherin
repressors, which play key roles in EMT. Downregulation of ZEB1 using shRNA in
expanded ß-cell-derived (BCD) cells induced mesenchymal-epithelial transition
(MET), ß-cell gene expression, and proliferation attenuation. In addition,
inhibition of ZEB1 expression potentiated redifferentiation induced by a
combination of soluble factors, as judged by an improved response to glucose
stimulation and a 3-fold increase in the fraction of C-peptide-positive cells to 
60% of BCD cells. Furthermore, ZEB1 shRNA led to increased insulin secretion in
cells transplanted in vivo. Our findings suggest that the effects of ZEB1
inhibition are mediated by attenuation of the miR-200c target genes SOX6 and
SOX2. These findings, which were reproducible in cells derived from multiple
human donors, emphasize the key role of ZEB1 in EMT in cultured BCD cells and
support the value of ZEB1 inhibition for BCD cell redifferentiation and
generation of functional human ß-like cells for cell therapy of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4532995
PMID: 26264186  [PubMed - in process]


24. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Sep 30;43(17):8183-203. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv688. Epub
2015 Jul 6.

The transcription factors SOX9 and SOX5/SOX6 cooperate genome-wide through
super-enhancers to drive chondrogenesis.

Liu CF(1), Lefebvre V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, Lerner Research Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. (2)Department of 
Cellular & Molecular Medicine, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 
Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA lefebvv@ccf.org.

SOX9 is a transcriptional activator required for chondrogenesis, and SOX5 and
SOX6 are closely related DNA-binding proteins that critically enhance its
function. We use here genome-wide approaches to gain novel insights into the full
spectrum of the target genes and modes of action of this chondrogenic trio. Using
the RCS cell line as a faithful model for proliferating/early prehypertrophic
growth plate chondrocytes, we uncover that SOX6 and SOX9 bind thousands of
genomic sites, frequently and most efficiently near each other. SOX9 recognizes
pairs of inverted SOX motifs, whereas SOX6 favors pairs of tandem SOX motifs. The
SOX proteins primarily target enhancers. While binding to a small fraction of
typical enhancers, they bind multiple sites on almost all super-enhancers (SEs)
present in RCS cells. These SEs are predominantly linked to cartilage-specific
genes. The SOX proteins effectively work together to activate these SEs and are
required for in vivo expression of their associated genes. These genes encode key
regulatory factors, including the SOX trio proteins, and all essential cartilage 
extracellular matrix components. Chst11, Fgfr3, Runx2 and Runx3 are among many
other newly identified SOX trio targets. SOX9 and SOX5/SOX6 thus cooperate
genome-wide, primarily through SEs, to implement the growth plate chondrocyte
differentiation program.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4787819
PMID: 26150426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Aug;55(2):161-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2015.05.006. Epub 
2015 May 27.

Intermediaries of branched chain amino acid metabolism induce fetal hemoglobin,
and repress SOX6 and BCL11A, in definitive erythroid cells.

Karkashon S(1), Raghupathy R(1), Bhatia H(1), Dutta A(1), Hess S(2), Higgs J(3), 
Tifft CJ(3), Little JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Oncology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center, 1300 Morris Park Blvd., Bronx, NY 10461, 
United States. (2)California Institute of Technology, Beckman Institute, Proteome
Exploration Laboratory, 1200 E California Blvd, MC139-74, Pasadena, CA 91125,
United States. (3)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Center for Hospital-based 
Specialties, Children's National Medical Center, 111 Michigan Ave. N.W.,
Washington, DC 20010-2970, United States. (4)Division of Hematology, Department
of Oncology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center,
1300 Morris Park Blvd., Bronx, NY 10461, United States. Electronic address:
Jane.little@uhhospitals.org.

High levels of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) can ameliorate human ß-globin gene
disorders. The short chain fatty acid butyrate is the paradigmatic metabolic
intermediary that induces HbF. Inherited disorders of branched-chain amino acid
(BCAA) metabolism have been associated with supranormal HbF levels beyond
infancy, e.g., propionic acidemia (PA) and methylmalonic acidemia (MMA). We
tested intermediaries of BCAA metabolism for their effects on definitive
erythropoiesis. Like butyrate, the elevated BCAA intermediaries isovalerate,
isobutyrate, and propionate, induce fetal globin gene expression in murine EryD
in vitro, are associated with bulk histone H3 hyperacylation, and repress the
transcription of key gamma globin regulatory factors, notably BCL11A and SOX6.
Metabolic intermediaries that are elevated in Maple Syrup Urine Disease (MSUD)
affect none of these processes. Percent HbF and gamma (<U+03B3>) chain isoforms were
also measured in non-anemic, therapeutically optimized subjects with MSUD (Group 
I, n=6) or with Isovaleric Acidemia (IVA), MMA, or PA (Group II, n=5). Mean HbF
was 0.24 ± 0.15% in Group I and 0.87 ± 0.13% in Group II (p=.01); only the G<U+03B3>
isoform was detected. We conclude that a family of biochemically related
intermediaries of branched chain amino acid metabolism induces fetal hemoglobin
during definitive erythropoiesis, with mechanisms that mirror those so far
identified for butyrate.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26142333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Aug;55(2):95-100. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2015.05.004. Epub
2015 May 12.

Impact of epigenetic mechanisms on therapeutic approaches of hemoglobinopathies.

Costa D(1), Capuano M(2), Sommese L(2), Napoli C(3).

Author information: 
(1)U.O.C. Immunohematology, Transfusion Medicine and Transplant Immunology
(SIMT), Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria (AOU), Second University of Naples,
Italy. Electronic address: dario.costa@policliniconapoli.it. (2)U.O.C.
Immunohematology, Transfusion Medicine and Transplant Immunology (SIMT), Azienda 
Ospedaliera Universitaria (AOU), Second University of Naples, Italy. (3)U.O.C.
Immunohematology, Transfusion Medicine and Transplant Immunology (SIMT), Azienda 
Ospedaliera Universitaria (AOU), Second University of Naples, Italy; Department
of Medical, Surgical, Neurological, Metabolic and Geriatric Sciences, Second
University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

Hemoglobinopathies are inherited disorders characterized by anomalies of
structure, function or production of globin chains. From conception to adulthood,
the different expressions over time of the various globin chains depend on the
activation/deactivation of different globin genes through methylation and
chromatin remodeling processes. The most significant clinical disorders are
ß-thalassemia and sickle cell disease. The clinical management of these disorders
engages regular blood transfusions. Another therapy is represented by allogeneic 
hematopoietic cells transplantation. There are several studies based on the
innovative therapeutic strategies that involve some epigenetic mechanisms focused
on the reactivation of <U+03B3>-globin gene expression. The induction of fetal
hemoglobin expression in adulthood is an effective therapy for these disorders.
Particularly interesting are the recent data on miRNAs showing the interaction of
these molecules with different transcription factors such as MYB, KLF, BCL11A and
SOX6. The aim of this review was to report an update on the dynamic epigenetic
modifications as targets for therapy in hemoglobinopathies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26142322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Oncogene. 2016 Mar 31;35(13):1692-702. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.234. Epub 2015 Jun
29.

Role of p14ARF-HDM2-p53 axis in SOX6-mediated tumor suppression.

Wang J(1), Ding S(1), Duan Z(1), Xie Q(1), Zhang T(1), Zhang X(1), Wang Y(1),
Chen X(1), Zhuang H(1), Lu F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Disease Center, School of Basic
Medicine, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China.

Sex-determining region Y box 6 (SOX6) has been described as a tumor-suppressor
gene in several cancers. Our previous work has suggested that SOX6 upregulated
p21(Waf1/Cip1)(p21) expression in a p53-dependent manner; however, the underlying
mechanism has remained elusive. In this study, we confirmed that SOX6 can
suppress cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo by stabilizing p53 protein and
subsequently upregulating p21. Co-immunoprecipitation and immunocytofluorescence 
assays demonstrated that SOX6 can promote formation of the p14ARF-HDM2-p53
ternary complex by promoting translocation of p14ARF (p14 alternate reading frame
tumor suppressor) to the nucleoplasm, thereby inhibiting HDM2-mediated p53
nuclear export and degradation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation combined with PCR
assay proved that SOX6 can bind to a potential binding site in the regulatory
region of the c-Myc gene. Furthermore, we confirmed that SOX6 can downregulate
the expression of c-Myc, as well as its direct target gene nucleophosmin 1
(NPM1), and that the SOX6-induced downregulation of NPM1 is linked to
translocation of p14ARF to the nucleoplasm. Finally, we showed that the highly
conserved high-mobility group (HMG) domain of SOX6 is required for SOX6-mediated 
p53 stabilization and tumor inhibitory activity. Collectively, these results
reveal a new mechanism of SOX6-mediated tumor suppression involving p21
upregulation via the p14ARF-HDM2-p53 axis in an HMG domain-dependent manner.

PMID: 26119940  [PubMed - in process]


28. Genome Res. 2015 Sep;25(9):1245-55. doi: 10.1101/gr.192591.115. Epub 2015 Jun 23.

Comprehensive identification and analysis of human accelerated regulatory DNA.

Gittelman RM(1), Hun E(2), Ay F(1), Madeoy J(1), Pennacchio L(3), Noble WS(1),
Hawkins RD(4), Akey JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195, USA; (2)Division of Medical Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195, USA; (3)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Genomics
Division, Berkeley, California 94701, USA. (4)Department of Genome Sciences,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA; Division of Medical
Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA;

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2015 Aug;16(8):438-9.

It has long been hypothesized that changes in gene regulation have played an
important role in human evolution, but regulatory DNA has been much more
difficult to study compared with protein-coding regions. Recent large-scale
studies have created genome-scale catalogs of DNase I hypersensitive sites
(DHSs), which demark potentially functional regulatory DNA. To better define
regulatory DNA that has been subject to human-specific adaptive evolution, we
performed comprehensive evolutionary and population genetics analyses on over 18 
million DHSs discovered in 130 cell types. We identified 524 DHSs that are
conserved in nonhuman primates but accelerated in the human lineage (haDHS), and 
estimate that 70% of substitutions in haDHSs are attributable to positive
selection. Through extensive computational and experimental analyses, we
demonstrate that haDHSs are often active in brain or neuronal cell types; play an
important role in regulating the expression of developmentally important genes,
including many transcription factors such as SOX6, POU3F2, and HOX genes; and
identify striking examples of adaptive regulatory evolution that may have
contributed to human-specific phenotypes. More generally, our results reveal new 
insights into conserved and adaptive regulatory DNA in humans and refine the set 
of genomic substrates that distinguish humans from their closest living primate
relatives.

© 2015 Gittelman et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4561485
PMID: 26104583  [PubMed - in process]


29. Nat Genet. 2015 Jul;47(7):776-83. doi: 10.1038/ng.3324. Epub 2015 Jun 1.

Trbp regulates heart function through microRNA-mediated Sox6 repression.

Ding J(1), Chen J(1), Wang Y(2), Kataoka M(3), Ma L(4), Zhou P(1), Hu X(1), Lin
Z(1), Nie M(5), Deng ZL(6), Pu WT(7), Wang DZ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (2)Departmant of Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (3)1] Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Department of
Cardiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (4)1] Department of
Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. [2] College of Life Sciences, Hubei University, Wuhan, China.
(5)1] Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The
Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(6)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing, China. (7)1] Department of Cardiology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2]
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Cardiomyopathy is associated with altered expression of genes encoding
contractile proteins. Here we show that Trbp (Tarbp2), an RNA-binding protein, is
required for normal heart function. Cardiac-specific inactivation in mice of Trbp
(Trbp(cKO)) caused progressive cardiomyopathy and lethal heart failure. Loss of
Trbp function resulted in upregulation of Sox6, repression of genes encoding
normal cardiac slow-twitch myofiber proteins and pathologically increased
expression of genes encoding skeletal fast-twitch myofiber proteins. Remarkably, 
knockdown of Sox6 fully rescued the Trbp-mutant phenotype, whereas mice
overexpressing Sox6 phenocopied Trbp(cKO) mice. Trbp inactivation was
mechanistically linked to Sox6 upregulation through altered processing of
miR-208a, which is a direct inhibitor of Sox6. Transgenic overexpression of
Mir208a sufficiently repressed Sox6, restored the balance in gene expression for 
fast- and slow-twitch myofiber proteins, and rescued cardiac function in
Trbp(cKO) mice. Together, our studies identify a new Trbp-mediated
microRNA-processing mechanism in the regulation of a linear genetic cascade
essential for normal heart function.

PMCID: PMC4485565
PMID: 26029872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Sci Rep. 2015 May 27;5:10398. doi: 10.1038/srep10398.

SOXE transcription factors form selective dimers on non-compact DNA motifs
through multifaceted interactions between dimerization and high-mobility group
domains.

Huang YH(1), Jankowski A(2), Cheah KS(3), Prabhakar S(4), Jauch R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genome Regulation Laboratory, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, 
190 Kai Yuan Avenue,Science Park, 510530 Guangzhou, China. (2)1] Computational
and Systems Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore 138672, Singapore
[2] Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics and Mechanics, University of Warsaw,
Banacha 2, 02-097 Warszawa, Poland. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Li Ka Shing
Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 21 Sassoon Rd, Hong Kong,
China. (4)Computational and Systems Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore,
Singapore 138672, Singapore.

The SOXE transcription factors SOX8, SOX9 and SOX10 are master regulators of
mammalian development directing sex determination, gliogenesis, pancreas
specification and neural crest development. We identified a set of palindromic
SOX binding sites specifically enriched in regulatory regions of melanoma cells. 
SOXE proteins homodimerize on these sequences with high cooperativity. In
contrast to other transcription factor dimers, which are typically rigidly
spaced, SOXE group proteins can bind cooperatively at a wide range of dimer
spacings. Using truncated forms of SOXE proteins, we show that a single
dimerization (DIM) domain, that precedes the DNA binding high mobility group
(HMG) domain, is sufficient for dimer formation, suggesting that DIM : HMG rather
than DIM:DIM interactions mediate the dimerization. All SOXE members can also
heterodimerize in this fashion, whereas SOXE heterodimers with SOX2, SOX4, SOX6
and SOX18 are not supported. We propose a structural model where SOXE-specific
intramolecular DIM:HMG interactions are allosterically communicated to the HMG of
juxtaposed molecules. Collectively, SOXE factors evolved a unique mode to
combinatorially regulate their target genes that relies on a multifaceted
interplay between the HMG and DIM domains. This property potentially extends
further the diversity of target genes and cell-specific functions that are
regulated by SOXE proteins.

PMCID: PMC4445065
PMID: 26013289  [PubMed - in process]


31. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jun 23;43(11):5394-408. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv426. Epub
2015 May 4.

The SOX9 upstream region prone to chromosomal aberrations causing campomelic
dysplasia contains multiple cartilage enhancers.

Yao B(1), Wang Q(1), Liu CF(1), Bhattaram P(1), Li W(1), Mead TJ(1), Crish JF(1),
Lefebvre V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, and Orthopaedic and Rheumatologic
Research Center, Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland, OH 44195,
USA. (2)Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, and Orthopaedic and
Rheumatologic Research Center, Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA lefebvv@ccf.org.

Two decades after the discovery that heterozygous mutations within and around
SOX9 cause campomelic dysplasia, a generalized skeleton malformation syndrome, it
is well established that SOX9 is a master transcription factor in chondrocytes.
In contrast, the mechanisms whereby translocations in the --350/-50-kb region 5' 
of SOX9 cause severe disease and whereby SOX9 expression is specified in
chondrocytes remain scarcely known. We here screen this upstream region and
uncover multiple enhancers that activate Sox9-promoter transgenes in the SOX9
expression domain. Three of them are primarily active in chondrocytes. E250
(located at -250 kb) confines its activity to condensed prechondrocytes, E195
mainly targets proliferating chondrocytes, and E84 is potent in all
differentiated chondrocytes. E84 and E195 synergize with E70, previously shown to
be active in most Sox9-expressing somatic tissues, including cartilage. While
SOX9 protein powerfully activates E70, it does not control E250. It requires its 
SOX5/SOX6 chondrogenic partners to robustly activate E195 and additional factors 
to activate E84. Altogether, these results indicate that SOX9 expression in
chondrocytes relies on widely spread transcriptional modules whose synergistic
and overlapping activities are driven by SOX9, SOX5/SOX6 and other factors. They 
help elucidate mechanisms underlying campomelic dysplasia and will likely help
uncover other disease mechanisms.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4477657
PMID: 25940622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Differentiation. 2015 Mar-Apr;89(3-4):77-86. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2015.03.002.
Epub 2015 Apr 7.

Adaxial cell migration in the zebrafish embryo is an active cell autonomous
property that requires the Prdm1a transcription factor.

Ono Y(1), Yu W(2), Jackson HE(3), Parkin CA(3), Ingham PW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Imperial College London-Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore, Singapore; A(<U+204E>)STAR Institute of Molecular
and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos, Singapore 138673, Singapore.
(2)A(<U+204E>)STAR Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos, 
Singapore 138673, Singapore. (3)A(<U+204E>)STAR Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology,
61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos, Singapore 138673, Singapore; MRC Centre for
Developmental and Biomedical Genetics, University of Sheffield, Western Bank,
Sheffield, United Kingdom. (4)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Imperial College
London-Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore; A(<U+204E>)STAR Institute
of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos, Singapore 138673,
Singapore. Electronic address: pingham@ntu.edu.sg.

Adaxial cells, the progenitors of slow-twitch muscle fibres in zebrafish, exhibit
a stereotypic migratory behaviour during somitogenesis. Although this process is 
known to be disrupted in various mutants, its precise nature has remained
unclear. Here, using in vivo imaging and chimera analysis, we show that adaxial
cell migration is a cell autonomous process, during which cells become polarised 
and extend filopodia at their leading edge. Loss of function of the Prdm1a
transcription factor disrupts the polarisation and migration of adaxial cells,
reflecting a role that is independent of its repression of sox6 expression.
Expression of the M- and N-cadherins, previously implicated in driving adaxial
cell migration, is largely unaffected by loss of Prdm1a function, suggesting that
differential cadherin expression is not sufficient for adaxial cell migration.

Copyright © 2015 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25861970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 20;10(3):e0119804. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119804.
eCollection 2015.

MicroRNA-499 expression distinctively correlates to target genes sox6 and rod1
profiles to resolve the skeletal muscle phenotype in Nile tilapia.

Nachtigall PG(1), Dias MC(2), Carvalho RF(3), Martins C(3), Pinhal D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute of Biosciences, Sao Paulo State University
(UNESP), Botucatu, Sao Paulo, 18618-970, Brazil. (2)Department of Morphology,
Institute of Biosciences, Sao Paulo State University (UNESP), Botucatu, Sao
Paulo, 18618-970, Brazil; Health Sciences Institute, Federal University of Mato
Grosso (UFMT), Sinop, Mato Grosso, 78550-000, Brazil. (3)Department of
Morphology, Institute of Biosciences, Sao Paulo State University (UNESP),
Botucatu, Sao Paulo, 18618-970, Brazil.

A class of small non-coding RNAs, the microRNAs (miRNAs), has been shown to be
essential for the regulation of specific cell pathways, including skeletal muscle
development, maintenance and homeostasis in vertebrates. However, the relative
contribution of miRNAs for determining the red and white muscle cell phenotypes
is far from being fully comprehended. To better characterize the role of miRNA in
skeletal muscle cell biology, we investigated muscle-specific miRNA (myomiR)
signatures in Nile tilapia fish. Quantitative (RT-qPCR) and spatial (FISH)
expression analyses revealed a highly differential expression (forty-four-fold)
of miR-499 in red skeletal muscle compared to white skeletal muscle, whereas the 
remaining known myomiRs were equally expressed in both muscle cell types.
Detailed examination of the miR-499 targets through bioinformatics led us to the 
sox6 and rod1 genes, which had low expression in red muscle cells according to
RT-qPCR, FISH, and protein immunofluorescence profiling experiments.
Interestingly, we verified that the high expression of miR-499 perfectly
correlates with a low expression of sox6 and rod1 target genes, as verified by a 
distinctive predominance of mRNA destabilization and protein translational decay 
to these genes, respectively. Through a genome-wide comparative analysis of SOX6 
and ROD1 protein domains and through an in silico gene regulatory network, we
also demonstrate that both proteins are essentially similar in vertebrate
genomes, suggesting their gene regulatory network may also be widely conserved.
Overall, our data shed light on the potential regulation of targets by miR-499
associated with the slow-twitch muscle fiber type phenotype. Additionally the
results provide novel insights into the evolutionary dynamics of miRNA and target
genes enrolled in a putative constrained molecular pathway in the skeletal muscle
cells of vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC4368118
PMID: 25793727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. FASEB J. 2015 Jun;29(6):2303-14. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-268151. Epub 2015 Feb 13.

Moderate alterations of the cytoskeleton in human chondrocytes after short-term
microgravity produced by parabolic flight maneuvers could be prevented by
up-regulation of BMP-2 and SOX-9.

Aleshcheva G(1), Wehland M(1), Sahana J(1), Bauer J(1), Corydon TJ(1),
Hemmersbach R(1), Frett T(1), Egli M(1), Infanger M(1), Grosse J(1), Grimm D(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Clinic for Plastic, Aesthetic and Hand Surgery, Otto-von-Guericke University,
Magdeburg, Germany; Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C,
Denmark; Max-Planck-Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany; DLR German 
Aerospace Center, Biomedical Research, Gravitational Biology, Cologne, Germany;
Aerospace Biomedical Science and Technology, Space Biology Group, Luzerne
University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Hergiswil, Switzerland; and Department
of Nuclear Medicine, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. (2)*Clinic
for Plastic, Aesthetic and Hand Surgery, Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg,
Germany; Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark;
Max-Planck-Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany; DLR German Aerospace
Center, Biomedical Research, Gravitational Biology, Cologne, Germany; Aerospace
Biomedical Science and Technology, Space Biology Group, Luzerne University of
Applied Sciences and Arts, Hergiswil, Switzerland; and Department of Nuclear
Medicine, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany dgg@biomed.au.dk.

Real and simulated microgravity induce a variety of changes in human cells. Most 
importantly, changes in the cytoskeleton have been noted, and studies on
microtubules have shown that they are gravisensitive. This study focuses on the
effects of short-term real microgravity on gene expression, protein content, and 
cytoskeletal structure of human chondrocytes. We cultivated human chondrocytes,
took them along a parabolic flight during the 24th Deutsches Zentrum für Luft-
und Raumfahrt Parabolic (DLR) Flight Campaign, and fixed them after the 1st and
the 31st parabola. Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed no changes after the
1st parabola, but disruptions of ß-tubulin, vimentin, and cytokeratin networks
after the 31st parabola. No F-actin stress fibers were detected even after 31
parabolas. Furthermore, mRNA and protein quantifications after the 31st parabola 
showed a clear up-regulation of cytoskeletal genes and proteins. The mRNAs were
significantly up-regulated as follows: TUBB, 2-fold; VIM, 1.3-fold; KRT8,
1.8-fold; ACTB, 1.9-fold; ICAM1, 4.8-fold; OPN, 7-fold; ITGA10, 1.5-fold; ITGB1, 
1.2-fold; TGFB1, 1.5-fold; CAV1, 2.6-fold; SOX9, 1.7-fold; BMP-2, 5.3-fold.
However, SOX5 (-25%) and SOX6 (-28%) gene expression was decreased. Contrary, no 
significant changes in gene expression levels were observed during vibration and 
hypergravity experiments. These data suggest that short-term microgravity affects
the gene expression of distinct proteins. In contrast to poorly differentiated
follicular thyroid cancer cells or human endothelial cells, chondrocytes only
exert moderate cytoskeletal alterations. The up-regulation of BMP-2, TGF-ß1, and 
SOX9 in chondrocytes may play a key role in preventing cytoskeletal alterations.

© FASEB.

PMID: 25681461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Skelet Muscle. 2015 Jan 27;5(1):2. doi: 10.1186/s13395-014-0026-2. eCollection
2015.

The role of Sox6 in zebrafish muscle fiber type specification.

Jackson HE(1), Ono Y(2), Wang X(2), Elworthy S(3), Cunliffe VT(3), Ingham PW(4).

Author information: 
(1)ASTAR Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Proteos, 61 Biopolis Drive,
Singapore, 138673 Republic of Singapore ; Bateson Centre, University of
Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield, S10 2TN UK. (2)ASTAR Institute of Molecular
and Cell Biology, Proteos, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore, 138673 Republic of
Singapore. (3)Bateson Centre, University of Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield,
S10 2TN UK. (4)ASTAR Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Proteos, 61
Biopolis Drive, Singapore, 138673 Republic of Singapore ; Lee Kong Chian School
of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, Proteos, 61 Biopolis Drive,
Singapore, 138673 Republic of Singapore ; Department of Medicine, Imperial
College, South Kensington Campus, London, SW7 2AZ UK.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor Sox6 has been implicated in regulating
muscle fiber type-specific gene expression in mammals. In zebrafish, loss of
function of the transcription factor Prdm1a results in a slow to fast-twitch
fiber type transformation presaged by ectopic expression of sox6 in slow-twitch
progenitors. Morpholino-mediated Sox6 knockdown can suppress this transformation 
but causes ectopic expression of only one of three slow-twitch specific genes
assayed. Here, we use gain and loss of function analysis to analyse further the
role of Sox6 in zebrafish muscle fiber type specification.
METHODS: The GAL4 binary misexpression system was used to express Sox6
ectopically in zebrafish embryos. Cis-regulatory elements were characterized
using transgenic fish. Zinc finger nuclease mediated targeted mutagenesis was
used to analyse the effects of loss of Sox6 function in embryonic, larval and
adult zebrafish. Zebrafish transgenic for the GCaMP3 Calcium reporter were used
to assay Ca2+ transients in wild-type and mutant muscle fibres.
RESULTS: Ectopic Sox6 expression is sufficient to downregulate slow-twitch
specific gene expression in zebrafish embryos. Cis-regulatory elements upstream
of the slow myosin heavy chain 1 (smyhc1) and slow troponin c (tnnc1b) genes
contain putative Sox6 binding sites required for repression of the former but not
the latter. Embryos homozygous for sox6 null alleles expressed tnnc1b throughout 
the fast-twitch muscle whereas other slow-specific muscle genes, including
smyhc1, were expressed ectopically in only a subset of fast-twitch fibers. Ca2+
transients in sox6 mutant fast-twitch fibers were intermediate in their speed and
amplitude between those of wild-type slow- and fast-twitch fibers. sox6
homozygotes survived to adulthood and exhibited continued misexpression of tnnc1b
as well as smaller slow-twitch fibers. They also exhibited a striking curvature
of the spine.
CONCLUSIONS: The Sox6 transcription factor is a key regulator of fast-twitch
muscle fiber differentiation in the zebrafish, a role similar to that ascribed to
its murine ortholog.

PMCID: PMC4323260
PMID: 25671076  [PubMed]


36. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2014;165(4):229-43. doi: 10.1159/000370067. Epub 2015
Jan 29.

Exacerbating factors induce different gene expression profiles in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells from asthmatics, patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and healthy subjects.

Pniewska E(1), Sokolowska M, Kuprys-Lipinska I, Kacprzak D, Kuna P, Pawliczak R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergology, Immunology and Dermatology, Department of
Immunopathology, Faculty of Biomedical Sciences and Postgraduate Training,
Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Despite several common phenotypic features, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) and severe asthma differ with regard to their causative 
factors and pathophysiology. Both diseases may be exacerbated by environmental
factors, however, the molecular profiles of disease episodes have not been
comprehensively studied. We identified differences in gene and protein expression
profiles expressed by peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of COPD patients,
patients with atopic asthma and healthy subjects when challenged with
exacerbating factors in vitro: lipopolysaccharide (LPS), house dust mite (HDM)
and cat allergen.
METHODS: PBMC isolated from patients with severe atopic asthma and COPD, as well 
as healthy subjects were stimulated with rDer p 1 DG, rFel d 1 DG and LPS. The
changes in the expression of 47 genes belonging to five groups (phospholipase A2,
eicosanoids, transcription factors, cytokines and airway remodeling) were studied
using TaqMan low density array cards. Immunoblotting was used to study relative
protein expression.
RESULTS: rDer p 1 significantly up-regulated the expression of PLA2G4A, PLA2G6,
PLA2G15, CYSLTR1, LB4R2, PTGS1, PTGS2, FOXP1, GATA3, HDAC2, IREB2, PPARG, STAT4, 
TSLP and CHI3L1 genes in asthmatics in comparison to healthy subjects. LPS
induced significant expression of ANXA1 and LTA4H in asthmatics when compared to 
COPD patients and healthy subjects. SOX6,STAT4 and IL1RL1 were induced in COPD
after LPS stimulation. Analysis of protein expression revealed a pattern similar 
to mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: LPS-induced exacerbation of asthma and COPD is characterized by
differential expression of selected genes in PBMC. HDM allergen changed the
expression profile of inflammatory genes between patients with asthma of atopic
origin and healthy controls.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25634111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 29;9(12):e115169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115169.
eCollection 2014.

Identification of SCAN domain zinc-finger gene ZNF449 as a novel factor of
chondrogenesis.

Okada K(1), Fukai A(2), Mori D(3), Hosaka Y(4), Yano F(5), Chung UI(6), Kawaguchi
H(7), Tanaka S(1), Ikeda T(8), Saito T(9).

Author information: 
(1)Sensory & Motor System Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan. (2)Sensory & Motor System Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; Sports Medicine and Orthopedics, Kanto Rosai
Hospital, Japan Labour Health and Welfare Organization, Kanagawa, Japan. (3)Bone 
and Cartilage Regenerative Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Sensory & Motor System Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; Orthopedic Surgery, Tokyo Metropolitan Bokutoh
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Bone and Cartilage Regenerative Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; Center for Disease Biology and
Integrative Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Center for Disease Biology and Integrative Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Sensory & Motor System Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; Spine Center, Tokyo Shinjuku
Medical Center, Japan Community Health care Organization, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Sensory & Motor System Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan; Division of Transfusion Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (9)Sensory & Motor System Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; Bone and Cartilage Regenerative 
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Transcription factors SOX9, SOX5 and SOX6 are indispensable for generation and
differentiation of chondrocytes. However, molecular mechanisms to induce the SOX 
genes are poorly understood. To address this issue, we previously determined the 
human embryonic enhancer of SOX6 by 5'RACE analysis, and identified the 46-bp
core enhancer region (CES6). We initially performed yeast one-hybrid assay for
screening other chondrogenic factors using CES6 as bait, and identified a zinc
finger protein ZNF449. ZNF449 and Zfp449, a counterpart in mouse, transactivated 
enhancers or promoters of SOX6, SOX9 and COL2A1. Zfp449 was expressed in
mesenchyme-derived tissues including cartilage, calvaria, muscle and tendon, as
well as in other tissues including brain, lung and kidney. In limb cartilage of
mouse embryo, Zfp449 protein was abundantly located in periarticular
chondrocytes, and decreased in accordance with the differentiation. Zfp449
protein was also detected in articular cartilage of an adult mouse. During
chondrogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells, ZNF449 was
increased at an early stage, and its overexpression enhanced SOX9 and SOX6 only
at the initial stage of the differentiation. We further generated Zfp449 knockout
mice to examine the in vivo roles; however, no obvious abnormality was observed
in skeletal development or articular cartilage homeostasis. ZNF449 may regulate
chondrogenic differentiation from mesenchymal progenitor cells, although the
underlying mechanisms are still unknown.

PMCID: PMC4278888
PMID: 25546433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 26;9(12):e115909. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115909.
eCollection 2014.

Investigating microenvironmental regulation of human chordoma cell behaviour.

Patel P(1), Brooks C(2), Seneviratne A(3), Hess DA(3), Séguin CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Schulich School of Medicine &
Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine &
Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine &
Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada; Robarts
Research Institute, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

The tumour microenvironment is complex and composed of many different
constituents, including matricellular proteins such as connective tissue growth
factor (CCN2), and is characterized by gradients in oxygen levels. In various
cancers, hypoxia and CCN2 promote stem and progenitor cell properties, and
regulate the proliferation, migration and phenotype of cancer cells. Our study
was aimed at investigating the effects of hypoxia and CCN2 on chordoma cells,
using the human U-CH1 cell line. We demonstrate that under basal conditions,
U-CH1 cells express multiple CCN family members including CCN1, CCN2, CCN3 and
CCN5. Culture of U-CH1 cells in either hypoxia or in the presence of recombinant 
CCN2 peptide promoted progenitor cell-like characteristics specific to the
notochordal tissue of origin. Specifically, hypoxia induced the most robust
increase in progenitor-like characteristics in U-CH1 cells, including increased
expression of the notochord-associated markers T, CD24, FOXA1, ACAN and CA12,
increased cell growth and tumour-sphere formation, and a decrease in the
percentage of vacuolated cells present in the heterogeneous population.
Interestingly, the effects of recombinant CCN2 peptide on U-CH1 cells were more
pronounced under normoxia than hypoxia, promoting increased expression of CCN1,
CCN2, CCN3 and CCN5, the notochord-associated markers SOX5, SOX6, T, CD24, and
FOXA1 as well as increased tumour-sphere formation. Overall, this study
highlights the importance of multiple factors within the tumour microenvironment 
and how hypoxia and CCN2 may regulate human chordoma cell behaviour.

PMCID: PMC4277432
PMID: 25541962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Bone. 2015 May;74:125-33. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2014.12.001. Epub 2014 Dec 10.

AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activity negatively regulates chondrogenic
differentiation.

Bandow K(1), Kusuyama J(1), Kakimoto K(1), Ohnishi T(1), Matsuguchi T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Field of Developmental Medicine, Kagoshima
University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka,
Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan. (2)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Field of
Developmental Medicine, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and
Dental Sciences, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan. Electronic
address: tmatsugu@dent.kagoshima-u.ac.jp.

Chondrocytes are derived from mesenchymal stem cells, and play an important role 
in cartilage formation. Sex determining region Y box (Sox) family transcription
factors are essential for chondrogenic differentiation, whereas the intracellular
signal pathways of Sox activation have not been clearly elucidated. AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK) is a serine-threonine kinase generally regarded as a key
regulator of cellular energy homeostasis. It is known that the catalytic alpha
subunit of AMPK is activated by upstream AMPK kinases (AMPKKs) including liver
kinase B1 (LKB1). We have previously reported that AMPK is a negative regulator
of osteoblastic differentiation. Here, we have explored the role of AMPK in
chondrogenic differentiation using in vitro culture models. The phosphorylation
level of the catalytic AMPK alpha subunit significantly decreased during
chondrogenic differentiation of primary chondrocyte precursors as well as ATDC-5,
a well-characterized chondrogenic cell line. Treatment with metformin, an
activator of AMPK, significantly reduced cartilage matrix formation and inhibited
gene expression of sox6, sox9, col2a1 and aggrecan core protein (acp). Thus,
chondrocyte differentiation is functionally associated with decreased AMPK
activity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25497570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. FEBS J. 2015 Feb;282(4):685-99. doi: 10.1111/febs.13173. Epub 2015 Jan 8.

Vitamin C induces a pluripotent state in mouse embryonic stem cells by modulating
microRNA expression.

Gao Y(1), Han Z, Li Q, Wu Y, Shi X, Ai Z, Du J, Li W, Guo Z, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi,
China; Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, Yangling,
Shaanxi, China; College of Life Sciences, Northwest A&F University, Yangling,
Shaanxi, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a group of noncoding RNAs, function as post-transcriptional
gene regulators and control the establishment, self-renewal and differentiation
of stem cells. Vitamin C has been recognized as a reprogramming enhancer because 
of its ability to induce a blastocyst-like state in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). 
However, knowledge on the regulation of miRNAs by vitamin C in ESCs is limited.
In this study, we found that vitamin C induced miRNA expression, particularly of 
ESC-specific miRNAs. Moreover, vitamin C maintained the miRNA expression of the
Dlk1-Dio3 imprinting region. The miRNAs in this region contain identical seed
sequences, which target a class of genes, including Kdm6b, Klf13, and Sox6, and
are mainly related to cell differentiation and development. These genes were
significantly downregulated by vitamin C. Notably, miR-143 promoted self-renewal 
of mouse ESCs and suppressed expression of the de novo methyltransferase gene
Dnmt3a. Knockdown of miR-143 by use of its inhibitor counteracted the vitamin
C-induced reduction in Dnmt3a expression, showing that vitamin C repressed Dnmt3a
expression via miR-143. Vitamin C also promoted DNA demethylation, including of
pluripotency gene promoters (Tbx3, Tcl1, and Esrrb) and ESC-specific miRNA
promoters (miR-290-295 and miR-17-92 clusters), and DNA hydroxymethylation,
including of the intergenic differentially methylated region of the Dlk1-Dio3
region. These results strongly suggested that vitamin C promoted widespread DNA
demethylation in gene promoters by modulating epigenetic modifiers, including
Dnmt3a, which activated pluripotency genes and ESC-specific miRNAs. Then,
differentiation and development genes were repressed by ESC-enriched miRNAs,
which maintained the stem cell state.

© 2014 FEBS.

PMID: 25491368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Jan;54(1):1-3. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2014.10.004. Epub
2014 Nov 3.

SCF-mediated <U+03B3>-globin gene expression in adult human erythroid cells is
associated with KLF1, BCL11A and SOX6 down-regulation.

Lulli V(1), Romania P(2), Morsilli O(1), Ilari R(1), Gabbianelli M(1), Testa
U(1), Marziali G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di
Sanità, Rome, Italy. (2)Dept. of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine,
Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy; Paediatric Haematology/Oncology
Department, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital IRCCS, Rome, Italy. (3)Dept. of
Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, 
Italy. Electronic address: giovanna.marziali@iss.it.

PMID: 25457384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Pediatr Neurol. 2015 Jan;52(1):115-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2014.08.021.
Epub 2014 Sep 17.

Disruption of SOX6 is associated with a rapid-onset dopa-responsive movement
disorder, delayed development, and dysmorphic features.

Ebrahimi-Fakhari D(1), Maas B(2), Haneke C(3), Niehues T(3), Hinderhofer K(2),
Assmann BE(4), Runz H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics I, Heidelberg
University Hospital, Ruprecht-Karls-University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
Electronic address: d.ebrahimi-fakhari@uni-heidelberg.de. (2)Institute of Human
Genetics, Ruprecht-Karls-University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Helios Hospital Krefeld, Krefeld, Germany.
(4)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics I, Heidelberg
University Hospital, Ruprecht-Karls-University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Sox6 is a transcription factor that is crucial for the
differentiation and development of cortical interneurons and dopaminergic neurons
of the substantia nigra pars compact. Loss-of-function mutations might thus
result in complex paroxysmal diseases such as epilepsy syndromes or movement
disorders.
PATIENT: We present a 15-year-old boy with delayed speech development and
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder who presented with a rapid-onset
generalized dopa-responsive dystonia.
RESULTS: Neurological examination revealed generalized dystonic and frequent
athetoid movements of the arms, trunk, and neck. Gait was severely impaired
secondary to frequent dystonic postures. Both a resting tremor and action tremors
were observed in both hands. Speech was dysarthric but language comprehension was
unimpaired. Testing for saccadic dysfunction revealed hypometric horizontal and
vertical saccades. Physical examination was otherwise significant for a pectus
carinatum and splenomegaly. Laboratory studies, brain magnetic resonance imaging,
and electroencephalography were unremarkable. Treatment with levodopa/carbidopa
led to a complete and sustained remission of neurological symptoms. Genetic
testing revealed a mono-allelic de novo 84-kb deletion on chromosome 11p15.2
encompassing exons 14-16 of the SOX6 gene (chr11: 15944880-16029095, NCBI
37/hg19).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of a dopa-responsive movement disorder
associated with SOX6 disruption. SOX6 mutations should be considered in the
differential diagnosis of unexplained dopa-responsive dystonia syndromes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25439488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Anticancer Res. 2014 Nov;34(11):6405-15.

High-density array comparative genomic hybridization detects novel copy number
alterations in gastric adenocarcinoma.

Seabra AD(1), Araújo TM(1), Mello Junior FA(1), Di Felipe Ávila Alcântara D(1),
De Barros AP(1), De Assumpção PP(2), Montenegro RC(1), Guimarães AC(1), Demachki 
S(2), Burbano RM(1), Khayat AS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Human Cytogenetics Laboratory, Federal University of Pará, Belém Pará, Brazil 
Oncology Research Center, Federal University of Pará, Belém Pará, Brazil.
(2)Oncology Research Center, Federal University of Pará, Belém Pará, Brazil.
(3)Human Cytogenetics Laboratory, Federal University of Pará, Belém Pará, Brazil 
Oncology Research Center, Federal University of Pará, Belém Pará, Brazil
khayatas@gmail.com.

AIM: To investigate frequent quantitative alterations of intestinal-type gastric 
adenocarcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed genome-wide DNA copy numbers of 22 samples and
using CytoScan® HD Array.
RESULTS: We identified 22 gene alterations that to the best of our knowledge have
not been described for gastric cancer, including of v-erb-b2 avian erythroblastic
leukemia viral oncogene homolog 4 (ERBB4), SRY (sex determining region Y)-box 6
(SOX6), regulator of telomere elongation helicase 1 (RTEL1) and
UDP-Gal:betaGlcNAc beta 1,4- galactosyltransferase, polypeptide 5 (B4GALT5). The 
most significant alterations related to peritoneal invasion involved the regions 
13q21.1 (gain) and 15q15.1, 17q23.1, 19q13.2 and 20q11.22 (loss of
heterozygozity; LOH), where we found LOH of erythrocyte membrane protein band
4.1-like 1 (EPB41L1) gene. In relation to early age of onset, the most
significant alterations were gains in the regions Xq26 and Xp22.31 and a loss in 
the region 11p15.4.
CONCLUSION: These quantitative changes may play a role in the development of this
type of neoplasia and may be used as markers in evaluating poor prognosis, as
well as act as potential therapeutic targets for gastric cancer.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25368240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 May;75(5):522-38. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22240. Epub 2014 Nov 13.

Sox5 controls dorsal progenitor and interneuron specification in the spinal cord.

Quiroga AC(1), Stolt CC, Diez del Corral R, Dimitrov S, Pérez-Alcalá S, Sock E,
Barbas JA, Wegner M, Morales AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular, Molecular and Developmental Neurobiology, Instituto
Cajal, CSIC, Madrid, 28002, Spain.

The basic organization of somatosensory circuits in the spinal cord is already
setup during the initial patterning of the dorsal neural tube. Extrinsic signals,
such as Wnt and TGF-ß pathways, activate combinatorial codes of transcription
factors that are responsible for generating a pattern of discrete domains of
dorsal progenitors (dp). These progenitors will give rise to distinct dorsal
interneurons (dI). The Wnt/ ßcatenin signaling pathway controls specification of 
dp/dI1-3 progenitors and interneurons. According to the current model in the
field, Wnt/ßcatenin activity seems to act in a graded fashion in the spinal cord,
as different relative levels determine the identity of adjacent progenitors.
However, it is not clear how this activity gradient is controlled and how the
identities of dI1-3 are differentially regulated by Wnt signalling. We have
determined that two SoxD transcription factors, Sox5 and Sox6, are expressed in
restricted domains of dorsal progenitors in the neural tube. Using gain- and
loss-of function approaches in chicken embryos, we have established that Sox5
controls cell fate specification of dp2 and dp3 progenitors and, as a result,
controls the correct number of the corresponding dorsal interneurons (dI2 and
dI3). Furthermore, Sox5 exerts its function by restricting dorsally Wnt signaling
activity via direct transcriptional induction of the negative Wnt pathway
regulator Axin2. By that way, Sox5 acts as a Wnt pathway modulator that
contributes to sharpen the dorsal gradient of Wnt/ßcatenin activity to control
the distinction of two functionally distinct types of interneurons, dI2 and dI3
involved in the somatosensory relay.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25363628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Aug;230(8):1750-7. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24848.

Contractile and metabolic properties of engineered skeletal muscle derived from
slow and fast phenotype mouse muscle.

Khodabukus A(1), Baar K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Physiology and Behavior, University of California 
Davis, Davis, California.

Satellite cells derived from fast and slow muscles have been shown to adopt
contractile and metabolic properties of their parent muscle. Mouse muscle shows
less distinctive fiber-type profiles than rat or rabbit muscle. Therefore, in
this study we sought to determine whether three-dimensional muscle constructs
engineered from slow soleus (SOL) and fast tibialis anterior (TA) from mice would
adopt the contractile and metabolic properties of their parent muscle.
Time-to-peak tension (TPT) and half-relaxation time (1/2RT) was significantly
slower in SOL constructs. In agreement with TPT, TA constructs contained
significantly higher levels of fast myosin heavy chain (MHC) and fast troponin C,
I, and T isoforms. Fast SERCA protein, both slow and fast calsequestrin isoforms 
and parvalbumin were found at higher levels in TA constructs. SOL constructs were
more fatigue resistant and contained higher levels of the mitochondrial proteins 
SDH and ATP synthase and the fatty acid transporter CPT-1. SOL constructs
contained lower levels of the glycolytic enzyme phosphofructokinase but higher
levels of the ß-oxidation enzymes LCAD and VLCAD suggesting greater fat
oxidation. Despite no changes in PGC-1a protein, SOL constructs contained higher 
levels of SIRT1 and PRC. TA constructs contained higher levels of the slow-fiber 
program repressor SOX6 and the six transcriptional complex (STC) proteins Eya1
and Six4 which may underlie the higher in fast-fiber and lower slow-fiber program
proteins. Overall, we have found that muscles engineered from predominantly slow 
and fast mouse muscle retain contractile and metabolic properties of their native
muscle.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25335966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Feb 1;24(3):865-74. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu478. Epub 2014 Sep
23.

Genome-wide association study in Chinese identifies novel loci for blood pressure
and hypertension.

Lu X(1), Wang L(2), Lin X(3), Huang J(4), Charles Gu C(5), He M(6), Shen H(7), He
J(8), Zhu J(3), Li H(3), Hixson JE(9), Wu T(6), Dai J(7), Lu L(3), Shen C(10),
Chen S(1), He L(11), Mo Z(12), Hao Y(1), Mo X(1), Yang X(1), Li J(1), Cao J(1),
Chen J(1), Fan Z(13), Li Y(1), Zhao L(1), Li H(14), Lu F(15), Yao C(16), Yu
L(17), Xu L(18), Mu J(19), Wu X(20), Deng Y(20), Hu D(21), Zhang W(22), Ji X(23),
Guo D(24), Guo Z(25), Zhou Z(26), Yang Z(27), Wang R(28), Yang J(29), Zhou X(30),
Yan W(31), Sun N(32), Gao P(33), Gu D(34).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease Fuwai Hospital, National Center
for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing 100037, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular
Disease National Human Genome Center at Beijing, Beijing 100176, China. (3)Key
Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences and
Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(4)Hypertension Division Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular
Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100037, China. (5)Division of Biostatistics, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (6)MOE Key Lab of Environment and Health, 
School of Public Health, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, China. (7)Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Ministry of Education Key Lab for Modern Toxicology School of
Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211166, China Section
of Clinical Epidemiology, Jiangsu Key Lab of Cancer Biomarkers, Prevention and
Treatment, Cancer Center, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029,
China. (8)Department of Epidemiology, Tulane University School of Public Health
and Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. (9)Department of Epidemiology,
University of Texas School of Public Health, Houston, TX 77025, USA.
(10)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Ministry of Education Key Lab
for Modern Toxicology School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 211166, China. (11)Bio-X Institutes, Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China. (12)Center for Genomic and
Personalized Medicine, Medical Scientific Research Center and Department of
Occupational Health and Environmental Health, School of Public Health, Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, China. (13)Department of Cardiology,
Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100730, China. (14)National Human Genome Center at Beijing, Beijing
100176, China. (15)Cardio-Cerebrovascular Control and Research Center, Institute 
of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jinan, Shandong 250062, 
China. (16)School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 
211166, China. (17)Department of Cardiology, Fujian Provincial People's Hospital,
Fuzhou, Fujian 350004, China. (18)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Hospital
of Beihua University, Beihua University, Jilin 132011, China. (19)Department of
Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, Shannxi 710061, China. (20)Center for Chronic and
Noncommunicable Disease Control and Prevention, Sichuan Center of Disease Control
and Prevention, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China. (21)School of Public Health,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450001, China School of Medicine, Shenzhen
University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518000, China. (22)School of Public Health,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450001, China. (23)Department of Internal 
Medicine, Xinle Red Cross Hospital, Xinle, Hebei 050700, China. (24)Department of
Internal Medicine, Yuxian Renmin Hospital, Yuxian, Shanxi 045100, China.
(25)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Medical College of
Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China. (26)Changshu Center of Disease
Control and Prevention, Changshu, Jiangsu 215501, China. (27)Nantong Center of
Disease Control and Prevention, Nantong, Jiangsu 226007, China. (28)Department of
Internal Medicine, Shijiazhuang Greatwall Hospital, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 052260,
China. (29)Department of Cardiology, Hanzhong People's Hospital, Hanzhong,
Shannxi 723000, China. (30)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan
University, Wuhan, Hubei 430060, China. (31)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, 
Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 200062, China. (32)Department
of Heart Center, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing 100044, China and. 
(33)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Shanghai Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. (34)State Key
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease Fuwai Hospital, National Center for
Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing 100037, China gudongfeng@vip.sina.com.

Hypertension is a common disorder and the leading risk factor for cardiovascular 
disease and premature deaths worldwide. Genome-wide association studies (GWASs)
in the European population have identified multiple chromosomal regions
associated with blood pressure, and the identified loci altogether explain only a
small fraction of the variance for blood pressure. The differences in
environmental exposures and genetic background between Chinese and European
populations might suggest potential different pathways of blood pressure
regulation. To identify novel genetic variants affecting blood pressure
variation, we conducted a meta-analysis of GWASs of blood pressure and
hypertension in 11 816 subjects followed by replication studies including 69 146 
additional individuals. We identified genome-wide significant (P < 5.0 × 10(-8)) 
associations with blood pressure, which included variants at three new loci
(CACNA1D, CYP21A2, and MED13L) and a newly discovered variant near SLC4A7. We
also replicated 14 previously reported loci, 8 (CASZ1, MOV10, FGF5, CYP17A1,
SOX6, ATP2B1, ALDH2, and JAG1) at genome-wide significance, and 6 (FIGN, ULK4,
GUCY1A3, HFE, TBX3-TBX5, and TBX3) at a suggestive level of P = 1.81 × 10(-3) to 
5.16 × 10(-8). These findings provide new mechanistic insights into the
regulation of blood pressure and potential targets for treatments.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4303798
PMID: 25249183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Osteoporos Int. 2015 Feb;26(2):553-61. doi: 10.1007/s00198-014-2882-3. Epub 2014 
Sep 12.

Functional analyses reveal the essential role of SOX6 and RUNX2 in the
communication of chondrocyte and osteoblast.

Zhang Y(1), Yang TL, Li X, Guo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University College of Medicine, The Key Laboratory of Biomedical
Information Engineering of Ministry of Education, Xi'an Jiaotong University,
Xi'an, People's Republic of China.

SUMMARY: This study provides novel evidence that sex determining region Y
(SRY)-box (SOX6) and runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) play essential
roles in the communication of chondrocyte and osteoblast. Our findings open a new
avenue to the limited understanding of the coordination effect between
chondrogenesis and osteogenesis.
INTRODUCTION: Sox6 and Runx2 are two new susceptibility genes for osteoporosis
identified by genome-wide association studies, but the functions of these genes
in osteogenesis remain unclear. Both genes are essential transcription factors in
chondrogenesis, which reminds us that SOX6 and RUNX2 might be involved in the
coordination of chondrogenesis and osteogenesis. Therefore, this study aimed to
investigate the functions of SOX6 and RUNX2 in the coupling regulation of
chondrogenesis and osteogenesis.
METHODS: We established a chondrogenic differentiation model of ATDC5 cell and
profiled the expression of SOX6 and RUNX2 during chondroblast differentiation. We
co-cultured osteoblast cells with ATDC5 cells in different differentiation stages
and examined the proliferation, cell cycle progression, apoptosis, and
differentiation of osteoblast cells. SOX6 or RUNX2 was knocked down using
specific siRNA and the effect was examined.
RESULTS: During chondrogenic differentiation, SOX6 and RUNX2 expressed
sequentially in the proliferating and hypertrophic stages. Proliferative ATDC5
cells stimulated the multiplication of osteoblasts and promoted more osteoblasts 
to enter S-phase. Hypertrophic ATDC5 cells enhanced the differentiation of
osteoblasts. Yet, the apoptosis of osteoblasts was neither affected by
proliferating nor hypertrophic ATDC5 cells. Knockdown of SOX6 in proliferating
ATDC5 cells significantly repressed the stimulation of osteoblast multiplication,
whereas depletion of RUNX2 in hypertrophic ATDC5 cells retarded the expression of
osteoblastic markers.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study first reveals that SOX6 and RUNX2 play important roles in 
the chondrogenesis-osteogenesis coordination. This finding enriches the limited
understanding about this coordination and unravels the novel function of SOX6 and
RUNX2 in the endochondral ossification.

PMID: 25212673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Biomed Res. 2014;35(4):243-50.

S100A1 and S100B are dispensable for endochondral ossification during skeletal
development.

Mori Y(1), Mori D, Chung UI, Tanaka S, Heierhorst J, Buchou T, Baudier J,
Kawaguchi H, Saito T.

Author information: 
(1)Sensory & Motor System Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo.

S100A1 and S100B are induced by the SOX trio transcription factors (SOX9, SOX5,
and SOX6) in chondrocytes, and inhibit their hypertrophic differentiation in
culture. However, functional roles of S100A1 and S100B during in vivo skeletal
development are yet to be determined. Here we show that mice deficient of both
the S100a1 and S100b genes displayed normal skeletal growth from embryonic stage 
to adulthood. Although no compensatory upregulation of other S100 family members 
was observed in S100a1/S100b double mutants, the related S100a2, S100a4, S100a10,
and S100a11 were expressed at similarly high levels to S100a1 and S100b in mouse 
primary chondrocytes. Furthermore, overexpression of these other S100 members
suppressed the hypertrophic differentiation of chondrocytes in vitro as
efficiently as S100A1 and S100B. Taken together, the present study demonstrates
that S100A1 and S100B are dispensable for endochondral ossification during
skeletal development, most likely because their deficiency may be masked by other
S100 proteins which have similar functions to those of S100A1 and S100B.

PMID: 25152033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Endocr J. 2014;61(11):1069-78. Epub 2014 Aug 12.

Association of osteoporosis susceptibility genes with bone mineral density and
bone metabolism related markers in Koreans: the Chungju Metabolic Disease Cohort 
(CMC) study.

Park SE(1), Oh KW, Lee WY, Baek KH, Yoon KH, Son HY, Lee WC, Kang MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

In this study, we evaluated the association between bone mineral density (BMD)
and 10 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within eight osteoporosis
susceptibility genes that were previously identified in genome-wide association
studies (GWASs). A total of 494 men and 493 postmenopausal women participating in
the Chungju Metabolic Disease cohort study in Korea were included. The following 
10 SNPs were genotyped: ZBTB40 rs6426749, MEF2C rs1366594, ESR1 rs2941740,
TNFRSF11B rs3134070, TNFRSF11B rs2073617, SOX6 rs711785, LRP5 rs599083, TNFSF11
rs227438, TNFSF11 rs9594782, and FOXL1 rs10048146; and the association between
these SNPs and bone metabolism-related markers was assessed. Two SNPs, TNFSF11
rs2277438 and FOXL1 rs1004816, were associated with lumbar spine BMD. TNFSF11
rs2277438 in men and SOX6 rs7117858 and FOXL1 rs10048146 in postmenopausal women 
were found to be associated with lumbar BMD. ZBTB40 rs6426749, MEF2C rs1366594,
and LRP5 rs599083 showed significant associations with femur neck BMD. These
three SNPs in men and MEF2C rs1366594 and ESR1 rs2941740 in postmenopausal women 
were associated with femur neck BMD. A significant association between MEF2C
rs1366594 and serum calcium levels was observed in men. Serum phosphorus levels
were related to SOX6 rs7117858. Serum PTH levels were significantly associated
with TNFRSF11B rs3134070 in men, and SOX6 rs711858 in postmenopausal women. In
conclusion, our study independently confirmed associations between several SNPs: 
ZBTB40, MEF2C, ESR1, SOX6, LRP5, TNFSF11, and FOXL1 and bone marrow density in
the Korean population.

PMID: 25132170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cell Rep. 2014 Aug 21;8(4):1018-25. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.07.016. Epub 2014 
Aug 7.

Sox6 and Otx2 control the specification of substantia nigra and ventral tegmental
area dopamine neurons.

Panman L(1), Papathanou M(2), Laguna A(3), Oosterveen T(4), Volakakis N(2),
Acampora D(5), Kurtsdotter I(3), Yoshitake T(6), Kehr J(6), Joodmardi E(2), Muhr 
J(3), Simeone A(5), Ericson J(7), Perlmann T(8).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden; MRC Toxicology 
Unit, Leicester LE1 9HN, UK. Electronic address: lp213@leicester.ac.uk. (2)Ludwig
Institute for Cancer Research, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Ludwig Institute for
Cancer Research, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Cell and Molecular
Biology, Karolinska Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. (4)MRC Toxicology Unit, 
Leicester LE1 9HN, UK. (5)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics "A.
Buzzati-Traverso," CNR, 80131 Naples, Italy; IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli IS 86077,
Italy. (6)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, 17177
Stockholm, Sweden. (7)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska
Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. (8)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research,
17177 Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska
Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address:
thomas.perlmann@licr.ki.se.

Distinct midbrain dopamine (mDA) neuron subtypes are found in the substantia
nigra pars compacta (SNc) and the ventral tegmental area (VTA), but it is mainly 
SNc neurons that degenerate in Parkinson's disease. Interest in how mDA neurons
develop has been stimulated by the potential use of stem cells in therapy or
disease modeling. However, very little is known about how specific dopaminergic
subtypes are generated. Here, we show that the expression profiles of the
transcription factors Sox6, Otx2, and Nolz1 define subpopulations of mDA neurons 
already at the neural progenitor cell stage. After cell-cycle exit, Sox6
selectively localizes to SNc neurons, while Otx2 and Nolz1 are expressed in a
subset of VTA neurons. Importantly, Sox6 ablation leads to decreased expression
of SNc markers and a corresponding increase in VTA markers, while Otx2 ablation
has the opposite effect. Moreover, deletion of Sox6 affects striatal innervation 
and dopamine levels. We also find reduced Sox6 levels in Parkinson's disease
patients. These findings identify Sox6 as a determinant of SNc neuron development
and should facilitate the engineering of relevant mDA neurons for cell therapy
and disease modeling.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25127144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Jun 19;3(1):15-23. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.05.009.
eCollection 2014.

Sustained ERK activation underlies reprogramming in regeneration-competent
salamander cells and distinguishes them from their mammalian counterparts.

Yun MH(1), Gates PB(1), Brockes JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biosciences, Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology,
University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

In regeneration-competent vertebrates, such as salamanders, regeneration depends 
on the ability of various differentiated adult cell types to undergo natural
reprogramming. This ability is rarely observed in regeneration-incompetent
species such as mammals, providing an explanation for their poor regenerative
potential. To date, little is known about the molecular mechanisms mediating
natural reprogramming during regeneration. Here, we have identified the extent of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activation as a key component of such
mechanisms. We show that sustained ERK activation following serum induction is
required for re-entry into the cell cycle of postmitotic salamander muscle cells,
partially by promoting the downregulation of p53 activity. Moreover, ERK
activation induces epigenetic modifications and downregulation of muscle-specific
genes such as Sox6. Remarkably, while long-term ERK activation is found in
salamander myotubes, only transient activation is seen in their mammalian
counterparts, suggesting that the extent of ERK activation could underlie
differences in regenerative competence between species.

PMCID: PMC4110794
PMID: 25068118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Transl Med. 2014 Jul 15;12:196. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-12-196.

Mir-208 promotes cell proliferation by repressing SOX6 expression in human
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Li H, Zheng D, Zhang B, Liu L, Ou J, Chen W, Xiong S, Gu Y(1), Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Imaging, the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510080, P,R, China. ygzihu@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is the major histological
type of esophageal cancer in developing countries. The prognosis and survival
rate of ESCC are very poor. Recently, microRNAs (miRNAs) have emerged as
important regulators of cancer cell biological processes. To better understanding
the molecular mechanisms by which they regulate the behavior of cancer cells is
needed.
METHODS: The expression of miR-208 was examined in ESCC cell lines and tumor
tissues by real-time PCR. Proliferation capability of ESCC cells upon regulation 
of miR-208 expression was detected by MTT assay, colony formation assay,
anchorage-independent growth ability assay and flow cytometry analysis. The
target of miR-208 was determined by western blotting analysis, luciferase
reporter assay and real-time PCR.
RESULTS: miR-208 was upregulated in ESCC cell lines and tissues. Overexpression
of miR-208 in ESCC cells increased cell proliferation, tumorigenicity and cell
cycle progression, whereas inhibition of miR-208 reduced cells proliferation,
tumorigenicity and cell cycle progression. Additionally, SOX6 was identified as a
direct target of miR-208. Ectopic expression of miR-208 led to downregulation of 
SOX6 protein, which resulted in the downregulation of p21, upregulation of cyclin
D1 and phosphorylation of Rb.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that miR-208 represents a potential onco-miR
and participates in ESCC carcinogenesis by suppressing SOX6 expression.

PMCID: PMC4107867
PMID: 25023649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Oct 1;34(19):3560-9. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00714-14. Epub 2014 Jul
14.

Fetal globin gene repressors as drug targets for molecular therapies to treat the
ß-globinopathies.

Suzuki M(1), Yamamoto M(2), Engel JD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Radioisotope Sciences, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan Tohoku Medical Megabank, Tohoku
University, Sendai, Japan. (3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA engel@umich.edu.

The human ß-globin locus is comprised of embryonic, fetal, and adult globin genes
that are expressed in a developmental stage-specific manner. Mutations in the
globin locus give rise to the ß-globinopathies, ß-thalassemia and sickle cell
disease, which begin to manifest symptoms around the time of birth. Although the 
fetal globin genes are autonomously silenced in adult-stage erythroid cells,
mutations lying both within and outside the locus lead to natural variations in
the level of fetal globin gene expression, and some of these significantly
ameliorate the clinical symptoms of the ß-globinopathies. Multiple reports have
now identified several transcription factors that are involved in fetal globin
gene repression in definitive (adult)-stage erythroid cells (the TR2/TR4
heterodimer, MYB, KLFs, BCL11A, and SOX6). To carry out their repression
functions, chromatin-modifying enzymes (such as DNA methyltransferase, histone
deacetylases, and lysine-specific histone demethylase 1) are additionally
involved as a consequence of forming large macromolecular complexes with the
DNA-binding subunits of these cellular machines. This review focuses on the
molecular mechanisms underlying fetal globin gene silencing and possible
near-future molecularly targeted therapies for treating the ß-globinopathies.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4187729
PMID: 25022757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 8;9(7):e102010. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102010. eCollection
2014.

EPO promotes bone repair through enhanced cartilaginous callus formation and
angiogenesis.

Wan L(1), Zhang F(2), He Q(3), Tsang WP(2), Lu L(4), Li Q(5), Wu Z(6), Qiu G(6), 
Zhou G(7), Wan C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, School of
Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong SAR, China. (2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Regenerative
Medicine, School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China; School of Biomedical Sciences Core
Laboratory, Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen, China. (3)Departments of Microbiology and Pathology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, United States of America. (4)Ministry
of Education Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, School of Biomedical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
SAR, China; Guangdong Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Bioactive Substances, New 
Drug Function Research Center, School of Life Science and Biopharmacy, Guangdong 
Pharmaceutical University, Guangzhou, China. (5)Guangdong Key Laboratory of
Pharmaceutical Bioactive Substances, New Drug Function Research Center, School of
Life Science and Biopharmacy, Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, Guangzhou,
China. (6)Department of Orthopaedics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing,
China. (7)The Center for Anti-Ageing and Regenerative Medicine, Medical School,
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(10):e111830.

Erythropoietin (EPO)/erythropoietin receptor (EPOR) signaling is involved in the 
development and regeneration of several non-hematopoietic tissues including the
skeleton. EPO is identified as a downstream target of the hypoxia inducible
factor-a (HIF-a) pathway. It is shown that EPO exerts a positive role in bone
repair, however, the underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms remain unclear.
In the present study we show that EPO and EPOR are expressed in the
proliferating, pre-hypertrophic and hypertrophic zone of the developing mouse
growth plates as well as in the cartilaginous callus of the healing bone. The
proliferation rate of chondrocytes is increased under EPO treatment, while this
effect is decreased following siRNA mediated knockdown of EPOR in chondrocytes.
EPO treatment increases biosynthesis of proteoglycan, accompanied by
up-regulation of chondrogenic marker genes including SOX9, SOX5, SOX6, collagen
type 2, and aggrecan. The effects are inhibited by knockdown of EPOR. Blockage of
the endogenous EPO in chondrocytes also impaired the chondrogenic
differentiation. In addition, EPO promotes metatarsal endothelial sprouting in
vitro. This coincides with the in vivo data that local delivery of EPO increases 
vascularity at the mid-stage of bone healing (day 14). In a mouse femoral
fracture model, EPO promotes cartilaginous callus formation at days 7 and 14, and
enhances bone healing at day 28 indexed by improved X-ray score and micro-CT
analysis of microstructure of new bone regenerates, which results in improved
biomechanical properties. Our results indicate that EPO enhances chondrogenic and
angiogenic responses during bone repair. EPO's function on chondrocyte
proliferation and differentiation is at least partially mediated by its receptor 
EPOR. EPO may serve as a therapeutic agent to facilitate skeletal regeneration.

PMCID: PMC4087003
PMID: 25003898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;33(5):1340-8. doi: 10.1159/000358701. Epub 2014 May 5.

MiR-16 induced the suppression of cell apoptosis while promote proliferation in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Zhu Y(1), Xia Y, Niu H, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding small RNAs that regulate cell 
proliferation and functions by interfering with the translation of target mRNAs. 
Altered expression of miRNA is known to induce various human malignancies, but
little is known about the role of miRNAs in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC).
METHODS: RT-PCR and Western blot were used to examine the expression of miRNAs
and candidate genes in 40 pairs of squamous cell carcinoma of human. MiR-16
mimics and inhibitor were transfected in human TE-1 and Eca-109 cells before
detecting the cell migration, proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle. The
regulation mechanism was confirmed by luciferase reporter assay. Caspase-3 and 9 
were detected by RT-PCR and Western blot.
RESULTS: Aberrant increased level of miR-16 was detected in the ESCC tissues
compared with the corresponding adjacent tumor tissues. MiR-16 could inhibit cell
apoptosis while promote cell proliferation by down-regulating RECK and SOX6 in
TE-1 and Eca-109 cell lines through binding the 3'UTR of both RECK and SOX6 mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant expression level of miR-16 could suppress cell apoptosis
while promote growth by regulating RECK and SOX6 which play important roles in
the pathogenesis of ESCC.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24852767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. PLoS One. 2014 May 6;9(5):e96636. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096636. eCollection 
2014.

Growth factor independence 1b (gfi1b) is important for the maturation of
erythroid cells and the regulation of embryonic globin expression.

Vassen L(1), Beauchemin H(1), Lemsaddek W(1), Krongold J(2), Trudel M(1), Möröy
T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, IRCM, Montréal, Québec, Canada. 
(2)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, IRCM, Montréal, Québec, Canada; 
Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(3)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, IRCM, Montréal, Québec, Canada; 
Département de Microbiologie, Infectiologie et Immunologie, Université de
Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada; Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill
University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Growth factor independence 1b (GFI1B) is a DNA binding repressor of transcription
with vital functions in hematopoiesis. Gfi1b-null embryos die at midgestation
very likely due to defects in erythro- and megakaryopoiesis. To analyze the full 
functionality of Gfi1b, we used conditionally deficient mice that harbor floxed
Gfi1b alleles and inducible (Mx-Cre, Cre-ERT) or erythroid specific (EpoR-Cre)
Cre expressing transgenes. In contrast to the germline knockout, EpoR-Cre
mediated erythroid specific ablation of Gfi1b allows full gestation, but causes
perinatal lethality with very few mice surviving to adulthood. Both the embryonic
deletion of Gfi1b by EpoR-Cre and the deletion in adult mice by Mx-Cre or Cre-ERT
leads to reduced numbers of erythroid precursors, perturbed and delayed erythroid
maturation, anemia and extramedullary erythropoiesis. Global expression analyses 
showed that the Hba-x, Hbb-bh1 and Hbb-y embryonic globin genes were upregulated 
in Gfi1b deficient TER119+ fetal liver cells over the gestation period from day
12.5-17.5 p.c. and an increased level of Hbb-bh1 and Hbb-y embryonic globin gene 
expression was even maintained in adult Gfi1b deficient mice. While the
expression of Bcl11a, a regulator of embryonic globin expression was not affected
by Gfi1b deficiency, the expression of Gata1 was reduced and the expression of
Sox6, also involved in globin switch, was almost entirely lost when Gfi1b was
absent. These findings establish Gfi1b as a regulator of embryonic globin
expression and embryonic and adult erythroid maturation.

PMCID: PMC4011847
PMID: 24800817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 15;9(4):e94607. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094607. eCollection
2014.

Genetic analysis of high bone mass cases from the BARCOS cohort of Spanish
postmenopausal women.

Sarrión P(1), Mellibovsky L(2), Urreizti R(1), Civit S(3), Cols N(1),
García-Giralt N(2), Yoskovitz G(2), Aranguren A(4), Malouf J(5), Di Gregorio
S(6), Río LD(6), Güerri R(2), Nogués X(2), Díez-Pérez A(2), Grinberg D(1),
Balcells S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Genètica, Universitat de Barcelona, IBUB, Barcelona, Spain;
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER),
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain; Institut de Biomedicina
Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Barcelona, Spain. (2)Unitat de Recerca en
Fisiologia Òssia i Articular (URFOA), Institut Municipal d'Investigacions
Mèdiques (IMIM), Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain; Red Tematica de
Investigación Cooperativa en Envejecimiento y Fragilidad (RETICEF), Instituto de 
Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain. (3)Departament d'Estadística, Universitat de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Departament de Genètica, Universitat de
Barcelona, IBUB, Barcelona, Spain. (5)Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau,
Barcelona, Spain. (6)Red Tematica de Investigación Cooperativa en Envejecimiento 
y Fragilidad (RETICEF), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain; CETIR
Medical Imaging Centre, Barcelona, Spain.

The aims of the study were to establish the prevalence of high bone mass (HBM) in
a cohort of Spanish postmenopausal women (BARCOS) and to assess the contribution 
of LRP5 and DKK1 mutations and of common bone mineral density (BMD) variants to a
HBM phenotype. Furthermore, we describe the expression of several
osteoblast-specific and Wnt-pathway genes in primary osteoblasts from two HBM
cases. A 0.6% of individuals (10/1600) displayed Z-scores in the HBM range (sum
Z-score >4). While no mutation in the relevant exons of LRP5 was detected, a rare
missense change in DKK1 was found (p.Y74F), which cosegregated with the phenotype
in a small pedigree. Fifty-five BMD SNPs from Estrada et al. [NatGenet
44:491-501,2012] were genotyped in the HBM cases to obtain risk scores for each
individual. In this small group of samples, Z-scores were found inversely related
to risk scores, suggestive of a polygenic etiology. There was a single exception,
which may be explained by a rare penetrant genetic variant, counterbalancing the 
additive effect of the risk alleles. The expression analysis in primary
osteoblasts from two HBM cases and five controls suggested that IL6R, DLX3,
TWIST1 and PPARG are negatively related to Z-score. One HBM case presented with
high levels of RUNX2, while the other displayed very low SOX6. In conclusion, we 
provide evidence of lack of LRP5 mutations and of a putative HBM-causing mutation
in DKK1. Additionally, we present SNP genotyping and expression results that
suggest additive effects of several genes for HBM.

PMCID: PMC3988071
PMID: 24736728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Bone Miner Res. 2014 Sep;29(9):1960-9. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2240.

Dlx5 and mef2 regulate a novel runx2 enhancer for osteoblast-specific expression.

Kawane T(1), Komori H, Liu W, Moriishi T, Miyazaki T, Mori M, Matsuo Y, Takada Y,
Izumi S, Jiang Q, Nishimura R, Kawai Y, Komori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Unit of Basic Medical Sciences, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

Runx2 is essential for osteoblast differentiation and chondrocyte maturation. The
expression of Runx2 is the first requisite step for the lineage determination
from mesenchymal stem cells to osteoblasts. Although the transcript from Runx2
distal promoter is majorly expressed in osteoblasts, the promoter failed to
direct green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression to osteoblasts. To find the
regulatory region, we generated GFP reporter mice driven by a bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) of Runx2 locus, and succeeded in the reproduction of 
endogenous Runx2 expression. By serially deleting it, we identified a 343-bp
enhancer, which directed GFP expression specifically to osteoblasts, about 30<U+2009>kb 
upstream of the distal promoter. The sequence of the 343-bp enhancer was highly
conserved among mouse, human, dog, horse, opossum, and chicken. Dlx5, Mef2c,
Tcf7, Ctnnb1, Sp7, Smad1, and Sox6, which localized on the enhancer region in
primary osteoblasts, synergistically upregulated the enhancer activity, whereas
Msx2 downregulated the activity in mouse osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells. Msx2 was
predominantly bound to the enhancer in mouse multipotent mesenchymal C3H10T1/2
cells, whereas Dlx5 was predominantly bound to the enhancer in MC3T3-E1 cells.
Dlx5 and Mef2 directly bound to the enhancer, and the binding sites were required
for the osteoblast-specific expression in mice, whereas the other factors bound
to the enhancer by protein-protein interaction. The enhancer was characterized by
the presence of the histone variant H2A.Z, the enrichment of histone H3 mono- and
dimethylated at Lys4 and acetylated at Lys18 and Lys27, but the depletion of
histone H3 trimethylated at Lys4 in primary osteoblasts. These findings indicated
that the enhancer, which had typical histone modifications for enhancers,
contains sufficient elements to direct Runx2 expression to osteoblasts, and that 
Dlx5 and Mef2, which formed an enhanceosome with Tcf7, Ctnnb1, Sp7, Smad1, and
Sox6, play an essential role in the osteoblast-specific activation of the
enhancer. © 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 24692107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 24;9(3):e89310. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089310. eCollection
2014.

Regulation of Sox6 by cyclin dependent kinase 5 in brain.

Rudrabhatla P(1), Utreras E(2), Jaffe H(3), Kulkarni AB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemistry, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America; Laboratory of Neurobiology, National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America. (2)Functional Genomics Section, Laboratory of Cell and Developmental
Biology, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Protein/Peptide Sequencing Facility, National Institute of Neurological
Diseases and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United
States of America.

Cyclin dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) is a proline-directed Ser/Thr kinase involved in
various biological functions during normal brain development and
neurodegeneration. In brain, Cdk5 activity is specific to post-mitotic neurons,
due to neuronal specific expression of its activator p35. The biological
functions of Cdk5 have been ascribed to its cytoplasmic substrates, however not
much is known in nucleus. Here, we show that nuclear transcription factor Sox6 is
a direct nuclear target of Cdk5. Sox6 is expressed in Tuj1 positive neurons,
suggesting that Sox6 is expressed in differentiating neurons. The expression of
Sox6 is high in mitotic nuclei during embryonic day 12 (E12) and gradually
decreases during development into adult. On the other hand, Cdk5 expression
gradually increases during its development. We show that Sox6 is expressed in
mitotic nuclei in embryonic day 12 (E12) and in migrating neurons of E16. Sox6 is
phosphorylated in vivo. Sox6 was detected by phospho-Ser/Thr and
phospho-Ser/Thr-Pro and MPM-2 (Mitotic protein #2) antibodies in brain.
Furthermore, calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase (CIAP) digestion resulted in
faster migration of Sox6 band. The GST-Sox6 was phosphorylated by Cdk5/p35. The
mass spectrometry analysis revealed that Sox6 is phosphorylated at T119PER motif.
We show that Sox6 steady state levels are regulated by Cdk5. Cdk5 knockout mice
die in utero and Sox6 protein expression is remarkably high in Cdk5-/- brain,
however, there is no change in mRNA expression, suggesting a post-translational
regulation of Sox6 by Cdk5. Transfection of primary cortical neurons with WT Cdk5
reduced Sox6 levels, while dominant negative (DN) Cdk5 and p35 increased Sox6
levels. Thus, our results indicate that Cdk5 regulates Sox6 steady state protein 
level that has an important role in brain development and function.

PMCID: PMC3963837
PMID: 24662752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Orthop Res. 2014 Jul;32(7):915-22. doi: 10.1002/jor.22616. Epub 2014 Mar 20.

Teneurin-4, a transmembrane protein, is a novel regulator that suppresses
chondrogenic differentiation.

Suzuki N(1), Mizuniwa C, Ishii K, Nakagawa Y, Tsuji K, Muneta T, Sekiya I,
Akazawa C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Graduate School of Health Care
Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 
113-8510, Japan.

Teneurin-4 (Ten-4), a transmembrane protein, is expressed in the nervous systems 
and the mesenchymal tissues, including the cartilage. However, the Ten-4 function
in cartilage development remains unknown. Here, we showed that Ten-4 is a novel
regulator of chondrogenesis. In situ hybridization analysis revealed that Ten-4
was highly expressed in the mesenchymal condensation area of the mouse femur at
embryonic day (E) 13.5, while its expression was decreased in the growth plate of
the femur at E18.5. Using the cartilage-like pellet culture of human synovial
mesenchymal cells, Ten-4 expression was induced and peaked 7 days after induction
of differentiation, while a production of type II and X collagens was increased
after Day 14. In the cartilage-like pellet, Ten-4 was highly expressed in the
less differentiated region. In the chondrogenic cell line ATDC5, knockdown of
Ten-4 expression significantly increased the alcian blue staining and expression 
levels of aggrecan and type II and X collagens. Further, an elevated expression
of Sox6, Sox9, and Runx2 and an attenuation of the ERK activation were observed
in the Ten-4-knockdown ATDC5 cells. These results suggested that Ten-4 suppresses
chondrogenic differentiation and regulates the expression and activation of the
key molecules for chondrogenesis.

© 2014 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24648313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Lung. 2014 Jun;192(3):441-8. doi: 10.1007/s00408-014-9569-6. Epub 2014 Mar 20.

Stem cells protect the bronchial stump in rat, increasing Sox6, Col2a1, and Agc1 
expression.

Llontop P(1), Santana-Rodríguez N, Clavo B, Quintana A, Fiuza MD, Camacho R,
Santana-Rodríguez A, Santana C, Ruíz-Caballero JA.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit, Experimental Surgery, Hospital Universitario Dr. Negrín,
c/Barranco de la Ballena, s/n, 35010, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Canary Islands,
Spain, perollonsa@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Post-pneumonectomy bronchopleural fistulas (BPFs) are associated with
high morbidity and mortality. Currently, since the management of BPFs is
difficult to assess, the best therapeutic approach is prevention. Our objective
was to evaluate the effects of adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) on the healing
of the bronchial stump in an experimental animal model.
METHODS: Left pneumonectomy was performed in 37 Sprague-Dawley rats. Animals were
randomly assigned to a control group (n = 13), an ASC group (n = 12), and an ASC 
plus Tissucol(®) group (ASCT) (n = 12). The ASCs and ASCTs were locally
administered at the bronchial stump after surgical pneumonectomy. Animals were
killed at 10 and 20 days. We analyzed histological changes and changes in the
expression of relevant genes involved in wound repair in the bronchial stump.
RESULTS: Two control animals, one animal from the ASC group, and one from the
ASCT group died from early BPF. All the remaining animals had an adequate
postoperative outcome. ASCs and ASCTs significantly decreased the necrosis and
ulcerations of the bronchial stump at 10 and 20 days. ASCs significantly
decreased mRNA expression of Igf1 at 10 days and Igf1, Tgfb1, Vegfa, and Col2a1
at 20 days, whereas there was increased expression of Agc1 and Col2a1 at 10 days 
and Sox6 at 20 days.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that local ASCs protected the bronchial stump 
after pneumonectomy and induced local changes in gene expression related to their
protective action. These results could lead to a potential new therapeutic
modality for the prevention of BPF.

PMID: 24647564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Tissue Eng Part A. 2014 Aug;20(15-16):2224-33. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2013.0559.
Epub 2014 May 29.

Serum- and growth-factor-free three-dimensional culture system supports cartilage
tissue formation by promoting collagen synthesis via Sox9-Col2a1 interaction.

Ahmed N(1), Iu J, Brown CE, Taylor DW, Kandel RA.

Author information: 
(1)1 CIHR-BioEngineering of Skeletal Tissues Team, Mount Sinai Hospital,
University of Toronto , Toronto, Canada .

OBJECTIVE: One of the factors preventing clinical application of regenerative
medicine to degenerative cartilage diseases is a suitable source of cells.
Chondrocytes, the only cell type of cartilage, grown in vitro under culture
conditions to expand cell numbers lose their phenotype along with the ability to 
generate hyaline cartilaginous tissue. In this study we determine that a serum-
and growth-factor-free three-dimensional (3D) culture system restores the ability
of the passaged chondrocytes to form cartilage tissue in vitro, a process that
involves sox9.
METHODS: Bovine articular chondrocytes were passaged twice to allow for cell
number expansion (P2) and cultured at high density on 3D collagen-type-II-coated 
membranes in high glucose content media supplemented with insulin and
dexamethasone (SF3D). The cells were characterized after monolayer expansion and 
following 3D culture by flow cytometry, gene expression, and histology. The early
changes in signaling transduction pathways during redifferentiation were
characterized.
RESULTS: The P2 cells showed a progenitor-like antigen profile of 99% CD44(+) and
40% CD105(+) and a gene expression profile suggestive of interzone cells. P2 in
SF3D expressed chondrogenic genes and accumulated extracellular matrix.
Downregulating insulin receptor (IR) with HNMPA-(AM3) or the PI-3/AKT kinase
pathway (activated by insulin treatment) with Wortmannin inhibited collagen
synthesis. HNMPA-(AM3) reduced expression of Col2, Col11, and IR genes as well as
Sox6 and -9. Co-immunoprecipitation and chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses of
HNMPA-(AM3)-treated cells showed binding of the coactivators Sox6 and Med12 with 
Sox9 but reduced Sox9-Col2a1 binding.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe a novel culture method that allows for increase in the
number of chondrocytes and promotes hyaline-like cartilage tissue formation in
part by insulin-mediated Sox9-Col2a1 binding. The suitability of the tissue
generated via this approach for use in joint repair needs to be examined in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4137332
PMID: 24606204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. BMC Genomics. 2014 Feb 19;15:141. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-141.

Transcriptome sequencing of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.) notochord prior to
development of the vertebrae provides clues to regulation of positional fate,
chordoblast lineage and mineralisation.

Wang S, Furmanek T, Kryvi H, Krossøy C, Totland GK, Grotmol S, Wargelius A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Marine Research, Bergen, Norway. anna.wargelius@imr.no.

BACKGROUND: In teleosts such as Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.), segmentation
and subsequent mineralisation of the notochord during embryonic stages are
essential for normal vertebrae formation. However, the molecular mechanisms
leading to segmentation and mineralisation of the notochord are poorly
understood. The aim of this study was to identify genes/pathways acting in
gradients over time and along the anterior-posterior axis during notochord
segmentation and immediately prior to mineralisation of the vertebral bodies in
Atlantic salmon.
RESULTS: Notochord samples were collected from unsegmented, pre-segmented and
segmented developmental stages. In each stage, the cellular core of the notochord
was cut into three pieces along the longitudinal axis (anterior, mid, posterior).
RNA was sequenced (22 million pair-end 100 bp/ library) and mapped to the salmon 
genome. 66569 transcripts were predicted and 55775 were annotated. In order to
identify possible gradients leading to segmentation of the notochord, all 71
notochord-expressed hox genes were investigated, most of them displaying a
typical anterior-posterior expression pattern along the notochord axis. The
clustering of hox genes revealed a pattern that could be related to notochord
segmentation. We further investigated how mineralisation is initiated in the
notochord, and several factors related to chondrogenic lineage were identified
(sox9, sox5, sox6, tgfb3, ihhb and col2a1), suggesting a cartilage-like character
of the notochord. KEGG analysis of differentially expressed genes between stages 
revealed down-regulation of pathways associated with ECM, cell division,
metabolism and development at onset of notochord segmentation. This implies that 
inhibitory signals produce segmentation of the notochord. One such potential
inhibitory signal was identified, col11a2, which was detected in segments of
non-mineralising notochord.
CONCLUSIONS: An incomplete salmon genome was successfully used to analyse RNA-seq
data from the cellular core of the Atlantic salmon notochord. In transcriptome we
found; hox gene patterns possibly linked to segmentation; down-regulation of
pathways in the notochord at onset of segmentation; segmented expression of
col11a2 in non-mineralised segments of the notochord; and a chondroblast-like
footprint in the notochord.

PMCID: PMC3943441
PMID: 24548379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Feb 18;111(7):2794-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1308758111. Epub 2014 Feb 5.

Positive feedback loop between Sox2 and Sox6 inhibits neuronal differentiation in
the developing central nervous system.

Lee KE(1), Seo J, Shin J, Ji EH, Roh J, Kim JY, Sun W, Muhr J, Lee S, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 120-750, Korea.

How a pool of undifferentiated neural progenitor cells is maintained in the
developing nervous system is an issue that remains unresolved. One of the key
transcription factors for self-renewal of these cells is Sox2, the forced
expression of which has been shown to inhibit neuronal differentiation in vivo.
To dissect the molecular mechanisms of Sox2 activity, a ChIP-on-chip assay has
been carried out for Sox2, and multiple candidate direct target genes have been
isolated. In this report, we provide evidence indicating that Sox6, which like
Sox2 belongs to the SRY-related HMG box transcription factor family, is a
bona-fide direct regulatory target of Sox2. In vivo, Sox6 expression is seen with
a temporal lag in Sox2-positive neural precursor cells in the ventricular zone,
and Sox2 promotes expression of Sox6 as a transcriptional activator.
Interestingly, gain- and loss-of-function assays indicate that Sox6 in turn is
required for the maintenance of Sox2 expression, suggesting that a positive
feedback loop, which functions to inhibit premature neuronal differentiation,
exists between the two transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3932859
PMID: 24501124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Front Physiol. 2014 Jan 28;5:3. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2014.00003. eCollection 2014.

Primitive and definitive erythropoiesis in mammals.

Palis J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Pediatric Biomedical Research, University
of Rochester Medical Center Rochester, NY, USA.

Red blood cells (RBCs), which constitute the most abundant cell type in the body,
come in two distinct flavors- primitive and definitive. Definitive RBCs in
mammals circulate as smaller, anucleate cells during fetal and postnatal life,
while primitive RBCs circulate transiently in the early embryo as large,
nucleated cells before ultimately enucleating. Both cell types are formed from
lineage-committed progenitors that generate a series of morphologically
identifiable precursors that enucleate to form mature RBCs. While definitive
erythroid precursors mature extravascularly in the fetal liver and postnatal
marrow in association with macrophage cells, primitive erythroid precursors
mature as a semi-synchronous cohort in the embryonic bloodstream. While the
cytoskeletal network is critical for the maintenance of cell shape and the
deformability of definitive RBCs, little is known about the components and
function of the cytoskeleton in primitive erythroblasts. Erythropoietin (EPO) is 
a critical regulator of late-stage definitive, but not primitive, erythroid
progenitor survival. However, recent studies indicate that EPO regulates multiple
aspects of terminal maturation of primitive murine and human erythroid
precursors, including cell survival, proliferation, and the rate of terminal
maturation. Primitive and definitive erythropoiesis share central transcriptional
regulators, including Gata1 and Klf1, but are also characterized by the
differential expression and function of other regulators, including myb, Sox6,
and Bcl11A. Flow cytometry-based methodologies, developed to purify murine and
human stage-specific erythroid precursors, have enabled comparative global gene
expression studies and are providing new insights into the biology of erythroid
maturation.

PMCID: PMC3904103
PMID: 24478716  [PubMed]


66. J Child Neurol. 2014 Nov;29(11):NP164-7. doi: 10.1177/0883073813514134. Epub 2014
Jan 21.

Global developmental delay, progressive relapsing-remitting parkinsonism, and
spinal syrinx in a child with SOX6 mutation.

Scott O(1), Pugh J(2), Kiddoo D(3), Sonnenberg LK(4), Bamforth S(5), Goez HR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada. (2)Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (3)Division of Urology and Pediatric Surgery,
Department of Surgery, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Glenrose Rehabilitation Hospital, Stollery Children's Hospital, Division of
Developmental Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (5)Department of Medical Genetics, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (6)Division of Pediatric Neurology,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
helly.goez@albertahealthservices.ca.

SOX6, a member of the SOX gene family, plays a key role in the development of
several mammalian tissues and organs, including the central nervous system.
Specifically, this gene modulates the differentiation and proliferation of
interneurons in the medial ganglionic eminence, as well as oligodendrocytes in
the spinal cord. We describe the case of a 4-year-old girl with global
developmental delay and a spinal cord syrinx who presented with recurrent
episodes of parkinsonian symptoms subsequent to febrile illnesses. The symptoms
included gait instability, tremor, and dysarthria, with a progressive
relapsing-remitting course over the span of 2 years. The patient was later found 
to have a large deletion-type mutation in the SOX6 gene. This case is the first
report in humans implying a role for SOX6 in basal ganglia function, as well as
spinal cord development.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMID: 24453155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Stem Cells. 2014 Jun;32(6):1629-35. doi: 10.1002/stem.1642.

Brief report: importance of SOX8 for in vitro chondrogenic differentiation of
human mesenchymal stromal cells.

Herlofsen SR(1), Høiby T, Cacchiarelli D, Zhang X, Mikkelsen TS, Brinchmann JE.

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian Center for Stem Cell Research and Institute of Immunology, Oslo
University Hospital-Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway.

The transcription factor SOX9 is believed to be the master regulator of
chondrogenesis. SOX8 is another SOX group E transcription factor with a high
degree of homology to SOX9. Here, we demonstrate that SOX8 mRNA levels decrease
during in vitro dedifferentiation of human articular chondrocytes and increase
during chondrogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stromal cells. Knockdown of
SOX9 reduced the expression of SOX8, COL2A1, and a range of other chondrogenic
molecules. SOX8 knockdown reduced the expression of a large number of overlapping
chondrogenic molecules, but not SOX9. Neither siSOX9 nor siSOX8 altered
expression of the hypertrophic marker gene COL10A1. siSOX9, but not siSOX8 led to
upregulation of hypertrophy associated genes MMP13 and ALPL. Transfection of
synthetic SOX5, 6, and 9 mRNA trio upregulated SOX8, COL2A1, and ACAN, but not
COL10A1 mRNA. Replacement of synthetic SOX9 by SOX8 in the SOX trio showed
similar but lower chondrogenic effect. We conclude that SOX8 expression is
regulated by SOX9, and that both together with SOX5 and SOX6 are required as a
SOX quartet for transcription of COL2A1 and a large number of other chondrogenic 
molecules. Neither SOX8 nor SOX9 affect COL10A1 expression, but SOX9 inhibits
chondrocyte hypertrophy through inhibition of MMP13 and ALPL expression.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24449344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 8;9(1):e83104. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083104. eCollection 
2014.

NPPB and ACAN, two novel SHOX2 transcription targets implicated in skeletal
development.

Aza-Carmona M(1), Barca-Tierno V(1), Hisado-Oliva A(1), Belinchón A(1),
Gorbenko-del Blanco D(2), Rodriguez JI(3), Benito-Sanz S(1), Campos-Barros A(1), 
Heath KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario
La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain ; Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto Carlos III,
Madrid, Spain. (2)Dept. Celular Biology, Immunology & Neurosciences, Facultad de 
Medicina, Universidad de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (3)Department of Pathology,
Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.

SHOX and SHOX2 transcription factors are highly homologous, with even identical
homeodomains. Genetic alterations in SHOX result in two skeletal dysplasias;
Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD), while no
human genetic disease has been linked to date with SHOX2. SHOX2 is, though,
involved in skeletal development, as shown by different knockout mice models. Due
to the high homology between SHOX and SHOX2, and their functional redundancy
during heart development, we postulated that SHOX2 might have the same
transcriptional targets and cofactors as SHOX in limb development. We selected
two SHOX transcription targets regulated by different mechanisms: 1) the
natriuretic peptide precursor B gene (NPPB) involved in the endochondral
ossification signalling and directly activated by SHOX; and 2) Aggrecan (ACAN), a
major component of cartilage extracellular matrix, regulated by the cooperation
of SHOX with the SOX trio (SOX5, SOX6 and SOX9) via the protein interaction
between SOX5/SOX6 and SHOX. Using the luciferase assay we have demonstrated that 
SHOX2, like SHOX, regulates NPPB directly whilst activates ACAN via its
cooperation with the SOX trio. Subsequently, we have identified and characterized
the protein domains implicated in the SHOX2 dimerization and also its protein
interaction with SOX5/SOX6 and SHOX using the yeast-two hybrid and
co-immunoprecipitation assays. Immunohistochemistry of human fetal growth plates 
from different time points demonstrated that SHOX2 is coexpressed with SHOX and
the members of the SOX trio. Despite these findings, no mutation was identified
in SHOX2 in a cohort of 83 LWD patients with no known molecular defect,
suggesting that SHOX2 alterations do not cause LWD. In conclusion, our work has
identified the first cofactors and two new transcription targets of SHOX2 in limb
development, and we hypothesize a time- and tissue-specific functional redundancy
between SHOX and SHOX2.

PMCID: PMC3885427
PMID: 24421874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mech Dev. 2014 Feb;131:24-34. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2013.11.001. Epub 2013 Nov 21.

Redundancy in regulation of chondrogenesis in MIA/CD-RAP-deficient mice.

Schmid R(1), Bosserhoff AK(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Regensburg Medical School, Institute of Pathology, D-93053
Regensburg, Germany. (2)University of Regensburg Medical School, Institute of
Pathology, D-93053 Regensburg, Germany. Electronic address:
anja.bosserhoff@klinik.uni-regensburg.de.

Recent in vitro analysis of MIA/CD-RAP-deficient (MIA(-/-)) mesenchymal stem
cells revealed altered chondrogenic differentiation, characterised by enhanced
proliferation and delayed differentiation. However, adult MIA(-/-) mice develop
normally and show only ultrastructural defects of the cartilage but no major
abnormalities. We therefore focused, in this study, on chondrogenesis in vivo in 
MIA(-/-) mouse embryos to reveal potential molecular changes during embryogenesis
and possible redundant mechanisms, which explain the almost normal phenotype
despite MIA/CD-RAP loss. In situ hybridisation analysis revealed larger
expression areas of Col2a1 and Sox9 positive, proliferating chondrocytes at day
15.5 and 16.5 of embryogenesis in MIA(-/-) mice. The initially diminished zone of
Col10a1-expressing hypertrophic chondrocytes at day 15.5 was compensated at day
16.5 in MIA(-/-) embryos. Supported by in vitro studies using mesenchymal stem
cells, we discovered that chondrogenesis in MIA(-/-) mice is modified by enhanced
Sox9, Sox6 and AP-2a expression. Finally, we identified reduced AP1 and CRE
activity, analysed by reporter gene- and electrophoretic mobility shift assays,
important for redundancy mechanism which rescued delayed hypertrophic
differentiation and allows normal development of MIA(-/-) mice. In summary, as
observed in other knockout models of molecules important for cartilage
development and differentiation, viability and functional integrity is reached by
remarkable molecular redundancy in MIA/CD-RAP knockout mice.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24269712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Apr 1;23(7):1923-33. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt575. Epub 2013 Nov
17.

Multistage genome-wide association meta-analyses identified two new loci for bone
mineral density.

Zhang L(1), Choi HJ, Estrada K, Leo PJ, Li J, Pei YF, Zhang Y, Lin Y, Shen H, Liu
YZ, Liu Y, Zhao Y, Zhang JG, Tian Q, Wang YP, Han Y, Ran S, Hai R, Zhu XZ, Wu S, 
Yan H, Liu X, Yang TL, Guo Y, Zhang F, Guo YF, Chen Y, Chen X, Tan L, Zhang L,
Deng FY, Deng H, Rivadeneira F, Duncan EL, Lee JY, Han BG, Cho NH, Nicholson GC, 
McCloskey E, Eastell R, Prince RL, Eisman JA, Jones G, Reid IR, Sambrook PN,
Dennison EM, Danoy P, Yerges-Armstrong LM, Streeten EA, Hu T, Xiang S, Papasian
CJ, Brown MA, Shin CS, Uitterlinden AG, Deng HW.

Author information: 
(1)Center of System Biomedical Sciences, University of Shanghai for Science and
Technology, Shanghai, China.

Aiming to identify novel genetic variants and to confirm previously identified
genetic variants associated with bone mineral density (BMD), we conducted a
three-stage genome-wide association (GWA) meta-analysis in 27 061 study subjects.
Stage 1 meta-analyzed seven GWA samples and 11 140 subjects for BMDs at the
lumbar spine, hip and femoral neck, followed by a Stage 2 in silico replication
of 33 SNPs in 9258 subjects, and by a Stage 3 de novo validation of three SNPs in
6663 subjects. Combining evidence from all the stages, we have identified two
novel loci that have not been reported previously at the genome-wide significance
(GWS; 5.0 × 10(-8)) level: 14q24.2 (rs227425, P-value 3.98 × 10(-13), SMOC1) in
the combined sample of males and females and 21q22.13 (rs170183, P-value 4.15 ×
10(-9), CLDN14) in the female-specific sample. The two newly identified SNPs were
also significant in the GEnetic Factors for OSteoporosis consortium (GEFOS, n =
32 960) summary results. We have also independently confirmed 13 previously
reported loci at the GWS level: 1p36.12 (ZBTB40), 1p31.3 (GPR177), 4p16.3
(FGFRL1), 4q22.1 (MEPE), 5q14.3 (MEF2C), 6q25.1 (C6orf97, ESR1), 7q21.3
(FLJ42280, SHFM1), 7q31.31 (FAM3C, WNT16), 8q24.12 (TNFRSF11B), 11p15.3 (SOX6),
11q13.4 (LRP5), 13q14.11 (AKAP11) and 16q24 (FOXL1). Gene expression analysis in 
osteogenic cells implied potential functional association of the two candidate
genes (SMOC1 and CLDN14) in bone metabolism. Our findings independently confirm
previously identified biological pathways underlying bone metabolism and
contribute to the discovery of novel pathways, thus providing valuable insights
into the intervention and treatment of osteoporosis.

PMCID: PMC3943521
PMID: 24249740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Cell Sci. 2013 Dec 15;126(Pt 24):5704-13. doi: 10.1242/jcs.135483. Epub 2013
Oct 21.

TAK1 regulates SOX9 expression in chondrocytes and is essential for postnatal
development of the growth plate and articular cartilages.

Gao L(1), Sheu TJ, Dong Y, Hoak DM, Zuscik MJ, Schwarz EM, Hilton MJ, O'Keefe RJ,
Jonason JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Center for Musculoskeletal
Research, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA.

TAK1 is a MAP3K that mediates non-canonical TGF-ß and BMP signaling. During the
embryonic period, TAK1 is essential for cartilage and joint development as
deletion of Tak1 in chondro-osteo progenitor cells leads to severe
chondrodysplasia with defects in both chondrocyte proliferation and maturation.
We have investigated the role of TAK1 in committed chondrocytes during early
postnatal development. Using the Col2a1-CreER(T2); Tak1(f/f) mouse model, we
induced deletion of Tak1 at postnatal day 7 and characterized the skeletal
phenotypes of these mice at 1 and 3 months of age. Mice with chondrocyte-specific
Tak1 deletion exhibited severe growth retardation and reduced proteoglycan and
type II collagen content in the extracellular matrix of the articular cartilage. 
We found reduced Col2a1 and Acan expression, but increased Mmp13 and Adamts5
expression, in Tak1-deficient chondrocytes along with reduced expression of the
SOX trio of transcription factors, SOX9, SOX5 and SOX6. In vitro, BMP2 stimulated
Sox9 gene expression and Sox9 promoter activity. These effects were reduced;
however, following Tak1 deletion or treatment with a TAK1 kinase inhibitor. TAK1 
affects both canonical and non-canonical BMP signal transduction and we found
that both of these pathways contribute to BMP2-mediated Sox9 promoter activation.
Additionally, we found that ATF2 directly binds the Sox9 promoter in response to 
BMP signaling and that this effect is dependent upon TAK1 kinase activity. These 
novel findings establish that TAK1 contributes to BMP2-mediated Sox9 gene
expression and is essential for the postnatal development of normal growth plate 
and articular cartilages.

PMCID: PMC3860312
PMID: 24144697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Oct 14;14(10):20386-98. doi: 10.3390/ijms141020386.

Molecular study of a Hoxa2 gain-of-function in chondrogenesis: a model of
idiopathic proportionate short stature.

Deprez PM(1), Nichane MG, Lengelé BG, Rezsöhazy R, Nyssen-Behets C.

Author information: 
(1)Ecole de Kinésiologie et Récréologie, Faculté des Sciences de la Santé et
Services Communautaires, Université de Moncton, Moncton, NB E1A 3E9, Canada.
catherine.behets@uclouvain.be.

In a previous study using transgenic mice ectopically expressing Hoxa2 during
chondrogenesis, we associated the animal phenotype to human idiopathic
proportionate short stature. Our analysis showed that this overall size reduction
was correlated with a negative influence of Hoxa2 at the first step of
endochondral ossification. However, the molecular pathways leading to such
phenotype are still unknown. Using protein immunodetection and histological
techniques comparing transgenic mice to controls, we show here that the
persistent expression of Hoxa2 in chondrogenic territories provokes a general
down-regulation of the main factors controlling the differentiation cascade, such
as Bapx1, Bmp7, Bmpr1a, Ihh, Msx1, Pax9, Sox6, Sox9 and Wnt5a. These data confirm
the impairment of chondrogenic differentiation by Hoxa2 overexpression. They also
show a selective effect of Hoxa2 on endochondral ossification processes since
Gdf5 and Gdf10, and Bmp4 or PthrP were up-regulated and unmodified, respectively.
Since Hoxa2 deregulation in mice induces a proportionate short stature phenotype 
mimicking human idiopathic conditions, our results give an insight into
understanding proportionate short stature pathogenesis by highlighting molecular 
factors whose combined deregulation may be involved in such a disease.

PMCID: PMC3821620
PMID: 24129174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Nat Neurosci. 2013 Nov;16(11):1588-97. doi: 10.1038/nn.3536. Epub 2013 Oct 6.

Subcortical origins of human and monkey neocortical interneurons.

Ma T(1), Wang C, Wang L, Zhou X, Tian M, Zhang Q, Zhang Y, Li J, Liu Z, Cai Y,
Liu F, You Y, Chen C, Campbell K, Song H, Ma L, Rubenstein JL, Yang Z.

Author information: 
(1)1] Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. [2] State
Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. [3].

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2013 Dec;14(12):818-9.
    Nat Neurosci. 2013 Nov;16(11):1512-4.

Cortical GABAergic inhibitory interneurons have crucial roles in the development 
and function of the cerebral cortex. In rodents, nearly all neocortical
interneurons are generated from the subcortical ganglionic eminences. In humans
and nonhuman primates, however, the developmental origin of neocortical GABAergic
interneurons remains unclear. Here we show that the expression patterns of
several key transcription factors in the developing primate telencephalon are
very similar to those in rodents, delineating the three main subcortical
progenitor domains (the medial, lateral and caudal ganglionic eminences) and the 
interneurons tangentially migrating from them. On the basis of the continuity of 
Sox6, COUP-TFII and Sp8 transcription factor expression and evidence from cell
migration and cell fate analyses, we propose that the majority of primate
neocortical GABAergic interneurons originate from ganglionic eminences of the
ventral telencephalon. Our findings reveal that the mammalian neocortex shares
basic rules for interneuron development, substantially reshaping our
understanding of the origin and classification of primate neocortical
interneurons.

PMID: 24097041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 16;8(9):e74315. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074315. eCollection
2013.

Sox6 up-regulation by macrophage migration inhibitory factor promotes survival
and maintenance of mouse neural stem/progenitor cells.

Ohta S(1), Misawa A, Lefebvre V, Okano H, Kawakami Y, Toda M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular Signaling, Institute for Advanced Medical Research, Keio 
University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) has important roles in supporting
the proliferation and/or survival of murine neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs),
but downstream effectors remain unknown. We show here that MIF robustly increases
the expression of Sox6 in NSPCs in vitro. During neural development, Sox6 is
expressed in the ventricular zone of the ganglionic eminence (GE) of mouse brains
at embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5), cultured NSPCs from E14.5 GE, and NSPCs in the
subventricular zone (SVZ) around the lateral ventricle (LV) of the adult mouse
forebrain. Retroviral overexpression of Sox6 in NSPCs increases the number of
primary and secondary neurospheres and inhibits cell differentiation. This effect
is accompanied with increased expression of Hes1 and Bcl-2 and Akt
phosphorylation, thus suggesting a role for Sox6 in promoting cell survival
and/or self-renewal ability. Constitutive activation of the transcription factor 
Stat3 results in up-regulation of Sox6 expression and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis showed that MIF increases Stat3 binding to the Sox6 
promoter in NSPCs, indicating that Stat3 stimulates Sox6 expression downstream of
MIF. Finally, the ability of MIF to increase the number of primary and secondary 
neurospheres is inhibited by Sox6 gene silencing. Collectively, our data identify
Sox6 as an important downstream effector of MIF signaling in stemness maintenance
of NSPCs.

PMCID: PMC3774630
PMID: 24066135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 11;8(9):e74504. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074504. eCollection
2013.

MiR-499 regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis during late-stage cardiac
differentiation via Sox6 and cyclin D1.

Li X(1), Wang J, Jia Z, Cui Q, Zhang C, Wang W, Chen P, Ma K, Zhou C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Key Laboratory of Molecular Cardiovascular Sciences, Ministry of
Education of China, Peking University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: MiR-499 is a cardiac-abundant miRNA. However, the biological
functions of miR-499 in differentiated cardiomyocytes or in the cardiomyocyte
differentiation process is not very clear. Sox6 is believed to be one of its
targets, and is also believed to play a role in cardiac differentiation.
Therefore, our aim was to investigate the association between Sox6 and miR-499
during cardiac differentiation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using a well-established in vitro cardiomyocyte
differentiation system, mouse P19CL6 cells, we found that miR-499 was highly
expressed in the late stage of cardiac differentiation. In cells stably
transfected with miR-499 (P-499 cells), it was found that miR-499 could promote
the differentiation into cardiomyocytes at the early stage of cardiac
differentiation. Notably, cell viability assay, EdU incorporation assay, and cell
cycle profile analysis all showed that the P-499 cells displayed the distinctive 
feature of hyperplastic growth. Further investigation confirmed that miR-499
could promote neonatal rat cardiomyocyte proliferation. MiR-499 knock-down
enhanced apoptosis in the late differentiation stage in P19CL6 cells, but
overexpression of miR-499 resulted in a decrease in the apoptosis rate. Sox6 was 
identified as a direct target of miR-499 and its expression was detected from day
8 or day 10 of cardiac differentiation of P19CL6 cells. Sox6 played a role in
cell viability, inhibited cell proliferation and promoted cell apoptosis in
P19CL6 cells and cardiomyocytes. The overexpression of Sox6 could reverse the
proliferation and anti-apoptosis effects of miR-499. It was also found that
miR-499 might exert its function by regulating cyclin D1 via its influence on
Sox6.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: miR-499 probably regulates the proliferation and
apoptosis of P19CL6 cells in the late stage of cardiac differentiation via its
effects on Sox6 and cyclin D1.

PMCID: PMC3770584
PMID: 24040263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Sep 5;93(3):545-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.07.010. Epub
2013 Aug 22.

Genome-wide association analysis of blood-pressure traits in African-ancestry
individuals reveals common associated genes in African and non-African
populations.

Franceschini N, Fox E, Zhang Z, Edwards TL, Nalls MA, Sung YJ, Tayo BO, Sun YV,
Gottesman O, Adeyemo A, Johnson AD, Young JH, Rice K, Duan Q, Chen F, Li Y, Tang 
H, Fornage M, Keene KL, Andrews JS, Smith JA, Faul JD, Guangfa Z, Guo W, Liu Y,
Murray SS, Musani SK, Srinivasan S, Velez Edwards DR, Wang H, Becker LC, Bovet P,
Bochud M, Broeckel U, Burnier M, Carty C, Chasman DI, Ehret G, Chen WM, Chen G,
Chen W, Ding J, Dreisbach AW, Evans MK, Guo X, Garcia ME, Jensen R, Keller MF,
Lettre G, Lotay V, Martin LW, Moore JH, Morrison AC, Mosley TH, Ogunniyi A,
Palmas W, Papanicolaou G, Penman A, Polak JF, Ridker PM, Salako B, Singleton AB, 
Shriner D, Taylor KD, Vasan R, Wiggins K, Williams SM, Yanek LR, Zhao W,
Zonderman AB, Becker DM, Berenson G, Boerwinkle E, Bottinger E, Cushman M, Eaton 
C, Nyberg F, Heiss G, Hirschhron JN, Howard VJ, Karczewsk KJ, Lanktree MB, Liu K,
Liu Y, Loos R, Margolis K, Snyder M; Asian Genetic Epidemiology Network
Consortium, Psaty BM, Schork NJ, Weir DR, Rotimi CN, Sale MM, Harris T, Kardia
SL, Hunt SC, Arnett D, Redline S, Cooper RS, Risch NJ, Rao DC, Rotter JI,
Chakravarti A, Reiner AP, Levy D, Keating BJ, Zhu X.

Collaborators: Go MJ, Kim YJ, Lee JY, Jeon JP, Kim SS, Han BG, Cho YS, Sim X, Tay
WT, Ong RT, Seielstad M, Liu JJ, Aung T, Wong TY, Teo YY, Tai ES, Chen CH, Chang 
LC, Chen YT, Wu JY, Kelly TN, Gu D, Hixson JE, Sung YJ, He J, Tabara Y, Kokubo Y,
Miki T, Iwai N, Kato N, Takeuchi F, Katsuya T, Nabika T, Sugiyama T, Zhang Y,
Huang W, Zhang X, Zhou X, Jin L, Zhu D.

High blood pressure (BP) is more prevalent and contributes to more severe
manifestations of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in African Americans than in any
other United States ethnic group. Several small African-ancestry (AA) BP
genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have been published, but their findings
have failed to replicate to date. We report on a large AA BP GWAS meta-analysis
that includes 29,378 individuals from 19 discovery cohorts and subsequent
replication in additional samples of AA (n = 10,386), European ancestry (EA) (n =
69,395), and East Asian ancestry (n = 19,601). Five loci (EVX1-HOXA, ULK4, RSPO3,
PLEKHG1, and SOX6) reached genome-wide significance (p < 1.0 × 10(-8)) for either
systolic or diastolic BP in a transethnic meta-analysis after correction for
multiple testing. Three of these BP loci (EVX1-HOXA, RSPO3, and PLEKHG1) lack
previous associations with BP. We also identified one independent signal in a
known BP locus (SOX6) and provide evidence for fine mapping in four additional
validated BP loci. We also demonstrate that validated EA BP GWAS loci, considered
jointly, show significant effects in AA samples. Consequently, these findings
suggest that BP loci might have universal effects across studied populations,
demonstrating that multiethnic samples are an essential component in identifying,
fine mapping, and understanding their trait variability.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3769920
PMID: 23972371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Stem Cells. 2013 Dec;31(12):2632-46. doi: 10.1002/stem.1522.

Sox transcription factors require selective interactions with Oct4 and specific
transactivation functions to mediate reprogramming.

Aksoy I(1), Jauch R, Eras V, Chng WB, Chen J, Divakar U, Ng CK, Kolatkar PR,
Stanton LW.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore.

The unique ability of Sox2 to cooperate with Oct4 at selective binding sites in
the genome is critical for reprogramming somatic cells into induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs). We have recently demonstrated that Sox17 can be converted
into a reprogramming factor by alteration of a single amino acid (Sox17EK) within
its DNA binding HMG domain. Here we expanded this study by introducing analogous 
mutations to 10 other Sox proteins and interrogated the role of N-and C-termini
on the reprogramming efficiency. We found that point-mutated Sox7 and Sox17 can
convert human and mouse fibroblasts into iPSCs, but Sox4, Sox5, Sox6, Sox8, Sox9,
Sox11, Sox12, Sox13, and Sox18 cannot. Next we studied regions outside the HMG
domain and found that the C-terminal transactivation domain of Sox17 and Sox7
enhances the potency of Sox2 in iPSC assays and confers weak reprogramming
potential to the otherwise inactive Sox4EK and Sox18EK proteins. These results
suggest that the glutamate (E) to lysine (K) mutation in the HMG domain is
necessary but insufficient to swap the function of Sox factors. Moreover, the HMG
domain alone fused to the VP16 transactivation domain is able to induce
reprogramming, albeit at low efficiency. By molecular dissection of the
C-terminus of Sox17, we found that the ß-catenin interaction region contributes
to the enhanced reprogramming efficiency of Sox17EK. To mechanistically
understand the enhanced reprogramming potential of Sox17EK, we analyzed
ChIP-sequencing and expression data and identified a subset of candidate genes
specifically regulated by Sox17EK and not by Sox2.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23963638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Pharmacol Sci. 2013;122(4):318-25. Epub 2013 Jul 25.

Negative correlation between Per1 and Sox6 expression during chondrogenic
differentiation in pre-chondrocytic ATDC5 cells.

Le NQ(1), Binh NT, Takarada T, Takarada-Iemata M, Hinoi E, Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kanazawa University Graduate School, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan.

Pre-chondrocytes undergo cellular differentiation stages during chondrogenesis
under the influence by different transcription factors such as sry-type high
mobility group box-9 (Sox9) and runt-related transcription factor-2 (Runx2). We
have shown upregulation by parathyroid hormone (PTH) of the clock gene Period-1
(Per1) through the cAMP/protein kinase A signaling pathway in pre-chondrocytic
ATDC5 cells. Here, we investigated the role of Per1 in the suppression of
chondrogenic differentiation by PTH. In ATDC5 cells exposed to 10 nM PTH, a
drastic but transient increase in Per1 expression was seen only 1 h after
addition together with a prolonged decrease in Sox6 levels. However, no
significant changes were induced in Sox5 and Runx2 levels in cells exposed to
PTH. In stable Per1 transfectants, a significant decrease in Sox6 levels was
seen, with no significant changes in Sox5 and Sox9 levels, in addition to the
inhibition of gene transactivation by Sox9 allies. Knockdown of Per1 by siRNA
significantly increased the Sox6 and type II collagen levels in cells cultured
for 24 - 60 h. These results suggest that Per1 plays a role in the suppressed
chondrocytic differentiation by PTH through a mechanism relevant to negative
regulation of transactivation of the Sox6 gene during chondrogenesis.

PMID: 23883486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1829(10):1075-91. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.07.004. Epub 2013 Jul 13.

Hmgb1 can facilitate activation of the matrilin-1 gene promoter by Sox9 and
L-Sox5/Sox6 in early steps of chondrogenesis.

Szénási T(1), Kénesi E, Nagy A, Molnár A, Bálint BL, Zvara Á, Csabai Z, Deák F,
Boros Oláh B, Mátés L, Nagy L, Puskás LG, Kiss I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Biological Research Centre, Hungarian Academy of
Sciences, H-6701 Szeged, Hungary. Electronic address: sztibor@brc.hu.

The architectural high mobility group box 1 (Hmgb1) protein acts as both a
nuclear and an extracellular regulator of various biological processes, including
skeletogenesis. Here we report its contribution to the evolutionarily conserved, 
distinctive regulation of the matrilin-1 gene (Matn1) expression in amniotes. We 
previously demonstrated that uniquely assembled proximal promoter elements
restrict Matn1 expression to specific growth plate cartilage zones by allowing
varying doses of L-Sox5/Sox6 and Nfi proteins to fine-tune their Sox9-mediated
transactivation. Here, we dissected the regulatory mechanisms underlying the
activity of a conserved distal promoter element 1. We show that this element
carries three Sox-binding sites, works as an enhancer in vivo, and allows
promoter activation by the Sox5/6/9 chondrogenic trio. In early steps of
chondrogenesis, declining Hmgb1 expression overlaps with the onset of Sox9
expression. Unlike repression in late steps, Hmgb1 overexpression in early
chondrogenesis increases Matn1 promoter activation by the Sox trio, and forced
Hmgb1 expression in COS-7 cells facilitates induction of Matn1 expression by the 
Sox trio. The conserved Matn1 control elements bind Hmgb1 and SOX9 with opposite 
efficiency in vitro. They show higher HMGB1 than SOX trio occupancy in
established chondrogenic cell lines, and HMGB1 silencing greatly increases MATN1 
and COL2A1 expression. Together, these data thus suggest a model whereby Hmgb1
helps recruit the Sox trio to the Matn1 promoter and thereby facilitates
activation of the gene in early chondrogenesis. We anticipate that Hmgb1 may
similarly affect transcription of other cartilage-specific genes.

© 2013.

PMID: 23860260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mech Dev. 2013 Sep-Oct;130(9-10):447-57. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2013.06.001. Epub
2013 Jun 28.

Control of muscle fibre-type diversity during embryonic development: the
zebrafish paradigm.

Jackson HE(1), Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos, Singapore
138673, Singapore.

Vertebrate skeletal muscle is composed of distinct types of fibre that are
functionally adapted through differences in their physiological and metabolic
properties. An understanding of the molecular basis of fibre-type specification
is of relevance to human health and fitness. The zebrafish provides an attractive
model for investigating fibre type specification; not only are their rapidly
developing embryos optically transparent, but in contrast to amniotes, the
embryonic myotome shows a discrete temporal and spatial separation of fibre type 
ontogeny that simplifies its analysis. Here we review the current state of
understanding of muscle fibre type specification and differentiation during
embryonic development of the zebrafish, with a particular focus on the roles of
the Prdm1a and Sox6 transcription factors, and consider the relevance of these
findings to higher vertebrate muscle biology.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23811405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cancer Epidemiol. 2013 Oct;37(5):732-6. doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2013.05.002. Epub
2013 Jun 1.

Decreased expression of SOX6 confers a poor prognosis in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Guo X(1), Yang M, Gu H, Zhao J, Zou L.

Author information: 
(1)302 Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100039, China. gxd302@163.com

BACKGROUND AND AIM: SOX6, a member of the D subfamily of sex determining region
y-related transcription factors, plays critical roles in cell fate determination,
differentiation and proliferation. It has been identified as a tumor suppressor
or an oncogene in different human cancers. However, the role of SOX6 in the
development and progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has not been
explored. The aim of this study was to investigate the expression of SOX6 in HCC 
and determine its correlation with tumor progression and prognosis.
METHODS: 130 HCC patients who had undergone curative liver resection were
selected and immunohistochemistry, Western blotting, and quantitative real time
polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) were performed to analyze SOX6 expression in
the respective tumors.
RESULTS: Q-PCR, immunohistochemistry and Western blotting consistently confirmed 
the decreased expression of SOX6 at both mRNA and protein levels in HCC tissues
compared with their adjacent nonneoplastic tissues (P<0.01). Additionally, the
expression of SOX6, determined by immunohistochemistry, was negatively correlated
with the tumor stage (P=0.003) and serum AFP (P=0.02). Moreover, HCC patients
with lower SOX6 expression had worse 5-year disease-free survival and 5-year
overall survival than those with high SOX6 expression (P=0.006 and 0.001,
respectively). Furthermore, the Cox proportional hazards model showed that the
decreased expression of SOX6 was an independent poor prognostic factor for both
5-year disease-free survival (hazards ratio [HR]=2.398, 95% confidence interval
[CI]=1.601-5.993, P=0.01) and 5-year overall survival (HR=3.569, CI=1.381-7.290, 
P=0.008) in HCC.
CONCLUSION: These findings provide evidence for the first time that SOX6
expression was decreased in HCC, which correlated with poor prognosis, suggesting
that SOX6 may be a novel and potential prognostic marker for HCC.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23731550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Skelet Muscle. 2013 May 10;3(1):11. doi: 10.1186/2044-5040-3-11.

Trip12, a HECT domain E3 ubiquitin ligase, targets Sox6 for proteasomal
degradation and affects fiber type-specific gene expression in muscle cells.

An CI(1), Ganio E, Hagiwara N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
nhagiwara@ucdavis.edu.

BACKGROUND: A sophisticated level of coordinated gene expression is necessary for
skeletal muscle fibers to obtain their unique functional identities. We have
previously shown that the transcription factor Sox6 plays an essential role in
coordinating muscle fiber type differentiation by acting as a transcriptional
suppressor of slow fiber-specific genes. Currently, mechanisms regulating the
activity of Sox6 in skeletal muscle and how these mechanisms affect the fiber
phenotype remain unknown.
METHODS: Yeast two-hybrid screening was used to identify binding partners of Sox6
in muscle. Small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of one of the Sox6
binding proteins, Trip12, was used to determine its effect on Sox6 activity in
C2C12 myotubes using quantitative analysis of fiber type-specific gene
expression.
RESULTS: We found that the E3 ligase Trip12, a HECT domain E3 ubiquitin ligase,
recognizes and polyubiquitinates Sox6. Inhibiting Trip12 or the 26S proteasome
activity resulted in an increase in Sox6 protein levels in C2C12 myotubes. This
control of Sox6 activity in muscle cells via Trip12 ubiquitination has
significant phenotypic outcomes. Knockdown of Trip12 in C2C12 myotubes led to
upregulation of Sox6 protein levels and concurrently to a decrease in slow
fiber-specific Myh7 expression coupled with an increased expression in fast
fiber-specific Myh4. Therefore, regulation of Sox6 cellular levels by the
ubiquitin-proteasome system can induce identity-changing alterations in the
expression of fiber type-specific genes in muscle cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our data, we propose that in skeletal muscle, E3 ligases
have a significant role in regulating fiber type-specific gene expression,
expanding their importance in muscle beyond their well-established role in
atrophy.

PMCID: PMC3666947
PMID: 23663701  [PubMed]


83. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2013 Jun;22(2):76-84. doi: 10.1097/PDM.0b013e31827a47f9.

High-resolution genome-wide copy-number analyses identify localized copy-number
alterations in Ewing sarcoma.

Lynn M(1), Wang Y, Slater J, Shah N, Conroy J, Ennis S, Morris T, Betts DR,
Fletcher JA, O'Sullivan MJ.

Author information: 
(1)The National Children's Research Centre, Dublin, Ireland.

Ewing sarcoma family tumors are aggressive sarcomas of childhood and adolescence 
with continuing poor outcomes. Decades of research on the characteristics of the 
often solitary-known oncogenic-genomic aberration in Ewing sarcoma family tumors,
namely a TET-ETS fusion, have provided little advancement in the understanding of
the molecular pathogenesis of Ewing sarcoma or treatment thereof. In this study, 
the high-resolution single-nucleotide polymorphism technology was used to
identify additional/secondary copy-number alterations (CNAs) in Ewing sarcoma
that might elucidate the aggressive biology of this sarcoma. We compared paired
constitutional and tumor DNA samples. Commonly known genomic alterations
including gain of 1q and chromosome 8 were the most frequently detected changes
in this study. In addition, deletions and loss of heterozygosity were identified 
in 10q, 11p, and 17p. Furthermore, tumor-specific CNAs were identified not only
in genes previously known to be of interest, including CDKN2A, but also in genes 
not previously associated with Ewing sarcoma, including SOX6 and PTEN. Selected
array-based findings were confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization,
immunohistochemical studies, or sequencing. The results highlight an unexpected
level of cytogenetic complexity associated with several of the samples, 2 of
which contained TP53 mutations. In summary, our high-resolution genome-wide
copy-number data identify several novel CNAs associated with Ewing sarcoma, which
are promising targets for novel therapeutic strategies in this aggressive
sarcoma.

PMID: 23628818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 5;288(14):9924-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.409342. Epub 2013 
Feb 19.

Hedgehog-Gli activators direct osteo-chondrogenic function of bone morphogenetic 
protein toward osteogenesis in the perichondrium.

Hojo H(1), Ohba S, Taniguchi K, Shirai M, Yano F, Saito T, Ikeda T, Nakajima K,
Komiyama Y, Nakagata N, Suzuki K, Mishina Y, Yamada M, Konno T, Takato T,
Kawaguchi H, Kambara H, Chung UI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Disease Biology and Integrative Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Specification of progenitors into the osteoblast lineage is an essential event
for skeletogenesis. During endochondral ossification, cells in the perichondrium 
give rise to osteoblast precursors. Hedgehog (Hh) and bone morphogenetic protein 
(BMP) are suggested to regulate the commitment of these cells. However,
properties of perichondrial cells and regulatory mechanisms of the specification 
process are still poorly understood. Here, we investigated the machineries by
combining a novel organ culture system and single-cell expression analysis with
mouse genetics and biochemical analyses. In a metatarsal organ culture
reproducing bone collar formation, activation of BMP signaling enhanced the bone 
collar formation cooperatively with Hh input, whereas the signaling induced
ectopic chondrocyte formation in the perichondrium without Hh input. Similar
phenotypes were also observed in compound mutant mice, where signaling activities
of Hh and BMP were genetically manipulated. Single-cell quantitative RT-PCR
analyses showed heterogeneity of perichondrial cells in terms of natural
characteristics and responsiveness to Hh input. In vitro analyses revealed that
Hh signaling suppressed BMP-induced chondrogenic differentiation; Gli1 inhibited 
the expression of Sox5, Sox6, and Sox9 (SRY box-containing gene 9) as well as
transactivation by Sox9. Indeed, ectopic expression of chondrocyte maker genes
were observed in the perichondrium of metatarsals in Gli1(-/-) fetuses, and the
phenotype was more severe in Gli1(-/-);Gli2(-/-) newborns. These data suggest
that Hh-Gli activators alter the function of BMP to specify perichondrial cells
into osteoblasts; the timing of Hh input and its target populations are critical 
for BMP function.

PMCID: PMC3617292
PMID: 23423383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Gene. 2013 Apr 15;518(2):368-75. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.12.102. Epub 2013 Jan
19.

Differential gene expression by Osterix knockdown in mouse chondrogenic ATDC5
cells.

Park SY(1), Kim JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Dongguk University, and
Medical Institute of Dongguk University, Gyeongju, 780-714, Republic of Korea.

Osterix (Osx) is a transcription factor required for osteoblast differentiation
during intramembranous and endochondral ossification. Recently, several reports
have described novel functions of Osx in chondrocyte differentiation. In an in
vitro study, in which the effects of Osx gene silencing were examined in mouse
chondrogenic ATDC5 cells, chondrocyte marker genes were found to be
expressionally downregulated and chondrocyte differentiation reduced. On the
other hand, in vivo studies based on chondrocyte-specific Osx knockouts
demonstrated impaired endochondral bone formation with delayed chondrocyte
differentiation and reduced cartilage matrix ossification. However, little is
known about the mechanism or targets of Osx involved in the control of
chondrocyte differentiation. Here, we attempted to high-density of Affymetrix
GeneChip microarray to investigate global gene expression profile changes caused 
by Osx knockdown in ATDC5 chondrocytes. The mRNA expressions of 112 genes were
significantly modified by Osx knockdown: 68 genes were upregulated and 44 genes
downregulated. Functional categories of gene expression classified by gene
ontology demonstrated that genes related to cell adhesion, development, and
signal transduction were highly affected by Osx knockdown. The expressions of
differential genes, such as Sfrp2, Sema3a, Nox4, Rgs4, Zfp521, Has2, Sox6,
Scn2a1, Sirpa, and Thbs2, were validated by quantitative real-time PCR. This
study shows that expression profiling can be used to identify genes that are
transcriptionally modified following Osx knockdown and to reveal the molecular
mechanism of chondrocyte differentiation regulated by Osx.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23337593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Apr 15;22(8):1663-78. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds555. Epub 2013 Jan 
8.

Loci influencing blood pressure identified using a cardiovascular gene-centric
array.

Ganesh SK, Tragante V, Guo W, Guo Y, Lanktree MB, Smith EN, Johnson T, Castillo
BA, Barnard J, Baumert J, Chang YP, Elbers CC, Farrall M, Fischer ME,
Franceschini N, Gaunt TR, Gho JM, Gieger C, Gong Y, Isaacs A, Kleber ME, Mateo
Leach I, McDonough CW, Meijs MF, Mellander O, Molony CM, Nolte IM, Padmanabhan S,
Price TS, Rajagopalan R, Shaffer J, Shah S, Shen H, Soranzo N, van der Most PJ,
Van Iperen EP, Van Setten J, Vonk JM, Zhang L, Beitelshees AL, Berenson GS, Bhatt
DL, Boer JM, Boerwinkle E, Burkley B, Burt A, Chakravarti A, Chen W,
Cooper-Dehoff RM, Curtis SP, Dreisbach A, Duggan D, Ehret GB, Fabsitz RR, Fornage
M, Fox E, Furlong CE, Gansevoort RT, Hofker MH, Hovingh GK, Kirkland SA,
Kottke-Marchant K, Kutlar A, Lacroix AZ, Langaee TY, Li YR, Lin H, Liu K, Maiwald
S, Malik R; CARDIOGRAM, METASTROKE, Murugesan G, Newton-Cheh C, O'Connell JR,
Onland-Moret NC, Ouwehand WH, Palmas W, Penninx BW, Pepine CJ, Pettinger M, Polak
JF, Ramachandran VS, Ranchalis J, Redline S, Ridker PM, Rose LM, Scharnag H,
Schork NJ, Shimbo D, Shuldiner AR, Srinivasan SR, Stolk RP, Taylor HA, Thorand B,
Trip MD, van Duijn CM, Verschuren WM, Wijmenga C, Winkelmann BR, Wyatt S, Young
JH, Boehm BO, Caulfield MJ, Chasman DI, Davidson KW, Doevendans PA, Fitzgerald
GA, Gums JG, Hakonarson H, Hillege HL, Illig T, Jarvik GP, Johnson JA, Kastelein 
JJ, Koenig W; LifeLines Cohort Study, März W, Mitchell BD, Murray SS, Oldehinkel 
AJ, Rader DJ, Reilly MP, Reiner AP, Schadt EE, Silverstein RL, Snieder H, Stanton
AV, Uitterlinden AG, van der Harst P, van der Schouw YT, Samani NJ, Johnson AD,
Munroe PB, de Bakker PI, Zhu X, Levy D, Keating BJ, Asselbergs FW.

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Aug 15;22(16):3394-5. Van Setten, Jessic A [corrected to Van 
Setten, Jessica].

Blood pressure (BP) is a heritable determinant of risk for cardiovascular disease
(CVD). To investigate genetic associations with systolic BP (SBP), diastolic BP
(DBP), mean arterial pressure (MAP) and pulse pressure (PP), we genotyped ~50 000
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that capture variation in ~2100 candidate 
genes for cardiovascular phenotypes in 61 619 individuals of European ancestry
from cohort studies in the USA and Europe. We identified novel associations
between rs347591 and SBP (chromosome 3p25.3, in an intron of HRH1) and between
rs2169137 and DBP (chromosome1q32.1 in an intron of MDM4) and between rs2014408
and SBP (chromosome 11p15 in an intron of SOX6), previously reported to be
associated with MAP. We also confirmed 10 previously known loci associated with
SBP, DBP, MAP or PP (ADRB1, ATP2B1, SH2B3/ATXN2, CSK, CYP17A1, FURIN, HFE, LSP1, 
MTHFR, SOX6) at array-wide significance (P < 2.4 × 10(-6)). We then replicated
these associations in an independent set of 65 886 individuals of European
ancestry. The findings from expression QTL (eQTL) analysis showed associations of
SNPs in the MDM4 region with MDM4 expression. We did not find any evidence of
association of the two novel SNPs in MDM4 and HRH1 with sequelae of high BP
including coronary artery disease (CAD), left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) or
stroke. In summary, we identified two novel loci associated with BP and confirmed
multiple previously reported associations. Our findings extend our understanding 
of genes involved in BP regulation, some of which may eventually provide new
targets for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC3657476
PMID: 23303523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cell Tissue Res. 2013 May;352(2):401-12. doi: 10.1007/s00441-012-1548-8. Epub
2012 Dec 30.

Octacalcium phosphate suppresses chondrogenic differentiation of ATDC5 cells.

Shibuya I(1), Yoshimura K, Miyamoto Y, Yamada A, Takami M, Suzawa T, Suzuki D,
Ikumi N, Hiura F, Anada T, Suzuki O, Kamijo R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Showa University School of Dentistry,
Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Implantation of octacalcium phosphate (OCP), a hydroxyapatite precursor, has been
reported to induce chondrogenesis in vivo. In this study, we examined the effects
of OCP on the chondrogenic differentiation of mouse chondroblastic ATDC5 cells in
vitro. Contrary to our expectation, chondrogenic differentiation of ATDC5 cells
evaluated by the mRNA expression of Col2a1, Acan and Col10a1 was suppressed by
OCP. Among Sox9, Sox5 and Sox6, essential transcription factors for
chondrogenesis, the expression of Sox6 mRNA was markedly lowered by OCP. Whereas 
ATDC5 cells dissolved OCP to liberate calcium and inorganic phosphorus, increased
calcium or phosphate in the medium had little effect on the differentiation of
these cells. Direct contact of ATDC5 cells with OCP was required to suppress the 
expression of Col2a1 and Sox6 mRNAs, whereas the introduction of Sox6 short
interfering RNA lowered the expression of Col2a1 mRNA. On the other hand, the
forced expression of Sox6 protein partially but significantly, restored the
expression of Col2a1 mRNA suppressed by OCP. These results indicate that OCP
suppresses the chondrogenic differentiation of ATDC5 cells, at least in part, at 
the Sox6 transcription level.

PMID: 23274552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Tissue Eng Part C Methods. 2013 Jul;19(7):550-67. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEC.2012.0508.
Epub 2013 Feb 19.

Enhanced hyaline cartilage matrix synthesis in collagen sponge scaffolds by using
siRNA to stabilize chondrocytes phenotype cultured with bone morphogenetic
protein-2 under hypoxia.

Legendre F(1), Ollitrault D, Hervieu M, Baugé C, Maneix L, Goux D, Chajra H,
Mallein-Gerin F, Boumediene K, Galera P, Demoor M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Microenvironnement Cellulaire et Pathologies, MILPAT, EA 4652, SFR
ICORE 146, Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, UFR de Médecine, Caen, France.

Cartilage healing by tissue engineering is an alternative strategy to
reconstitute functional tissue after trauma or age-related degeneration. However,
chondrocytes, the major player in cartilage homeostasis, do not self-regenerate
efficiently and lose their phenotype during osteoarthritis. This process is
called dedifferentiation and also occurs during the first expansion step of
autologous chondrocyte implantation (ACI). To ensure successful ACI therapy,
chondrocytes must be differentiated and capable of synthesizing hyaline cartilage
matrix molecules. We therefore developed a safe procedure for redifferentiating
human chondrocytes by combining appropriate physicochemical factors: hypoxic
conditions, collagen scaffolds, chondrogenic factors (bone morphogenetic
protein-2 [BMP-2], and insulin-like growth factor I [IGF-I]) and RNA interference
targeting the COL1A1 gene. Redifferentiation of dedifferentiated chondrocytes was
evaluated using gene/protein analyses to identify the chondrocyte phenotypic
profile. In our conditions, under BMP-2 treatment, redifferentiated and
metabolically active chondrocytes synthesized a hyaline-like cartilage matrix
characterized by type IIB collagen and aggrecan molecules without any sign of
hypertrophy or osteogenesis. In contrast, IGF-I increased both specific and
noncharacteristic markers (collagens I and X) of chondrocytes. The specific
increase in COL2A1 gene expression observed in the BMP-2 treatment was shown to
involve the specific enhancer region of COL2A1 that binds the trans-activators
Sox9/L-Sox5/Sox6 and Sp1, which are associated with a decrease in the
trans-inhibitors of COL2A1, c-Krox, and p65 subunit of NF-kappaB. Our procedure
in which BMP-2 treatment under hypoxia is associated with a COL1A1 siRNA,
significantly increased the differentiation index of chondrocytes, and should
offer the opportunity to develop new ACI-based therapies in humans.

PMID: 23270543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Apr 1;319(6):820-37. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.11.020. Epub
2012 Dec 10.

Stimulatory and inhibitory mechanisms of slow muscle-specific myosin heavy chain 
gene expression in fish: transient and transgenic analysis of torafugu MYH(M86-2)
promoter in zebrafish embryos.

Asaduzzaman M(1), Kinoshita S, Bhuiyan SS, Asakawa S, Watabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquatic Bioscience, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

The myosin heavy chain gene, MYHM86-2, exhibited restricted expression in slow
muscle fibers of torafugu embryos and larvae, suggesting its functional roles for
embryonic and larval muscle development. However, the transcriptional mechanisms 
involved in its expression are still ambiguous. The present study is the first
extensive analysis of slow muscle-specific MYHM86-2 promoter in fish for
identifying the cis-elements that are crucial for its expression. Combining both 
transient transfection and transgenic approaches, we demonstrated that the 2614bp
5'-flanking sequences of MYHM86-2 contain a sufficient promoter activity to drive
gene expression specific to superficial slow muscle fibers. By cyclopamine
treatment, we also demonstrated that the differentiation of such superficial slow
muscle fibers depends on hedgehog signaling activity. The deletion analyses
defined an upstream fragment necessary for repressing ectopic MYHM86-2 expression
in the fast muscle fibers. The transcriptional mechanism that prevents MYHM86-2
expression in the fast muscle fibers is mediated through Sox6 binding elements.
We also demonstrated that Sox6 may function as a transcriptional repressor of
MYHM86-2 expression. We further discovered that nuclear factor of activated T
cells (NFAT) binding elements plays a key role and myocyte enhancer factor-2
(MEF2) binding elements participate in the transcriptional regulation of MYHM86-2
expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23237989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Arthritis Res Ther. 2012 Oct 29;14(5):R233. doi: 10.1186/ar4076.

Muscle-fiber transdifferentiation in an experimental model of respiratory chain
myopathy.

Venhoff N, Lebrecht D, Pfeifer D, Venhoff AC, Bissé E, Kirschner J, Walker UA.

INTRODUCTION: Skeletal muscle fiber composition and muscle energetics are not
static and change in muscle disease. This study was performed to determine
whether a mitochondrial myopathy is associated with adjustments in skeletal
muscle fiber-type composition.
METHODS: Ten rats were treated with zidovudine, an antiretroviral nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitor that induces a myopathy by interfering with
mitochondrial functions. Soleus muscles were examined after 21 weeks of
treatment. Ten untreated rats served as controls.
RESULTS: Zidovudine induced a myopathy with mitochondrial DNA depletion,
abnormalities in mitochondrial ultrastructure, and reduced cytochrome c oxidase
activity. Mitochondrial DNA was disproportionally more diminished in type I
compared with type II fibers, whereas atrophy predominated in type II fibers.
Compared with those of controls, zidovudine-exposed soleus muscles contained an
increased proportion (256%) of type II fibers, whereas neonatal myosin heavy
chains remained repressed, indicating fiber-type transformation in the absence of
regeneration. Microarray gene-expression analysis confirmed enhanced fast-fiber
isoforms, repressed slow-fiber transcripts, and reduced neonatal fiber
transcripts in the mitochondrial myopathy. Respiratory chain transcripts were
diminished, whereas the enzymes of glycolysis and glycogenolysis were enhanced,
indicating a metabolic adjustment from oxidative to glycolytic capacities. A
coordinated regulation was found of transcription factors known to orchestrate
type II fiber formation (upregulation of MyoD, Six1, Six2, Eya1, and Sox6, and
downregulation of myogenin and ERR<U+03B3>).
CONCLUSIONS: The type I to type II fiber transformation in mitochondrial myopathy
implicates mitochondrial function as a new regulator of skeletal muscle fiber
type.

PMCID: PMC3580545
PMID: 23107834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2013 Jan;21(1):246-58. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2012.10.007.
Epub 2012 Oct 18.

Chondrocytes extract from patients with osteoarthritis induces chondrogenesis in 
infrapatellar fat pad-derived stem cells.

López-Ruiz E(1), Perán M, Cobo-Molinos J, Jiménez G, Picón M, Bustamante M,
Arrebola F, Hernández-Lamas MC, Delgado-Martínez AD, Montañez E, Marchal JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of Jaén, Jaén E-23071, Spain.
elruiz@ujaen.es

OBJECTIVE: Infrapatellar fat pad of patients with osteoarthritis (OA) contains
multipotent and highly clonogenic adipose-derived stem cells that can be isolated
by low invasive methods. Moreover, nuclear and cytoplasmic cellular extracts have
been showed to be effective in induction of cell differentiation and
reprogramming. The aim of this study was to induce chondrogenic differentiation
of autologous mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) obtained from infrapatellar fat pad
(IFPSCs) of patients with OA using cellular extracts-based transdifferentiation
method.
DESIGN: IFPSCs and chondrocytes were isolated and characterized by flow
cytometry. IFPSCs were permeabilized with Streptolysin O and then exposed to a
cell extract obtained from chondrocytes. Then, IFPSCs were cultured for 2 weeks
and chondrogenesis was evaluated by morphologic and ultrastructural observations,
immunologic detection, gene expression analysis and growth on 3-D poly
(dl-lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) scaffolds.
RESULTS: After isolation, both chondrocytes and IFPSCs displayed similar
expression of MSCs surface makers. Collagen II was highly expressed in
chondrocytes and showed a basal expression in IFPSCs. Cells exposed to
chondrocyte extracts acquired a characteristic morphological and ultrastructural 
chondrocyte phenotype that was confirmed by the increased proteoglycan formation 
and enhanced collagen II immunostaining. Moreover, chondrocyte extracts induced
an increase in mRNA expression of chondrogenic genes such as Sox9, L-Sox5, Sox6
and Col2a1. Interestingly, chondrocytes, IFPSCs and transdifferentiated IFPSCs
were able to grow, expand and produce extracellular matrix (ECM) on 3D PLGA
scaffolds.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate for the first time that extracts obtained from
chondrocytes of osteoarthritic knees promote chondrogenic differentiation of
autologous IFPSCs. Moreover, combination of transdifferentiated IFPSCs with
biodegradable PLGA 3D scaffolds can serve as an efficient system for the
maintenance and maturation of cartilage tissue. These findings suggest its
usefulness to repair articular surface in OA.

Copyright © 2012 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23085560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. PLoS Genet. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002962. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002962. Epub 2012 
Sep 27.

A comparison of brain gene expression levels in domesticated and wild animals.

Albert FW(1), Somel M, Carneiro M, Aximu-Petri A, Halbwax M, Thalmann O,
Blanco-Aguiar JA, Plyusnina IZ, Trut L, Villafuerte R, Ferrand N, Kaiser S,
Jensen P, Pääbo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. falbert@princeton.edu

Domestication has led to similar changes in morphology and behavior in several
animal species, raising the question whether similarities between different
domestication events also exist at the molecular level. We used mRNA sequencing
to analyze genome-wide gene expression patterns in brain frontal cortex in three 
pairs of domesticated and wild species (dogs and wolves, pigs and wild boars, and
domesticated and wild rabbits). We compared the expression differences with those
between domesticated guinea pigs and a distant wild relative (Cavia aperea) as
well as between two lines of rats selected for tameness or aggression towards
humans. There were few gene expression differences between domesticated and wild 
dogs, pigs, and rabbits (30-75 genes (less than 1%) of expressed genes were
differentially expressed), while guinea pigs and C. aperea differed more
strongly. Almost no overlap was found between the genes with differential
expression in the different domestication events. In addition, joint analyses of 
all domesticated and wild samples provided only suggestive evidence for the
existence of a small group of genes that changed their expression in a similar
fashion in different domesticated species. The most extreme of these shared
expression changes include up-regulation in domesticates of SOX6 and PROM1, two
modulators of brain development. There was almost no overlap between gene
expression in domesticated animals and the tame and aggressive rats. However, two
of the genes with the strongest expression differences between the rats (DLL3 and
DHDH) were located in a genomic region associated with tameness and aggression,
suggesting a role in influencing tameness. In summary, the majority of brain gene
expression changes in domesticated animals are specific to the given
domestication event, suggesting that the causative variants of behavioral
domestication traits may likewise be different.

PMCID: PMC3459979
PMID: 23028369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Am J Psychiatry. 2012 Oct;169(10):1082-91.

Deficits in transcriptional regulators of cortical parvalbumin neurons in
schizophrenia.

Volk DW(1), Matsubara T, Li S, Sengupta EJ, Georgiev D, Minabe Y, Sampson A,
Hashimoto T, Lewis DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA.
volkdw@upmc.edu

OBJECTIVE: In schizophrenia, alterations within the prefrontal cortical GABA
system appear to be most prominent in neurons that contain parvalbumin or
somatostatin but not calretinin. The transcription factors Lhx6 and Sox6 play
critical roles in the specification, migration, and maturation of parvalbumin and
somatostatin neurons, but not calretinin neurons, and continue to be strongly
expressed in this cell type-specific manner in the prefrontal cortex of adult
humans. The authors investigated whether Lhx6 and/or Sox6 mRNA levels are
deficient in schizophrenia, which may contribute to cell type-specific
disturbances in cortical parvalbumin and somatostatin neurons.
METHOD: The authors used quantitative PCR and in situ hybridization with film and
grain counting analyses to quantify mRNA levels in postmortem samples of
prefrontal cortex area 9 of 42 schizophrenia subjects and 42 comparison subjects 
who had no psychiatric diagnoses in life, as well as antipsychotic-exposed
monkeys.
RESULTS: In schizophrenia subjects, the authors observed lower mRNA levels for
Lhx6, parvalbumin, somatostatin, and glutamate decarboxylase (GAD67; the
principal enzyme in GABA synthesis), but not Sox6 or calretinin. Cluster analysis
revealed that a subset of schizophrenia subjects consistently showed the most
severe deficits in the affected transcripts. Grain counting analyses revealed
that some neurons that normally express Lhx6 were not detectable in schizophrenia
subjects. Finally, lower Lhx6 mRNA levels were not attributable to psychotropic
medications or illness chronicity.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that in a subset of individuals with
schizophrenia, Lhx6 deficits may contribute to a failure of some cortical
parvalbumin and somatostatin neurons to successfully migrate or develop a
detectable GABA-ergic phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3513625
PMID: 22983435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Oct;97(10):E1958-77. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-1890.
Epub 2012 Sep 10.

Clinical review: Genome-wide association studies of skeletal phenotypes: what we 
have learned and where we are headed.

Hsu YH(1), Kiel DP.

Author information: 
(1)Hebrew SeniorLife Institute for Aging Research, 1200 Centre Street, Boston,
Massachusetts 02131, USA.

CONTEXT: The primary goals of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are to
discover new molecular and biological pathways involved in the regulation of bone
metabolism that can be leveraged for drug development. In addition, the
identified genetic determinants may be used to enhance current risk factor
profiles.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: There have been more than 40 published GWAS on skeletal
phenotypes, predominantly focused on dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry-derived
bone mineral density (BMD) of the hip and spine.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: Sixty-six BMD loci have been replicated across all the
published GWAS, confirming the highly polygenic nature of BMD variation. Only
seven of the 66 previously reported genes (LRP5, SOST, ESR1, TNFRSF11B,
TNFRSF11A, TNFSF11, PTH) from candidate gene association studies have been
confirmed by GWAS. Among 59 novel BMD GWAS loci that have not been reported by
previous candidate gene association studies, some have been shown to be involved 
in key biological pathways involving the skeleton, particularly Wnt signaling
(AXIN1, LRP5, CTNNB1, DKK1, FOXC2, HOXC6, LRP4, MEF2C, PTHLH, RSPO3, SFRP4,
TGFBR3, WLS, WNT3, WNT4, WNT5B, WNT16), bone development: ossification (CLCN7,
CSF1, MEF2C, MEPE, PKDCC, PTHLH, RUNX2, SOX6, SOX9, SPP1, SP7),
mesenchymal-stem-cell differentiation (FAM3C, MEF2C, RUNX2, SOX4, SOX9, SP7),
osteoclast differentiation (JAG1, RUNX2), and TGF-signaling (FOXL1, SPTBN1,
TGFBR3). There are still 30 BMD GWAS loci without prior molecular or biological
evidence of their involvement in skeletal phenotypes. Other skeletal phenotypes
that either have been or are being studied include hip geometry, bone ultrasound,
quantitative computed tomography, high-resolution peripheral quantitative
computed tomography, biochemical markers, and fractures such as vertebral,
nonvertebral, hip, and forearm.
CONCLUSIONS: Although several challenges lie ahead as GWAS moves into the next
generation, there are prospects of new discoveries in skeletal biology. This
review integrates findings from previous GWAS and provides a roadmap for future
directions building on current GWAS successes.

PMCID: PMC3674343
PMID: 22965941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 12;287(42):35351-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.399386. Epub 2012
Aug 24.

Characterization of the DNA-binding properties of the Mohawk homeobox
transcription factor.

Anderson DM(1), George R, Noyes MB, Rowton M, Liu W, Jiang R, Wolfe SA,
Wilson-Rawls J, Rawls A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287-4501, 
USA.

The homeobox transcription factor Mohawk (Mkx) is a potent transcriptional
repressor expressed in the embryonic precursors of skeletal muscle, cartilage,
and bone. MKX has recently been shown to be a critical regulator of
musculoskeletal tissue differentiation and gene expression; however, the genetic 
pathways through which MKX functions and its DNA-binding properties are currently
unknown. Using a modified bacterial one-hybrid site selection assay, we
determined the core DNA-recognition motif of the mouse monomeric Mkx homeodomain 
to be A-C-A. Using cell-based assays, we have identified a minimal Mkx-responsive
element (MRE) located within the Mkx promoter, which is composed of a highly
conserved inverted repeat of the core Mkx recognition motif. Using the minimal
MRE sequence, we have further identified conserved MREs within the locus of Sox6,
a transcription factor that represses slow fiber gene expression during skeletal 
muscle differentiation. Real-time PCR and immunostaining of in vitro
differentiated muscle satellite cells isolated from Mkx-null mice revealed an
increase in the expression of Sox6 and down-regulation of slow fiber structural
genes. Together, these data identify the unique DNA-recognition properties of MKX
and reveal a novel role for Mkx in promoting slow fiber type specification during
skeletal muscle differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3471766
PMID: 22923612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Endocrine. 2013 Feb;43(1):127-35. doi: 10.1007/s12020-012-9726-8. Epub 2012 Jul
14.

The influence of the genetic and non-genetic factors on bone mineral density and 
osteoporotic fractures in Chinese women.

Deng YH(1), Zhao L, Zhang MJ, Pan CM, Zhao SX, Zhao HY, Sun LH, Tao B, Song HD,
Wang WQ, Ning G, Liu JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Rui-jin Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao-tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Institute of Endocrine and
Metabolic Diseases, Shanghai, 200025, People's Republic of China.

Comment in
    Endocrine. 2013 Feb;43(1):6-7.

To investigate the effects of genetic and non-genetic factors on bone mineral
densities (BMDs) and osteoporotic fractures. This was a cross-sectional study to 
investigate the relationships between 18 SNPs and non-genetic factors with BMDs
and osteoporotic fractures in 1012 Chinese Han women. Five SNPs in genes GPR177, 
CTNNB1, MEF2C, SOX6, and TNFRSF11B were associated with L1-4 or total hip BMDs.
rs11898505 in SPTBN1 gene was associated with osteoporotic fractures. Subjects
carrying the largest number of risk alleles (highest 10 %) not only had lower BMD
values as compared to those carrying the least number of risk alleles (lowest 10 
%), they also had a higher risk of fracture [P = 0.002, OR = 2.252, 95 %CI
(1.136, 4.463)]. Results from multivariate stepwise regression analysis revealed 
that age [P < 0.001, OR = 1.038, 95 % CI (1.018, 1.058)], number of falls in a
year [P < 0.001, OR = 2.347, 95 % CI (1.459, 3.774)], the G risk allele in
rs11898505 [P = 0.023, OR = 1.559, 95 % CI (1.062, 2.290)], and the L1-4 BMD [P =
0.017, OR = 0.286, 95 % CI (0.102, 0.798)] were associated with the occurrence of
osteoporotic fractures. Genetic (rs11898505) and non-genetic factors (age, number
of falls in a year and L1-4 BMD) could work in concert to contribute to the risk 
of osteoporotic fractures.

PMID: 22798246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Front Neural Circuits. 2012 Jul 9;6:44. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2012.00044.
eCollection 2012.

The origin of neocortical nitric oxide synthase-expressing inhibitory neurons.

Jaglin XH(1), Hjerling-Leffler J, Fishell G, Batista-Brito R.

Author information: 
(1)NYU Neuroscience Institute, New York University Langone Medical Center New
York, NY, USA.

Inhibitory neurons are critical for regulating effective transfer of sensory
information and network stability. The precision of inhibitory function likely
derives from the existence of a variety of interneuron subtypes. Their
specification is largely dependent on the locale of origin of interneuron
progenitors. Neocortical and hippocampal inhibitory neurons originate the
subpallium, namely in the medial and caudal ganglionic eminences (MGE and CGE),
and in the preoptic area (POA). In the hippocampus, neuronal nitric oxide
synthase (nNOS)-expressing cells constitute a numerically large GABAergic
interneuron population. On the contrary, nNOS-expressing inhibitory neurons
constitute the smallest of the known neocortical GABAergic neuronal subtypes. The
origins of most neocortical GABAergic neuron subtypes have been thoroughly
investigated, however, very little is known about the origin of, or the genetic
programs underlying the development of nNOS neurons. Here, we show that the vast 
majority of neocortical nNOS-expressing neurons arise from the MGE rather than
the CGE. Regarding their molecular signature, virtually all neocortical nNOS
neurons co-express the neuropeptides somatostatin (SST) and neuropeptide Y (NPY),
and about half of them express the calcium-binding protein calretinin (CR). nNOS 
neurons thus constitute a small cohort of the MGE-derived SST-expressing
population of cortical inhibitory neurons. Finally, we show that conditional
removal of the transcription factor Sox6 in MGE-derived GABAergic cortical
neurons results in an absence of SST and CR expression, as well as reduced
expression of nNOS in neocortical nNOS neurons. Based on their respective
abundance, origin and molecular signature, our results suggest that neocortical
and hippocampal nNOS GABAergic neurons likely subserve different functions and
have very different physiological relevance in these two cortical structures.

PMCID: PMC3391688
PMID: 22787442  [PubMed]


98. Development. 2012 Aug;139(16):2988-98. doi: 10.1242/dev.078675. Epub 2012 Jul 4.

The protein kinase MLTK regulates chondrogenesis by inducing the transcription
factor Sox6.

Suzuki T(1), Kusakabe M, Nakayama K, Nishida E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Biostudies,
Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

Sox9 acts together with Sox5 or Sox6 as a master regulator for chondrogenesis;
however, the inter-relationship among these transcription factors remains
unclear. Here, we show that the protein kinase MLTK plays an essential role in
the onset of chondrogenesis through triggering the induction of Sox6 expression
by Sox9. We find that knockdown of MLTK in Xenopus embryos results in drastic
loss of craniofacial cartilages without defects in neural crest development. We
also find that Sox6 is specifically induced during the onset of chondrogenesis,
and that the Sox6 induction is inhibited by MLTK knockdown. Remarkably, Sox6
knockdown phenocopies MLTK knockdown. Moreover, we find that ectopic expression
of MLTK induces Sox6 expression in a Sox9-dependent manner. Our data suggest that
p38 and JNK pathways function downstream of MLTK during chondrogenesis. These
results identify MLTK as a novel key regulator of chondrogenesis, and reveal its 
action mechanism in chondrocyte differentiation during embryonic development.

PMID: 22764049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e38197. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038197. Epub 2012 May 30.

Aldosterone inhibits the fetal program and increases hypertrophy in the heart of 
hypertensive mice.

Azibani F(1), Devaux Y, Coutance G, Schlossarek S, Polidano E, Fazal L, Merval R,
Carrier L, Solal AC, Chatziantoniou C, Launay JM, Samuel JL, Delcayre C.

Author information: 
(1)Unit 942 INSERM and Université Paris-Diderot, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Arterial hypertension (AH) induces cardiac hypertrophy and
reactivation of "fetal" gene expression. In rodent heart, alpha-Myosin Heavy
Chain (MyHC) and its micro-RNA miR-208a regulate the expression of beta-MyHC and 
of its intronic miR-208b. However, the role of aldosterone in these processes
remains unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: RT-PCR and western-blot were used to investigate 
the genes modulated by arterial hypertension and cardiac hyperaldosteronism. We
developed a model of double-transgenic mice (AS-Ren) with cardiac
hyperaldosteronism (AS mice) and systemic hypertension (Ren). AS-Ren mice had
increased (x2) angiotensin II in plasma and increased (x2) aldosterone in heart. 
Ren and AS-Ren mice had a robust and similar hypertension (+70%) versus their
controls. Anatomical data and echocardiography showed a worsening of cardiac
hypertrophy (+41%) in AS-Ren mice (P<0.05 vs Ren). The increase of ANP (x 2.5;
P<0.01) mRNA observed in Ren mice was blunted in AS-Ren mice. This non-induction 
of antitrophic natriuretic peptides may be involved in the higher trophic cardiac
response in AS-Ren mice, as indicated by the markedly reduced cardiac hypertrophy
in ANP-infused AS-Ren mice for one month. Besides, the AH-induced increase of
ßMyHC and its intronic miRNA-208b was prevented in AS-Ren. The inhibition of miR 
208a (-75%, p<0.001) in AS-Ren mice compared to AS was associated with increased 
Sox 6 mRNA (x 1.34; p<0.05), an inhibitor of ßMyHC transcription. Eplerenone
prevented all aldosterone-dependent effects.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results indicate that increased aldosterone in
heart inhibits the induction of atrial natriuretic peptide expression, via the
mineralocorticoid receptor. This worsens cardiac hypertrophy without changing
blood pressure. Moreover, this work reveals an original aldosterone-dependent
inhibition of miR-208a in hypertension, resulting in the inhibition of ß-myosin
heavy chain expression through the induction of its transcriptional repressor
Sox6. Thus, aldosterone inhibits the fetal program and increases cardiac
hypertrophy in hypertensive mice.

PMCID: PMC3364229
PMID: 22666483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Aug;40(15):7303-18. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks466. Epub 2012
May 25.

Myh7b/miR-499 gene expression is transcriptionally regulated by MRFs and Eos.

Yeung F(1), Chung E, Guess MG, Bell ML, Leinwand LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology and Biofrontiers 
Institute, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA.

The sarcomeric myosin gene, Myh7b, encodes an intronic microRNA, miR-499, which
regulates cardiac and skeletal muscle biology, yet little is known about its
transcriptional regulation. To identify the transcription factors involved in
regulating Myh7b/miR-499 gene expression, we have mapped the transcriptional
start sites and identified an upstream 6.2 kb region of the mouse Myh7b gene
whose activity mimics the expression pattern of the endogenous Myh7b gene both in
vitro and in vivo. Through promoter deletion analysis, we have mapped a distal
E-box element and a proximal Ikaros site that are essential for Myh7b promoter
activity in muscle cells. We show that the myogenic regulatory factors, MyoD,
Myf5 and Myogenin, bind to the E-box, while a lymphoid transcription factor,
Ikaros 4 (Eos), binds to the Ikaros motif. Further, we show that through physical
interaction, MyoD and Eos form an active transcriptional complex on the chromatin
to regulate the expression of the endogenous Myh7b/miR-499 gene in muscle cells. 
We also provide the first evidence that Eos can regulate expression of additional
myosin genes (Myosin 1 and ß-Myosin) via the miR-499/Sox6 pathway. Therefore, our
results indicate a novel role for Eos in the regulation of the myofiber gene
program.

PMCID: PMC3424578
PMID: 22638570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mar Biotechnol (NY). 2012 Oct;14(5):655-63. doi: 10.1007/s10126-012-9451-6. Epub 
2012 May 3.

Mapping of DNA sex-specific markers and genes related to sex differentiation in
turbot (Scophthalmus maximus).

Viñas A(1), Taboada X, Vale L, Robledo D, Hermida M, Vera M, Martínez P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Biología (CIBUS), Universidad de
Santiago de Compostela, Rúa Lope Gómez de Marzoa s/n 15782, Santiago de
Compostela, Spain. anamaria.vinas@usc.es

Production of all-female populations in turbot can increase farmer's benefits
since sexual dimorphism in growth in this species is among the highest within
marine fish, turbot females reaching commercial size 3-6 months earlier than
males. Puberty in males occurs earlier than in females, which additionally slows 
their growth. Thus, elucidating the mechanisms of sex determination and gonad
differentiation is a relevant goal for turbot production. A ZZ/ZW sex
determination mechanism has been suggested for this species, and four sex-related
quantitative trait loci (QTL) were detected, the major one located in linkage
group (LG) 5 and the three minor ones in LG6, LG8, and LG21. In the present work,
we carried out a linkage analysis for several sex-related markers: (1) three
anonymous sex-associated RAPD and (2) several candidate genes related to sex
determination and gonad differentiation in other species (Sox3, Sox6, Sox8, Sox9,
Sox17, Sox19, Amh, Dmrta2, Cyp19a, Cyp19b). We focused our attention on their
co-localization with the major and minor sex-related QTL trying to approach to
the master sex-determining gene of this species. Previously described
growth-related QTL were also considered since the association observed between
growth and sex determination in fish. Amh, Dmrta2, and one RAPD were located in
LG5, while Sox9 and Sox17 (LG21), Cyp19b (LG6), and a second RAPD (LG8) co-mapped
with suggestive sex-related QTL, thus supporting further analyses on these genes 
to elucidate the genetic basis of this relevant trait for turbot farming.

PMID: 22552957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 22;287(26):22206-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.343194. Epub
2012 Apr 30.

L-Sox5 and Sox6 proteins enhance chondrogenic miR-140 microRNA expression by
strengthening dimeric Sox9 activity.

Yamashita S(1), Miyaki S, Kato Y, Yokoyama S, Sato T, Barrionuevo F, Akiyama H,
Scherer G, Takada S, Asahara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biomedicine, National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, 2-10-1 Okura, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.

Sox9 plays a critical role in early chondrocyte initiation and promotion as well 
as repression of later maturation. Fellow Sox family members L-Sox5 and Sox6 also
function as regulators of cartilage development by boosting Sox9 activation of
chondrocyte-specific genes such as Col2a1 and Agc1; however, the regulatory
mechanism and other target genes are largely unknown. MicroRNAs are a class of
short, non-coding RNAs that act as negative regulators of gene expression by
promoting target mRNA degradation and/or repressing translation. Analysis of
genetically modified mice identified miR-140 as a cartilage-specific microRNA
that could be a critical regulator of cartilage development and homeostasis.
Recent findings suggest Sox9 promotes miR-140 expression, although the detailed
mechanisms are not fully understood. In this study we demonstrate that the
proximal upstream region of pri-miR-140 has chondrogenic promoter activity in
vivo. We found an L-Sox5/Sox6/Sox9 (Sox trio) response element and detailed
binding site in the promoter region. Furthermore, detailed analysis suggests the 
DNA binding and/or transactivation ability of Sox9 as a homodimer is boosted by
L-Sox5 and Sox6. These findings provide new insight into cartilage-specific gene 
regulation by the Sox trio.

PMCID: PMC3381182
PMID: 22547066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Biol Evol. 2012 Oct;29(10):3181-91. Epub 2012 Apr 20.

Non conservation of function for the evolutionarily conserved prdm1 protein in
the control of the slow twitch myogenic program in the mouse embryo.

Vincent SD(1), Mayeuf A, Niro C, Saitou M, Buckingham M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, CNRS URA 2575, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France. stephane.vincent@igbmc.fr

Muscles are composed of multinucleated muscle fibers with different contractile
and physiological properties, which result from specific slow or fast gene
expression programs in the differentiated muscle cells. In the zebra fish embryo,
the slow program is under the control of Hedgehog signaling from the notochord
and floor plate. This pathway activates the expression of the conserved
transcriptional repressor, Prdm1 (Blimp1), which in turn represses the fast
program and promotes the slow program in adaxial cells of the somite and their
descendants. In the mouse embryo, myogenesis is also initiated in the myotomal
compartment of the somite, but the slow muscle program is not confined to a
specific subset of cells. We now show that Prdm1 is expressed in the first
differentiated myocytes of the early myotome from embryonic day (E)9.5-E11.5.
During this period, muscle formation depends on the myogenic regulatory factors, 
Myf5 and Mrf4. In their absence, Prdm1 is not activated, in apparent contrast to 
zebra fish where Prdm1 is expressed in the absence of Myf5 and MyoD that drive
myogenesis in adaxial cells. However, as in zebra fish, Prdm1 expression in the
mouse myotome does not occur in the absence of Hedgehog signaling. Analysis of
the muscle phenotype of Prdm1 mutant embryos shows that myogenesis appears to
proceed normally. Notably, there is no requirement for Prdm1 activation of the
slow muscle program in the mouse myotome. Furthermore, the gene for the
transcriptional repressor, Sox6, which is repressed by Prdm1 to permit slow
muscle differentiation in zebra fish, is not expressed in the mouse myotome. We
propose that the lack of functional conservation for mouse Prdm1, that can
nevertheless partially rescue the adaxial cells of zebra fish Prdm1 mutants,
reflects differences in the evolution of the role of key regulators such as Prdm1
or Sox6, in initiating the onset of the slow muscle program, between teleosts and
mammals.

PMID: 22522309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Mol Med (Berl). 2012 Jun;90(6):649-66. doi: 10.1007/s00109-011-0842-3. Epub
2012 Jan 4.

Sox9/Sox6 and Sp1 are involved in the insulin-like growth factor-I-mediated
upregulation of human type II collagen gene expression in articular chondrocytes.

Renard E(1), Porée B, Chadjichristos C, Kypriotou M, Maneix L, Bigot N, Legendre 
F, Ollitrault D, De Crombrugghe B, Malléin-Gérin F, Moslemi S, Demoor M,
Boumediene K, Galéra P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Matrice Extracellulaire et Pathologie, IFR ICORE 146, Université
de Caen/Basse-Normandie, UFR de Médecine, CHU niveau 3, Avenue de la Côte de
Nacre, 14032, Caen Cedex, France.

Type II collagen is a marker of articular cartilage encoded by the COL2A1 gene.
The nature of the trans factors involved in the upregulation of this gene by
insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) remains unclear. We found that IGF-I
increased type II collagen synthesis by a transcriptional control mechanism
involving a 715-bp region within the COL2A1 first-intron specific enhancer. The
overproduction of L-Sox5/Sox6/Sox9 and Sp1 and decoy experiments targeting these 
factors demonstrated their action in concert in IGF-I trans-activation. These
results were supported by the data obtained in knockdown experiments in which
siRNA against Sox9/Sox6 and Sp1 prevented the IGF-I-induced increase in collagen 
II production. Indeed, each of these trans-activators increased the expression of
others. IGF-I increased the binding of Sox9 and Sp1/Sp3 to their cis elements in 
the enhancer, and we provide the first evidence of Sox9 interaction with the
promoter by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Interactions with COL2A1 were also
observed for Sp1, p300/CBP, and Tip60. Finally, a physical interaction between
Sox9, p300, Sp3, and Sp1 was detected. These data demonstrate the role of Sox9,
Sp1/Sp3, and euchromatin-associated factors (p300, Tip60) in the IGF-I-induced
upregulation of COL2A1, indicating possible use of this growth factor in
articular cartilage engineering applications to promote repair in patients with
degenerative diseases, such as osteoarthritis.

PMID: 22215151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2011;2011:459-65. doi:
10.1182/asheducation-2011.1.459.

Targeted therapeutic strategies for fetal hemoglobin induction.

Sankaran VG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
sankaran@broadinstitute.org

Increased levels of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) can ameliorate the severity of the
ß-hemoglobin disorders, sickle cell disease (SCD) and ß-thalassemia, which are
major sources of morbidity and mortality worldwide. As a result, there has been a
longstanding interest in developing therapeutic approaches for inducing HbF. For 
more than 3 decades, the majority of HbF inducers developed were based on empiric
observations and have had limited success. Recently, human genetic approaches
have provided insight into previously unappreciated regulators of the
fetal-to-adult hemoglobin switch and HbF silencing, revealing molecular targets
to induce HbF. This article reviews these developments and discusses how
molecules including BCL11A, KLF1, MYB, SOX6, miRNAs 15a and 16-1, and histone
deacetylase 1 and 2 (HDAC1/2) could be important targets for HbF induction in
humans. The current understanding of how these molecules function and the
benefits and drawbacks of each of these potential therapeutic targets are also
examined. The identification of these regulators of HbF expression is extremely
promising and suggests that rationally designed approaches targeting the very
mechanisms mediating this switching process could lead to better, less toxic, and
more effective strategies for HbF induction.

PMID: 22160074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Dec 9;89(6):688-700. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.10.013. Epub
2011 Nov 17.

Blood pressure loci identified with a gene-centric array.

Johnson T, Gaunt TR, Newhouse SJ, Padmanabhan S, Tomaszewski M, Kumari M, Morris 
RW, Tzoulaki I, O'Brien ET, Poulter NR, Sever P, Shields DC, Thom S, Wannamethee 
SG, Whincup PH, Brown MJ, Connell JM, Dobson RJ, Howard PJ, Mein CA, Onipinla A, 
Shaw-Hawkins S, Zhang Y, Davey Smith G, Day IN, Lawlor DA, Goodall AH;
Cardiogenics Consortium, Fowkes FG, Abecasis GR, Elliott P, Gateva V; Global
BPgen Consortium, Braund PS, Burton PR, Nelson CP, Tobin MD, van der Harst P,
Glorioso N, Neuvrith H, Salvi E, Staessen JA, Stucchi A, Devos N, Jeunemaitre X, 
Plouin PF, Tichet J, Juhanson P, Org E, Putku M, Sõber S, Veldre G, Viigimaa M,
Levinsson A, Rosengren A, Thelle DS, Hastie CE, Hedner T, Lee WK, Melander O,
Wahlstrand B, Hardy R, Wong A, Cooper JA, Palmen J, Chen L, Stewart AF, Wells GA,
Westra HJ, Wolfs MG, Clarke R, Franzosi MG, Goel A, Hamsten A, Lathrop M, Peden
JF, Seedorf U, Watkins H, Ouwehand WH, Sambrook J, Stephens J, Casas JP, Drenos
F, Holmes MV, Kivimaki M, Shah S, Shah T, Talmud PJ, Whittaker J, Wallace C,
Delles C, Laan M, Kuh D, Humphries SE, Nyberg F, Cusi D, Roberts R, Newton-Cheh
C, Franke L, Stanton AV, Dominiczak AF, Farrall M, Hingorani AD, Samani NJ,
Caulfield MJ, Munroe PB.

Collaborators: Newton-Cheh C, Johnson T, Gateva V, Tobin MD, Bochud M, Coin L,
Najjar SS, Hua J, Heath SC, Eyheramendy S, Papadakis K, Voight BF, Scott LJ,
Zhang F, Farrall M, Tanaka T, Wallace C, Chambers JC, Khaw KT, Nilsson P, van der
Harst P, Polidoro S, Grobbee DE, Onland-Moret NC, Bots ML, Wain LV, Elliott KS,
Teumer A, Luan J, Lucas G, Kuusisto J, Burton PR, Hadley D, McArdle WL, Wellcome 
Trust Case Control Consortium, Brown M, Dominiczak A, Newhouse SJ, Samani NJ,
Webster J, Zeggini E, Beckmann JS, Bergmann S, Lim N, Song K, Vollenweider P,
Waeber G, Waterworth DM, Yuan X, Groop L, Orho M, Allione A, Di Gregorio A,
Guarrera S, Panico S, Ricceri F, Romanazzi V, Sacerdote C, Vineis P, Barroso I,
Sandhu MS, Luben RN, Crawford GJ, Jousilahti P, Perola M, Boehnke M, Bonnycastle 
LL, Collins FS, Jackson AU, Mohlke KL, Stringham HM, Valle TT, Willer CJ, Bergman
RN, Morken MA, Döring A, Gieger C, Illig T, Meitinger T, Org E, Pfeufer A,
Wichmann HE, Kathiresan S, Marrugat J, O'Donnell CJ, Schwartz SM, Siscovick DS,
Subirana I, Freimer NB, Hartikainen AL, McCarthy MI, OReilly PF, Peltonen L,
Pouta A, de Jong PE, Snieder H, van Gilst WH, Clarke R, Goel A, Hamsten A, Peden 
JF, Seedorf U, Syv C, Tognoni G, Lakatta EG, Sanna S, Scheet P, Schlessinger D,
Scuteri A, Dörr M, Ernst F, Felix SB, Homuth G, Lorbeer R, Reffelmann T, Rettig
R, Völker U, Galan P, Gut IG, Hercberg S, Lathrop GM, Zeleneka D, Deloukas P,
Soranzo N, Williams FM, Zhai G, Salomaa V, Laakso M, Elosua R, Forouhi NG, Völzke
H, Uiterwaal CS, van der Schouw YT, Numans ME, Matullo G, Navis G, Berglund G,
Bingham SA, Kooner JS, Paterson AD, Connell JM, Bandinelli S, Ferrucci L, Watkins
H, Spector TD, Tuomilehto J, Altshuler D, Strachan DP, Laan M, Meneton P, Wareham
NJ, Uda M, Jarvelin MR, Mooser V, Melander O, Loos RJ, Elliott P, Abecasis GR,
Caulfield M, Munroe PB, Attwood T, Belz S, Braund P, Brocheton J, Cambien F,
Cooper J, Crisp-Hihn A, Diemert P, Deloukas P, Eardman J, Foad N, Godefroy T,
Goodall AH, Gracey J, Gray E, Gwilliams R, Heimer S, Hengstenberg C, Jolley J,
Krishnan U, Lloyd-Jones H, Liljedahl U, Lugauer I, Lundmark P, Maouche S, Moore
JS, Montalescot G, Muir D, Murray E, Nelson CP, Neudert J, Niblett D, O'Leary K, 
Ouwehand WH, Pollard H, Proust C, Rankin A, Rendon A, Rice CM, Sager HB, Samani
NJ, Sambrook J, Schmitz G, Scholz M, Schroeder L, Schunkert H, Stephens J,
Syvannen AC, Tennstedt S, Wallace C.

Raised blood pressure (BP) is a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease.
Previous studies have identified 47 distinct genetic variants robustly associated
with BP, but collectively these explain only a few percent of the heritability
for BP phenotypes. To find additional BP loci, we used a bespoke gene-centric
array to genotype an independent discovery sample of 25,118 individuals that
combined hypertensive case-control and general population samples. We followed up
four SNPs associated with BP at our p < 8.56 × 10(-7) study-specific significance
threshold and six suggestively associated SNPs in a further 59,349 individuals.
We identified and replicated a SNP at LSP1/TNNT3, a SNP at MTHFR-NPPB independent
(r(2) = 0.33) of previous reports, and replicated SNPs at AGT and ATP2B1 reported
previously. An analysis of combined discovery and follow-up data identified SNPs 
significantly associated with BP at p < 8.56 × 10(-7) at four further loci (NPR3,
HFE, NOS3, and SOX6). The high number of discoveries made with modest genotyping 
effort can be attributed to using a large-scale yet targeted genotyping array and
to the development of a weighting scheme that maximized power when meta-analyzing
results from samples ascertained with extreme phenotypes, in combination with
results from nonascertained or population samples. Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
and transcript expression data highlight potential gene regulatory mechanisms at 
the MTHFR and NOS3 loci. These results provide candidates for further study to
help dissect mechanisms affecting BP and highlight the utility of studying SNPs
and samples that are independent of those studied previously even when the sample
size is smaller than that in previous studies.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3234370
PMID: 22100073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cancer. 2012 May 1;118(9):2431-42. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26566. Epub 2011 Oct 11.

Aberrant expression of microRNA 155 may accelerate cell proliferation by
targeting sex-determining region Y box 6 in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Xie Q(1), Chen X, Lu F, Zhang T, Hao M, Wang Y, Zhao J, McCrae MA, Zhuang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Infectious Disease Center, Peking University
Health Science Center, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent research has suggested that the oncomir microRNA 155 (miR-155)
is up-regulated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In this study, the authors
investigated the tumorigenic mechanism of this oncomir in the development of HCC.
METHODS: Quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
was conducted to analyze the expressions of miR-155 and its potential target
genes in paired tumor tissues and adjacent tumor-free tissues and in disease-free
liver tissue samples. The in silico predicted target genes of miR-155 were
assessed by dual-luciferase reporting assay, real-time RT-PCR, and Western blot
analyses. U6 promoters that drive miR-155 precursor overexpression and miR-155
tough decoy knock-down constructs were used to study its affects on cell
proliferation in vitro and on tumor formation in nude mice.
RESULTS: Quantitative RT-PCR demonstrated a gradual ascension of miR-155
expression in cirrhotic liver tissues and in HCC tumor tissues compared with low 
expression levels in normal liver tissues. Ectopic expression of miR-155 in HepG2
cells enhanced its tumorigenesis, whereas depletion of the endogenous miR-155
reversed these tumorigenic properties. Ectopic expression of sex-determining
region Y box 6 (SOX6) was able to reverse the growth-promoting property of
miR-155. Concordantly, the results demonstrated for the first time that SOX6 is a
direct target of miR-155. Further analysis revealed that SOX6 reduced cell growth
by up-regulating p21waf1/cip1 expression in a p53-dependent manner. In addition, 
a decline in p21waf1/cip1 expression caused by miR-155 could be reversed by SOX6 
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The current data indicated that SOX6 is a novel target of miR-155
and that miR-155 enhances liver cell tumorigenesis at least in part through the
novel miR-155/SOX6/p21waf1/cip1 axis. These findings suggest that miR-155 may be 
a potential target for HCC treatment.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 21989846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. BMC Dev Biol. 2011 Oct 10;11:59. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-11-59.

Genome-wide mapping of Sox6 binding sites in skeletal muscle reveals both direct 
and indirect regulation of muscle terminal differentiation by Sox6.

An CI(1), Dong Y, Hagiwara N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, California 95616,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Sox6 is a multi-faceted transcription factor involved in the terminal
differentiation of many different cell types in vertebrates. It has been
suggested that in mice as well as in zebrafish Sox6 plays a role in the terminal 
differentiation of skeletal muscle by suppressing transcription of slow fiber
specific genes. In order to understand how Sox6 coordinately regulates the
transcription of multiple fiber type specific genes during muscle development, we
have performed ChIP-seq analyses to identify Sox6 target genes in mouse fetal
myotubes and generated muscle-specific Sox6 knockout (KO) mice to determine the
Sox6 null muscle phenotype in adult mice.
RESULTS: We have identified 1,066 Sox6 binding sites using mouse fetal myotubes. 
The Sox6 binding sites were found to be associated with slow fiber-specific,
cardiac, and embryonic isoform genes that are expressed in the sarcomere as well 
as transcription factor genes known to play roles in muscle development. The
concurrently performed RNA polymerase II (Pol II) ChIP-seq analysis revealed that
84% of the Sox6 peak-associated genes exhibited little to no binding of Pol II,
suggesting that the majority of the Sox6 target genes are transcriptionally
inactive. These results indicate that Sox6 directly regulates terminal
differentiation of muscle by affecting the expression of sarcomere protein genes 
as well as indirectly through influencing the expression of transcription factors
relevant to muscle development. Gene expression profiling of Sox6 KO skeletal and
cardiac muscle revealed a significant increase in the expression of the genes
associated with Sox6 binding. In the absence of the Sox6 gene, there was dramatic
upregulation of slow fiber-specific, cardiac, and embryonic isoform gene
expression in Sox6 KO skeletal muscle and fetal isoform gene expression in Sox6
KO cardiac muscle, thus confirming the role Sox6 plays as a transcriptional
suppressor in muscle development.
CONCLUSIONS: Our present data indicate that during development, Sox6 functions as
a transcriptional suppressor of fiber type-specific and developmental isoform
genes to promote functional specification of muscle which is critical for optimum
muscle performance and health.

PMCID: PMC3239296
PMID: 21985497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Am J Epidemiol. 2011 Nov 15;174(10):1115-26. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwr233. Epub 2011
Oct 5.

Association of obesity-related genetic variants with endometrial cancer risk: a
report from the Shanghai Endometrial Cancer Genetics Study.

Delahanty RJ(1), Beeghly-Fadiel A, Xiang YB, Long J, Cai Q, Wen W, Xu WH, Cai H, 
He J, Gao YT, Zheng W, Shu XO.

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt Epidemiology Center, 2525 West End Avenue, Nashville, TN
37203-1738, USA.

Obesity is a well-established risk factor for endometrial cancer, the most common
gynecologic malignancy. Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have
identified multiple genetic markers for obesity. The authors evaluated the
association of obesity-related single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with
endometrial cancer using GWAS data from their recently completed study, the
Shanghai Endometrial Cancer Genetics Study, which comprised 832 endometrial
cancer cases and 2,049 controls (1996-2005). Thirty-five SNPs previously
associated with obesity or body mass index (BMI; weight (kg)/height (m)(2)) at a 
minimum significance level of =5 × 10(-7) in the US National Human Genome
Research Institute's GWAS catalog (http://genome.gov/gwastudies) and representing
26 unique loci were evaluated by either direct genotyping or imputation. The
authors found that for 22 of the 26 unique loci tested (84.6%), the
BMI-associated risk variants were present at a higher frequency in cases than in 
population controls (P = 0.0003). Multiple regression analysis showed that 9 of
35 BMI-associated variants, representing 7 loci, were significantly associated (P
= 0.05) with the risk of endometrial cancer; for all but 1 SNP, the direction of 
association was consistent with that found for BMI. For consistent SNPs, the
allelic odds ratios ranged from 1.15 to 1.29. These 7 loci are in the
SEC16B/RASAL, TMEM18, MSRA, SOX6, MTCH2, FTO, and MC4R genes. The associations
persisted after adjustment for BMI, suggesting that genetic markers of obesity
provide value in addition to BMI in predicting endometrial cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3246689
PMID: 21976109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Dev Biol. 2011 Nov 15;359(2):303-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.08.010. Epub 2011 
Aug 22.

Genesis of muscle fiber-type diversity during mouse embryogenesis relies on Six1 
and Six4 gene expression.

Richard AF(1), Demignon J, Sakakibara I, Pujol J, Favier M, Strochlic L, Le Grand
F, Sgarioto N, Guernec A, Schmitt A, Cagnard N, Huang R, Legay C, Guillet-Deniau 
I, Maire P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, CNRS (UMR
8104), Paris, France.

Adult skeletal muscles in vertebrates are composed of different types of
myofibers endowed with distinct metabolic and contraction speed properties.
Genesis of this fiber-type heterogeneity during development remains poorly known,
at least in mammals. Six1 and Six4 homeoproteins of the Six/sine oculis family
are expressed throughout muscle development in mice, and Six1 protein is enriched
in the nuclei of adult fast-twitch myofibers. Furthermore, Six1/Six4 proteins are
known to control the early activation of fast-type muscle genes in myocytes
present in the mouse somitic myotome. Using double Six1:Six4 mutants (SixdKO) to 
dissect in vivo the genesis of muscle fiber-type heterogeneity, we analyzed here 
the phenotype of the dorsal/epaxial muscles remaining in SixdKO. We show by
electron microscopy analysis that the absence of these homeoproteins precludes
normal sarcomeric organization of the myofiber leading to a dystrophic aspect,
and by immunohistochemistry experiments a deficiency in synaptogenesis.
Affymetrix transcriptome analysis of the muscles remaining in E18.5 SixdKO
identifies a major role for these homeoproteins in the control of genes that are 
specifically activated in the adult fast/glycolytic myofibers, particularly those
controlling Ca(2+) homeostasis. Absence of Six1 and Six4 leads to the development
of dorsal myofibers lacking expression of fast-type muscle genes, and mainly
expressing a slow-type muscle program. The absence of restriction of the
slow-type program during the fetal period in SixdKO back muscles is associated
with a decreased HDAC4 protein level, and subcellular relocalization of the
transcription repressor Sox6. Six genes thus behave as essential global
regulators of muscle gene expression, as well as a central switch to drive the
skeletal muscle fast phenotype during fetal development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21884692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Development. 2011 Oct;138(20):4399-404. doi: 10.1242/dev.070516. Epub 2011 Aug
31.

Prdm1a and miR-499 act sequentially to restrict Sox6 activity to the fast-twitch 
muscle lineage in the zebrafish embryo.

Wang X(1), Ono Y, Tan SC, Chai RJ, Parkin C, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos, Singapore
138673, Singapore.

Sox6 has been proposed to play a conserved role in vertebrate skeletal muscle
fibre type specification. In zebrafish, sox6 transcription is repressed in
slow-twitch progenitors by the Prdm1a transcription factor. Here we identify sox6
cis-regulatory sequences that drive fast-twitch-specific expression in a
Prdm1a-dependent manner. We show that sox6 transcription subsequently becomes
derepressed in slow-twitch fibres, whereas Sox6 protein remains restricted to
fast-twitch fibres. We find that translational repression of sox6 is mediated by 
miR-499, the slow-twitch-specific expression of which is in turn controlled by
Prdm1a, forming a regulatory loop that initiates and maintains the slow-twitch
muscle lineage.

PMID: 21880783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Cell Mol Med. 2012 Apr;16(4):740-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2011.01352.x.

Role of Slug transcription factor in human mesenchymal stem cells.

Torreggiani E(1), Lisignoli G, Manferdini C, Lambertini E, Penolazzi L,
Vecchiatini R, Gabusi E, Chieco P, Facchini A, Gambari R, Piva R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biologia Molecolare, Sezione di Biologia
Molecolare, Università degli Studi di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

The pathways that control mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) differentiation are not
well understood, and although some of the involved transcription factors (TFs)
have been characterized, the role of others remains unclear. We used human MSCs
from tibial plateau (TP) trabecular bone, iliac crest (IC) bone marrow and
Wharton's jelly (WJ) umbilical cord demonstrating a variability in their mineral 
matrix deposition, and in the expression levels of TFs including Runx2, Sox9,
Sox5, Sox6, STAT1 and Slug, all involved in the control of
osteochondroprogenitors differentiation program. Because we reasoned that the
basal expression level of some TFs with crucial role in the control of MSC fate
may be correlated with osteogenic potential, we considered the possibility to
affect the hMSCs behaviour by using gene silencing approach without exposing
cells to induction media. In this study we found that Slug-silenced cells changed
in morphology, decreased in their migration ability, increased Sox9 and Sox5 and 
decreased Sox6 and STAT1 expression. On the contrary, the effect of Slug
depletion on Runx2 was influenced by cell type. Interestingly, we demonstrated a 
direct in vivo regulatory action of Slug by chromatin immunoprecipitation,
showing a specific recruitment of this TF in the promoter of Runx2 and Sox9
genes. As a whole, our findings have important potential implication on bone
tissue engineering applications, reinforcing the concept that manipulation of
specific TF expression levels may elucidate MSC biology and the molecular
mechanisms, which promote osteogenic differentiation.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3822845
PMID: 21645238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jun 21;108(25):10196-201. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1107413108. Epub 2011 Jun 1.

Concerted regulation of myofiber-specific gene expression and muscle performance 
by the transcriptional repressor Sox6.

Quiat D(1), Voelker KA, Pei J, Grishin NV, Grange RW, Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

In response to physiological stimuli, skeletal muscle alters its myofiber
composition to significantly affect muscle performance and metabolism. This
process requires concerted regulation of myofiber-specific isoforms of sarcomeric
and calcium regulatory proteins that couple action potentials to the generation
of contractile force. Here, we identify Sox6 as a fast myofiber-enriched
repressor of slow muscle gene expression in vivo. Mice lacking Sox6 specifically 
in skeletal muscle have an increased number of slow myofibers, elevated
mitochondrial activity, and exhibit down-regulation of the fast myofiber gene
program, resulting in enhanced muscular endurance. In addition, microarray
profiling of Sox6 knockout muscle revealed extensive muscle fiber-type
remodeling, and identified numerous genes that display distinctive fiber-type
enrichment. Sox6 directly represses the transcription of slow myofiber-enriched
genes by binding to conserved cis-regulatory elements. These results identify
Sox6 as a robust regulator of muscle contractile phenotype and metabolism, and
elucidate a mechanism by which functionally related muscle fiber-type specific
gene isoforms are collectively controlled.

PMCID: PMC3121857
PMID: 21633012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Clin Calcium. 2011 Jun;21(6):845-51. doi: CliCa1106845851.

[Transcriptional regulation in chondrogenesis by Sox9].

[Article in Japanese]

Akiyama H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Deaprtment of Orthopaedics, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

To identify a group of transcription factors required for chondrogenesis, several
researchers tried to detect a chondrocyte-specific enhancer element of Col2a1
gene. Benoit de Crombrugghe's group finally found out 48bp in the first intron of
Col2a1 gene as a chondrocyte-specific enhancer element, and moreover they also
concluded that binding of homodimer of Sox9 and homo-or heterodimer of Sox5÷Sox6 
to this element is indispensable for Col2a1 transcription in chodrocytes.
Furthermore, mouse genetic approaches revealed that Sox9, Sox5 and Sox6 are
required for chondrogenesis, leading to conclusion that these Sox transcription
factors are master regulators in chondrogenesis. Recent studies showed that
p300÷CBP, Trap230 (med12) , Wwp2, and Med25 are components of transcriptional
machinery of Sox9 in chondrogenesis.

PMID: 21628799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Osteoporos Int. 2012 Feb;23(2):781-7. doi: 10.1007/s00198-011-1626-x. Epub 2011
Apr 6.

Genetic variants in the SOX6 gene are associated with bone mineral density in
both Caucasian and Chinese populations.

Yang TL(1), Guo Y, Liu YJ, Shen H, Liu YZ, Lei SF, Li J, Tian Q, Deng HW.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of Education,
and Institute of Molecular Genetics, School of Life Science and Technology, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, People's Republic of China.

SUMMARY: Given the biological function of SOX6 and recent genome-wide association
finding, we performed a fine-mapping association analyses to investigate the
relationship between SOX6 and BMD both in Caucasian and Chinese populations. We
identified many single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within or near the SOX6
gene to be significantly associated with hip bone mineral density (BMD).
INTRODUCTION: SOX6 gene is an essential transcription factor in chondrogenesis
and cartilage formation. Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) detected a
SNP (rs7117858) located at the downstream of SOX6 significantly associated with
hip BMD.
METHODS: Given the biological function of SOX6 and the GWAS finding, we
considered SOX6 as a new candidate for BMD and osteoporosis. Therefore, in this
study, we performed a fine-mapping association analyses to investigate the
relationship between SNPs within and near the SOX6 gene and BMD at both hip and
spine. A total of 301 SNPs were tested in two independent US Caucasian
populations (2,286 and 1,000 unrelated subjects, respectively) and a Chinese
population (1,627 unrelated Han subjects).
RESULTS: We confirmed that the previously reported rs7117858-A was associated
with reduced hip BMD, with combined P value of 2.45<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-4). Besides this SNP,
we identified another 19 SNPs within or near the SOX6 gene to be significantly
associated with hip BMD after false discovery rate adjustment. The most
significant SNP was rs1347677 located at the intron 3 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.15<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-7)). Seven 
additional SNPs in high linkage disequilibrium with rs1347677 were also
significantly associated with hip BMD. SNPs in SOX6 showed significant skeletal
site specificity since no SNP was detected to be associated with spine BMD.
CONCLUSION: Our study identified many SNPs in the SOX6 gene associated with hip
BMD even across different ethnicities, which further highlighted the importance
of the SOX6 gene influencing BMD variation and provided more information to the
understanding of the genetic architecture of osteoporosis.

PMCID: PMC4171834
PMID: 21625884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Bone Miner Metab. 2011 Jul;29(4):390-5. doi: 10.1007/s00774-011-0273-9. Epub
2011 May 19.

Unraveling the transcriptional regulatory machinery in chondrogenesis.

Akiyama H(1), Lefebvre V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Kyoto University, 54 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. hakiyama@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Since the discovery of SOX9 mutations in the severe human skeletal malformation
syndrome campomelic dysplasia in 1994, Sox9 was shown to be both required and
sufficient for chondrocyte specification and differentiation. At the same time,
its distant relatives Sox5 and Sox6 were shown to act in redundancy with each
other to robustly enhance its functions. The Sox trio is currently best known for
its ability to activate the genes for cartilage-specific extracellular matrix
components. Sox9 and Sox5/6 homodimerize through domains adjacent to their
Sry-related high-mobility-group DNA-binding domain to increase the efficiency of 
their cooperative binding to chondrocyte-specific enhancers. Sox9 possesses a
potent transactivation domain and thereby recruits diverse transcriptional
co-activators, histone-modifying enzymes, subunits of the mediator complex, and
components of the general transcriptional machinery, such as CBP/p300, Med12,
Med25, and Wwp2. This information helps us begin to unravel the mechanisms
responsible for Sox9-mediated transcription. We review here the discovery of this
master chondrogenic trio and its roles in chondrogenesis in vivo and at the
molecular level, and we discuss how these pioneering studies open the way for
many additional studies that are needed to further increase our understanding of 
the transcriptional regulatory machinery operating in chondrogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3354916
PMID: 21594584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. PLoS One. 2011 May 9;6(5):e19481. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019481.

Elevated miR-499 levels blunt the cardiac stress response.

Shieh JT(1), Huang Y, Gilmore J, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, California,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The heart responds to myriad stresses by well-described
transcriptional responses that involve long-term changes in gene expression as
well as more immediate, transient adaptations. MicroRNAs quantitatively regulate 
mRNAs and thus may affect the cardiac transcriptional output and cardiac
function. Here we investigate miR-499, a microRNA embedded within a
ventricular-specific myosin heavy chain gene, which is expressed in heart and
skeletal muscle.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We assessed miR-499 expression in human tissue to
confirm its potential relevance to human cardiac gene regulation. Using a
transgenic mouse model, we found that elevated miR-499 levels caused cellular
hypertrophy and cardiac dysfunction in a dose-dependent manner. Global gene
expression profiling revealed altered levels of the immediate early stress
response genes (Egr1, Egr2 and Fos), ß-myosin heavy chain (Myh7), and skeletal
muscle actin (Acta1). We verified the effect of miR-499 on the immediate early
response genes by miR-499 gain- and loss-of-function in vitro. Consistent with a 
role for miR-499 in blunting the response to cardiac stress, asymptomatic
miR-499-expressing mice had an impaired response to pressure overload and
accentuated cardiac dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS: Elevated miR-499 levels affect cardiac gene expression and
predispose to cardiac stress-induced dysfunction. miR-499 may titrate the cardiac
response to stress in part by regulating the immediate early gene response.

PMCID: PMC3090396
PMID: 21573063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Clin Oral Implants Res. 2011 Apr;22(4):382-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-0501.2010.02104.x.

Transcriptional profiling of "guided bone regeneration" in a critical-size
calvarial defect.

Ivanovski S(1), Hamlet S, Retzepi M, Wall I, Donos N.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry and Oral Health, Centre for Medicine and Oral Health,
Griffith University, Gold Coast Campus, Qld, Australia.
s.ivanovski@griffith.edu.au

OBJECTIVES: Guided bone regeneration (GBR) is a commonly utilized surgical
technique in the craniofacial region. The transcriptional mechanisms associated
with this type of bone regeneration are not well understood. The aim of this
study was to characterize the transcriptome associated with GBR of a
critical-size calvarial defect in the rat.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Critical-size calvarial defects were created in six Wistar 
strain rats and treated according to the principles of GBR. The tissue filling
the regenerating defect was harvested at 7 and 14 days. Total RNA was extracted
and microarray analysis was carried out to identify the differences in the
transcriptome between days 7 and 14.
RESULTS: Gene ontology (GO) analysis of the genes up-regulated at day 7 showed
that immature wound healing-related mechanisms, such as protein metabolism and
cell proliferation, were up-regulated at this time point. Furthermore, the
immuno-inflammatory process was also up-regulated at the earlier time point. In
contrast, by day 14, GO groups consistent with wound maturation, such as
extracellular matrix formation, anatomical structure development and cell
differentiation, were up-regulated. Furthermore, the functionally important GO
categories of skeletal development, ossification and bone mineralization were
up-regulated at day 14. Genes of interest that belonged to this group and were
up-regulated at day 14 included growth and differentiation factors (Bmp2, Bmp3,
Tgfb3), extracellular matrix proteins (osteocalcin, osteomodulin, stenniocalcin
1) and transcription factors (Runx2, Sox6, Satb2). Furthermore, a number of genes
associated with Tgfß/Bmp and Wnt signalling were also up-regulated. Besides
skeletogenesis, genes associated with angiogenesis and neurogenesis were also
up-regulated at day 14.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptome associated with a maturing GBR-treated
craniofacial bone defect is characterized by the down-regulation of the
immuno-inflammatory response and up-regulation of skeletogeneis-, angiogenesis-
and neurogenesis-associated genes. The Tgfß/Bmp and Wnt signalling pathways play 
an important role in the regenerative process.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21561480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Blood. 2011 Apr 21;117(16):4396-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-11-320887.

Heterozygous disruption of human SOX6 is insufficient to impair erythropoiesis or
silencing of fetal hemoglobin.

Sankaran VG, Menne J, Heller R.

PMID: 21511965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Dev Dyn. 2011 Jun;240(6):1311-21. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22639. Epub 2011 Apr 14.

Sox6, jack of all trades: a versatile regulatory protein in vertebrate
development.

Hagiwara N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of California, Davis, California 95616, USA. nhagiwara@ucdavis.edu

Approximately 20,000 genes are encoded in our genome, one tenth of which are
thought to be transcription factors. Considering the complexity and variety of
cell types generated during development, many transcription factors likely play
multiple roles. Uncovering the versatile roles of Sox6 in vertebrate development 
sheds some light on how an organism efficiently utilizes the limited resources of
transcription factors. The structure of the Sox6 gene itself may dictate its
functional versatility. First, Sox6 contains no known regulatory domains;
instead, it utilizes various cofactors. Second, Sox6 has a long 3'-UTR that
contains multiple microRNA targets, thus its protein level is duly adjusted by
cell type-specific microRNAs. Just combining these two characteristics alone
makes Sox6 extremely versatile. To date, Sox6 has been reported to regulate
differentiation of tissues of mesoderm, ectoderm, and endoderm origins, making
Sox6 a truly multifaceted transcription factor.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3092843
PMID: 21495113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Circulation. 2011 Mar 29;123(12):1287-96. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.982918.
Epub 2011 Mar 14.

Human cardiac stem cell differentiation is regulated by a mircrine mechanism.

Hosoda T(1), Zheng H, Cabral-da-Silva M, Sanada F, Ide-Iwata N, Ogórek B,
Ferreira-Martins J, Arranto C, D'Amario D, del Monte F, Urbanek K, D'Alessandro
DA, Michler RE, Anversa P, Rota M, Kajstura J, Leri A.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Anesthesia and Medicine, Brigham and Womens Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, 75 Francis St., Boston, MA 02115, USA. thosoda@partners.org

Erratum in
    Circulation. 2015 Dec 1;132(22):e362.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2011 Oct 25;124(17):e456; author's reply e457.

BACKGROUND: Cardiac stem cells (CSCs) delivered to the infarcted heart generate a
large number of small fetal-neonatal cardiomyocytes that fail to acquire the
differentiated phenotype. However, the interaction of CSCs with postmitotic
myocytes results in the formation of cells with adult characteristics.
METHODS AND RESULTS: On the basis of results of in vitro and in vivo assays, we
report that the commitment of human CSCs (hCSCs) to the myocyte lineage and the
generation of mature working cardiomyocytes are influenced by microRNA-499
(miR-499), which is barely detectable in hCSCs but is highly expressed in
postmitotic human cardiomyocytes. miR-499 traverses gap junction channels and
translocates to structurally coupled hCSCs favoring their differentiation into
functionally competent cells. Expression of miR-499 in hCSCs represses the
miR-499 target genes Sox6 and Rod1, enhancing cardiomyogenesis in vitro and after
infarction in vivo. Although cardiac repair was detected in all cell-treated
infarcted hearts, the aggregate volume of the regenerated myocyte mass and
myocyte cell volume were greater in animals injected with hCSCs overexpressing
miR-499. Treatment with hCSCs resulted in an improvement in ventricular function,
consisting of a better preservation of developed pressure and positive and
negative dP/dt after infarction. An additional positive effect on cardiac
performance occurred with miR-499, pointing to enhanced myocyte
differentiation/hypertrophy as the mechanism by which miR-499 potentiated the
restoration of myocardial mass and function in the infarcted heart.
CONCLUSIONS: The recognition that miR-499 promotes the differentiation of hCSCs
into mechanically integrated cardiomyocytes has important clinical implications
for the treatment of human heart failure.

PMCID: PMC3066266
PMID: 21403094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Blood. 2011 Apr 28;117(17):4600-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-325357. Epub 2011
Mar 4.

A transient definitive erythroid lineage with unique regulation of the ß-globin
locus in the mammalian embryo.

McGrath KE(1), Frame JM, Fromm GJ, Koniski AD, Kingsley PD, Little J, Bulger M,
Palis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Pediatric Biomedical Research, University
of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA.

A transient erythromyeloid wave of definitive hematopoietic progenitors
(erythroid/myeloid progenitors [EMPs]) emerges in the yolk sac beginning at
embryonic day 8.25 (E8.25) and colonizes the liver by E10.5, before
adult-repopulating hematopoietic stem cells. At E11.5, we observe all
maturational stages of erythroid precursors in the liver and the first definitive
erythrocytes in the circulation. These early fetal liver erythroblasts express
predominantly adult ß-globins and the definitive erythroid-specific
transcriptional modifiers c-myb, Sox6, and Bcl11A. Surprisingly, they also
express low levels of "embryonic" ßH1-, but not ey-, globin transcripts.
Consistent with these results, RNA polymerase and highly modified histones are
found associated with ßH1- and adult globin, but not ey-globin, genes. E11.5
definitive proerythroblasts from mice transgenic for the human ß-globin locus,
like human fetal erythroblasts, express predominately human <U+03B3>-, low ß-, and no
e-globin transcripts. Significantly, E9.5 yolk sac-derived EMPs cultured in vitro
have similar murine and human transgenic globin expression patterns. Later liver 
proerythroblasts express low levels of <U+03B3>-globin, while adult marrow
proerythroblasts express only ß-globin transcripts. We conclude that yolk
sac-derived EMPs, the first of 2 origins of definitive erythropoiesis, express a 
unique pattern of globin genes as they generate the first definitive erythrocytes
in the liver of the mammalian embryo.

PMCID: PMC3099576
PMID: 21378272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. EMBO J. 2011 Mar 2;30(5):835-45. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.361. Epub 2011 Feb 1.

miRNAs control insulin content in pancreatic ß-cells via downregulation of
transcriptional repressors.

Melkman-Zehavi T(1), Oren R, Kredo-Russo S, Shapira T, Mandelbaum AD, Rivkin N,
Nir T, Lennox KA, Behlke MA, Dor Y, Hornstein E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2011 Mar 2;30(5):797-9.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) were shown to be important for pancreas development, yet their
roles in differentiated ß-cells remain unclear. Here, we show that miRNA
inactivation in ß-cells of adult mice results in a striking diabetic phenotype.
While islet architecture is intact and differentiation markers are maintained,
Dicer1-deficient ß-cells show a dramatic decrease in insulin content and insulin 
mRNA. As a consequence of the change in insulin content, the animals become
diabetic. We provide evidence for involvement of a set of miRNAs in regulating
insulin synthesis. The specific knockdown of miR-24, miR-26, miR-182 or miR-148
in cultured ß-cells or in isolated primary islets downregulates insulin promoter 
activity and insulin mRNA levels. Further, miRNA-dependent regulation of insulin 
expression is associated with upregulation of transcriptional repressors,
including Bhlhe22 and Sox6. Thus, miRNAs in the adult pancreas act in a new
network that reinforces insulin expression by reducing the expression of insulin 
transcriptional repressors.

PMCID: PMC3049206
PMID: 21285947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Blood. 2011 Mar 31;117(13):3669-79. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-04-282350. Epub 2011 
Jan 24.

Sox6 enhances erythroid differentiation in human erythroid progenitors.

Cantù C(1), Ierardi R, Alborelli I, Fugazza C, Cassinelli L, Piconese S, Bosè F, 
Ottolenghi S, Ferrari G, Ronchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie e Bioscienze, Università di Milano-Bicocca,
Piazza della Scienza 2, Milan, Italy.

Sox6 belongs to the Sry (sex-determining region Y)-related
high-mobility-group-box family of transcription factors, which control cell-fate 
specification of many cell types. Here, we explored the role of Sox6 in human
erythropoiesis by its overexpression both in the erythroleukemic K562 cell line
and in primary erythroid cultures from human cord blood CD34+ cells. Sox6 induced
significant erythroid differentiation in both models. K562 cells underwent
hemoglobinization and, despite their leukemic origin, died within 9 days after
transduction; primary erythroid cultures accelerated their kinetics of erythroid 
maturation and increased the number of cells that reached the final enucleation
step. Searching for direct Sox6 targets, we found SOCS3 (suppressor of cytokine
signaling-3), a known mediator of cytokine response. Sox6 was bound in vitro and 
in vivo to an evolutionarily conserved regulatory SOCS3 element, which induced
transcriptional activation. SOCS3 overexpression in K562 cells and in primary
erythroid cells recapitulated the growth inhibition induced by Sox6, which
demonstrates that SOCS3 is a relevant Sox6 effector.

PMID: 21263153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Apr 15;20(8):1547-59. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr032. Epub 2011 Jan 
24.

SHOX interacts with the chondrogenic transcription factors SOX5 and SOX6 to
activate the aggrecan enhancer.

Aza-Carmona M(1), Shears DJ, Yuste-Checa P, Barca-Tierno V, Hisado-Oliva A,
Belinchón A, Benito-Sanz S, Rodríguez JI, Argente J, Campos-Barros A, Scambler
PJ, Heath KE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario
La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain.

SHOX (short stature homeobox-containing gene) encodes a transcription factor
implicated in skeletal development. SHOX haploinsufficiency has been demonstrated
in Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), a skeletal dysplasia associated with
disproportionate short stature, as well as in a variable proportion of cases with
idiopathic short stature (ISS). In order to gain insight into the SHOX signalling
pathways, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen to identify SHOX-interacting
proteins. Two transcription factors, SOX5 and SOX6, were identified.
Co-immunoprecipitation assays confirmed the existence of the SHOX-SOX5 and
SHOX-SOX6 interactions in human cells, whereas immunohistochemical studies
demonstrated the coexpression of these proteins in 18- and 32-week human fetal
growth plates. The SHOX homeodomain and the SOX6 HMG domain were shown to be
implicated in the SHOX-SOX6 interaction. Moreover, different SHOX missense
mutations, identified in LWD and ISS patients, disrupted this interaction. The
physiological importance of these interactions was investigated by studying the
effect of SHOX on a transcriptional target of the SOX trio, Agc1, which encodes
one of the main components of cartilage, aggrecan. Our results show that SHOX
cooperates with SOX5/SOX6 and SOX9 in the activation of the upstream Agc1
enhancer and that SHOX mutations affect this activation. In conclusion, we have
identified SOX5 and SOX6 as the first two SHOX-interacting proteins and have
shown that this interaction regulates aggrecan expression, an essential factor in
chondrogenesis and skeletal development.

PMID: 21262861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2011 Apr;19(4):449-57. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2011.01.005.
Epub 2011 Jan 18.

Electroporation-mediated gene transfer of SOX trio to enhance chondrogenesis in
adipose stem cells.

Im GI(1), Kim HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Dongguk University Ilsan Hospital, Republic of
Korea. gunil@duih.org

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to determine if the
electroporation-mediated gene transfer of SOX trio enhances the chondrogenic
potential of adipose stem cells (ASCs).
DESIGN: ASCs were transfected with SOX trio genes using an electroporation
technique and cultured for 3 weeks. The pellets were analyzed for DNA and
glycosaminoglycan (GAG) analysis, and the gene and protein expression of SOX-5,
SOX-6, SOX-9, type 1 collagen (COL1Al), type 2 collagen (COL2Al) and type 10
collagen (COL10A1) using real-time PCR and Western blot analysis. Further in vivo
studies were carried out by subcutaneous transplantation of pellets in severe
combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice for 3 weeks.
RESULTS: The gene transfer efficiency was high (approximately 70%). Transfected
ASCs showed high expression of corresponding genes after 21 days, and each SOX
protein was detected in ASCs transfected with the corresponding gene. The
chondrogenic differentiation of ASCs, as demonstrated by GAG levels and
Safranin-O staining, showed significant enhancement when SOX trio were
co-transfected, while subsets with single gene transfer of SOX-5, -6, or -9 did
not show significant elevation. SOX trio co-transfection enhanced COL2A1 mRNA,
but did not increase COL1A1 and COL10A1 mRNA. Type II collagen protein
dramatically increased, and type X collagen decreased with co-transfection of the
SOX trio. When pellets were implanted in the subcutaneous pouch of SCID mice for 
3 weeks, ASCs co-transfected with SOX trio demonstrated abundant proteoglycan,
significantly reduced mineralization.
CONCLUSION: The electroporation-mediated transfection of SOX trio greatly
enhances chondrogenesis from ASCs, while decreasing hypertrophy.

Copyright © 2011 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21251990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Apr;300(4):E633-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00515.2010. Epub 2010 Dec 21.

ß2-adrenergic receptors inhibit the expression of collagen type II in growth
plate chondrocytes by stimulating the AP-1 factor Jun-B.

Mitchell J(1), Lai LP, Peralta F, Xu Y, Sugamori K.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
jane.mitchell@utoronto.ca

The sympathetic nervous system can regulate both osteoblast and chondrocyte
growth and activity through ß(2)-adrenergic receptors (ß(2)-AR). We have shown
previously that ß(2)-AR activate both adenylyl cyclase and mitogen-activated
protein kinases ERK1/2 in growth plate chondrocytes prepared from ribs of
embryonic E18.5 mice. Here we examined ß(2)-AR inhibition of collagen type II
(Col II) expression in growth plate chondrocytes and the molecular pathways
involved. Stimulation of ß(2)-AR by isoproterenol inhibited Col II mRNA and
protein levels by ~50% beginning at 2 h, with both remaining suppressed over 24
h. This inhibition was blocked by propranolol and inhibitors of either MEK1 or
PKA. Isoproterenol stimulated an AP-1-luciferase reporter and increased the
expression of AP-1 factors c-Fos, Fra-1, Fra-2, c-Jun, and Jun-B but had no
effect on Jun-D. Stimulation of AP-1 activity was blocked by inhibitors of MEK1
or PKA. siRNA inhibition of AP-1 factors showed that depletion of only Jun-B
attenuated isoproterenol-mediated inhibition of Col II. Transfection with jun-B
or c-fos showed selective inhibition of Col II mRNA and a Col II luciferase
reporter construct by jun-B. Isoproterenol as well as jun-B overexpression in the
chondrocytes also inhibited the expression of Sox-6 mRNA and protein, and
depletion of Jun-B abrogated ß(2)-AR inhibition of Sox-6. Collectively, these
findings demonstrate regulation of chondrocyte differentiation through ß(2)-AR
mediated by ERK1/2 and PKA stimulation of the AP-1 factor Jun-B that inhibits the
expression of Sox-6 and Col II.

PMID: 21177286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Feb;31(4):686-99. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00019-10. Epub 2010 Dec
20.

Evolutionarily conserved, growth plate zone-specific regulation of the matrilin-1
promoter: L-Sox5/Sox6 and Nfi factors bound near TATA finely tune activation by
Sox9.

Nagy A(1), Kénesi E, Rentsendorj O, Molnár A, Szénási T, Sinkó I, Zvara A, Oommen
ST, Barta E, Puskás LG, Lefebvre V, Kiss I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Biological Research Center of the Hungarian Academy
of Sciences, Szeged, Hungary.

To help uncover the mechanisms underlying the staggered expression of
cartilage-specific genes in the growth plate, we dissected the transcriptional
mechanisms driving expression of the matrilin-1 gene (Matn1). We show that a
unique assembly of evolutionarily conserved cis-acting elements in the Matn1
proximal promoter restricts expression to the proliferative and prehypertrophic
zones of the growth plate. These elements functionally interact with distal
elements and likewise are capable of restricting the domain of activity of a
pancartilaginous Col2a1 enhancer. The proximal elements include a Pe1 element
binding the chondrogenic L-Sox5, Sox6, and Sox9 proteins, a SI element binding
Nfi proteins, and an initiator Ine element binding the Sox trio and other
factors. Sox9 binding to Pe1 is indispensable for functional interaction with the
distal promoter. Binding of L-Sox5/Sox6 to Ine and Nfib to SI modulates Sox9
transactivation in a protein dose-dependent manner, possibly to enhance Sox9
activity in early stages of chondrogenesis and repress it at later stages. Hence,
our data suggest a novel model whereby Sox and Nfi proteins bind to conserved
Matn1 proximal elements and functionally interact with each other to finely tune 
gene expression in specific zones of the cartilage growth plate.

PMCID: PMC3028657
PMID: 21173167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Jan;13(1):59-65. doi: 10.1038/ncb2134. Epub 2010 Dec 19.

The E3 ubiquitin ligase Wwp2 regulates craniofacial development through
mono-ubiquitylation of Goosecoid.

Zou W(1), Chen X, Shim JH, Huang Z, Brady N, Hu D, Drapp R, Sigrist K, Glimcher
LH, Jones D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Disease, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts 0211, USA.

Craniofacial anomalies (CFAs) are the most frequently occurring human congenital 
disease, and a major cause of infant mortality and childhood morbidity. Although 
CFAs seems to arise from a combination of genetic factors and environmental
influences, the underlying gene defects and pathophysiological mechanisms for
most CFAs are currently unknown. Here we reveal a role for the E3 ubiquitin
ligase Wwp2 in regulating craniofacial patterning. Mice deficient in Wwp2 develop
malformations of the craniofacial region. Wwp2 is present in cartilage where its 
expression is controlled by Sox9. Our studies demonstrate that Wwp2 influences
craniofacial patterning through its interactions with Goosecoid (Gsc), a
paired-like homeobox transcription factor that has an important role in
craniofacial development. We show that Wwp2-associated Gsc is a transcriptional
activator of the key cartilage regulatory protein Sox6. Wwp2 interacts with Gsc
to facilitate its mono-ubiquitylation, a post-translational modification required
for optimal transcriptional activation of Gsc. Our results identify for the first
time a physiological pathway regulated by Wwp2 in vivo, and also a unique
non-proteolytic mechanism through which Wwp2 controls craniofacial development.

PMCID: PMC3059716
PMID: 21170031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Sci China Life Sci. 2010 Sep;53(9):1065-72. doi: 10.1007/s11427-010-4056-7. Epub 
2010 Nov 23.

A genome-wide association analysis implicates SOX6 as a candidate gene for wrist 
bone mass.

Tan L(1), Liu R, Lei S, Pan R, Yang T, Yan H, Pei Y, Yang F, Zhang F, Pan F,
Zhang Y, Hu H, Levy S, Deng H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Statistical Genetics, College of Life Sciences,
Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410081, China.

Osteoporosis is a highly heritable common bone disease leading to fractures that 
severely impair the life quality of patients. Wrist fractures caused by
osteoporosis are largely due to the scarcity of wrist bone mass. Here we report
the results of a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of wrist bone mineral
density (BMD). We examined ~500000 SNP markers in 1000 unrelated homogeneous
Caucasian subjects and found a novel allelic association with wrist BMD at
rs11023787 in the SOX6 (SRY (sex determining region Y)-box 6) gene
(P=9.00×10(-5)). Subjects carrying the C allele of rs11023787 in SOX6 had
significantly higher mean wrist BMD values than those with the T allele
(0.485:0.462 g cm(-2) for C allele vs. T allele carriers). For validation, we
performed SOX6 association for BMD in an independent Chinese sample and found
that SNP rs11023787 was significantly associated with wrist BMD in the Chinese
sample (P=6.41×10(-3)). Meta-analyses of the GWAS scan and the replication
studies yielded P-values of 5.20×10(-6) for rs11023787. Results of this study,
together with the functional relevance of SOX6 in cartilage formation, support
the SOX6 gene as an important gene for BMD variation.

PMID: 21104366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. FEBS Lett. 2011 Jan 3;585(1):148-52. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.11.030. Epub
2010 Nov 19.

Stat3 is essential for neuronal differentiation through direct transcriptional
regulation of the Sox6 gene.

Snyder M(1), Huang XY, Zhang JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, NY 10065, USA.

The transcription factor Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3
(Stat3) functions in various cellular processes including neuronal
differentiation. We show that the SRY-box containing gene 6 (Sox6) gene,
important for neuronal differentiation, is a direct target gene of Stat3. We
demonstrate that in response to ligand stimulation, Stat3 binds to the Sox6
promoter and induces its expression. Furthermore, Stat3 is activated and Sox6 is 
induced during neuronal differentiation of P19 cells in the absence of exogenous 
ligand treatment. Moreover, using an RNA interference approach, we show that
Stat3 is required for Sox6 expression during neuronal differentiation.

Copyright © 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3022371
PMID: 21094641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Tissue Eng Part A. 2011 Apr;17(7-8):1003-13. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2010.0499. Epub
2011 Jan 10.

Chondrogenic differentiation of human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells 
in self-gelling alginate discs reveals novel chondrogenic signature gene
clusters.

Herlofsen SR(1), Küchler AM, Melvik JE, Brinchmann JE.

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian Center for Stem Cell Research, Oslo University Hospital
Rikshospitalet, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

We have used a disc-shaped self-gelling alginate hydrogel as a scaffold for in
vitro chondrogenic differentiation of human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem 
cells. The comparison of monolayer cells and alginate embedded cells with or
without differentiation medium allowed us to perform a detailed kinetic study of 
the expression of a range of genes and proteins known to be involved in
chondrogenesis, using real-time polymerase chain reaction, fluorescence
immunohistochemistry, and glycosaminoglycan measurement in the supernatant. mRNA 
encoding type II collagen (COL2), COL10, aggrecan, and SOX5, 6, and 9 were
greatly elevated already at day 7, whereas COL1 and versican mRNA were gradually 
reduced. COL2 and aggrecan were dispersed throughout the extracellular matrix at 
day 21, whereas COL10 distribution was mainly intra/pericellular. COL1 seemed to 
be produced by only some of the cells. SOX proteins were predominantly localized 
in the nuclei. Then, using microarray analysis, we identified a signature cluster
of extracellular matrix and transcription factor genes upregulated during
chondrogenesis similar to COL2A1, and clusters of genes involved in immune
responses, blood vessel development, and cell adhesion downregulated similar to
the chemokine CXCL12. Analysis of the signature chondrogenic clusters, including 
novel potential marker genes identified here, may provide a better understanding 
of how the stem cell fate could be directed to produce perfect hyaline cartilage 
implants.

PMCID: PMC3063696
PMID: 21087199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 1;17(1):46-55. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1155. Epub
2010 Nov 17.

Characterization of tumor-suppressive function of SOX6 in human esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma.

Qin YR(1), Tang H, Xie F, Liu H, Zhu Y, Ai J, Chen L, Li Y, Kwong DL, Fu L, Guan 
XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, the First affiliated hospital, Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, China.

PURPOSE: By using cDNA microarray analysis, we identified a transcriptional
factor, SOX6, was frequently downregulated in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma 
(ESCC). The aim of this study is to investigate the role of SOX6 in human
esophageal cancer development, and to examine the prevalence and clinical
significance of SOX6 downregulation in ESCC.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Expressions of SOX6 mRNA in 50 ESCCs and SOX6 protein in 300
ESCCs were investigated by semiquantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry,
respectively. The tumor-suppressive function of SOX6 was characterized by cell
growth, foci formation, wound-healing and cell invasive assays, and tumor
xenograft experiment. Western blot analysis was applied to detect protein
expression levels.
RESULTS: SOX6 was frequently downregulated in primary ESCCs in both mRNA level
(29/50, 58%) and protein level (149/219, 68.0%), which was significantly
associated with the poor differentiation (P = 0.029), lymph node metastases (P = 
0.014), advanced TNM stage (P = 0.000), and disease-specific survival (P <
0.001). Multivariate analysis indicated that the downregulation of SOX6 (P =
0.000) was a significant independent prognostic factors for ESCC. Functional
studies showed that SOX6 was able to suppress both in vitro and in vivo
tumorigenic ability of ESCC cells. The tumor-suppressive mechanism of SOX6 was
associated with its role in G1/S cell-cycle arrest by upregulating expressions of
p53 and p21(WAF1/CIP1) and downregulating expressions of cyclin D1/CDK4, cyclin
A, and ß-catenin.
CONCLUSIONS: We provided the first evidence that SOX6 is a novel tumor-suppressor
gene in ESCC development and is a potential prognostic marker in ESCC.

©2010 AACR.

PMID: 21084391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Stroke. 2010 Dec;41(12):2750-6. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.596981. Epub 2010 Oct 
21.

Genomewide linkage and peakwide association analyses of carotid plaque in
Caribbean Hispanics.

Dong C(1), Beecham A, Slifer S, Wang L, Blanton SH, Wright CB, Rundek T, Sacco
RL.

Author information: 
(1)Evelyn F. McKnight Center for Age-Related Memory Loss, Department of
Neurology, Miller Schoolof Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Atherosclerosis is a complex subclinical cardiovascular
disorder with a substantial genetic component. This study sought to identify
genetic loci influencing carotid plaque in 2 independent samples.
METHODS: B-mode ultrasound was performed to determine the presence and area of
carotid plaque. Variance components analysis was used to test for linkage using
383 autosomal microsatellite markers in 1308 subjects from 100 Dominican
families. Multiple linear and logistic regression models were used to investigate
the association between plaque traits and 18,904 single nucleotide polymorphisms 
under the 1-logarithm of odds unit down regions of linkage peaks in an
independent community-based data set (N = 941, 41% Dominicans) from the Northern 
Manhattan Study.
RESULTS: After adjustment for age, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cigarette
pack-years, body mass index, and waist-to-hip ratio, significant heritability was
detected for plaque presence (h² = 0.50 ± 0.14, P < 0.0001) and plaque area
(h²=0.17 ± 0.04, P < 0.0001). Quantitative and dichotomous trait linkage analyses
obtained similar results and identified 4 regions with multipoint logarithm of
odds scores = 2.00 on 7q36, 11p15, 14q32, and 15q23. In the association analysis 
of the 4 linkage peaks, several single nucleotide polymorphisms in or near SOX6, 
FSD2, AP3S2, EFTUD1, and MYOD1 were associated with carotid plaque traits with a 
nominal P = 0.0005 in the Northern Manhattan Study data set and with a P = 0.01
in Northern Manhattan Study Dominican subset.
CONCLUSIONS: Carotid plaque has considerable heritability and may be influenced
by loci on chromosomes 11p15, 14q32, and 15q23. The SOX6 gene within the bone
morphogenic protein pathway could be a candidate for carotid plaque. Larger
independent studies are needed to validate these findings.

PMCID: PMC3004531
PMID: 20966410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 7;5(10):e13217. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013217.

European bone mineral density loci are also associated with BMD in East-Asian
populations.

Styrkarsdottir U(1), Halldorsson BV, Gudbjartsson DF, Tang NL, Koh JM, Xiao SM,
Kwok TC, Kim GS, Chan JC, Cherny S, Lee SH, Kwok A, Ho S, Gretarsdottir S, Kostic
JP, Palsson ST, Sigurdsson G, Sham PC, Kim BJ, Kung AW, Kim SY, Woo J, Leung PC, 
Kong A, Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland. unnur.styrkarsdottir@decode.is

Most genome-wide association (GWA) studies have focused on populations of
European ancestry with limited assessment of the influence of the sequence
variants on populations of other ethnicities. To determine whether markers that
we have recently shown to associate with Bone Mineral Density (BMD) in Europeans 
also associate with BMD in East-Asians we analysed 50 markers from 23 genomic
loci in samples from Korea (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>1,397) and two Chinese Hong Kong sample sets
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>3,869 and n<U+200A>=<U+200A>785). Through this effort we identified fourteen loci that
associated with BMD in East-Asian samples using a false discovery rate (FDR) of
0.05; 1p36 (ZBTB40, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.3×10(-9)), 1p31 (GPR177, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00012), 3p22 (CTNNB1,
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00013), 4q22 (MEPE, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0026), 5q14 (MEF2C, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.3×10(-5)), 6q25 (ESR1, 
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0011), 7p14 (STARD3NL, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00025), 7q21 (FLJ42280, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00017), 8q24
(TNFRSF11B, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>3.4×10(-5)), 11p15 (SOX6, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00033), 11q13 (LRP5, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0033),
13q14 (TNFSF11, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>7.5×10(-5)), 16q24 (FOXL1, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0010) and 17q21 (SOST,
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.015). Our study marks an early effort towards the challenge of cataloguing 
bone density variants shared by many ethnicities by testing BMD variants that
have been established in Europeans, in East-Asians.

PMCID: PMC2951352
PMID: 20949110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Jan;39(2):486-501. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq819. Epub 2010 Sep
17.

A highly conserved SOX6 double binding site mediates SOX6 gene downregulation in 
erythroid cells.

Cantu' C(1), Grande V, Alborelli I, Cassinelli L, Cantu' I, Colzani MT, Ierardi
R, Ronzoni L, Cappellini MD, Ferrari G, Ottolenghi S, Ronchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie e Bioscienze, Università di Milano-Bicocca,
Milan, Italy. mcclaudio061281@gmail.com

The Sox6 transcription factor plays critical roles in various cell types,
including erythroid cells. Sox6-deficient mice are anemic due to impaired red
cell maturation and show inappropriate globin gene expression in definitive
erythrocytes. To identify new Sox6 target genes in erythroid cells, we used the
known repressive double Sox6 consensus within the ey-globin promoter to perform a
bioinformatic genome-wide search for similar, evolutionarily conserved motifs
located within genes whose expression changes during erythropoiesis. We found a
highly conserved Sox6 consensus within the Sox6 human gene promoter itself. This 
sequence is bound by Sox6 in vitro and in vivo, and mediates transcriptional
repression in transient transfections in human erythroleukemic K562 cells and in 
primary erythroblasts. The binding of a lentiviral transduced Sox6FLAG protein to
the endogenous Sox6 promoter is accompanied, in erythroid cells, by strong
downregulation of the endogenous Sox6 transcript and by decreased in vivo
chromatin accessibility of this region to the PstI restriction enzyme. These
observations suggest that the negative Sox6 autoregulation, mediated by the
double Sox6 binding site within its own promoter, may be relevant to control the 
Sox6 transcriptional downregulation that we observe in human erythroid cultures
and in mouse bone marrow cells in late erythroid maturation.

PMCID: PMC3025548
PMID: 20852263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 9;5(8):e12088. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012088.

Sox6 is necessary for efficient erythropoiesis in adult mice under physiological 
and anemia-induced stress conditions.

Dumitriu B(1), Bhattaram P, Dy P, Huang Y, Quayum N, Jensen J, Lefebvre V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Orthopaedic Research Center, Cleveland Clinic
Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Definitive erythropoiesis is a vital process throughout life. Both
its basal activity under physiological conditions and its increased activity
under anemia-induced stress conditions are highly stimulated by the hormone
erythropoietin. The transcription factor Sox6 was previously shown to enhance
fetal erythropoiesis together and beyond erythropoietin signaling, but its
importance in adulthood and mechanisms of action remain unknown. We used here
Sox6 conditional null mice and molecular assays to address these questions.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Sox6fl/flErGFPCre adult mice, which lacked Sox6
in erythroid cells, exhibited compensated anemia, erythroid cell developmental
defects, and anisocytotic, short-lived red cells under physiological conditions, 
proving that Sox6 promotes basal erythropoiesis. Tamoxifen treatment of
Sox6fl/flCaggCreER mice induced widespread inactivation of Sox6 in a timely
controlled manner and resulted in erythroblast defects before reticulocytosis,
demonstrating that impaired erythropoiesis is a primary cause rather than
consequence of anemia in the absence of Sox6. Twenty five percent of
Sox6fl/flErGFPCre mice died 4 or 5 days after induction of acute anemia with
phenylhydrazine. The others recovered slowly. They promptly increased their
erythropoietin level and amplified their erythroid progenitor pool, but then
exhibited severe erythroblast and reticulocyte defects. Sox6 is thus essential in
the maturation phase of stress erythropoiesis that follows the
erythropoietin-dependent amplification phase. Sox6 inactivation resulted in
upregulation of embryonic globin genes, but embryonic globin chains remained
scarce and apparently inconsequential. Sox6 inactivation also resulted in
downregulation of erythroid terminal markers, including the Bcl2l1 gene for the
anti-apoptotic factor Bcl-xL, and in vitro assays indicated that Sox6 directly
upregulates Bcl2l1 downstream of and beyond erythropoietin signaling.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study demonstrates that Sox6 is necessary for
efficient erythropoiesis in adult mice under both basal and stress conditions. It
is primarily involved in enhancing the survival rate and maturation process of
erythroid cells and acts at least in part by upregulating Bcl2l1.

PMCID: PMC2918505
PMID: 20711497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. PLoS Genet. 2010 Jun 10;6(6):e1000977. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000977.

An integration of genome-wide association study and gene expression profiling to 
prioritize the discovery of novel susceptibility Loci for osteoporosis-related
traits.

Hsu YH(1), Zillikens MC, Wilson SG, Farber CR, Demissie S, Soranzo N, Bianchi EN,
Grundberg E, Liang L, Richards JB, Estrada K, Zhou Y, van Nas A, Moffatt MF, Zhai
G, Hofman A, van Meurs JB, Pols HA, Price RI, Nilsson O, Pastinen T, Cupples LA, 
Lusis AJ, Schadt EE, Ferrari S, Uitterlinden AG, Rivadeneira F, Spector TD,
Karasik D, Kiel DP.

Author information: 
(1)Hebrew SeniorLife Institute for Aging Research, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Osteoporosis is a complex disorder and commonly leads to fractures in elderly
persons. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have become an unbiased approach 
to identify variations in the genome that potentially affect health. However, the
genetic variants identified so far only explain a small proportion of the
heritability for complex traits. Due to the modest genetic effect size and
inadequate power, true association signals may not be revealed based on a
stringent genome-wide significance threshold. Here, we take advantage of SNP and 
transcript arrays and integrate GWAS and expression signature profiling relevant 
to the skeletal system in cellular and animal models to prioritize the discovery 
of novel candidate genes for osteoporosis-related traits, including bone mineral 
density (BMD) at the lumbar spine (LS) and femoral neck (FN), as well as
geometric indices of the hip (femoral neck-shaft angle, NSA; femoral neck length,
NL; and narrow-neck width, NW). A two-stage meta-analysis of GWAS from 7,633
Caucasian women and 3,657 men, revealed three novel loci associated with
osteoporosis-related traits, including chromosome 1p13.2 (RAP1A, p = 3.6x10(-8)),
2q11.2 (TBC1D8), and 18q11.2 (OSBPL1A), and confirmed a previously reported
region near TNFRSF11B/OPG gene. We also prioritized 16 suggestive genome-wide
significant candidate genes based on their potential involvement in skeletal
metabolism. Among them, 3 candidate genes were associated with BMD in women.
Notably, 2 out of these 3 genes (GPR177, p = 2.6x10(-13); SOX6, p = 6.4x10(-10)) 
associated with BMD in women have been successfully replicated in a large-scale
meta-analysis of BMD, but none of the non-prioritized candidates (associated with
BMD) did. Our results support the concept of our prioritization strategy. In the 
absence of direct biological support for identified genes, we highlighted the
efficiency of subsequent functional characterization using publicly available
expression profiling relevant to the skeletal system in cellular or whole animal 
models to prioritize candidate genes for further functional validation.

PMCID: PMC2883588
PMID: 20548944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Genes Dev. 2010 Apr 15;24(8):783-98. doi: 10.1101/gad.1897310.

Transcriptional silencing of {gamma}-globin by BCL11A involves long-range
interactions and cooperation with SOX6.

Xu J(1), Sankaran VG, Ni M, Menne TF, Puram RV, Kim W, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The developmental switch from human fetal (gamma) to adult (beta) hemoglobin
represents a clinically important example of developmental gene regulation. The
transcription factor BCL11A is a central mediator of gamma-globin silencing and
hemoglobin switching. Here we determine chromatin occupancy of BCL11A at the
human beta-globin locus and other genomic regions in vivo by high-resolution
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-chip analysis. BCL11A binds the upstream
locus control region (LCR), epsilon-globin, and the intergenic regions between
gamma-globin and delta-globin genes. A chromosome conformation capture (3C) assay
shows that BCL11A reconfigures the beta-globin cluster by modulating chromosomal 
loop formation. We also show that BCL11A and the HMG-box-containing transcription
factor SOX6 interact physically and functionally during erythroid maturation.
BCL11A and SOX6 co-occupy the human beta-globin cluster along with GATA1, and
cooperate in silencing gamma-globin transcription in adult human erythroid
progenitors. These findings collectively demonstrate that transcriptional
silencing of gamma-globin genes by BCL11A involves long-range interactions and
cooperation with SOX6. Our findings provide insight into the mechanism of BCL11A 
action and new clues for the developmental gene regulatory programs that function
at the beta-globin locus.

PMCID: PMC2854393
PMID: 20395365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Jul;224(1):178-86. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22120.

The ERK5 and ERK1/2 signaling pathways play opposing regulatory roles during
chondrogenesis of adult human bone marrow-derived multipotent progenitor cells.

Bobick BE(1), Matsche AI, Chen FH, Tuan RS.

Author information: 
(1)Cartilage Biology and Orthopaedics Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Department of
Health and Human Services, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Adult human bone marrow-derived multipotent progenitor cells (MPCs) are able to
differentiate into a variety of specialized cell types, including chondrocytes,
and are considered a promising candidate cell source for use in cartilage tissue 
engineering. In this study, we examined the regulation of MPC chondrogenesis by
mitogen-activated protein kinases in an attempt to better understand how to
generate hyaline cartilage in the laboratory that more closely resembles native
tissue. Specifically, we employed the high-density pellet culture model system to
assess the roles of ERK5 and ERK1/2 pathway signaling in MPC chondrogenesis.
Western blotting revealed that high levels of ERK5 phosphorylation correlate with
low levels of MPC chondrogenesis and that as TGF-beta 3-enhanced MPC
chondrogenesis proceeds, phospho-ERK5 levels steadily decline. Conversely, levels
of phospho-ERK1/2 paralleled the progression of MPC chondrogenesis.
siRNA-mediated knockdown of ERK5 pathway components MEK5 and ERK5 resulted in
increased MPC pellet mRNA transcript levels of the cartilage-characteristic
marker genes SOX9, COL2A1, AGC, L-SOX5, and SOX6, as well as enhanced
accumulation of SOX9 protein, collagen type II protein, and Alcian blue-stainable
proteoglycan. In contrast, knockdown of ERK1/2 pathway members MEK1 and ERK1
decreased expression of all chondrogenic markers tested. Finally, overexpression 
of MEK5 and ERK5 also depressed MPC chondrogenesis, as indicated by diminished
activity of a co-transfected collagen II promoter-luciferase reporter construct. 
In conclusion, our results suggest a novel role for the ERK5 pathway as an
important negative regulator of adult human MPC chondrogenesis and illustrate
that the ERK5 and ERK1/2 kinase cascades play opposing roles regulating MPC
cartilage formation.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20232315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Neuron. 2010 Mar 11;65(5):612-26. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.02.018.

MicroRNA-mediated control of oligodendrocyte differentiation.

Zhao X(1), He X, Han X, Yu Y, Ye F, Chen Y, Hoang T, Xu X, Mi QS, Xin M, Wang F, 
Appel B, Lu QR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Kent Waldrep Foundation Center for
Basic Neuroscience Research on Nerve Growth and Regeneration, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2010 May;11(5):298.
    Neuron. 2010 Mar 11;65(5):577-9.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate various biological processes, but evidence for miRNAs
that control the differentiation program of specific neural cell types has been
elusive. To determine the role of miRNAs in the formation of myelinating
oligodendrocytes, we selectively deleted a miRNA-processing enzyme, Dicer1, in
oligodendrocyte lineage cells. Mice lacking Dicer1 display severe myelinating
deficits despite an expansion of the oligodendrocyte progenitor pool. To search
for miRNAs responsible for the induction of oligodendrocyte maturation, we
identified miR-219 and miR-338 as oligodendrocyte-specific miRNAs in spinal cord.
Overexpression of these miRNAs is sufficient to promote oligodendrocyte
differentiation. Additionally, blockage of these miRNA activities in
oligodendrocyte precursor culture and knockdown of miR-219 in zebrafish inhibit
oligodendrocyte maturation. miR-219 and miR-338 function in part by directly
repressing negative regulators of oligodendrocyte differentiation, including
transcription factors Sox6 and Hes5. These findings illustrate that miRNAs are
important regulators of oligodendrocyte differentiation, providing new targets
for myelin repair.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2855245
PMID: 20223198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Neuron. 2010 Mar 11;65(5):597-611. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.01.027.

Dicer1 and miR-219 Are required for normal oligodendrocyte differentiation and
myelination.

Dugas JC(1), Cuellar TL, Scholze A, Ason B, Ibrahim A, Emery B, Zamanian JL, Foo 
LC, McManus MT, Barres BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA 94305-5125, USA. jcdugas@alum.mit.edu

Comment in
    Neuron. 2010 Mar 11;65(5):577-9.
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2010 May;11(5):298.

To investigate the role of microRNAs in regulating oligodendrocyte (OL)
differentiation and myelination, we utilized transgenic mice in which microRNA
processing was disrupted in OL precursor cells (OPCs) and OLs by targeted
deletion of Dicer1. We found that inhibition of OPC-OL miRNA processing disrupts 
normal CNS myelination and that OPCs lacking mature miRNAs fail to differentiate 
normally in vitro. We identified three miRNAs (miR-219, miR-138, and miR-338)
that are induced 10-100x during OL differentiation; the most strongly induced of 
these, miR-219, is necessary and sufficient to promote OL differentiation, and
partially rescues OL differentiation defects caused by total miRNA loss. miR-219 
directly represses the expression of PDGFRalpha, Sox6, FoxJ3, and ZFP238
proteins, all of which normally help to promote OPC proliferation. Together,
these findings show that miR-219 plays a critical role in coupling
differentiation to proliferation arrest in the OL lineage, enabling the rapid
transition from proliferating OPCs to myelinating OLs.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2843397
PMID: 20223197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. BMC Dev Biol. 2010 Mar 9;10:29. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-10-29.

Molecular profiling of the developing mouse axial skeleton: a role for Tgfbr2 in 
the development of the intervertebral disc.

Sohn P(1), Cox M, Chen D, Serra R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham
AL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Very little is known about how intervertebral disc (IVD) is formed or
maintained. Members of the TGF-beta superfamily are secreted signaling proteins
that regulate many aspects of development including cellular differentiation. We 
recently showed that deletion of Tgfbr2 in Col2a expressing mouse tissue results 
in alterations in development of IVD annulus fibrosus. The results suggested
TGF-beta has an important role in regulating development of the axial skeleton,
however, the mechanistic basis of TGF-beta action in these specialized joints is 
not known. One of the hurdles to understanding development of IVD is a lack of
known markers. To identify genes that are enriched in the developing mouse IVD
and to begin to understand the mechanism of TGF-beta action in IVD development,
we undertook a global analysis of gene expression comparing gene expression
profiles in developing mouse vertebrae and IVD. We also compared expression
profiles in tissues from wild type and Tgfbr2 mutant mice as well as in
sclerotome cultures treated with TGF-beta or BMP4.
RESULTS: Lists of IVD and vertebrae enriched genes were generated. Expression
patterns for several genes were verified either through in situ hybridization or 
literature/database searches resulting in a list of genes that can be used as
markers of IVD. Cluster analysis using genes listed under the Gene Ontology terms
multicellular organism development and pattern specification indicated that
mutant IVD more closely resembled vertebrae than wild type IVD. We also generated
lists of genes regulated by TGF-beta or BMP4 in cultured sclerotome. As expected,
treatment with BMP4 resulted in up-regulation of cartilage marker genes including
Acan, Sox 5, Sox6, and Sox9. In contrast, treatment with TGF-beta1 did not
regulate expression of cartilage markers but instead resulted in up-regulation of
many IVD markers including Fmod and Adamtsl2.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose TGF-beta has two functions in IVD development: 1) to
prevent chondrocyte differentiation in the presumptive IVD and 2) to promote
differentiation of annulus fibrosus from sclerotome. We have identified genes
that are enriched in the IVD and regulated by TGF-beta that warrant further
investigation as regulators of IVD development.

PMCID: PMC2848151
PMID: 20214815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Dev Biol. 2010 May 15;341(2):346-59. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.02.024. Epub 2010 
Mar 4.

Synovial joint morphogenesis requires the chondrogenic action of Sox5 and Sox6 in
growth plate and articular cartilage.

Dy P(1), Smits P, Silvester A, Penzo-Méndez A, Dumitriu B, Han Y, de la Motte CA,
Kingsley DM, Lefebvre V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, and Orthopaedic and Rheumatologic Research Center,
Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue (NC-10),
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

The mechanisms underlying synovial joint development remain poorly understood.
Here we use complete and cell-specific gene inactivation to identify the roles of
the redundant chondrogenic transcription factors Sox5 and Sox6 in this process.
We show that joint development aborts early in complete mutants
(Sox5(-/-)6(-/-)). Gdf5 and Wnt9a expression is punctual in articular progenitor 
cells, but Sox9 downregulation and cell condensation in joint interzones are
late. Joint cell differentiation is unsuccessful, regardless of lineage, and
cavitation fails. Sox5 and Sox6 restricted expression to chondrocytes in
wild-type embryos and continued Erg expression and weak Ihh expression in
Sox5(-/-)6(-/-) growth plates suggest that growth plate failure contribute to
this Sox5(-/-)6(-/-) joint morphogenesis block. Sox5/6 inactivation in specified 
joint cells and chondrocytes (Sox5(fl/fl)6(fl/fl)Col2Cre) also results in a joint
morphogenesis block, whereas Sox5/6 inactivation in specified joint cells only
(Sox5(fl/fl)6(fl/fl)Gdf5Cre) results in milder joint defects and normal growth
plates. Sox5(fl/fl)6(fl/fl)Gdf5Cre articular chondrocytes remain
undifferentiated, as shown by continued Gdf5 expression and pancartilaginous gene
downregulation. Along with Prg4 downregulation, these defects likely account for 
joint tissue overgrowth and incomplete cavitation in adult mice. Together, these 
data suggest that synovial joint morphogenesis relies on essential roles for
Sox5/6 in promoting both growth plate and articular chondrocyte differentiation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2862098
PMID: 20206616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Development. 2010 Apr;137(7):1159-67. doi: 10.1242/dev.045005. Epub 2010 Feb 24.

Runx1 and Runx2 cooperate during sternal morphogenesis.

Kimura A(1), Inose H, Yano F, Fujita K, Ikeda T, Sato S, Iwasaki M, Jinno T, Ae
K, Fukumoto S, Takeuchi Y, Itoh H, Imamura T, Kawaguchi H, Chung UI, Martin JF,
Iseki S, Shinomiya K, Takeda S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Chondrocyte differentiation is strictly regulated by various transcription
factors, including Runx2 and Runx3; however, the physiological role of Runx1 in
chondrocyte differentiation remains unknown. To examine the role of Runx1, we
generated mesenchymal-cell-specific and chondrocyte-specific Runx1-deficient mice
[Prx1 Runx1(f/f) mice and alpha1(II) Runx1(f/f) mice, respectively] to circumvent
the embryonic lethality of Runx1-deficient mice. We then mated these mice with
Runx2 mutant mice to obtain mesenchymal-cell-specific or chondrocyte-specific
Runx1; Runx2 double-mutant mice [Prx1 DKO mice and alpha1(II) DKO mice,
respectively]. Prx1 Runx1(f/f) mice displayed a delay in sternal development and 
Prx1 DKO mice completely lacked a sternum. By contrast, alpha1(II) Runx1(f/f)
mice and alpha1(II) DKO mice did not show any abnormal sternal morphogenesis or
chondrocyte differentiation. Notably, Runx1, Runx2 and the Prx1-Cre transgene
were co-expressed specifically in the sternum, which explains the observation
that the abnormalities were limited to the sternum. Histologically, mesenchymal
cells condensed normally in the prospective sternum of Prx1 DKO mice; however,
commitment to the chondrocyte lineage, which follows mesenchymal condensation,
was significantly impaired. In situ hybridization analyses demonstrated that the 
expression of alpha1(II) collagen (Col2a1 - Mouse Genome Informatics), Sox5 and
Sox6 in the prospective sternum of Prx1 DKO mice was severely attenuated, whereas
Sox9 expression was unchanged. Molecular analyses revealed that Runx1 and Runx2
induce the expression of Sox5 and Sox6, which leads to the induction of
alpha1(II) collagen expression via the direct regulation of promoter activity.
Collectively, these results show that Runx1 and Runx2 cooperatively regulate
sternal morphogenesis and the commitment of mesenchymal cells to become
chondrocytes through the induction of Sox5 and Sox6.

PMCID: PMC2835330
PMID: 20181744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Apr;30(8):1937-45. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01370-09. Epub 2010 Feb
12.

Uncoupling of expression of an intronic microRNA and its myosin host gene by exon
skipping.

Bell ML(1), Buvoli M, Leinwand LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA.

The ancient MYH7b gene, expressed in striated muscle and brain, encodes a
sarcomeric myosin and the intronic microRNA miR-499. We find that skipping of an 
exon introduces a premature termination codon in the transcript that
downregulates MYH7b protein production without affecting microRNA expression.
Among other genes, endogenous miR-499 targets the 3' untranslated region of the
transcription factor Sox6, which in turn acts as a repressor of MYH7b
transcriptional activity. Thus, concerted transcription and alternative splicing 
uncouple the level of expression of MYH7b and miR-499 when their coexpression is 
not required.

PMCID: PMC2849460
PMID: 20154144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Hum Genet. 2010 Mar;127(3):249-85. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0773-z. Epub 2009 Dec 
12.

Genetics of osteoporosis: accelerating pace in gene identification and
validation.

Li WF(1), Hou SX, Yu B, Li MM, Férec C, Chen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, The First Affiliated Hospital, General Hospital of
the People's Liberation Army, 100037 Beijing, China.

Osteoporosis is characterized by low bone mineral density and structural
deterioration of bone tissue, leading to an increased risk of fractures. It is
the most common metabolic bone disorder worldwide, affecting one in three women
and one in eight men over the age of 50. In the past 15 years, a large number of 
genes have been reported as being associated with osteoporosis. However, only in 
the past 4 years we have witnessed an accelerated pace in identifying and
validating osteoporosis susceptibility loci. This increase in pace is mostly due 
to large-scale association studies, meta-analyses, and genome-wide association
studies of both single nucleotide polymorphisms and copy number variations. A
comprehensive review of these developments revealed that, to date, at least 15
genes (VDR, ESR1, ESR2, LRP5, LRP4, SOST, GRP177, OPG, RANK, RANKL, COLIA1, SPP1,
ITGA1, SP7, and SOX6) can be reasonably assigned as confirmed osteoporosis
susceptibility genes, whereas, another >30 genes are promising candidate genes.
Notably, confirmed and promising genes are clustered in three biological
pathways, the estrogen endocrine pathway, the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway,
and the RANKL/RANK/OPG pathway. New biological pathways will certainly emerge
when more osteoporosis genes are identified and validated. These genetic findings
may provide new routes toward improved therapeutic and preventive interventions
of this complex disease.

PMID: 20101412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Apr;30(4):859-68. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.197434. Epub 2010 Jan 15.

MicroRNA-1 and -499 regulate differentiation and proliferation in human-derived
cardiomyocyte progenitor cells.

Sluijter JP(1), van Mil A, van Vliet P, Metz CH, Liu J, Doevendans PA, Goumans
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)University Medical Center Utrecht, Department of Cardiology, Division of Heart
and Lungs, Heidelberglaan 100, Utrecht, The Netherlands. j.sluijter@umcutrecht.nl

OBJECTIVE: To improve regeneration of the injured myocardium, it is necessary to 
enhance the intrinsic capacity of the heart to regenerate itself and/or replace
the damaged tissue by cell transplantation. Cardiomyocyte progenitor cells
(CMPCs) are a promising cell population, easily expanded and efficiently
differentiated into beating cardiomyocytes. Recently, several studies have
demonstrated that microRNAs (miRNAs) are important for stem cell maintenance and 
differentiation via translational repression. We hypothesize that miRNAs are also
involved in proliferation/differentiation of the human CMPCs in vitro.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Human fetal CMPCs were isolated, cultured, and efficiently
differentiated into beating cardiomyocytes. miRNA expression profiling
demonstrated that muscle-specific miR-1 and miR-499 were highly upregulated in
differentiated cells. Transient transfection of miR-1 and -499 in CMPC reduced
proliferation rate by 25% and 15%, respectively, and enhanced differentiation
into cardiomyocytes in human CMPCs and embryonic stem cells, likely via the
repression of histone deacetylase 4 or Sox6. Histone deacetylase 4 and Sox6
protein levels were reduced, and small interference RNA (siRNA)-mediated
knockdown of Sox6 strongly induced myogenic differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: miRNAs regulate the proliferation of human CMPC and their
differentiation into cardiomyocytes. By modulating miR-1 and -499 expression
levels, human CMPC function can be altered and differentiation directed, thereby 
enhancing cardiomyogenic differentiation.

PMID: 20081117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Tissue Eng Part A. 2010 Jun;16(6):1845-55. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2009.0531.

Improving chondrogenesis: potential and limitations of SOX9 gene transfer and
mechanical stimulation for cartilage tissue engineering.

Kupcsik L(1), Stoddart MJ, Li Z, Benneker LM, Alini M.

Author information: 
(1)AO Research Institute, Davos Platz, Switzerland.

Articular cartilage injuries and degeneration affect a large proportion of the
population in developed countries world wide. Stem cells can be differentiated
into chondrocytes by adding transforming growth factor-beta1 and dexamethasone to
a pellet culture, which are unfeasible for tissue engineering purposes. We
attempted to achieve stable chondrogenesis without any requirement for exogenous 
growth factors. Human mesenchymal stem cells were transduced with an adenoviral
vector containing the SRY-related HMG-box gene 9 (SOX9), and were cultured in a
three-dimensional (3D) hydrogel scaffold composite. As an additional treatment,
mechanical stimulation was applied in a custom-made bioreactor. SOX9 increased
the expression level of its known target genes, as well as its cofactors: the
long form of SOX5 and SOX6. However, it was unable to increase the synthesis of
sulfated glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). Mechanical stimulation slightly enhanced
collagen type X and increased lubricin expression. The combination of SOX9 and
mechanical load boosted GAG synthesis as shown by (35)S incorporation. GAG
production rate corresponded well with the amount of (endogenous) transforming
growth factor-beta1. Finally, cartilage oligomeric matrix protein expression was 
increased by both treatments. These findings provide insight into the
mechanotransduction of mesenchymal stem cells and demonstrate the potential of a 
transcription factor in stem cell therapy.

PMID: 20067399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Orthop Res. 2010 Jun;28(6):834-40. doi: 10.1002/jor.21043.

Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells express the pericyte marker 3G5 in
culture and show enhanced chondrogenesis in hypoxic conditions.

Khan WS(1), Adesida AB, Tew SR, Lowe ET, Hardingham TE.

Author information: 
(1)United Kingdom Centre for Tissue Engineering, Faculty of Life Sciences,
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. wasimkhan@doctors.org.uk

Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells are a potential source of cells for
the repair of articular cartilage defects. Hypoxia has been shown to improve
chondrogenesis in some cells. In this study, bone marrow-derived stem cells were 
characterized and the effects of hypoxia on chondrogenesis investigated. Adherent
bone marrow colony-forming cells were characterized for stem cell surface
epitopes, and then cultured as cell aggregates in chondrogenic medium under
normoxic (20% oxygen) or hypoxic (5% oxygen) conditions. The cells stained
strongly for markers of adult mesenchymal stem cells, and a high number of cells 
were also positive for the pericyte marker 3G5. The cells showed a chondrogenic
response in cell aggregate cultures and, in lowered oxygen, there was increased
matrix accumulation of proteoglycan, but less cell proliferation. In hypoxia,
there was increased expression of key transcription factor SOX6, and of collagens
II and XI, and aggrecan. Pericytes are a candidate stem cell in many tissue, and 
our results show that bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells express the
pericyte marker 3G5. The response to chondrogenic culture in these cells was
enhanced by lowered oxygen tension. This has important implications for tissue
engineering applications of bone marrow-derived stem cells.

(c) 2010 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 20058274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Pharmacol Sci. 2010;112(1):89-97. Epub 2010 Jan 6.

A new chondrogenic differentiation initiator with the ability to up-regulate SOX 
trio expression.

Noguchi K(1), Watanabe Y, Fuse T, Takizawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Research Laboratories, Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda
Pharmaceutical Company Limited, Japan. Noguchi_Ken-ichi@takeda.co.jp

During random screening for chondrogenic differentiation inducers, we found that 
Compound-1,
4-[4-(2,3-dihydro-1,4-benzodioxin-6-yl)-1H-pyrazol-3-yl]benzene-1,3-diol,
initiated chondrogenic differentiation of the chondroprogenitor cell line ATDC5. 
Compound-1 initiated chondrogenic differentiation of the mesenchymal stem cell
line C3H10T1/2 in regions where cell aggregates formed and simultaneously
inhibited adipogenic differentiation. In C3H10T1/2 cells, Compound-1 increased
the expression of Sry-related high-mobility-group box transcription factors
L-SOX5, SOX6, and SOX9 (SOX trio) more strongly than bone morphogenic protein
(BMP)-2. cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) inhibitors suppressed
Compound-1-dependent L-SOX5 and SOX6 up-regulation. PKA inhibitors also
suppressed the up-regulation of aggrecan mRNA induced by Compound-1, indicating
that increases in L-SOX5 and SOX6 mRNA, in which the PKA pathway participates,
are involved in the mechanisms behind the action of Compound-1. On the other
hand, the SOX6 and aggrecan gene expression, which were up-regulated by BMP-2,
were not affected by the PKA inhibitor. Compound-1 induced chondrogenic
differentiation of bone marrow stromal cells and recovered cartilage matrix
production by primary chondrocytes, which had been decreased by
interleukin-1beta. These results show the potential of Compound-1 to be a new
cartilage repair agent for inducing chondrogenic differentiation via SOX trio
up-regulation.

PMID: 20051655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jan 1;391(1):1116-21. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.12.034. Epub 2009 Dec 11.

Fibulin-3 negatively regulates chondrocyte differentiation.

Wakabayashi T(1), Matsumine A, Nakazora S, Hasegawa M, Iino T, Ota H, Sonoda H,
Sudo A, Uchida A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine,
2-174 Edobashi, Tsu-city, Mie 514-8507, Japan.

Fibulin-3 is a member of the fibulin family that has been newly recognized as
extracellular matrix proteins. We assessed the effects of fibulin-3
overexpression on chondrocyte differentiation using the clonal murine cell line
ATDC5. The ATDC5-FBLN3 stably expressing fibulin-3 protein was spindle-shaped
cell compared to the ATDC5-mock with plump cell. The cell growth in the
ATDC5-FBLN3 was accelerated in comparison to that in the ATDC5-mock. The
ATDC5-FBLN3 was not stained by Alcian blue, nor was there any cartilage aggregate
formed after the induction of chondrogenic differentiation. The expression of
type II collagen, aggrecan, and type X collagen was completely suppressed in
ATDC5-FBLN3 even after the induction of differentiation. The overexpression of
fibulin-3 reduced the expression of Sox5 and Sox6, while it maintained the
expression of Sox9. These findings suggest that fibulin-3 may play an important
role as a negative regulator of chondrocyte differentiation.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20005202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Jan 1;109(1):265-76. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22419.

The intermediate filament vimentin regulates chondrogenesis of adult human bone
marrow-derived multipotent progenitor cells.

Bobick BE(1), Tuan RS, Chen FH.

Author information: 
(1)Cartilage Biology and Orthopaedics Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Department of
Health and Human Services, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Cytoskeletal proteins play important regulatory roles in a variety of cellular
processes, including proliferation, migration, and differentiation. However,
whereas actin and tubulin have established roles regulating developmental
chondrogenesis, there is no evidence supporting a function for the intermediate
filament vimentin in embryonic cartilage formation. We hypothesized that vimentin
may regulate the chondrogenic differentiation of adult multipotent progenitor
cells (MPCs), such as those involved in cartilage formation during bone fracture 
repair. As our model of adult progenitor cell chondrogenesis, we employed
high-density pellet cultures of human bone marrow-derived MPCs. siRNA-mediated
knockdown of vimentin mRNA and protein triggered a reduction in the extent of MPC
cartilage formation, as evidenced by depressed accumulation of mRNAs for the
cartilage-specific marker genes aggrecan and collagen type II, as well as reduced
levels of Alcian blue-stainable proteoglycan and collagen II protein in the
extracellular matrix. Moreover, mRNA and protein levels for the
chondro-regulatory transcription factors SOX5, SOX6, and SOX9 were diminished by 
vimentin knockdown. Depleted cellular vimentin also induced a drastic reduction
in PKA phosphorylation levels but did not affect the phosphorylation of multiple 
other chondro-regulatory kinases and transcription factors, including ERK1/2,
p38, Smad2, and Smad1/5/8. Importantly, siRNA-mediated knockdown of PKA C-alpha
mRNA and protein mimicked the reduction in chondrogenesis caused by diminished
cellular vimentin. Finally, overexpression of vimentin in MPCs significantly
enhanced the activity of a transfected collagen II promoter-luciferase reporter
gene. In conclusion, we describe a novel role for the intermediate filament
vimentin as a positive regulator of adult human bone marrow-derived MPC
chondrogenesis.

PMID: 19937731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Nat Genet. 2009 Nov;41(11):1199-206. doi: 10.1038/ng.446. Epub 2009 Oct 4.

Twenty bone-mineral-density loci identified by large-scale meta-analysis of
genome-wide association studies.

Rivadeneira F(1), Styrkársdottir U, Estrada K, Halldórsson BV, Hsu YH, Richards
JB, Zillikens MC, Kavvoura FK, Amin N, Aulchenko YS, Cupples LA, Deloukas P,
Demissie S, Grundberg E, Hofman A, Kong A, Karasik D, van Meurs JB, Oostra B,
Pastinen T, Pols HA, Sigurdsson G, Soranzo N, Thorleifsson G, Thorsteinsdottir U,
Williams FM, Wilson SG, Zhou Y, Ralston SH, van Duijn CM, Spector T, Kiel DP,
Stefansson K, Ioannidis JP, Uitterlinden AG; Genetic Factors for Osteoporosis
(GEFOS) Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Bone mineral density (BMD) is a heritable complex trait used in the clinical
diagnosis of osteoporosis and the assessment of fracture risk. We performed
meta-analysis of five genome-wide association studies of femoral neck and lumbar 
spine BMD in 19,195 subjects of Northern European descent. We identified 20 BMD
loci that reached genome-wide significance (GWS; P < 5 x 10(-8)), of which 13 map
to regions not previously associated with this trait: 1p31.3 (GPR177), 2p21
(SPTBN1), 3p22 (CTNNB1), 4q21.1 (MEPE), 5q14 (MEF2C), 7p14 (STARD3NL), 7q21.3
(FLJ42280), 11p11.2 (LRP4, ARHGAP1, F2), 11p14.1 (DCDC5), 11p15 (SOX6), 16q24
(FOXL1), 17q21 (HDAC5) and 17q12 (CRHR1). The meta-analysis also confirmed at GWS
level seven known BMD loci on 1p36 (ZBTB40), 6q25 (ESR1), 8q24 (TNFRSF11B),
11q13.4 (LRP5), 12q13 (SP7), 13q14 (TNFSF11) and 18q21 (TNFRSF11A). The many SNPs
associated with BMD map to genes in signaling pathways with relevance to bone
metabolism and highlight the complex genetic architecture that underlies
osteoporosis and variation in BMD.

PMCID: PMC2783489
PMID: 19801982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Nov;20(21):4541-51. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E09-03-0227. Epub 2009
Sep 16.

Sox9 family members negatively regulate maturation and calcification of
chondrocytes through up-regulation of parathyroid hormone-related protein.

Amano K(1), Hata K, Sugita A, Takigawa Y, Ono K, Wakabayashi M, Kogo M, Nishimura
R, Yoneda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University Graduate School
of Dentistry, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Sox9 is a transcription factor that plays an essential role in chondrogenesis and
has been proposed to inhibit the late stages of endochondral ossification.
However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of chondrocyte
maturation and calcification by Sox9 remain unknown. In this study, we attempted 
to clarify roles of Sox9 in the late stages of chondrocyte differentiation. We
found that overexpression of Sox9 alone or Sox9 together with Sox5 and Sox6
(Sox5/6/9) inhibited the maturation and calcification of murine primary
chondrocytes and up-regulated parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP)
expression in primary chondrocytes and the mesenchymal cell line C3H10T1/2.
Sox5/6/9 stimulated the early stages of chondrocyte proliferation and
development. In contrast, Sox5/6/9 inhibited maturation and calcification of
chondrocytes in organ culture. The inhibitory effects of Sox5/6/9 were rescued by
treating with anti-PTHrP antibody. Moreover, Sox5/6/9 bound to the promoter
region of the PTHrP gene and up-regulated PTHrP gene promoter activity.
Interestingly, we also found that the Sox9 family members functionally
collaborated with Ihh/Gli2 signaling to regulate PTHrP expression and chondrocyte
differentiation. Our results provide novel evidence that Sox9 family members
mediate endochondral ossification by up-regulating PTHrP expression in
association with Ihh/Gli2 signaling.

PMCID: PMC2770942
PMID: 19759178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Int J Cancer. 2010 Feb 15;126(4):919-29. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24851.

Identification of HLA-A2- and A24-restricted T-cell epitopes derived from SOX6
expressed in glioma stem cells for immunotherapy.

Ueda R(1), Ohkusu-Tsukada K, Fusaki N, Soeda A, Kawase T, Kawakami Y, Toda M.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology Research Group, Keio University School of Medicine,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Malignant gliomas are the most aggressive human primary brain tumors and are
currently incurable. Immunotherapies have the potential to target glioma and
glioma stem cells (GSCs) that are resistant to conventional therapies. We
previously identified SOX6 as a human glioma antigen and demonstrated that
vaccination with SOX6 DNA induced cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) specific for
glioma, thereby exerting therapeutic antitumor responses in glioma-bearing mice. 
In this study, we attempted to identify SOX6-derived peptides as specific targets
for effective and safe T-cell-mediated immunotherapy targeting SOX6-positive
glioma and GSCs. In vitro stimulation with human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A*2402
(A24)-restricted peptides, RFENLGPQL (SOX6(504)) and PYYEEQARL (SOX6(628)) or the
HLA-A*0201 (A2)-restricted peptide, ALFGDQDTV (SOX6(447)) was capable of inducing
SOX6 peptide-specific CTLs in peripheral blood mononuclear cells derived from
healthy donors and glioma patients. These CTLs were able to lyse a majority of
glioma cell lines and a GSC line derived from human glioblastoma in an HLA Class 
I-restricted and an antigen-dependent manner. Furthermore, peptide vaccines of
SOX6(628), which was conserved in the murine SOX6 protein and expected to bind to
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) H-2(d), induced CTLs specific for
SOX6(628) in H-2(d) mice. Normal autologous cells from mice, in which
SOX6-specific immune responses were generated, were not destroyed. These results 
suggest that these SOX6 peptides are potnetially immunogenic in HLA-A24 or -A2
positive glioma patients and should be considered as a promising strategy for
safe and effective T-cell-based immunotherapy of patients with gliomas.

PMID: 19728337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. PLoS One. 2009 Aug 28;4(8):e6827. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006827.

Powerful bivariate genome-wide association analyses suggest the SOX6 gene
influencing both obesity and osteoporosis phenotypes in males.

Liu YZ(1), Pei YF, Liu JF, Yang F, Guo Y, Zhang L, Liu XG, Yan H, Wang L, Zhang
YP, Levy S, Recker RR, Deng HW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Missouri - Kansas City, Kansas City,
Missouri, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Current genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are normally
implemented in a univariate framework and analyze different phenotypes in
isolation. This univariate approach ignores the potential genetic correlation
between important disease traits. Hence this approach is difficult to detect
pleiotropic genes, which may exist for obesity and osteoporosis, two common
diseases of major public health importance that are closely correlated
genetically.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To identify such pleiotropic genes and the key mechanistic
links between the two diseases, we here performed the first bivariate GWAS of
obesity and osteoporosis. We searched for genes underlying co-variation of the
obesity phenotype, body mass index (BMI), with the osteoporosis risk phenotype,
hip bone mineral density (BMD), scanning approximately 380,000 SNPs in 1,000
unrelated homogeneous Caucasians, including 499 males and 501 females. We
identified in the male subjects two SNPs in intron 1 of the SOX6 (SRY-box 6)
gene, rs297325 and rs4756846, which were bivariately associated with both BMI and
hip BMD, achieving p values of 6.82x10(-7) and 1.47x10(-6), respectively. The two
SNPs ranked at the top in significance for bivariate association with BMI and hip
BMD in the male subjects among all the approximately 380,000 SNPs examined
genome-wide. The two SNPs were replicated in a Framingham Heart Study (FHS)
cohort containing 3,355 Caucasians (1,370 males and 1,985 females) from 975
families. In the FHS male subjects, the two SNPs achieved p values of 0.03 and
0.02, respectively, for bivariate association with BMI and femoral neck BMD.
Interestingly, SOX6 was previously found to be essential to both cartilage
formation/chondrogenesis and obesity-related insulin resistance, suggesting the
gene's dual role in both bone and fat.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings, together with the prior biological evidence, suggest
the SOX6 gene's importance in co-regulation of obesity and osteoporosis.

PMCID: PMC2730014
PMID: 19714249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Neuron. 2009 Aug 27;63(4):466-81. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.08.005.

The cell-intrinsic requirement of Sox6 for cortical interneuron development.

Batista-Brito R(1), Rossignol E, Hjerling-Leffler J, Denaxa M, Wegner M, Lefebvre
V, Pachnis V, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Smilow Neuroscience Program and the Department of Cell Biology, Smilow
Research Building, New York University School of Medicine, 522 First Avenue, New 
York, NY 10016, USA.

We describe the role of Sox6 in cortical interneuron development, from a cellular
to a behavioral level. We identify Sox6 as a protein expressed continuously
within MGE-derived cortical interneurons from postmitotic progenitor stages into 
adulthood. Both its expression pattern and null phenotype suggests that Sox6 gene
function is closely linked to that of Lhx6. In both Lhx6 and Sox6 null animals,
the expression of PV and SST and the position of both basket and Martinotti
neurons are abnormal. We find that Sox6 functions downstream of Lhx6.
Electrophysiological analysis of Sox6 mutant cortical interneurons revealed that 
basket cells, even when mispositioned, retain characteristic but immature
fast-spiking physiological features. Our data suggest that Sox6 is not required
for the specification of MGE-derived cortical interneurons. It is, however,
necessary for their normal positioning and maturation. As a consequence, the
specific removal of Sox6 from this population results in a severe epileptic
encephalopathy.

PMCID: PMC2773208
PMID: 19709629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Physiol Genomics. 2009 Nov 6;39(3):219-26. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00042.2009. Epub 2009 Aug 18.

Evidence of MyomiR network regulation of beta-myosin heavy chain gene expression 
during skeletal muscle atrophy.

McCarthy JJ(1), Esser KA, Peterson CA, Dupont-Versteegden EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College Health Sciences, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, Kentucky 40536-0298, USA. jjmcca2@uky.edu

There is a growing recognition that noncoding RNAs (ncRNA) play an important role
in the regulation of gene expression. A class of small (19-22 nt) ncRNAs, known
as microRNAs (miRs), have received a great deal of attention lately because of
their ability to repress gene expression through a unique posttranscriptional
3'-untranslated region (UTR) mechanism. The objectives of the current study were 
to identify miRs expressed in the rat soleus muscle and determine if their
expression was changed in response to hindlimb suspension. Comprehensive
profiling revealed 151 miRs were expressed in the soleus muscle and expression of
18 miRs were significantly (P < 0.01) changed after 2 and/or 7 days of hindlimb
suspension. The significant decrease (16%) in expression of muscle-specific
miR-499 in response to hindlimb suspension was confirmed by RT-PCR and suggested 
activation of the recently proposed miR encoded by myosin gene (MyomiR) network
during atrophy. Further analysis of soleus muscle subjected to hindlimb
suspension for 28 days provided evidence consistent with MyomiR network
repression of beta-myosin heavy chain gene (beta-MHC) expression. The significant
downregulation of network components miR-499 and miR-208b by 40 and 60%,
respectively, was associated with increased expression of Sox6 (2.2-fold) and
Purbeta (23%), predicted target genes of miR-499 and known repressors of beta-MHC
expression. A Sox6 3'-UTR reporter gene confirmed Sox6 is a target gene of
miR-499. These results further expand the role of miRs in adult skeletal muscle
and are consistent with a model in which the MyomiR network regulates slow myosin
expression during muscle atrophy.

PMCID: PMC2789671
PMID: 19690046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Oct;12(10):1238-47. doi: 10.1038/nn.2387. Epub 2009 Aug 5.

SOX6 controls dorsal progenitor identity and interneuron diversity during
neocortical development.

Azim E(1), Jabaudon D, Fame RM, Macklis JD.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital-Harvard Medical School Center for Nervous
System Repair, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The neuronal diversity of the CNS emerges largely from controlled spatial and
temporal segregation of cell type-specific molecular regulators. We found that
the transcription factor SOX6 controls the molecular segregation of dorsal
(pallial) from ventral (subpallial) telencephalic progenitors and the
differentiation of cortical interneurons, regulating forebrain progenitor and
interneuron heterogeneity. During corticogenesis in mice, SOX6 and SOX5 were
largely mutually exclusively expressed in pallial and subpallial progenitors,
respectively, and remained mutually exclusive in a reverse pattern in postmitotic
neuronal progeny. Loss of SOX6 from pallial progenitors caused their
inappropriate expression of normally subpallium-restricted developmental
controls, conferring mixed dorsal-ventral identity. In postmitotic cortical
interneurons, loss of SOX6 disrupted the differentiation and diversity of
cortical interneuron subtypes, analogous to SOX5 control over cortical projection
neuron development. These data indicate that SOX6 is a central regulator of both 
progenitor and cortical interneuron diversity during neocortical development.

PMCID: PMC2903203
PMID: 19657336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Mar;42(3):429-32. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2009.07.016. Epub 2009 Jul 30.

The SoxD transcription factors--Sox5, Sox6, and Sox13--are key cell fate
modulators.

Lefebvre V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Orthopaedic Research Center, Cleveland Clinic
Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. lefebvv@ccf.org

Sox5, Sox6, and Sox13 constitute the group D of sex-determining region
(Sry)-related transcription factors. They are highly conserved in the
family-specific high-mobility-group (HMG) box DNA-binding domain and in a
group-specific coiled-coil domain. The latter mediates SoxD protein dimerization 
and thereby preferential binding to pairs of DNA recognition sites. The SoxD
genes have overlapping expression and cell-autonomously control discrete
lineages. Sox5 and Sox6 redundantly enhance chondrogenesis, but retard
gliogenesis. Sox5 hinders melanogenesis, promotes neural crest generation, and
controls the pace of neurogenesis. Sox6 promotes erythropoiesis, and Sox13
modulates T cell specification and is an autoimmune antigen. SoxD proteins
enhance transactivation by Sox9 in chondrocytes, but antagonize Sox9 and other
SoxE proteins in oligodendrocytes and melanocytes, and also repress transcription
through various mechanisms in several other lineages. While their biological and 
molecular functions remain incompletely understood, the SoxD proteins have thus
already proven that they critically modulate cell fate in major lineages.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2826538
PMID: 19647094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Tissue Eng Part A. 2010 Jan;16(1):81-90. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2009.0222.

Collagen type II enhances chondrogenesis in adipose tissue-derived stem cells by 
affecting cell shape.

Lu Z(1), Doulabi BZ, Huang C, Bank RA, Helder MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.

Ideally, biomaterials have inductive properties, favoring specific lineage
differentiation. For chondrogenic induction, these properties have been
attributed to collagen type II. However, the underlying mechanisms are largely
unknown. This study aimed to investigate whether collagen type II favors
chondrogenic induction by affecting cell shape through beta1 integrins and Rho
A/Rock signaling. For this purpose, adipose tissue-derived stem cells (ASCs) were
encapsulated in collagen type I or II gels and cultured in plain and chondrogenic
medium. It was demonstrated that (i) ASCs showed more efficient chondrogenic
induction (higher collagen X, aggrecan, sox6, sox9, and collagen II gene
expression) in both plain and chondrogenic media in collagen type II versus
collagen type I gels; (ii) ASCs showed lower Rock 2 gene expression and a more
rounded cell shape in collagen type II versus type I gels when grown in plain
medium; (iii) Rock inhibitor (Y27632) more effectively enhanced chondrogenic gene
expression of ASCs in collagen type I than in collagen type II gels, and
diminished differences in chondrogenic gene expression and cell shape of ASCs
between the two gel types; and (iv) beta1 integrins blocking not only reduced the
differences of chondrogenic gene expression but also eliminated the differences
of Rock 1 and Rock 2 gene expressions and cell shape when comparing ASCs embedded
in collagen type I and II gels. We conclude that collagen type II provides the
inductive signaling for chondrogenic differentiation in ASCs by evoking a round
cell shape through beta1 integrin-mediated Rho A/Rock signaling pathway.

PMID: 19624244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Blood. 2009 Sep 10;114(11):2299-306. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-05-219386. Epub 2009
Jul 13.

Cytokine-mediated increases in fetal hemoglobin are associated with globin gene
histone modification and transcription factor reprogramming.

Sripichai O(1), Kiefer CM, Bhanu NV, Tanno T, Noh SJ, Goh SH, Russell JE,
Rognerud CL, Ou CN, Oneal PA, Meier ER, Gantt NM, Byrnes C, Lee YT, Dean A,
Miller JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Therapeutic regulation of globin genes is a primary goal of translational
research aimed toward hemoglobinopathies. Signal transduction was used to
identify chromatin modifications and transcription factor expression patterns
that are associated with globin gene regulation. Histone modification and
transcriptome profiling were performed using adult primary CD34(+) cells cultured
with cytokine combinations that produced low versus high levels of gamma-globin
mRNA and fetal hemoglobin (HbF). Embryonic, fetal, and adult globin transcript
and protein expression patterns were determined for comparison. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed RNA polymerase II occupancy and histone tail 
modifications consistent with transcriptional activation only in the high-HbF
culture condition. Transcriptome profiling studies demonstrated reproducible
changes in expression of nuclear transcription factors associated with high HbF. 
Among the 13 genes that demonstrated differential transcript levels, 8
demonstrated nuclear protein expression levels that were significantly changed by
cytokine signal transduction. Five of the 8 genes are recognized regulators of
erythropoiesis or globin genes (MAFF, ID2, HHEX, SOX6, and EGR1). Thus,
cytokine-mediated signal transduction in adult erythroid cells causes significant
changes in the pattern of globin gene and protein expression that are associated 
with distinct histone modifications as well as nuclear reprogramming of erythroid
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC2745848
PMID: 19597182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Bone. 2009 Sep;45(3):568-78. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2009.05.004. Epub 2009 May 13.

Interference by adrenaline with chondrogenic differentiation through suppression 
of gene transactivation mediated by Sox9 family members.

Takarada T(1), Hojo H, Iemata M, Sahara K, Kodama A, Nakamura N, Hinoi E, Yoneda 
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kanazawa University Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology,
Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan.

In contrast to osteoblasts, little attention has been paid to the functional
expression of adrenergic signaling machineries in chondrocytes. Expression of
mRNA was for the first time demonstrated for different adrenergic receptor (AdR) 
subtypes in chondrogenic ATDC5 cells and mouse metatarsals isolated before
vascularization in culture, but not for other molecules related to adrenergic
signaling. In neonatal mouse tibial sections, beta(2)AdR and alpha(2a)AdR mRNA
expression was found in chondrocytes at different developmental stages by in situ
hybridization. Exposure to adrenaline significantly suppressed expression of
several maturation markers through the cAMP/protein kinase A pathway activated by
beta(2)AdR without affecting cellular proliferation in both cultured ATDC5 cells 
and metatarsals. Adrenaline also significantly inhibited gene transactivation by 
sry-type HMG box 9 (Sox9) family members essential for chondrogenic
differentiation in a manner prevented by the general betaAdR antagonist
propranolol, with a concomitant significant decrease in the levels of Sox6 mRNA
and corresponding protein, in ATDC5 cells and primary cultured mouse costal
chondrocytes. Systemic administration of propranolol significantly promoted the
increased expression of mRNA for collagen I and collagen X, but not for collagen 
II, in callus of fractured femur in mice. These results suggest that adrenaline
may interfere with chondrogenic differentiation through downregulation of Sox6
expression for subsequent suppression of gene transactivation mediated by Sox9
family members after activation of beta(2)AdR expressed by chondrocytes.

PMID: 19446054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Dev Dyn. 2009 Jun;238(6):1595-604. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21957.

DAX-1 and SOX6 molecular interplay results in an antagonistic effect in pre-mRNA 
splicing.

Ohe K(1), Tamai KT, Parvinen M, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS-INSERM-ULP, Strasbourg, France.

DAX-1 (DSS-AHC Critical Region on the X Chromosome-1) is a member of the nuclear 
hormone receptor superfamily that has an important role in steroidogenesis and
gonadogenesis. To investigate the role of DAX-1 in the testis, a yeast two-hybrid
screen was performed and SOX6, member of the Sry box (SOX) protein family, was
cloned as candidate. The interaction was confirmed biochemically and expression
of SOX6 overlapped with that of DAX-1 in the developing gonad, as well as in
Sertoli cells of the adult testis. We show here that DAX-1 is able to inhibit
splicing in in vivo and in vitro splicing assays, and this inhibition is relieved
by the addition of SOX6. SOX6 appears to inhibit the interaction between DAX-1
and the splicing machinery, thus providing a likely mechanism for functional
interference. We conclude that DAX-1 and SOX6 proteins interact, have overlapped 
expression in the testis, and act antagonistically during pre-mRNA splicing.
Developmental Dynamics 238:1595-1604, 2009. (c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19384854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2009 Aug;17(8):1065-75. doi:
10.1016/j.joca.2009.02.003. Epub 2009 Feb 20.

Transcriptional induction of SOX9 by NF-kappaB family member RelA in chondrogenic
cells.

Ushita M(1), Saito T, Ikeda T, Yano F, Higashikawa A, Ogata N, Chung U, Nakamura 
K, Kawaguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sensory & Motor System Medicine, University of Tokyo, Hongo
7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Although SOX9 is a key molecule for chondrogenic differentiation,
little is known about the upstream signal. The present study attempted to
identify transcription factors to induce SOX9 expression and examined the
mechanism.
METHODS: Sequences of about 1 kb of 5'-end flanking regions were compared between
human and mouse SOX9 genes. In vivo localization was examined by
immunohistochemistry in the limb cartilage of fetal mice. Promoter activities of 
the SOX9, SOX6, and type II collagen (COL2A1) genes were determined in human
non-chondrogenic HeLa cells and mouse chondrogenic ATDC5 cells transfected with a
luciferase-reporter gene containing the promoter fragments. Protein-DNA binding
was examined by electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assays. The chondrogenic differentiation was assessed by endogenous SOX9, SOX6,
and COL2A1 mRNA levels, and by Alcian blue staining and alkaline phosphatase
activity.
RESULTS: Among transcription factors whose binding motifs were identified in the 
highly-conserved regions between human and mouse SOX9 promoters, a nuclear factor
kappa B (NF-kappaB) member RelA strongly activated the promoter activity. RelA
and SOX9 were co-localized in the limb cartilage. Deletion, mutagenesis, and
tandem-repeat analyses identified the core region responsive to RelA at the
NF-kappaB binding motif to be around -250bp of the human SOX9 promoter, and this 
was confirmed to show specific binding to RelA. RelA induced the chondrogenic
differentiation parameters in HeLa and ATDC5 cells.
CONCLUSION: We have identified RelA as a transcriptional factor for SOX9
induction and chondrogenic differentiation via binding to an NF-kappaB binding
motif in the SOX9 promoter.

PMID: 19254740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. BMC Genet. 2009 Jan 15;10:2. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-10-2.

Mapping of five candidate sex-determining loci in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss).

Alfaqih MA(1), Brunelli JP, Drew RE, Thorgaard GH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences and Center for Reproductive Biology, Washington 
State University, Pullman, WA 99164-4236, USA. dr_faqih@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Rainbow trout have an XX/XY genetic mechanism of sex determination
where males are the heterogametic sex. The homology of the sex-determining gene
(SDG) in medaka to Dmrt1 suggested that SDGs evolve from downstream genes by gene
duplication. Orthologous sequences of the major genes of the mammalian sex
determination pathway have been reported in the rainbow trout but the map
position for the majority of these genes has not been assigned.
RESULTS: Five loci of four candidate genes (Amh, Dax1, Dmrt1 and Sox6) were
tested for linkage to the Y chromosome of rainbow trout. We exclude the role of
all these loci as candidates for the primary SDG in this species. Sox6i and
Sox6ii, duplicated copies of Sox6, mapped to homeologous linkage groups 10 and 18
respectively. Genotyping fishes of the OSU x Arlee mapping family for Sox6i and
Sox6ii alleles indicated that Sox6i locus might be deleted in the Arlee lineage.
CONCLUSION: Additional candidate genes should be tested for their linkage to the 
Y chromosome. Mapping data of duplicated Sox6 loci supports previously suggested 
homeology between linkage groups 10 and 18. Enrichment of the rainbow trout
genomic map with known gene markers allows map comparisons with other salmonids. 
Mapping of candidate sex-determining loci is important for analyses of potential 
autosomal modifiers of sex-determination in rainbow trout.

PMCID: PMC2633016
PMID: 19146678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Clin Invest. 2009 Jan;119(1):146-56. doi: 10.1172/JCI36851. Epub 2008 Dec 15.

Mutant Hoxd13 induces extra digits in a mouse model of synpolydactyly directly
and by decreasing retinoic acid synthesis.

Kuss P(1), Villavicencio-Lorini P, Witte F, Klose J, Albrecht AN, Seemann P,
Hecht J, Mundlos S.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

Individuals with the birth defect synpolydactyly (SPD) have 1 or more digit
duplicated and 2 or more digits fused together. One form of SPD is caused by
polyalanine expansions in homeobox d13 (Hoxd13). Here we have used the naturally 
occurring mouse mutant that has the same mutation, the SPD homolog (Spdh) allele,
and a similar phenotype, to investigate the molecular pathogenesis of SPD. A
transgenic approach and crossing experiments showed that the Spdh allele is a
combination of loss and gain of function. Here we identify retinaldehyde
dehydrogenase 2 (Raldh2), the rate-limiting enzyme for retinoic acid (RA)
synthesis in the limb, as a direct Hoxd13 target and show decreased RA production
in limbs from Spdh/Spdh mice. Intrauterine treatment with RA restored
pentadactyly in Spdh/Spdh mice. We further show that RA and WT Hoxd13 suppress
chondrogenesis in mesenchymal progenitor cells, whereas Hoxd13 encoded by Spdh
promotes cartilage formation in primary cells isolated from Spdh/Spdh limbs, and 
that this was associated with increased expression of Sox6/9. Increased Sox9
expression and ectopic cartilage formation in the interdigital mesenchyme of
limbs from Spdh/Spdh mice suggest uncontrolled differentiation of these cells
into the chondrocytic lineage. Thus, we propose that mutated Hoxd13 causes
polydactyly in SPD by inducing extraneous interdigital chondrogenesis, both
directly and indirectly, via a reduction in RA levels.

PMCID: PMC2613457
PMID: 19075394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. BMC Genomics. 2008 Dec 8;9:591. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-591.

Transcriptome analysis of mammary epithelial subpopulations identifies novel
determinants of lineage commitment and cell fate.

Kendrick H(1), Regan JL, Magnay FA, Grigoriadis A, Mitsopoulos C, Zvelebil M,
Smalley MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer Research, 
London, UK. howard.kendrick@icr.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Understanding the molecular control of cell lineages and fate
determination in complex tissues is key to not only understanding the
developmental biology and cellular homeostasis of such tissues but also for our
understanding and interpretation of the molecular pathology of diseases such as
cancer. The prerequisite for such an understanding is detailed knowledge of the
cell types that make up such tissues, including their comprehensive molecular
characterisation. In the mammary epithelium, the bulk of the tissue is composed
of three cell lineages, namely the basal/myoepithelial, luminal epithelial
estrogen receptor positive and luminal epithelial estrogen receptor negative
cells. However, a detailed molecular characterisation of the transcriptomic
differences between these three populations has not been carried out.
RESULTS: A whole transcriptome analysis of basal/myoepithelial cells, luminal
estrogen receptor negative cells and luminal estrogen receptor positive cells
isolated from the virgin mouse mammary epithelium identified 861, 326 and 488
genes as highly differentially expressed in the three cell types, respectively.
Network analysis of the transcriptomic data identified a subpopulation of luminal
estrogen receptor negative cells with a novel potential role as non-professional 
immune cells. Analysis of the data for potential paracrine interacting factors
showed that the basal/myoepithelial cells, remarkably, expressed over twice as
many ligands and cell surface receptors as the other two populations combined. A 
number of transcriptional regulators were also identified that were
differentially expressed between the cell lineages. One of these, Sox6, was
specifically expressed in luminal estrogen receptor negative cells and functional
assays confirmed that it maintained mammary epithelial cells in a differentiated 
luminal cell lineage.
CONCLUSION: The mouse mammary epithelium is composed of three main cell types
with distinct gene expression patterns. These suggest the existence of a novel
functional cell type within the gland, that the basal/myoepithelial cells are key
regulators of paracrine signalling and that there is a complex network of
differentially expressed transcription factors controlling mammary epithelial
cell fate. These data will form the basis for understanding not only cell fate
determination and cellular homeostasis in the normal mammary epithelium but also 
the contribution of different mammary epithelial cell types to the etiology and
molecular pathology of breast disease.

PMCID: PMC2629782
PMID: 19063729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Aug;28(16):4999-5013. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00695-08. Epub 2008
Jun 16.

L-Sox5 and Sox6 drive expression of the aggrecan gene in cartilage by securing
binding of Sox9 to a far-upstream enhancer.

Han Y(1), Lefebvre V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Orthopaedic Research Center, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

The Sry-related high-mobility-group box transcription factor Sox9 recruits the
redundant L-Sox5 and Sox6 proteins to effect chondrogenesis, but the mode of
action of the trio remains unclear. We identify here a highly conserved 359-bp
sequence 10 kb upstream of the Agc1 gene for aggrecan, a most essential cartilage
proteoglycan and key marker of chondrocyte differentiation. This sequence directs
expression of a minimal promoter in both embryonic and adult cartilage in
transgenic mice, in a manner that matches Agc1 expression. The chondrogenic trio 
is required and sufficient to mediate the activity of this enhancer. It acts
directly, Sox9 binding to a critical cis-acting element and L-Sox5/Sox6 binding
to three additional elements, which are cooperatively needed. Upon binding to
their specific sites, L-Sox5/Sox6 increases the efficiency of Sox9 binding to its
own recognition site and thereby robustly potentiates the ability of Sox9 to
activate the enhancer. L-Sox5/Sox6 similarly secures Sox9 binding to Col2a1
(encoding collagen-2) and other cartilage-specific enhancers. This study thus
uncovers critical cis-acting elements and transcription factors driving Agc1
expression in cartilage and increases understanding of the mode of action of the 
chondrogenic Sox trio.

PMCID: PMC2519711
PMID: 18559420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Pathobiology. 2008;75(3):195-9. doi: 10.1159/000124980.

SOX gene expression in human osteoarthritic cartilage.

Haag J(1), Gebhard PM, Aigner T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: While the developmental role of the SOX transcription factors in fetal
chondrocyte differentiation is well documented, much less is known about the
expression of SOX family members in normal and osteoarthritic adult cartilage.
Therefore, the aim of the present study was to present a thorough analysis of SOX
gene expression in normal and osteoarthritic human adult cartilage.
METHODS: RNA from normal and osteoarthritic knee cartilage from human adults was 
analyzed by gene expression profiling using GeneChip technology (Affymetrix) and 
quantitative real time PCR.
RESULTS: Most members of the SOX transcription factor family showed no or very
low expression levels in normal and osteoarthritic cartilage from adults. In
contrast, SOX9 expression was fairly high in normal cartilage, amounting to
approximately 20% of GAPDH levels. SOX9 transcript levels were substantially
reduced in osteoarthritis. SOX6 levels were reduced, albeit starting from a low
basis expression in normal tissue.
CONCLUSION: The presented data indicate that the role of the SOX transcription
factor family in adult human cartilage is most probably restricted to a few
members, with SOX9 being the most prominent. Furthermore, the reduction of SOX9
and SOX6 transcript levels in osteoarthritic chondrocytes might be responsible
for the loss of phenotypic stability of osteoarthritic chondrocytes.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18550917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Genesis. 2008 Jun;46(6):294-9. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20392.

Generation of mice harboring a Sox5 conditional null allele.

Dy P(1), Han Y, Lefebvre V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Orthopaedic Research Center, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

Sox5 belongs to the Sry-related HMG box gene family, which encodes transcription 
factors controlling cell fate and differentiation in many lineages. Sox5 produces
a long L-Sox5 protein in neuronal, glial, neural crest, cartilage, and other
cells, and a short Sox5 protein in spermatids. Sox5(-/-) mice have revealed
essential roles for L-Sox5 in development but their neonatal death has prevented 
postnatal studies. We show here that we have generated mice harboring a
conditional null allele for L-Sox5 (Sox5(fl+)) by flanking the fifth coding exon 
with loxP sites. Cre recombinase-mediated conversion of Sox5(fl+) into Sox5(fl-) 
abolishes L-Sox5 expression. Expectedly, Sox5(fl+/fl+) mice are indistinguishable
from wildtype mice, and Sox5(fl-/fl-) mice from Sox5(-/-) mice. Moreover, the
chondrodysplasia of Sox5(fl+/fl+)Sox6(fl+/fl+)Prx1Cre mice demonstrates that the 
two redundant chondrogenic Sox genes can be efficiently inactivated in a cell
type-specific manner. This Sox5 conditional null allele will be valuable in
further uncovering the in vivo roles of L-Sox5.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18543318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. EMBO Rep. 2008 Jul;9(7):683-9. doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.73. Epub 2008 Jun 6.

Prdm1- and Sox6-mediated transcriptional repression specifies muscle fibre type
in the zebrafish embryo.

von Hofsten J(1), Elworthy S, Gilchrist MJ, Smith JC, Wardle FC, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics, University of Sheffield,
Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

The zebrafish u-boot (ubo) gene encodes the transcription factor Prdm1, which is 
essential for the specification of the primary slow-twitch muscle fibres that
derive from adaxial cells. Here, we show that Prdm1 functions by acting as a
transcriptional repressor and that slow-twitch-specific muscle gene expression is
activated by Prdm1-mediated repression of the transcriptional repressor Sox6.
Genes encoding fast-specific isoforms of sarcomeric proteins are ectopically
expressed in the adaxial cells of ubo(tp39) mutant embryos. By using chromatin
immunoprecipitation, we show that these are direct targets of Prdm1. Thus, Prdm1 
promotes slow-twitch fibre differentiation by acting as a global repressor of
fast-fibre-specific genes, as well as by abrogating the repression of
slow-fibre-specific genes.

PMCID: PMC2424280
PMID: 18535625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Aug 8;372(4):547-52. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.05.063. Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Beta1 integrins regulate chondrogenesis and rock signaling in adipose stem cells.

Lu ZF(1), Zandieh Doulabi B, Huang CL, Bank RA, Helder MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.

Beta1 integrins play a controversial role during chondrogenesis. Since the
maturation of chondrocytes relies on a signaling switch from cell-cell to
cell-matrix interactions, we hypothesized that beta1 integrins play a different
role at the earlier (mainly cell-cell interaction) from the later stage (mainly
cell-matrix interaction) of chondrogenesis. Our data showed: in plain medium,
sox9, collagen X, and collagen II gene expressions of ASCs were induced by
beta1-integrin blockage at day 14. In chondrogenic medium, however, sox 9, sox6, 
and collagen II gene expression were induced at day 4 but inhibited at day 14. In
addition, both beta1-integrin blockage and TGF-beta1 down-regulated Rock-1 and -2
gene expression and produced the round cells. We concluded that beta1 integrins
play a more important role at the later stages than earlier stages of
chondrogenesis, and that the onset of chondrogenesis promoted by beta1-integrin
blockage might be through inhibiting Rock signaling.

PMID: 18514067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jul 18;372(1):230-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.05.022. Epub 2008 May 13.

Upregulation of Runx2 and Osterix during in vitro chondrogenesis of human
adipose-derived stromal cells.

Rich JT(1), Rosová I, Nolta JA, Myckatyn TM, Sandell LJ, McAlinden A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Washington University
School of Medicine St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The aim of this study was to create a gene expression profile to better define
the phenotype of human adipose-derived stromal cells (HADSCs) during in vitro
chondrogenesis, osteogenesis and adipogenesis. A novel aspect of this work was
the analysis of the same subset of genes during HADSC differentiation into all
three lineages. Chondrogenic induction resulted in increased mRNA expression of
Sox transcription factors, COL2A1,COL10A1, Runx2, and Osterix. This is the first 
report demonstrating significant upregulation in expression of
osteogenesis-related transcription factors Runx2 and Osterix by TGF-beta3
induction of HADSCs during in vitro chondrogenesis. These findings suggest that
the commonly-used chondrogenic induction reagents promote differentiation
suggestive of hypertrophic chondrocytes and osteoblasts. We conclude that
alternative strategies are required to induce efficient articular chondrocyte
differentiation in order for HADSCs to be of clinical use in cartilage tissue
engineering.

PMCID: PMC2548292
PMID: 18482578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Int J Dev Biol. 2008;52(4):323-32. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.072490gh.

Loss of Sox9 function results in defective chondrocyte differentiation of mouse
embryonic stem cells in vitro.

Hargus G(1), Kist R, Kramer J, Gerstel D, Neitz A, Scherer G, Rohwedel J.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medical Molecular Biology, University of Lubeck, Lubeck, Germany.

The transcription factor Sox9 plays an important role during chondrogenesis.
After early conditional inactivation of Sox9 in mesenchymal limb bud cells of
mice, mesenchymal condensations as well as cartilage and bone are completely
absent in the developing limbs. We analyzed chondrogenic differentiation of
Sox9-/- mouse embryonic stem cells in vitro, using two clones with different
targeted mutations. We found that the development of mature and hypertrophic
chondrocytes is completely inhibited in the absence of Sox9 confirming that Sox9 
is required for the formation of cartilage. In contrast, Sox9+/- mouse embryonic 
stem cells showed continuous but reduced differentiation into mature
chondrocytes. Interestingly, the formation of early chondrogenic condensations
expressing characteristic marker genes such as scleraxis, Sox5 and Sox6 was not
inhibited in the absence of Sox9 in vitro. Thus, we propose that the earliest
step of chondrogenesis could be regulated by a non cell-autonomous function of
Sox9.

PMID: 18415932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 4;283(14):9239-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M705175200. Epub 2008
Feb 13.

Focal adhesion kinase/Src suppresses early chondrogenesis: central role of CCN2.

Pala D(1), Kapoor M, Woods A, Kennedy L, Liu S, Chen S, Bursell L, Lyons KM,
Carter DE, Beier F, Leask A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology and Division of Oral Biology,
Canadian Institute of Health Research Group in Skeletal Development and
Remodeling, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

Adhesive signaling plays a key role in cellular differentiation, including in
chondrogenesis. Herein, we probe the contribution to early chondrogenesis of two 
key modulators of adhesion, namely focal adhesion kinase (FAK)/Src and CCN2
(connective tissue growth factor, CTGF). We use the micromass model of
chondrogenesis to show that FAK/Src signaling, which mediates cell/matrix
attachment, suppresses early chondrogenesis, including the induction of Ccn2,
Agc, and Sox6. The FAK/Src inhibitor PP2 elevates Ccn2, Agc, and Sox6 expression 
in wild-type mesenchymal cells in micromass culture, but not in cells lacking
CCN2. Our results suggest a reduction in FAK/Src signaling is a critical feature 
permitting chondrogenic differentiation and that CCN2 operates downstream of this
loss to promote chondrogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2431031
PMID: 18276598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Int J Cancer. 2008 May 15;122(10):2274-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23366.

Induction of protective and therapeutic antitumor immunity by a DNA vaccine with 
a glioma antigen, SOX6.

Ueda R(1), Kinoshita E, Ito R, Kawase T, Kawakami Y, Toda M.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology Research Group, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

We previously reported identifying SOX6 as a glioma antigen by serological
screening using a testis cDNA library. Its preferential expression and frequent
IgG responses in glioma patients indicate that SOX6 may be a useful target for
immunotherapy. To examine whether cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) responses specific
for SOX6 to destroy glioma can be generated in vivo, we treated glioma-bearing
mice by vaccination with a plasmid DNA encoding murine full-length SOX6 protein. 
Following SOX6-DNA vaccination, CTLs specific for SOX6-expressing glioma cells
were induced, while normal autologous-cells that had restrictedly expressed SOX6 
during embryogenesis were not destroyed. Furthermore, DNA vaccination with SOX6
exerted protective and therapeutic antitumor responses in the glioma-bearing
mice. This antitumor activity was abrogated by the depletion of CD4 positive T
cells and/or CD8 positive T cells. These results suggest that the SOX6 protein
has multiple CTL and helper epitopes to induce antitumor activity and the
effectiveness of SOX6-DNA vaccine for the prevention and treatment of glioma.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18224680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Arthritis Rheum. 2008 Jan;58(1):154-63. doi: 10.1002/art.23175.

Regional differences in chondrocyte metabolism in osteoarthritis: a detailed
analysis by laser capture microdissection.

Fukui N(1), Ikeda Y, Ohnuki T, Tanaka N, Hikita A, Mitomi H, Mori T, Juji T,
Katsuragawa Y, Yamamoto S, Sawabe M, Yamane S, Suzuki R, Sandell LJ, Ochi T.

Author information: 
(1)National Hospital Organization Sagamihara Hospital, Sagamihara, Japan.
n-fukui@sagamihara-hosp.gr.jp

OBJECTIVE: To determine the change in metabolic activity of chondrocytes in
osteoarthritic (OA) cartilage, considering regional difference and degree of
cartilage degeneration.
METHODS: OA cartilage was obtained from knee joints with end-stage OA, at both
macroscopically intact areas and areas with various degrees of cartilage
degeneration. Control cartilage was obtained from age-matched donors. Using laser
capture microdissection, cartilage samples were separated into superficial,
middle, and deep zones, and gene expression was compared quantitatively in the
respective zones between OA and control cartilage.
RESULTS: In OA cartilage, gene expression changed markedly with the site. The
expression of cartilage matrix genes was highly enhanced in macroscopically
intact areas, but the enhancement was less obvious in the degenerated areas,
especially in the upper regions. In contrast, in those regions, the expression of
type III collagen and fibronectin was most enhanced, suggesting that chondrocytes
underwent a phenotypic change there. Within OA cartilage, the expression of
cartilage matrix genes was significantly correlated with SOX9 expression, but not
with SOX5 or SOX6 expression. In OA cartilage, the strongest correlation was
observed between the expression of type III collagen and fibronectin, suggesting 
the presence of a certain link(s) between their expression.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study revealed a comprehensive view of the
metabolic change of the chondrocytes in OA cartilage. The change of gene
expression profile was most obvious in the upper region of the degenerated
cartilage. The altered gene expression at that region may be responsible for the 
loss of cartilage matrix associated with OA.

PMID: 18163492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2007 Dec;33(6):621-30. Epub 2007 Oct 24.

Expression of SoxE and SoxD genes in human gliomas.

Schlierf B(1), Friedrich RP, Roerig P, Felsberg J, Reifenberger G, Wegner M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Members of group E and group D of the Sox gene family function as important
transcriptional regulators of glial development in the central nervous system.
Here, we have examined Sox gene expression in 60 human primary gliomas.
Transcripts from each of the six group E and group D genes were expressed in
gliomas of various types and malignancy grades, but with significant differences.
SOX5, SOX9 and SOX10 were generally expressed at levels similar to or below those
in adult brain tissue. In contrast, many oligodendrogliomas exhibited
upregulation of SOX6, SOX8 and SOX13. Furthermore, loss of heterozygosity on
chromosomal arms 1p and 19q was associated with significantly higher SOX8 mRNA
levels. Low-grade astrocytomas, but not glioblastomas, also showed elevated SOX8 
transcript levels. Taken together, the expression pattern of Sox genes in gliomas
is heterogeneous and overall compatible with the less differentiated state of
glioma cells as compared with their normal adult counterparts. Despite their
restricted expression in astrocytes and oligodendrocytes during normal
development, none of the Sox genes was selectively expressed in tumours of the
oligodendroglial or astrocytic lineage. This is compatible with an origin of
gliomas from neuroepithelial stem or precursor cells.

PMID: 17961134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Development. 2007 Nov;134(21):3917-28. Epub 2007 Oct 3.

HIF1alpha regulation of Sox9 is necessary to maintain differentiation of hypoxic 
prechondrogenic cells during early skeletogenesis.

Amarilio R(1), Viukov SV, Sharir A, Eshkar-Oren I, Johnson RS, Zelzer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, PO Box 26,
Rehovot 76100, Israel.

During early stages of limb development, the vasculature is subjected to
extensive remodeling that leaves the prechondrogenic condensation avascular and, 
as we demonstrate hereafter, hypoxic. Numerous studies on a variety of cell types
have reported that hypoxia has an inhibitory effect on cell differentiation. In
order to investigate the mechanism that supports chondrocyte differentiation
under hypoxic conditions, we inactivated the transcription factor
hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF1alpha) in mouse limb bud mesenchyme.
Developmental analysis of Hif1alpha-depleted limbs revealed abnormal cartilage
and joint formation in the autopod, suggesting that HIF1alpha is part of a
mechanism that regulates the differentiation of hypoxic prechondrogenic cells.
Dramatically reduced cartilage formation in Hif1alpha-depleted micromass culture 
cells under hypoxia provided further support for the regulatory role of HIF1alpha
in chondrogenesis. Reduced expression of Sox9, a key regulator of chondrocyte
differentiation, followed by reduction of Sox6, collagen type II and aggrecan in 
Hif1alpha-depleted limbs raised the possibility that HIF1alpha regulation of Sox9
is necessary under hypoxic conditions for differentiation of prechondrogenic
cells to chondrocytes. To study this possibility, we targeted Hif1alpha
expression in micromass cultures. Under hypoxic conditions, Sox9 expression was
increased twofold relative to its expression in normoxic condition; this
increment was lost in the Hif1alpha-depleted cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
demonstrated direct binding of HIF1alpha to the Sox9 promoter, thus supporting
direct regulation of HIF1alpha on Sox9 expression. This work establishes for the 
first time HIF1alpha as a key component in the genetic program that regulates
chondrogenesis by regulating Sox9 expression in hypoxic prechondrogenic cells.

PMID: 17913788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 2;282(44):32158-67. Epub 2007 Sep 5.

Functional gene screening system identified TRPV4 as a regulator of chondrogenic 
differentiation.

Muramatsu S(1), Wakabayashi M, Ohno T, Amano K, Ooishi R, Sugahara T, Shiojiri S,
Tashiro K, Suzuki Y, Nishimura R, Kuhara S, Sugano S, Yoneda T, Matsuda A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Drug Discovery, Research Center, Asahi Kasei Pharma Corp., 2-1 
Samejima, Fuji, Shizuoka 416-8501, Japan. muramatsu.sb@om.asahi-kasei.co.jp

Sox9 is a transcription factor that is essential for chondrocyte differentiation 
and chondrocyte-specific gene expression. However, the precise mechanism of Sox9 
activation during chondrogenesis is not fully understood. To investigate this
mechanism, we performed functional gene screening to identify genes that activate
SOX9-dependent transcription, using full-length cDNA libraries generated from a
murine chondrogenic cell line, ATDC5. Screening revealed that TRPV4 (transient
receptor potential vanilloid 4), a cation channel molecule, significantly
elevates SOX9-dependent reporter activity. Microarray and quantitative real time 
PCR analyses demonstrated that during chondrogenesis in ATDC5 and C3H10T1/2 (a
murine mesenchymal stem cell line), the expression pattern of TRPV4 was similar
to the expression patterns of chondrogenic marker genes, such as type II collagen
and aggrecan. Activation of TRPV4 by a pharmacological activator induced
SOX9-dependent reporter activity, and this effect was abolished by the addition
of the TRPV antagonist ruthenium red or by using a small interfering RNA for
TRPV4. The SOX9-dependent reporter activity due to TRPV4 activation was abrogated
by both EGTA and a calmodulin inhibitor, suggesting that the Ca2+/calmodulin
signal is essential in this process. Furthermore, activation of TRPV4 in concert 
with insulin activity in ATDC5 cells or in concert with bone morphogenetic
protein-2 in C3H10T1/2 cells promoted synthesis of sulfated glycosaminoglycan,
but activation of TRPV4 had no effect alone. We showed that activation of TRPV4
increased the steady-state levels of SOX9 mRNA and protein and SOX6 mRNA. Taken
together, our results suggest that TRPV4 regulates the SOX9 pathway and
contributes to the process of chondrogenesis.

PMID: 17804410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Genome Res. 2007 Oct;17(10):1438-47. Epub 2007 Sep 4.

Computational identification and functional validation of regulatory motifs in
cartilage-expressed genes.

Davies SR(1), Chang LW, Patra D, Xing X, Posey K, Hecht J, Stormo GD, Sandell LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Chondrocyte gene regulation is important for the generation and maintenance of
cartilage tissues. Several regulatory factors have been identified that play a
role in chondrogenesis, including the positive transacting factors of the SOX
family such as SOX9, SOX5, and SOX6, as well as negative transacting factors such
as C/EBP and delta EF1. However, a complete understanding of the intricate
regulatory network that governs the tissue-specific expression of cartilage genes
is not yet available. We have taken a computational approach to identify
cis-regulatory, transcription factor (TF) binding motifs in a set of cartilage
characteristic genes to better define the transcriptional regulatory networks
that regulate chondrogenesis. Our computational methods have identified several
TFs, whose binding profiles are available in the TRANSFAC database, as important 
to chondrogenesis. In addition, a cartilage-specific SOX-binding profile was
constructed and used to identify both known, and novel, functional paired
SOX-binding motifs in chondrocyte genes. Using DNA pattern-recognition
algorithms, we have also identified cis-regulatory elements for unknown TFs. We
have validated our computational predictions through mutational analyses in cell 
transfection experiments. One novel regulatory motif, N1, found at high frequency
in the COL2A1 promoter, was found to bind to chondrocyte nuclear proteins.
Mutational analyses suggest that this motif binds a repressive factor that
regulates basal levels of the COL2A1 promoter.

PMCID: PMC1987341
PMID: 17785538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Stem Cells. 2007 Nov;25(11):2786-96. Epub 2007 Jul 26.

Chondrogenic differentiation of human bone marrow stem cells in transwell
cultures: generation of scaffold-free cartilage.

Murdoch AD(1), Grady LM, Ablett MP, Katopodi T, Meadows RS, Hardingham TE.

Author information: 
(1)UK Centre for Tissue Engineering and Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix
Research, University of Manchester, Faculty of Life Sciences, Michael Smith
Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

Human bone marrow stem cells (hMSCs) have been shown to differentiate in vitro
into a number of cell lineages and are a potential autologous cell source for the
repair and replacement of damaged and diseased musculoskeletal tissues. hMSC
differentiation into chondrocytes has been described in high-density cell pellets
cultured with specific growth and differentiation factors. We now describe how
culture of hMSCs as a shallow multicellular layer on a permeable membrane over
2-4 weeks resulted in a much more efficient formation of cartilaginous tissue
than in established chondrogenic assays. In this format, the hMSCs differentiated
in 14 days to produce translucent, flexible discs, 6 mm in diameter by 0.8-1 mm
in thickness from 0.5 x 10(6) cells. The discs contained an extensive
cartilage-like extracellular matrix (ECM), with more than 50% greater
proteoglycan content per cell than control hMSCs differentiated in standard cell 
pellet cultures. The disc constructs were also enriched in the cartilage-specific
collagen II, and this was more homogeneously distributed than in cell pellet
cultures. The expression of cartilage matrix genes for collagen type II and
aggrecan was enhanced in disc cultures, but improved matrix production was not
accompanied by increased expression of the transcription factors SOX9, L-SOX5,
and SOX6. The fast continuous growth of cartilage ECM in these cultures up to 4
weeks appeared to result from the geometry of the construct and the efficient
delivery of nutrients to the cells. Scaffold-free growth of cartilage in this
format will provide a valuable experimental system for both experimental and
potential clinical studies.

PMID: 17656642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Dev Dyn. 2007 Aug;236(8):2062-76.

Sox6 is required for normal fiber type differentiation of fetal skeletal muscle
in mice.

Hagiwara N(1), Yeh M, Liu A.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Davis, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine/Rowe
Program in Human Genetics, Davis, California 95616, USA. nhagiwara@ucdavis.edu

Sox6, a member of the Sox family of transcription factors, is highly expressed in
skeletal muscle. Despite its abundant expression, the role of Sox6 in muscle
development is not well understood. We hypothesize that, in fetal muscle, Sox6
functions as a repressor of slow fiber type-specific genes. In the wild-type
mouse, differentiation of fast and slow fibers becomes apparent during late fetal
stages (after approximately embryonic day 16). However, in the Sox6 null-p(100H) 
mutant mouse, all fetal muscle fibers maintain slow fiber characteristics, as
evidenced by expression of the slow myosin heavy chain MyHC-beta. Knockdown of
Sox6 expression in wild-type myotubes results in a significant increase in
MyHC-beta expression, supporting our hypothesis. Analysis of the MyHC-beta
promoter revealed a Sox consensus sequence that likely functions as a negative
cis-regulatory element. Together, our results suggest that Sox6 plays a critical 
role in the fiber type differentiation of fetal skeletal muscle.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17584907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 10;282(32):23500-8. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Rac1 signaling stimulates N-cadherin expression, mesenchymal condensation, and
chondrogenesis.

Woods A(1), Wang G, Dupuis H, Shao Z, Beier F.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Group in Skeletal Development and Remodeling, Department of Physiology
and Pharmacology, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada.

The molecular mechanisms controlling differentiation of mesenchymal precursor
cells into chondrocytes (chondrogenesis) are not completely understood. We have
recently shown that the small GTPase RhoA inhibits this process. Here we
demonstrate that a different Rho GTPase family member, Rac1, promotes
chondrogenesis. Pharmacological inhibition of Rac1 expression in micromass
culture resulted in reduced mRNA levels of the chondrogenic markers collagen II
and aggrecan, and decreased accumulation of glycosaminoglycans. Expression of the
essential chondrogenic transcription factors Sox9, Sox5, and Sox6 was also
reduced upon inhibition of Rac1 signaling. In contrast, overexpression of Rac1 in
the chondrogenic ATDC5 cell line increased mRNA transcripts of Sox9, 5, and 6,
collagen II, and aggrecan. Inhibition of Rac1 resulted in a reduction in the
number, size, and organization of cellular condensations and decreased expression
of N-cadherin. Overexpression of Rac1 resulted in an increase in N-cadherin
expression levels. Furthermore, genetic ablation of Rac1 in primary micromass
cultures resulted in reduced expression of chondrogenic markers. Additionally, we
provide evidence that Cdc42 also promotes chondrogenesis. Overexpression of Cdc42
in ATDC5 cells resulted in increased expression of Sox5, Sox9, and collagen II
but not Sox6, aggrecan, or N-cadherin. Therefore, we demonstrate that Rac1 and
Cdc42 are positive regulators of chondrogenesis, but act at least in part through
different cellular and molecular mechanisms.

PMID: 17573353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Arthritis Res Ther. 2007;9(3):R55.

Hypoxic conditions increase hypoxia-inducible transcription factor 2alpha and
enhance chondrogenesis in stem cells from the infrapatellar fat pad of
osteoarthritis patients.

Khan WS(1), Adesida AB, Hardingham TE.

Author information: 
(1)UK Centre for Tissue Engineering and Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Matrix
Research, Faculty of Life Sciences, Michael Smith Building, University of
Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

Stem cells derived from the infrapatellar fat pad (IPFP) are a potential source
of stem cells for the repair of articular cartilage defects. Hypoxia has been
shown to improve chondrogenesis in adult stem cells. In this study we
investigated the effects of hypoxia on gene expression changes and chondrogenesis
in stem cells from the IPFP removed from elderly patients with osteoarthritis at 
total knee replacement. Adherent colony-forming cells were isolated and cultured 
from the IPFP from total knee replacement. The cells at passage 2 were
characterised for stem cell surface epitopes, and then cultured for 14 days as
cell aggregates in chondrogenic medium under normoxic (20% oxygen) or hypoxic (5%
oxygen) conditions. Gene expression analysis, DNA and glycosoaminoglycan assays
and immunohistochemical staining were determined to assess chondrogenesis.
IPFP-derived adherent colony-forming cells stained strongly for markers of adult 
mesenchymal stem cells, including CD44, CD90 and CD105, and they were negative
for the haematopoietic cell marker CD34 and for the neural and myogenic cell
marker CD56. Cell aggregates of IPFP cells showed a chondrogenic response. In
hypoxic conditions there was increased matrix accumulation of proteoglycan but
less cell proliferation, which resulted in 3.5-fold more glycosoaminoglycan per
DNA after 14 days of culture. In hypoxia there was increased expression of
hypoxia-inducible transcription factor (HIF)2alpha and not HIF1alpha, and the
expression of key transcription factors SOX5, SOX6 and SOX9, and that of
aggrecan, versican and collagens II, IX, X and XI, was also increased. These
results show that cells with stem cell characteristics were isolated from the
IPFP of elderly patients with osteoarthritis and that their response to
chondrogenic culture was enhanced by lowered oxygen tension, which upregulated
HIF2alpha and increased the synthesis and assembly of matrix during
chondrogenesis. This has important implications for tissue engineering
applications of cells derived from the IPFP.

PMCID: PMC2206341
PMID: 17537234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Front Biosci. 2007 May 1;12:3899-910.

Transcriptional activation of cartilage oligomeric matrix protein by Sox9, Sox5, 
and Sox6 transcription factors and CBP/p300 coactivators.

Liu CJ(1), Zhang Y, Xu K, Parsons D, Alfonso D, Di Cesare PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, NYU Hospital for Joint Diseases, New York, 
NY 10003, USA. chuanju.liu@med.nyu.edu

The gene for cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP) encodes a noncollagenous 
matrix protein that is expressed predominantly in cartilage. COMP gene expression
is deficient in the Sox9-null mouse, but the molecular mechanism remains unknown.
We have previously delineated a 30-bp negative regulatory element (NRE) and a
51-bp positive regulatory element (PRE) in the regulatory region of the COMP
gene. Subsequently we isolated LRF transcription repressor as an NRE-binding
protein and established that LRF inhibits COMP gene expression via recruiting
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to the COMP promoter. In this study we demonstrated
that Sox9, an essential transcription factor of chondrogenesis, binds to the COMP
promoter at the PRE in which 13 nucleotides (TGTTTACCTTGTG) are required for the 
binding of Sox9. Sox9 activates COMP gene expression and this activation is
PRE-dependent. Sox9 is required for COMP gene expression during chondrogenesis,
since repression of Sox9 expression using the small interfering RNA approach
inhibited COMP gene expression. In addition, activation of COMP gene expression
by Sox9 requires the participation of transcription factors Sox5 and Sox6 as well
as the coactivators CBP and p300 histone acetylase. It appears that there exists 
a balance between LRF repressor and Sox9 activator in the control of COMP gene,
since transactivation of COMP gene by Sox9 was abolished by the coexpression of
LRF, and excess Sox9 overcame the LRF-mediated inhibition. This study provides
the first evidence that Sox9 directly associates with COMP gene promoter and that
mediation of COMP gene activation by Sox9 involves Sox5, Sox6, CBP, and p300
coactivators.

PMID: 17485346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jun 1;357(2):383-90. Epub 2007 Apr 2.

Identification and characterization of the human SOX6 promoter.

Ikeda T(1), Saito T, Ushita M, Yano F, Kan A, Itaka K, Moro T, Nakamura K,
Kawaguchi H, Chung UI.

Author information: 
(1)Sensory and Motor System Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

The present study attempted to identify and characterize the embryonic promoter
of Sox6, a determinant regulator of chondrogenic differentiation. A common
transcription start region for human and mouse Sox6 was initially identified,
which contained a highly conserved sequence, A-box. Tandem repeats of A-box had a
strong transcriptional activity both at the basal level and in response to Sox9. 
Cells carrying the 4xA-box-DsRed2 reporter fluoresced only upon chondrogenic
differentiation. The 46-bp core enhancer region (CES6) was then identified in the
3' half of A-box, within which a C/EBP-binding motif was identified.
Overexpressed C/EBPbeta activated the Sox6 promoter, and mutant 4xCES6 constructs
lacking the C/EBP motif lost their basal activity. CES6 and nuclear extracts
formed a specific complex, which was supershifted by anti-C/EBPbeta antibody, and
in vitro translated C/EBPbeta specifically bound to CES6. Thus, we successfully
identified the Sox6 promoter and its core enhancer and characterized the
interactions with regulatory transcription factors.

PMID: 17433257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 29;282(26):19052-61. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

SOX6 suppresses cyclin D1 promoter activity by interacting with beta-catenin and 
histone deacetylase 1, and its down-regulation induces pancreatic beta-cell
proliferation.

Iguchi H(1), Urashima Y, Inagaki Y, Ikeda Y, Okamura M, Tanaka T, Uchida A,
Yamamoto TT, Kodama T, Sakai J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Systems Biology and Medicine, Research Center for Advanced
Science and Technology, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.

Sex-determining region Y-box (SOX) 6 negatively regulates glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion from beta-cells and is a down-regulated transcription factor in
the pancreatic islet cells of hyperinsulinemic obese mice. To determine the
contribution of SOX6 to insulin resistance, we analyzed the effects of SOX6 on
cell proliferation. Small interfering RNA-mediated attenuation of SOX6 expression
stimulated the proliferation of insulinoma INS-1E and NIH-3T3 cells, whereas
retroviral overexpression resulted in inhibition of cell growth. Quantitative
real time-PCR analysis revealed that the levels of cyclin D1 transcripts were
markedly decreased by SOX6 overexpression. Luciferase-reporter assay with
beta-catenin showed that SOX6 suppresses cyclin D1 promoter activities. In vitro 
binding experiments showed that the LZ/Q domain of SOX6 physically interacts with
armadillo repeats 1-4 of beta-catenin. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay revealed that increased SOX6 expression significantly reduced the levels of
acetylated histones H3 and H4 at the cyclin D1 promoter. By using a histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor and co-immunoprecipitation analysis, we showed that 
SOX6 suppressed cyclin D1 activities by interacting withbeta-catenin and HDAC1.
The data presented suggest that SOX6 may be an important factor in
obesity-related insulin resistance.

PMID: 17412698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. EMBO Rep. 2007 May;8(5):504-9. Epub 2007 Mar 30.

S100A1 and S100B, transcriptional targets of SOX trio, inhibit terminal
differentiation of chondrocytes.

Saito T(1), Ikeda T, Nakamura K, Chung UI, Kawaguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sensory and Motor System Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Center
for Disease Biology and Integrative Medicine, University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1,
Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Transcription factor SOX9 (sex-determining region Y-type high mobility group box 
9) and its coactivators SOX5 and SOX6 (the SOX trio) induce early-stage
chondrocyte differentiation and suppress its terminal stage. To identify possible
targets of the SOX trio, we carried out a microarray analysis and identified
S100A1 and S100B as possible target molecules. S100 protein expression was
localized in late proliferative and pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes of the mouse
growth plate. Overexpression of S100A1, S100B or their combination in cultured
chondrogenic cells did not induce early differentiation, but suppressed
hypertrophic differentiation and mineralization. Silencing of both S100A1 and
S100B stimulated terminal differentiation and reversed the SOX-trio-mediated
inhibition. Finally, luciferase reporter, electrophoretic mobility shift and
chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses showed that transcription of both S100
proteins is induced by the SOX trio, and also identified their respective
enhancer elements in the 5'-end flanking region. We conclude that S100A1 and
S100B are transcriptional targets of the SOX trio and mediate its inhibition of
terminal differentiation of chondrocytes.

PMCID: PMC1866207
PMID: 17396138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007 Jul;293(1):C172-83. Epub 2007 Mar 14.

Sox9-dependent transcriptional regulation of the proprotein convertase furin.

Guimont P(1), Grondin F, Dubois CM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Division, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Sherbrooke, QC, Canada
J1H 5N4.

The proprotein convertase furin participates in the maturation/bioactivation of a
variety of proproteins involved in chondrogenesis events. These include
parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP), an autocrine/paracrine factor that
is crucial to both normal cartilage development and cartilage-related
pathological processes. Despite the known importance of furin activity in the
bioactivation of the polypeptides, the mechanisms that control furin regulation
in chondrogenesis remain unknown. To gain insight into the molecular regulation
of furin, we used the mouse prechondrogenic ATDC5 cell line, an established in
vitro model of cartilage differentiation. Peak expression of both furin mRNA and 
furin PTHrP maturation was observed during chondrocyte nodule formation stage, an
event that correlated with increased mRNA levels of Sox9, a potent
high-mobility-group (HMG) box-containing transcription factor required for
cartilage formation. Inhibition of furin activity led to a diminution in
maturation of PTHrP, suggesting a relationship between Sox9-induced regulation of
furin and chondrogenesis events. Transient transfection of Sox9 in
nonchondrogenic cells resulted in a marked increase in furin mRNA and in the
transactivation of the furin P1A promoter. Direct Sox9 action on the P1A promoter
was narrowed down to a critical paired site with Sox9 binding capability in vitro
and in vivo. Sox9 transactivation effect was inhibited by L-Sox5 and Sox-6, two
Sox9 homologs also expressed in ATDC5 cells. Sox6 inhibitory effect was reduced
when using Sox6-HMG-box mutants, indicating a repressive effect through direct
HMG-box/DNA binding. Our work suggests a mechanism by which furin is regulated
during chondrogenesis. It also adds to the complexity of Sox molecule interaction
during gene regulation.

PMID: 17360815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(6):1919-32. Epub 2007 Mar 1.

Switched alternative splicing of oncogene CoAA during embryonal carcinoma stem
cell differentiation.

Yang Z(1), Sui Y, Xiong S, Liour SS, Phillips AC, Ko L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Alternative splicing produces functionally distinct proteins participating in
cellular processes including differentiation and development. CoAA is a
coactivator that regulates transcription-coupled splicing and its own pre-mRNA
transcript is alternatively spliced. We show here that the CoAA gene is
embryonically expressed and alternatively spliced in multiple tissues to three
splice variants, CoAA, CoAM and CoAR. During retinoic-acid-induced P19 stem cell 
differentiation, the expression of CoAA undergoes a rapid switch to its dominant 
negative splice variant CoAM in the cavity of the embryoid body. CoAM
functionally inhibits CoAA, and their switched expression up-regulates
differentiation marker Sox6. Using a CoAA minigene cassette, we find that the
switched alternative splicing of CoAA and CoAM is regulated by the cis-regulating
sequence upstream of the CoAA basal promoter. Consistent to this, we show that
p54(nrb) and PSF induce CoAM splice variant through the cis-regulating sequence. 
We have previously shown that the CoAA gene is amplified in human cancers with a 
recurrent loss of this cis-regulating sequence. These results together suggest
that the upstream regulatory sequence contributes to alternative splicing of the 
CoAA gene during stem cell differentiation, and its selective loss in human
cancers potentially deregulates CoAA alternative splicing and alters stem cell
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1874587
PMID: 17337438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Exp Hematol. 2007 Mar;35(3):358-67.

Stem cell transplantation demonstrates that Sox6 represses epsilon y globin
expression in definitive erythropoiesis of adult mice.

Cohen-Barak O(1), Erickson DT, Badowski MS, Fuchs DA, Klassen CL, Harris DT,
Brilliant MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Arizona, College of Medicine, Tucson, 
AZ 85724, USA.

Sox6, a member of the Sox transcription factor family, is essential for the
silencing of epsilon y globin gene expression in definitive erythropoiesis of
mice. Homozygous Sox6-null mice are neonatally lethal, precluding analysis at
later stages. We created adult mice that are deficient in Sox6 specifically in
hematopoietic tissues by transplanting embryonic liver stem cells from
Sox6-deficient mice into lethally irradiated congenic wild-type adult mice. The
mice receiving mutant stem cells (mutant engrafted) showed high expression levels
of epsilon y in bone marrow, spleen, and circulating blood compared with mice
receiving wild-type and heterozygous stem cells (control engrafted). The level of
expression of epsilon y in circulating blood was directly correlated with the
percentage of successful mutant donor cell engraftment. Additionally, the mutant 
engrafted adult mice showed an increase in erythroid precursor cells in bone
marrow, spleen, and blood. Thus, Sox6 continues to function as a major regulator 
of epsilon y in adult definitive erythropoiesis and is required for normal
erythrocyte maturation. Therefore, Sox6 may provide a novel therapeutic target by
reactivating epsilon y in patients with hemoglobinopathies such as sickle cell
anemia and beta-thalassemia.

PMID: 17309816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Matrix Biol. 2007 May;26(4):224-33. Epub 2006 Dec 8.

Misexpression of Sox9 in mouse limb bud mesenchyme induces polydactyly and
rescues hypodactyly mice.

Akiyama H(1), Stadler HS, Martin JF, Ishii TM, Beachy PA, Nakamura T, de
Crombrugghe B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
hakiyama@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Our previous studies have demonstrated the essential roles of the transcription
factor Sox9 in the commitment of mesenchymal cells to a chondrogenic cell lineage
and in overt chondrogenesis during limb bud development. However, it remains
unknown if Sox9 induces chondrogenesis in mesenchyme ectopically in vivo as a
master regulator of chondrogenesis. In this study, we first generated mutant mice
in which Sox9 was misexpressed in the limb bud mesenchyme. The mutant mouse
embryos exhibited polydactyly in limb buds in association with ectopic expression
of Sox5 and Sox6 although markers for the different axes of limb bud development 
showed a normal pattern of expression. Misexpression of Sox9 stimulated cell
proliferation in limb bud mesenchyme, suggesting that Sox9 has a role in
recruiting mesenchymal cells to mesenchymal condensation. Second, despite the
facts that misexpression of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) induces polydactyly in a number 
of mutant mice and Shh-null mutants have severely defective cartilage elements in
limb buds, misexpression of Sox9 did not restore limb bud phenotypes in Shh-null 
mutants. Rather, there was no expression of Sox9 in digit I of Hoxa13Hd mutant
embryos, and Sox9 partially rescued hypodactyly in Hoxa13Hd mutant embryos. These
results provide evidence that Sox9 induces ectopic chondrogenesis in mesenchymal 
cells and strongly suggest that its expression may be regulated by Hox genes
during limb bud development.

PMID: 17222543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Endocrinology. 2007 Mar;148(3):1266-77. Epub 2006 Dec 7.

2-methoxyestradiol induces mammary gland differentiation through
amphiregulin-epithelial growth factor receptor-mediated signaling: molecular
distinctions from the mammary gland of pregnant mice.

Huh JI(1), Qiu TH, Chandramouli GV, Charles R, Wiench M, Hager GL, Catena R,
Calvo A, LaVallee TM, Desprez PY, Green JE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Regulation and Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Building 41, 41 Medlars Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

Levels of 2-methoxyestradiol (2ME(2)), an endogenous metabolite of estradiol, are
highly elevated during late stages of pregnancy when mammary glands have
differentiated with the formation of alveolar structures producing milk proteins.
Based upon our previous demonstration that 2ME(2) induces mammary ductal dilation
associated with expression of mammary differentiation markers when administered
to transgenic mice that spontaneously develop mammary cancer, we studied the
effects of 2ME(2) on normal mammary gland development. The results of this study 
demonstrate that 2ME(2) can induce a partial differentiation of normal mammary
glands in virgin mice, as evidenced by the appearance of limited numbers of
alveolar cells and significantly increased expression of the differentiation
markers beta-casein and whey acidic protein. 2ME(2)-induced differentiation is
associated with inhibition of expression of inhibitor of differentiation 1 (Id-1)
in normal mammary epithelial cells through elements in the 5'-flanking region of 
the Id-1 gene. Microarray analysis revealed that 2ME(2)-induced differentiation
of the mammary gland shares some significant similarities in gene expression with
that of mammary glands from late-stage pregnancy, including elevated expression
of many milk protein differentiation markers. However, several genes are
differentially regulated between 2ME(2)-treated mammary glands and differentiated
mammary glands through pregnancy. Significantly, amphiregulin, ATF3, serpine2,
and SOX6 were up-regulated in 2ME(2)-treated mammary glands but not in mammary
glands from pregnant mice. Using the SCp2 differentiation cell line system, we
demonstrate that 2ME(2) induces differentiation through the down-regulation of
Id-1 and up-regulation of amphiregulin. Administration of amphiregulin to SCp2
cells induced differentiation, whereas inhibition of 2ME(2)-induced expression of
amphiregulin by small interfering RNA blocked differentiation. Estrogen
receptor-negative SCp2 cells differentiate in response to 2ME(2), but not
estradiol, suggesting that 2ME(2) operates through an estrogen
receptor-independent mechanism. These data demonstrate that 2ME(2) can induce a
partial differentiation of the mammary gland through mechanisms that differ from 
those normally used during pregnancy.

PMID: 17158205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2006;585:431-41.

Molecular mechanism of osteochondroprogenitor fate determination during bone
formation.

Zou L(1), Zou X, Li H, Mygind T, Zeng Y, Lü N, Bünger C.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Research Laboratory, Aarhus University Hospital, 8000 Aarhus C,
Denmark.

Osteoblasts and chondrocytes, which derive from a common mesenchymal precursor
(osteochondroprogenitor), are involved in bone formation and remodeling in vivo. 
Determination of osteochondroprogenitor fate is under the control of complex
hormonal and local factors converging onto a series of temporospatial dependent
transcription regulators. Sox9, together with L-Sox5 and Sox6, of the Sox family 
is required for chondrogenic differentiation commitment, while Runx2/Cbfa 1, a
member of runt family and Osterix/Osx, a novel zinc finger-containing
transcription factor play a pivotal role in osteoblast differentiation decision
and hypertrophic chondrocyte maturation. Recent in vitro and in vivo evidence
suggests beta-catenin, a transcriptional activator in the canonical Wnt pathway, 
can act as a determinant factor for controlling chondrocyte and osteoblast
differentiation. Here we focus on several intensively studied transcription
factors and Wnt/beta-catenin signal molecules to illustrate the regulatory
mechanism in directing commitment between osteoblast and chondrocyte, which will 
eventually allow us to properly manipulate the mesenchymal progenitor cell
differentiation on bone and regeneration of cartilage tissue engineering.

PMID: 17120800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Dev Cell. 2006 Nov;11(5):697-709.

SoxD proteins influence multiple stages of oligodendrocyte development and
modulate SoxE protein function.

Stolt CC(1), Schlierf A, Lommes P, Hillgärtner S, Werner T, Kosian T, Sock E,
Kessaris N, Richardson WD, Lefebvre V, Wegner M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Emil-Fischer-Zentrum, Universität Erlangen, D-91054
Erlangen, Germany.

The myelin-forming oligodendrocytes are an excellent model to study
transcriptional regulation of specification events, lineage progression, and
terminal differentiation in the central nervous system. Here, we show that the
group D Sox transcription factors Sox5 and Sox6 jointly and cell-autonomously
regulate several stages of oligodendrocyte development in the mouse spinal cord. 
They repress specification and terminal differentiation and influence migration
patterns. As a consequence, oligodendrocyte precursors and terminally
differentiating oligodendrocytes appear precociously in spinal cords deficient
for both Sox proteins. Sox5 and Sox6 have opposite functions than the group E Sox
proteins Sox9 and Sox10, which promote oligodendrocyte specification and terminal
differentiation. Both genetic as well as molecular evidence suggests that Sox5
and Sox6 directly interfere with the function of group E Sox proteins. Our
studies reveal a complex regulatory network between different groups of Sox
proteins that is essential for proper progression of oligodendrocyte development.

PMID: 17084361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2006 Oct;128(4):219-24.

[SOX6 attenuates glucose-stimulated insulin secretion by repressing PDX1
transcriptional activity].

[Article in Japanese]

Iguchi H(1), Sakai J.

Author information: 
(1)haruhisa-iguchi@ds-pharma.co.jp

PMID: 17038784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Clin Calcium. 2006 May;16(5):829-36.

[Interactions of chondrocytes and osteoblasts during endochondral bone
formation].

[Article in Japanese]

Higashikawa A(1), Kawaguchi H, Nakamura K, Chung U.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Tokyo Faculty of Medicine, Department of Orthopedic Surgery.

During endochondral bone formation, mesenchymal condensations, chondrocyte
differentiation and proliferation, termination of proliferation, hypertrophic
differentiation, and replacement by bone occur sequentially. This sequence is
spatially represented by the structure of the growth plate of the embryo, and
reflects the evolution of bone. Endochondral bone formation is mainly regulated
by the interactions of chondrocytes and osteoblasts; a variety of signals are
implicated in this regulation. The roles of factors regulating chondrocyte
proliferation and hypertrophy including the Sox trio, PTH related peptide
(PTHrP), Indian hedgehog (Ihh), the runt-related transcription factor (Runx)
family, fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) and bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) and other factors including hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha
(HIF-1alpha) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) will be discussed.

PMID: 16679626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Genesis. 2006 May;44(5):219-24.

Generation of mice harboring a Sox6 conditional null allele.

Dumitriu B(1), Dy P, Smits P, Lefebvre V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering and Orthopaedic Research Center, Lerner
Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

Sox6 belongs to the family of Sry-related HMG box transcription factors, which
determine cell fate and differentiation in various lineages. Sox6 is expressed in
several tissues, including cartilage, testis, neuronal, and erythropoietic
tissues. Mice lacking Sox6 have revealed critical roles for Sox6 in several of
these tissues, but their multiple defects and early lethality has limited studies
in specific cell types and in postnatal mice. We show here that we have generated
mice harboring a Sox6 conditional null allele (Sox6(fl+)) by flanking the second 
coding exon with loxP sites. This allele encodes wildtype Sox6 protein, is
expressed normally, and is efficiently converted into a null allele (Sox6(fl-))
by Cre-mediated recombination in somatic and germ cells. Sox6(fl+/fl+) mice are
indistinguishable from wildtype mice, and Sox6(fl-/fl-) mice from Sox6(-/-) mice.
These Sox6 conditional null mice will thus be valuable for further uncovering the
roles of Sox6 in various processes in vivo.

PMID: 16652367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Blood. 2006 Aug 15;108(4):1198-207. Epub 2006 Apr 20.

Sox6 cell-autonomously stimulates erythroid cell survival, proliferation, and
terminal maturation and is thereby an important enhancer of definitive
erythropoiesis during mouse development.

Dumitriu B(1), Patrick MR, Petschek JP, Cherukuri S, Klingmuller U, Fox PL,
Lefebvre V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195,
USA.

Erythropoiesis, the essential process of hematopoietic stem cell development into
erythrocytes, is controlled by lineage-specific transcription factors that
determine cell fate and differentiation and by the hormone erythropoietin that
stimulates cell survival and proliferation. Here we identify the Sry-related
high-mobility-group (HMG) box transcription factor Sox6 as an important enhancer 
of definitive erythropoiesis. Sox6 is highly expressed in proerythroblasts and
erythroblasts in the fetal liver, neonatal spleen, and bone marrow. Mouse fetuses
and pups lacking Sox6 develop erythroid cells slowly and feature misshapen,
short-lived erythrocytes. They compensate for anemia by elevating the serum level
of erythropoietin and progressively enlarging their erythropoietic tissues.
Erythroid-specific inactivation of Sox6 causes the same phenotype, demonstrating 
cell-autonomous roles for Sox6 in erythroid cells. Sox6 potentiates the ability
of erythropoietin signaling to promote proerythroblast survival and has an effect
additive to that of erythropoietin in stimulating proerythroblast and
erythroblast proliferation. Sox6 also critically facilitates erythroblast and
reticulocyte maturation, including hemoglobinization, cell condensation, and
enucleation, and ensures erythrocyte cytoskeleton long-term stability. It does
not control adult globin and erythrocyte cytoskeleton genes but acts by
stabilizing filamentous actin (F-actin) levels. Sox6 thus enhances erythroid cell
development at multiple levels and thereby ensures adequate production and
quality of red blood cells.

PMID: 16627753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Jun 10;312(10):1727-44. Epub 2006 Apr 3.

Temporal transcriptome of mouse ATDC5 chondroprogenitors differentiating under
hypoxic conditions.

Chen L(1), Fink T, Ebbesen P, Zachar V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Stem Cell Research, Department of Health Science and
Technology, Aalborg University, Fredrik Bajers Vej 3B, DK-9220 Aalborg, Denmark.

The formation of cartilage takes place in vivo in an environment of reduced
oxygen tension. To study the effect of hypoxia on the process of chondrogenesis, 
ATDC5 mouse chondroprogenitor cells were induced to differentiate by the addition
of insulin and cultured under ambient and hypoxic conditions corresponding to 21%
and 1% O2 in the gas phase, respectively. The production of extracellular
proteoglycans as well as the transcriptional profile of 104 selected genes was
determined by real-time RT-PCR. Hypoxia alone induced early chondrogenesis as
evidenced by the synthesis of glycosaminoglycans and expression of aggrecan and
collagen type II genes. Surprisingly, however, hypoxic incubation of
insulin-treated cells delayed and suppressed the insulin-mediated early
chondrogenesis and almost completely blocked hypertrophic differentiation.
Analysis of the gene expression yielded several clues as to the mechanisms
involved. In addition, a group of genes was identified that have not previously
been associated with hypoxia, including Ak4, Akt3, Col X, Fmod, Ier3, IGFbp4,
MafF, Mxi1, Rcor2, Rras, Sox6, Tnni2, Wnt5a, and Zfp313.

PMID: 16580664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 12;281(19):13134-40. Epub 2006 Mar 24.

RhoA/ROCK signaling regulates chondrogenesis in a context-dependent manner.

Woods A(1), Beier F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, The Canadian Institutes for Health 
Research (CIHR) Group in Skeletal Development and Remodeling, University of
Western Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5C1 Canada.

The development of the cartilage template that precedes endochondral bone
formation requires the condensation of mesenchymal cells and their subsequent
differentiation to the chondrocytic lineage. We have previously shown that
inhibition of the RhoA/ROCK signaling pathway or actin dynamics enhances Sox9
mRNA expression, increases glycosaminoglycan production, and transforms cell
shape to a spherical, chondrocyte-like morphology. However, we demonstrate here
that in three-dimensional micromass cultures of mesenchymal cells, increased
expression of Sox9 in response to these manipulations is not sufficient to induce
the expression of established Sox9 target genes. This is illustrated by a
decrease in the transcript levels of collagen II and aggrecan as well as reduced 
activity of a Sox9-responsive reporter gene in response to ROCK inhibition and
cytochalasin D. We also demonstrate a decrease in mRNA levels of the
transcriptional co-activators L-Sox5 and Sox6 upon ROCK inhibition and
cytochalasin D. The decrease in Sox9 activity is likely partially due to reduced 
L-Sox5 and Sox6 levels but also to a delay in Sox9 phosphorylation following ROCK
inhibition. In contrast, inhibition of the RhoA/ROCK pathway and cytochalasin D
treatment in monolayer culture results in the enhancement of a number of markers 
of chondrogenesis such as Sox9 activity and collagen II and aggrecan transcripts 
levels. These data demonstrate that the effects of RhoA/ROCK signaling and actin 
polymerization inhibitors on chondrogenic gene expression are dependent on the
cellular context.

PMID: 16565087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. PLoS Genet. 2006 Feb;2(2):e14. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Sox6 directly silences epsilon globin expression in definitive erythropoiesis.

Yi Z(1), Cohen-Barak O, Hagiwara N, Kingsley PD, Fuchs DA, Erickson DT, Epner EM,
Palis J, Brilliant MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Arizona, College of Medicine, Tucson, 
Arizona, USA.

Sox6 is a member of the Sox transcription factor family that is defined by the
conserved high mobility group (HMG) DNA binding domain, first described in the
testis determining gene, Sry. Previous studies have suggested that Sox6 plays a
role in the development of the central nervous system, cartilage, and muscle. In 
the Sox6-deficient mouse, p100H, epsilony globin is persistently expressed, and
increased numbers of nucleated red cells are present in the fetal circulation.
Transfection assays in GM979 (erythroleukemic) cells define a 36-base pair region
of the epsilony proximal promoter that is critical for Sox6 mediated repression. 
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assays demonstrate that Sox6 acts as a repressor by directly binding to
the epsilony promoter. The normal expression of Sox6 in wild-type fetal liver and
the ectopic expression of epsilony in p100H homozygous fetal liver demonstrate
that Sox6 functions in definitive erythropoiesis. The present study shows that
Sox6 is required for silencing of epsilony globin in definitive erythropoiesis
and suggests a role for Sox6 in erythroid cell maturation. Thus, Sox6 regulation 
of epsilony globin might provide a novel therapeutical target in the treatment of
hemoglobinopathies such as sickle cell anemia and thalassemia.

PMCID: PMC1359074
PMID: 16462943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. FEBS Lett. 2006 Feb 20;580(5):1215-21. Epub 2006 Jan 20.

Repression of SOX6 transcriptional activity by SUMO modification.

Fernández-Lloris R(1), Osses N, Jaffray E, Shen LN, Vaughan OA, Girwood D,
Bartrons R, Rosa JL, Hay RT, Ventura F.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Ciències Fisiològiques II, IDIBELL, Campus de Bellvitge,
Universitat de Barcelona, C/Feixa Llarga s/n, 08907 L'Hospitalet de Llobregat,
Spain.

SOX6 plays key functions in several developmental processes, including
neurogenesis and skeleton formation. In this report, we show that SOX6 is
modified in vitro and in vivo by small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) on two
distinct sites. Mutation of both sites abolished SOX6 sumoylation and increased
SOX6 transcriptional activity. SUMO dependent repression of SOX6 transcription
was promoted by UBC9 whereas siRNA to UBC9, cotransfection of inactive UBC9 or a 
SUMO protease increased SOX6 transcriptional activity. Furthermore, co-expression
of SOX6 with SUMO2 results in the appearance of SOX6 in a punctate nuclear
pattern that colocalized with promyelocytic leukemia protein, which was partially
abolished by mutations in SOX6 sumoylation sites.

PMID: 16442531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Med Genet. 2006 Jun;43(6):534-40. Epub 2005 Oct 28.

Balanced translocation in a patient with craniosynostosis disrupts the SOX6 gene 
and an evolutionarily conserved non-transcribed region.

Tagariello A, Heller R, Greven A, Kalscheuer VM, Molter T, Rauch A, Kress W,
Winterpacht A.

Craniosynostosis is a congenital developmental disorder involving premature
fusion of cranial sutures, which results in an abnormal shape of the skull.
Significant progress in understanding the molecular basis of this phenotype has
been made for a small number of syndromic craniosynostosis forms. Nevertheless,
in the majority of the approximately 100 craniosynostosis syndromes and in
non-syndromic craniosynostosis the underlying gene defects and pathomechanisms
are unknown. Here we report on a male infant presenting at birth with
brachycephaly, proptosis, midfacial hypoplasia, and low set ears. Three
dimensional cranial computer tomography showed fusion of the lambdoid sutures and
distal part of the sagittal suture with a gaping anterior fontanelle. Mutations
in the genes for FGFR2 and FGFR3 were excluded. Standard chromosome analysis
revealed a de novo balanced translocation t(9;11)(q33;p15). The breakpoint on
chromosome 11p15 disrupts the SOX6 gene, known to be involved in skeletal growth 
and differentiation processes. SOX6 mutation screening of another 104
craniosynostosis patients revealed one missense mutation leading to the exchange 
of a highly conserved amino acid (p.D68N) in a single patient and his reportedly 
healthy mother. The breakpoint on chromosome 9 is located in a region without any
known or predicted genes but, interestingly, disrupts patches of evolutionarily
highly conserved non-genic sequences and may thus led to dysregulation of
flanking genes on chromosome 9 or 11 involved in skull vault development. The
present case is one of the very rare reports of an apparently balanced
translocation in a patient with syndromic craniosynostosis, and reveals novel
candidate genes for craniosynostoses and cranial suture formation.

PMCID: PMC2564540
PMID: 16258006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Anat Embryol (Berl). 2005 Oct;210(3):175-85. Epub 2005 Oct 18.

Ultrastructural analysis of mouse embryonic stem cell-derived chondrocytes.

Kramer J(1), Klinger M, Kruse C, Faza M, Hargus G, Rohwedel J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Molecular Biology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck,
Germany. Jan_Kramer@gmx.de

Pluripotent embryonic stem (ES) cells cultivated as cellular aggregates, so
called embryoid bodies (EBs), differentiate spontaneously into different cell
types of all three germ layers in vitro resembling processes of cellular
differentiation during embryonic development. Regarding chondrogenic
differentiation, murine ES cells differentiate into progenitor cells, which form 
pre-cartilaginous condensations in the EB-outgrowths and express marker molecules
characteristic for mesenchymal cell types such as Sox5 and Sox6. Later, mature
chondrocytes appear which express collagen type II, and the collagen fibers show 
a typical morphology as demonstrated by electron-microscopical analysis. These
mature chondrogenic cells are organized in cartilage nodules and produce large
amounts of extracellular proteoglycans as revealed by staining with cupromeronic 
blue. Finally, cells organized in nodules express collagen type X, indicating the
hypertrophic stage. In conclusion, differentiation of murine ES cells into
chondrocytes proceeds from the undifferentiated stem cell via progenitor cells up
to mature chondrogenic cells, which then undergo hypertrophy. Furthermore,
because the ES-cell-derived chondrocytes did not express elastin, a marker for
elastic cartilage tissue, we suggest the cartilage nodules to resemble hyaline
cartilage tissue.

PMID: 16211392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2005 Jul;19(109):94-7.

[Development and congenital malformations of the skeleton].

[Article in Polish]

Burdan F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pracownia Teratologii Doswiadczalnej Katedry i Zakladu Anatomii Prawidlowej
Czlowieka Akademii Medycznej im. prof. Feliksa Skubiszewskiego w Lublinie.
fb3@wp.pl

The article presents current knowledge on skeleton development, which is
initiated by mesenchymal cells condensation. The mesenchymal to epithelial
transformation, vascular regression, cartilage formation and ossification are
involved in normal skeletogenesis. All the processes are influenced by various
genes and regulatory molecules, e.g., N-cadherin, vascular endothelial growth
factor, transforming growth factor-beta, syndecan-3 and others. The
chondrogenesis depends on the Sox genes expression - Sox5, Sox6 and especially
Sox9, which continued action produce persistent cartilage. The essential role in 
osteogenesis is played by the transcription factor Runx2 that directly activates 
expression of genes coding typical bone proteins like collagen type I,
osteocalcin, osteopontin and osteonectin. Development of fibrous, cartilaginous
and synovial joints, bone maturation and remodeling, and mechanisms leading to
skeleton dysmorphogenesis are also discussed.

PMID: 16194038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2005 Sep;75(3):200-12.

Transcriptional control of chondrocyte fate and differentiation.

Lefebvre V(1), Smits P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering and Orthopaedic Research Center,
Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA. lefebvv@ccf.org

Chondrogenesis is an essential process in vertebrates. It leads to the formation 
of cartilage growth plates, which drive body growth and have primary roles in
endochondral ossification. It also leads to the formation of permanent
cartilaginous tissues that provide major structural support in the articular
joints and respiratory and auditory tracts throughout life. Defects in
chondrogenesis cause chondrodysostoses and chondrodysplasias. These skeletal
malformation diseases account for a significant proportion of birth defects in
humans and can dramatically affect a person's expectancy and quality of life.
Chondrogenesis occurs when pluripotent mesenchymal cells commit to the
chondrocyte lineage, and through a series of differentiation steps build and
eventually remodel cartilage. This review summarizes and discusses our current
knowledge and lack of knowledge about the chondrocyte differentiation pathway,
from mesenchymal cells to growth plate and articular chondrocytes, with a main
focus on how it is controlled by tissue patterning and cell differentiation
transcription factors, such as, but not limited to, Pax1 and Pax9, Nkx3.1 and
Nkx3.2, Sox9, Sox5 and Sox6, Runx2 and Runx3, and c-Maf.

Copyright (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16187326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 11;280(45):37669-80. Epub 2005 Sep 7.

SOX6 attenuates glucose-stimulated insulin secretion by repressing PDX1
transcriptional activity and is down-regulated in hyperinsulinemic obese mice.

Iguchi H(1), Ikeda Y, Okamura M, Tanaka T, Urashima Y, Ohguchi H, Takayasu S,
Kojima N, Iwasaki S, Ohashi R, Jiang S, Hasegawa G, Ioka RX, Magoori K, Sumi K,
Maejima T, Uchida A, Naito M, Osborne TF, Yanagisawa M, Yamamoto TT, Kodama T,
Sakai J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Systems Biology and Medicine, Research Center for Advanced
Science and Technology, University of Tokyo, Japan.

In obesity-related insulin resistance, pancreatic islets compensate for insulin
resistance by increasing secretory capacity. Here, we report the identification
of sex-determining region Y-box 6 (SOX6), a member of the high mobility group box
superfamily of transcription factors, as a co-repressor for pancreatic-duodenal
homeobox factor-1 (PDX1). SOX6 mRNA levels were profoundly reduced by both a long
term high fat feeding protocol in normal mice and in genetically obese ob/ob mice
on a normal chow diet. Interestingly, we show that SOX6 is expressed in adult
pancreatic insulin-producing beta-cells and that overexpression of SOX6 decreased
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, which was accompanied by decreased ATP/ADP 
ratio, Ca(2+) mobilization, proinsulin content, and insulin gene expression. In a
complementary fashion, depletion of SOX6 by small interfering RNAs augmented
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in insulinoma mouse MIN6 and rat INS-1E
cells. These effects can be explained by our mechanistic studies that show SOX6
acts to suppress PDX1 stimulation of the insulin II promoter through a direct
protein/protein interaction. Furthermore, SOX6 retroviral expression decreased
acetylation of histones H3 and H4 in chromatin from the promoter for the insulin 
II gene, suggesting that SOX6 may decrease PDX1 stimulation through changes in
chromatin structure at specific promoters. These results suggest that
perturbations in transcriptional regulation that are coordinated through SOX6 and
PDX1 in beta-cells may contribute to the beta-cell adaptation in obesity-related 
insulin resistance.

PMID: 16148004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Bone Miner Metab. 2005;23(5):337-40.

Distinct roles of Sox5, Sox6, and Sox9 in different stages of chondrogenic
differentiation.

Ikeda T(1), Kawaguchi H, Kamekura S, Ogata N, Mori Y, Nakamura K, Ikegawa S,
Chung UI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tissue Engineering, University of Tokyo Hospital, 7-3-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.

PMID: 16133682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Dev Dyn. 2005 Oct;234(2):301-11.

Slow and fast fiber isoform gene expression is systematically altered in skeletal
muscle of the Sox6 mutant, p100H.

Hagiwara N(1), Ma B, Ly A.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Davis, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Rowe
Program in Genetics, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that p100H mutant mice, which lack a functional
Sox6 gene, exhibit skeletal and cardiac muscle degeneration and develop cardiac
conduction abnormalities soon after birth. To understand the role of Sox6 in
skeletal muscle development, we identified muscle-specific genes differentially
expressed between wild-type and p100H mutant skeletal muscles and investigated
their temporal expression in the mutant muscle. We found that, in the mutant
skeletal muscle, slow fiber and cardiac isoform genes are expressed at
significantly higher levels, whereas fast fiber isoform genes are expressed at
significantly lower levels than wild-type. Onset of this aberrant fiber
type-specific gene expression in the mutant coincides with the beginning of the
secondary myotube formation, at embryonic day 15-16 in mice. Together with our
earlier report, demonstrating early postnatal muscle defects in the Sox6
null-p100H mutant, the present results suggest that Sox6 likely plays an
important role in muscle development.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16124007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Apr 27;85(16):1129-32.

[Cbfal's effect on chondrogenic gene expression in fibroblast].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang W(1), Zhu YP, Wang J, Deng LF.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Traumatology and Orthopaedics, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai
Second Medical University, Shanghai 200025, China.

OBJECTIVE: Core-binding factor a1, Cbfa1, which belongs to the runt-domain gene
family, is an essential transcription factor for osteoblastic differentiation and
osteogenesis. To examine the effects of Cbfa1 exhibit on gene expression which
involving in the chondrogenesis.
METHODS: On the first, using RT-PCR method, we directly cloned Cbfa1/Runx2 full
length cDNA from E13.5 days mouse embryos limb buds. Consequently Cbfa1/Runx2 was
cloned into pcDNA3.1 plasmid to make a eukaryotic expression vector. All the
clones were proved to be correct by enzyme cutting and sequencing analysis. On
the second, we used pcDNA3.1-Cbfa1 to tansfect fibroblast. 48 hours later, we
contrasted the gene transcription of Sox9, Sox5 and Sox6 between tansfected and
untransfected. 72 hours later, type II collagen have also been examined by
Western blotting.
RESULTS: Cbfa1 overexpression in fibroblast can upregulate the expression of Sox9
and type II collagen, but it have no effect on the expression of Sox5 and Sox6.
CONCLUSION: Cbfa1 may involve in the regulation of chondrogenesis.

PMID: 16029574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Arthritis Res Ther. 2005;7(4):R732-45. Epub 2005 Apr 1.

The role of interleukin-1 in the pathogenesis of human intervertebral disc
degeneration.

Le Maitre CL(1), Freemont AJ, Hoyland JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Laboratory and Regenerative Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. christine.lemaitre@manchester.ac.uk

In this study, we investigated the hypotheses that in human intervertebral disc
(IVD) degeneration there is local production of the cytokine IL-1, and that this 
locally produced cytokine can induce the cellular and matrix changes of IVD
degeneration. Immunohistochemistry was used to localize five members of the IL-1 
family (IL-1alpha, IL-1beta, IL-1Ra (IL-1 receptor antagonist), IL-1RI (IL-1
receptor, type I), and ICE (IL-1beta-converting enzyme)) in non-degenerate and
degenerate human IVDs. In addition, cells derived from non-degenerate and
degenerate human IVDs were challenged with IL-1 agonists and the response was
investigated using real-time PCR for a number of matrix-degrading enzymes, matrix
proteins, and members of the IL-1 family. This study has shown that native disc
cells from non-degenerate and degenerate discs produced the IL-1 agonists,
antagonist, the active receptor, and IL-1beta-converting enzyme. In addition,
immunopositivity for these proteins, with the exception of IL-1Ra, increased with
severity of degeneration. We have also shown that IL-1 treatment of human IVD
cells resulted in increased gene expression for the matrix-degrading enzymes (MMP
3 (matrix metalloproteinase 3), MMP 13 (matrix metalloproteinase 13), and
ADAMTS-4 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs)) and a 
decrease in the gene expression for matrix genes (aggrecan, collagen II, collagen
I, and SOX6). In conclusion we have shown that IL-1 is produced in the degenerate
IVD. It is synthesized by native disc cells, and treatment of human disc cells
with IL-1 induces an imbalance between catabolic and anabolic events, responses
that represent the changes seen during disc degeneration. Therefore, inhibiting
IL-1 could be an important therapeutic target for preventing and reversing disc
degeneration.

PMCID: PMC1175026
PMID: 15987475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Nat Methods. 2005 May;2(5):363-70. Epub 2005 Apr 21.

Quantitative analysis of gene expression in living adult neural stem cells by
gene trapping.

Scheel JR(1), Ray J, Gage FH, Barlow C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

The potential of neural stem cells (NSCs) for the treatment of neurodegenerative 
diseases makes the identification and characterization of genes involved in
neural stem cell responses therapeutically important. Although technologies exist
for measuring gene expression in cells, they often provide only a representative 
expression profile specific to a stimulus and time. We developed a complementary 
technology based on a retroviral-vector gene-trap approach that uses
beta-lactamase-induced disruption of fluorescence resonance energy transfer in
the fluorophore CCF-2/AM. A library of 'tagged' adult rat NSCs was generated by
transduction with gene-trap virus produced from a single-integrant packaging cell
line that allowed us to quantitatively analyze dynamic gene expression changes in
real time in living NSCs. Using this library we identified previously unknown
genes regulated by oxidative stress, indomethacin and factors that induce
differentiation, and show that one of the trapped genes, Sox6, is sufficient to
induce astrocytic differentiation when overexpressed.

PMID: 15846364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Biochem J. 2005 Aug 1;389(Pt 3):705-16.

Highly conserved proximal promoter element harbouring paired Sox9-binding sites
contributes to the tissue- and developmental stage-specific activity of the
matrilin-1 gene.

Rentsendorj O(1), Nagy A, Sinkó I, Daraba A, Barta E, Kiss I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Biological Research Center of the Hungarian Academy
of Sciences, Temesvári krt 62, H-6726 Szeged, Hungary.

The matrilin-1 gene has the unique feature that it is expressed in chondrocytes
in a developmental stage-specific manner. Previously, we found that the chicken
matrilin-1 long promoter with or without the intronic enhancer and the short
promoter with the intronic enhancer restricted the transgene expression to the
columnar proliferative chondroblasts and prehypertrophic chondrocytes of
growth-plate cartilage in transgenic mice. To study whether the short promoter
shared by these transgenes harbours cartilage-specific control elements, we
generated transgenic mice expressing the LacZ reporter gene under the control of 
the matrilin-1 promoter between -338 and +67. Histological analysis of the
founder embryos demonstrated relatively weak transgene activity in the developing
chondrocranium, axial and appendicular skeleton with highest level of expression 
in the columnar proliferating chondroblasts and prehypertrophic chondrocytes.
Computer analysis of the matrilin-1 genes of amniotes revealed a highly conserved
Pe1 (proximal promoter element 1) and two less-conserved sequence blocks in the
distal promoter region. The inverted Sox motifs of the Pe1 element interacted
with chondrogenic transcription factors Sox9, L-Sox5 and Sox6 in vitro and
another factor bound to the spacer region. Point mutations in the Sox motifs or
in the spacer region interfered with or altered the formation of nucleoprotein
complexes in vitro and significantly decreased the reporter gene activity in
transient expression assays in chondrocytes. In vivo occupancy of the Sox motifs 
in genomic footprinting in the expressing cell type, but not in fibroblasts, also
supported the involvement of Pe1 in the tissue-specific regulation of the gene.
Our results indicate that interaction of Pe1 with distal DNA elements is required
for the high level, cartilage- and developmental stage-specific transgene
expression.

PMCID: PMC1180720
PMID: 15804237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Sep;204(3):927-33.

Inhibition of Cdk6 expression through p38 MAP kinase is involved in
differentiation of mouse prechondrocyte ATDC5.

Moro T(1), Ogasawara T, Chikuda H, Ikeda T, Ogata N, Maruyama Z, Komori T, Hoshi 
K, Chung UI, Nakamura K, Okayama H, Kawaguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sensory and Motor System Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Japan.

Because a temporal arrest in the G1-phase of the cell cycle is a prerequisite for
cell differentiation, this study investigated the involvement of cell cycle
factors in the differentiation of cultured mouse prechondrocyte cell line ATDC5. 
Among the G1 cell cycle factors examined, both protein and mRNA levels of
cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk6) were downregulated during the culture in a
differentiation medium. The protein degradation of Cdk6 was not involved in this 
downregulation because proteasome inhibitors did not reverse the protein level.
When inhibitors of p38 MAPK, ERK-1/2, and PI3K/Akt were added to the culture,
only a p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580 blocked the decrease in the Cdk6 protein level
by the differentiation medium, indicating that the Cdk6 inhibition was mediated
by p38 MAPK pathway. In fact, p38 MAPK was confirmed to be phosphorylated during 
differentiation of ATDC5 cells. Enforced expression of Cdk6 in ATDC5 cells
blocked the chondrocyte differentiation and inhibited Sox5 and Sox6 expressions. 
However, the Cdk6 overexpression did not affect the proliferation or the cell
cycle progression, suggesting that the inhibitory effect of Cdk6 on the
differentiation was exerted by a mechanism largely independent of its cell cycle 
regulation. These results indicate that Cdk6 may be a regulator of chondrocyte
differentiation and that its p38-mediated downregulation is involved in the
efficient differentiation.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15795936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Apr 5;102(14):5062-7. Epub 2005 Mar 21.

Bmpr1a and Bmpr1b have overlapping functions and are essential for chondrogenesis
in vivo.

Yoon BS(1), Ovchinnikov DA, Yoshii I, Mishina Y, Behringer RR, Lyons KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Previous studies have demonstrated the ability of bone morphogenetic proteins
(BMPs) to promote chondrogenic differentiation in vitro. However, the in vivo
role of BMP signaling during chondrogenesis has been unclear. We report here that
BMP signaling is essential for multiple aspects of early chondrogenesis. Whereas 
mice deficient in type 1 receptors Bmpr1a or Bmpr1b in cartilage are able to form
intact cartilaginous elements, double mutants develop a severe generalized
chondrodysplasia. The majority of skeletal elements that form through
endochondral ossification are absent, and the ones that form are rudimentary. The
few cartilage condensations that form in double mutants are delayed in the
prechondrocytic state and never form an organized growth plate. The reduced size 
of mutant condensations results from increased apoptosis and decreased
proliferation. Moreover, the expression of cartilage-specific extracellular
matrix proteins is severely reduced in mutant elements. We demonstrate that this 
defect in chondrocytic differentiation can be attributed to lack of Sox9, L-Sox5,
and Sox6 expression in precartilaginous condensations in double mutants. In
summary, our study demonstrates that BMPR1A and BMPR1B are functionally redundant
during early chondrogenesis and that BMP signaling is required for chondrocyte
proliferation, survival, and differentiation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC555995
PMID: 15781876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Brain Tumor Pathol. 2004;21(3):117-20.

Immunohistochemical analysis of SOX6 expression in human brain tumors.

Ueda R(1), Yoshida K, Kawakami Y, Kawase T, Toda M.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology Research Group, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinano-machi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

We previously demonstrated that the developmentally regulated gene, SOX6, is
strongly expressed in glioma cells and in the fetal brain, but only faintly in
the normal adult brain. Recent studies have indicated that brain tumor cells may 
share antigens, signaling systems, and behavior with neural stem/progenitor
cells. To test the validity of this proposition, we analyzed the expression of
SOX6 in various human central nervous system (CNS) tumors. Immunohistochemical
analysis revealed that astrocytic and oligodendroglial tumors expressed SOX6;
neuronal-glial cell tumors (central neurocytoma) and embryonal tumors
(medulloblastoma), which arise from multipotential stem cell precursors, also
showed a high intensity of SOX6 staining. In contrast, ependymal tumors
(ependymoma and subependymoma), meningioma, and schwannoma, which are all well
differentiated tumors, showed either no staining or only faint staining for SOX6.
These results suggest that SOX6 may be expressed in bipotential or multipotential
cells capable of neuronal and glial differentiation, but not in fully
differentiated cells. SOX6 may be a useful marker for the diagnosis of tumors
arising from immature bipotential cells that may differentiate into neuronal and 
glial cells.

PMID: 15696972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Brain Tumor Pathol. 2004;21(1):35-8.

Expression of a transcriptional factor, SOX6, in human gliomas.

Ueda R(1), Yoshida K, Kawakami Y, Kawase T, Toda M.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology Research Group, Keio University School of Medicine,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

By screening a human testis cDNA library with glioma patients' sera, we isolated 
a transcriptional factor, SOX6. Here, we analyzed SOX6 expression in gliomas
having a range of malignancy grades using immunostaining. Murine Sox6 is a
transcriptional factor that is specifically expressed in the developing central
nervous system and in the early stages of chondrogenesis in mouse embryos. The
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) revealed that the SOX6
gene was more highly expressed in glioma tissues and fetal brain than in normal
adult brain and other cancer cells, except melanoma cells. Immunohistochemical
analysis with the anti-SOX6 antibody showed that all the glioma tissues analyzed 
(14 glioblastomas, 14 anaplastic astrocytomas, 3 anaplastic oligoastrocytomas, 5 
diffuse astrocytomas, 1 oligodendroglioma, and 1 pilocytic astrocytoma) expressed
SOX6 in tumor cells, but only a few SOX6-positive cells were detected in
nonneoplastic tissues from the cerebral cortex. These results indicate that the
developmentally regulated transcription factor SOX6 may be a potential diagnostic
marker for gliomas.

PMID: 15696967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Development. 2005 Feb;132(3):515-28. Epub 2005 Jan 5.

Genetic analysis of interactions between the somitic muscle, cartilage and tendon
cell lineages during mouse development.

Brent AE(1), Braun T, Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Proper formation of the musculoskeletal system requires the coordinated
development of the muscle, cartilage and tendon lineages arising from the somitic
mesoderm. During early somite development, muscle and cartilage emerge from two
distinct compartments, the myotome and sclerotome, in response to signals
secreted from surrounding tissues. As the somite matures, the tendon lineage is
established within the dorsolateral sclerotome, adjacent to and beneath the
myotome. We examine interactions between the three lineages by observing tendon
development in mouse mutants with genetically disrupted muscle or cartilage
development. Through analysis of embryos carrying null mutations in Myf5 and
Myod1, hence lacking both muscle progenitors and differentiated muscle, we
identify an essential role for the specified myotome in axial tendon development,
and suggest that absence of tendon formation in Myf5/Myod1 mutants results from
loss of the myotomal FGF proteins, which depend upon Myf5 and Myod1 for their
expression, and are required, in turn, for induction of the tendon progenitor
markers. Our analysis of Sox5/Sox6 double mutants, in which the
chondroprogenitors are unable to differentiate into cartilage, reveals that the
two cell fates arising from the sclerotome, axial tendon and cartilage are
alternative lineages, and that cartilage differentiation is required to actively 
repress tendon development in the dorsolateral sclerotome.

PMID: 15634692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Arthritis Rheum. 2004 Nov;50(11):3561-73.

The combination of SOX5, SOX6, and SOX9 (the SOX trio) provides signals
sufficient for induction of permanent cartilage.

Ikeda T(1), Kamekura S, Mabuchi A, Kou I, Seki S, Takato T, Nakamura K, Kawaguchi
H, Ikegawa S, Chung UI.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Bone & Joint Diseases, SNP Research Center, RIKEN (The
Institute of Physical and Chemical Research), University of Tokyo, 4-6-1
Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To regenerate permanent cartilage, it is crucial to know not only the 
necessary conditions for chondrogenesis, but also the sufficient conditions. The 
objective of this study was to determine the signal sufficient for
chondrogenesis.
METHODS: Embryonic stem cells that had been engineered to fluoresce upon
chondrocyte differentiation were treated with combinations of factors necessary
for chondrogenesis, and chondrocyte differentiation was detected as fluorescence.
We screened for the combination that could induce fluorescence within 3 days.
Then, primary mesenchymal stem cells, nonchondrogenic immortalized cell lines,
and primary dermal fibroblasts were treated with the combination, and the
induction of chondrocyte differentiation was assessed by detecting the expression
of the cartilage marker genes and the accumulation of proteoglycan-rich matrix.
The effects of monolayer, spheroid, and 3-dimensional culture systems on
induction by combinations of transcription factors were compared. The effects of 
the combination on hypertrophic and osteoblastic differentiation were evaluated
by detecting the expression of the characteristic marker genes.
RESULTS: No single factor induced fluorescence. Among various combinations
examined, only the SOX5, SOX6, and SOX9 combination (the SOX trio) induced
fluorescence within 3 days. The SOX trio successfully induced chondrocyte
differentiation in all cell types tested, including nonchondrogenic types, and
the induction occurred regardless of the culture system used. Contrary to the
conventional chondrogenic techniques, the SOX trio suppressed hypertrophic and
osteogenic differentiation at the same time.
CONCLUSION: These data strongly suggest that the SOX trio provides signals
sufficient for the induction of permanent cartilage.

PMID: 15529345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. FEBS Lett. 2004 Nov 5;577(1-2):60-6.

Suppression of Sox6 in P19 cells leads to failure of neuronal differentiation by 
retinoic acid and induces retinoic acid-dependent apoptosis.

Hamada-Kanazawa M(1), Ishikawa K, Ogawa D, Kanai M, Kawai Y, Narahara M, Miyake
M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kobe-Gakuin University, Arise,
Ikawadani-cho, Nishi-ku, Kobe 651-2180, Japan. hamada@pharm.kobegakuin.ac.jp

The Sox6 gene is a member of the Sox gene family, which encodes transcription
factors, and previous studies have suggested that it plays an important role in
the development of the central nervous system. Aggregation of embryonic carcinoma
P19 cells with retinoic acid (RA) results in the development of neurons, glia,
and fibroblast-like cells. Sox6 mRNA increases rapidly in P19 cells during RA
induction and then decreases during differentiation into neuronal cells. To
investigate whether Sox6 expression is essential for neuronal differentiation, we
established Sox6-suppressed P19 (P19[anti-Sox6]) cells by transfection of
antisense-Sox6 cDNA. Most of the P19[anti-Sox6] cells showed no neurites and were
not stained by the anti-MAP 2 antibody, while the suppression of Sox6 expression 
nearly totally blocked neuronal differentiation in P19 cells. Further, Sox6
suppression caused RA-dependent apoptosis by P19[anti-Sox6] cells: RA-treated
P19[anti-Sox6] cells showed chromatin condensation, DNA fragmentation, and an
increase in caspase-3-like activity. Thus, Sox6 is considered essential for
neuronal differentiation and may play an important role in the early stages of
neuronal differentiation or apoptosis.

PMID: 15527762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 3;279(49):50942-8. Epub 2004 Sep 28.

SOX9-dependent and -independent transcriptional regulation of human cartilage
link protein.

Kou I(1), Ikegawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Bone and Joint Diseases, SNP Research Center, RIKEN, Tokyo
108-8639, Japan.

Cartilage link protein is a key component of the cartilage extracellular matrix. 
The transcriptional regulation of the gene encoding cartilage link protein
(CRTL1) is largely unknown, however. Here, we investigated the regulation of
CRTL1 by SOX9, a key regulator of cartilage matrix genes and chondrogenesis.
Knockdown of SOX9 resulted in decreased CRTL1 expression. SOX9 induced CRTL1
expression effectively in human non-chondrocytic immortalized cell lines as well 
as in mesenchymal stem cell and adult dermal fibroblast. These results indicate
that, like other cartilage matrix genes, SOX9 is a key regulator of CRTL1. Unlike
other cartilage matrix genes, however, the activation of CRTL1 by SOX9 and its
known transcriptional co-activators L-SOX5 and SOX6 was cell type-dependent. Two 
cis-acting enhancer elements resided in the 5'-untranslated region of CRTL1. One 
contained a heptameric SOX binding sequence and showed SOX9-dependent enhancer
activity in several cell lines. The other showed cell type-specific
SOX9-independent enhancer activity. These findings suggest that the enhancer
elements may mediate differential expression of CRTL1 during chondrocyte
differentiation and maturation.

PMID: 15456769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Development. 2004 Sep;131(18):4455-65. Epub 2004 Aug 11.

LSox5 regulates RhoB expression in the neural tube and promotes generation of the
neural crest.

Perez-Alcala S(1), Nieto MA, Barbas JA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal CSIC, Doctor Arce 37, 28002 Madrid, Spain.

Members of the Sox family of transcription factors are involved in a number of
crucial developmental processes, including sex determination, neurogenesis and
skeletal development. LSox5 is a member of the group D Sox factors that, in
conjunction with Sox6 and Sox9, promotes chondrogenesis by activating the
expression of cartilage-specific extracellular matrix molecules. We have cloned
the chicken homologue of LSox5 and found that it is initially expressed in the
premigratory and migratory neural crest after Slug and FoxD3. Subsequently, the
expression of LSox5 is maintained in cephalic crest derivatives, and it appears
to be required for the development of the glial lineage, the Schwann cells and
satellite glia in cranial ganglia. Misexpression of LSox5 in the cephalic neural 
tube activated RhoB expression throughout the dorsoventral axis. Furthermore, the
prolonged forced expression of LSox5 enlarged the dorsal territory in which the
neural crest is generated, extended the 'temporal window' of neural crest
segregation, and led to an overproduction of neural crest cells in cephalic
regions. In addition to HNK-1, the additional neural crest cells expressed
putative upstream markers (Slug, FoxD3) indicating that a regulatory feedback
mechanism may operate during neural crest generation. Thus, our data show that in
addition to the SoxE genes (Sox9 and Sox10) a SoxD gene (Sox5) also participates 
in neural crest development and that a cooperative interaction may operate during
neural crest generation, as seen during the formation of cartilage.

PMID: 15306568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Circulation. 2004 Jun 8;109(22):2720-3. Epub 2004 Jun 1.

Novel gene locus for autosomal dominant left ventricular noncompaction maps to
chromosome 11p15.

Sasse-Klaassen S(1), Probst S, Gerull B, Oechslin E, Nürnberg P, Heuser A, Jenni 
R, Hennies HC, Thierfelder L.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Roessle Str 10, 13092
Berlin, Germany. sasse@mdc-berlin.de

BACKGROUND: Left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC) is a congenital unclassified
cardiomyopathy with numerous prominent trabeculations and deep intertrabecular
recesses in a hypertrophied and hypokinetic myocardium. It has been reported to
occur in isolation or in association with congenital heart disease. Mutations in 
the X-linked G4.5 gene are responsible for cases of isolated LVNC in male
infants, but G4.5 mutations were not found in patients with clinical onset of
disease in adulthood. In addition, several families with LVNC and an autosomal
dominant pattern of inheritance suggest genetic heterogeneity.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We performed a genome-wide linkage analysis in a family with
autosomal dominant LVNC and show that a locus containing the LVNC disease gene
maps to chromosome 11p15. A peak 2-point logarithm of odds score of 5.06 was
obtained with marker D11S902 at theta=0. Haplotype analysis defined a critical
interval of 6.4 centimorgan between D11S1794 and D11S928 corresponding to a
physical distance of 6.8 megabases. No disease-causing mutation was identified in
2 prime positional candidate genes, muscle LIM protein (MLP) and SOX6.
CONCLUSIONS: We have mapped a locus for autosomal dominant LVNC to a 6.8-megabase
region on human chromosome 11p15. Identification of the disease gene will allow
genetic screening and provide fundamental insight into the understanding of
myocardial morphogenesis.

PMID: 15173023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 2;279(27):28564-73. Epub 2004 Apr 13.

SOX7 and GATA-4 are competitive activators of Fgf-3 transcription.

Murakami A(1), Shen H, Ishida S, Dickson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. amurakam@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Fgf-3 is expressed in a dynamic and complex spatiotemporal pattern during mouse
development. Previous studies identified GATA-4 as a transcription factor that
binds the key regulatory element PS4A of the Fgf-3 promoter and stimulates
transcription. Here we show that members of the SOX family of transcription
factors also bind PS4A and differentially modulate transcription. At least five
SOX genes, Sox2, Sox6, Sox7, Sox13, and Sox17, were expressed in F9 cells, and of
these, Sox7 and Sox17 were dramatically induced in parallel with Fgf-3 following 
differentiation into parietal endoderm-like cells with retinoic acid and
dibutyryl cAMP. Complexes could be detected on PS4A with SOX2, SOX7, and SOX17 by
using nuclear extracts from differentiated F9 cells. However, only Sox7
expression markedly activated the Fgf-3 promoter in these cells. By contrast,
SOX2 was a poor activator of Fgf-3 transcription, and when Sox2 was coexpressed
with Gata4, it negatively modulated the strong activation mediated by GATA-4.
More detailed analyses showed that SOX7 competes with GATA-4 for PS4A occupancy
and to activate the Fgf-3 promoter. In situ hybridization analysis showed that
Sox7 is co-expressed with Fgf-3 and Gata4 in the parietal endoderm of E7.5 mouse 
embryos. In culture, GATA-4-deficient embryonal stem cells were shown to express 
Fgf-3 upon differentiation into embryoid bodies, although at lower levels than
were found in wild type embryonal stem cells. This Fgf-3 expression was virtually
abolished when Sox7 expression was suppressed by RNA interference. These results 
show that SOX7 is a potent activator of Fgf-3 transcription.

PMID: 15082719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Cell Biol. 2004 Mar 1;164(5):747-58.

Sox5 and Sox6 are needed to develop and maintain source, columnar, and
hypertrophic chondrocytes in the cartilage growth plate.

Smits P(1), Dy P, Mitra S, Lefebvre V.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland
Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid Ave., ND-20, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Sox5 and Sox6 encode Sry-related transcription factors that redundantly promote
early chondroblast differentiation. Using mouse embryos with three or four null
alleles of Sox5 and Sox6, we show that they are also essential and redundant in
major steps of growth plate chondrocyte differentiation. Sox5 and Sox6 promote
the development of a highly proliferating pool of chondroblasts between the
epiphyses and metaphyses of future long bones. This pool is the likely cellular
source of growth plates. Sox5 and Sox6 permit formation of growth plate columnar 
zones by keeping chondroblasts proliferating and by delaying chondrocyte
prehypertrophy. They allow induction of chondrocyte hypertrophy and permit
formation of prehypertrophic and hypertrophic zones by delaying chondrocyte
terminal differentiation induced by ossification fronts. They act, at least in
part, by down-regulating Ihh signaling, Fgfr3, and Runx2 and by up-regulating
Bmp6. In conclusion, Sox5 and Sox6 are needed for the establishment of
multilayered growth plates, and thereby for proper and timely development of
endochondral bones.

PMCID: PMC2172159
PMID: 14993235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. FEBS Lett. 2004 Feb 27;560(1-3):192-8.

Sox6 overexpression causes cellular aggregation and the neuronal differentiation 
of P19 embryonic carcinoma cells in the absence of retinoic acid.

Hamada-Kanazawa M(1), Ishikawa K, Nomoto K, Uozumi T, Kawai Y, Narahara M, Miyake
M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kobe-Gakuin University, Arise,
Ikawadani-cho, Nishi-ku, Kobe 651-2180, Japan. hamada@pharm.kobegakuin.ac.jp

The Sox6 gene is a member of the Sox gene family that encodes transcription
factors. Previous studies have suggested that Sox6 plays an important role in the
development of the central nervous system. Aggregation of embryonic carcinoma P19
cells with retinoic acid (RA) results in the development of neurons, glia and
fibroblast-like cells. In this report, we have shown that Sox6 mRNA increased
rapidly in P19 cells during RA induction and then decreased during the
differentiation of P19 into neuronal cells. To explore the possible roles of Sox6
during this process, stably Sox6-overexpressing P19 cell lines (P19[Sox6]) were
established. These P19[Sox6] had acquired both characteristics of the wild-type
P19 induced by RA. First, P19[Sox6] cells showed a marked cellular aggregation in
the absence of RA. Second, P19[Sox6] could differentiate into
microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2)-expressing neuronal cells in the absence 
of RA. Sox6 expression could cause the activation of endogenous genes including
the neuronal transcription factor Mash-1, the neuronal development-related gene
Wnt-1, the neuron-specific cell adhesion molecule N-cadherin, and the
neuron-specific protein MAP2, resulting in neurogenesis. Moreover, E-cadherin, a 
major cell adhesion molecule of wild-type P19, was strongly induced by Sox6,
resulting in cellular aggregation without RA. Thus Sox6 may play a critical role 
in cellular aggregation and neuronal differentiation of P19 cells.

PMID: 14988021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Bone Miner Res. 2004 Feb;19(2):245-55.

Negative regulation of chondrocyte differentiation by transcription factor
AP-2alpha.

Huang Z(1), Xu H, Sandell L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine,
St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. huangz@msnotes.wustl.edu

This study investigated the role of transcription factor AP-2alpha in chondrocyte
differentiation in vitro. AP-2alpha mRNA declined during differentiation, and
overexpression of AP-2alpha inhibited differentiation. The results demonstrated
that AP-2alpha plays a negative role in chondrocyte differentiation.INTRODUCTION:
Transcription factor AP-2alpha has been detected in growth plate and articular
chondrocytes and has been shown to regulate cartilage matrix gene expression in
vitro. However, the precise functional role of AP-2alpha in chondrocyte
differentiation is not known. In this study, we assessed the expression and the
function of AP-2alpha in chondrocyte differentiation of ATDC5 cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Chondrocyte differentiation of ATDC5 cells was induced
with insulin or transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta). Proteoglycan
production was assessed by alcian blue staining, and expression levels of
chondrocyte marker genes and AP-2 gene family were determined by quantitative
real time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
Overexpression of AP-2alpha in ATDC5 cells was accomplished by retroviral
infection. Infected cells were selected for G418 resistance and pooled for
further analysis.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Quantitative real time RT-PCR analysis showed that among
the four members of the AP-2 gene family, AP-2alpha mRNA was the most abundant.
AP-2alpha mRNA levels progressively declined during the differentiation induced
by either insulin or TGF-beta treatment. Retroviral expression of AP-2alpha in
ATDC5 cells prevented the formation of cartilage nodules, suppressed the
proteoglycan production, and inhibited the expression of type II collagen,
aggrecan, and type X collagen. Expression profile analysis of key transcription
factors involved in chondrogenesis showed that overexpression of AP-2alpha
maintained the expression of Sox9 but suppressed the expression of SoxS and Sox6.
Taken together, we provide, for the first time, molecular and cellular evidence
suggesting that AP-2alpha is a negative regulator of chondrocyte differentiation.

PMID: 14969394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Oncogene. 2004 Feb 19;23(7):1420-7.

Identification of a human glioma antigen, SOX6, recognized by patients' sera.

Ueda R(1), Iizuka Y, Yoshida K, Kawase T, Kawakami Y, Toda M.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology Research Group, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

To identify tumor antigens for glioma, a human testis cDNA library was screened
by serological identification of antigens by recombinant expression cloning with 
sera from glioma patients. In this screening, the most frequently isolated
antigen was SOX6, an Sry-related high-mobility group (HMG) box-containing gene.
SOX6 is a transcriptional factor that is specifically expressed in the developing
central nervous system and in the early stages of chondrogenesis in mouse
embryos. IgG antibodies against SOX6 were detected in sera from 12 of 36 glioma
patients (33.3%), 0 of 14 patients with other brain disease (0%), and one of 54
other cancer patients (1.9%). In sera from 37 healthy individuals, no IgG
responses against SOX6 were detected, except in an elderly female. Furthermore,
Western blot and ELISA analyses with sera from glioma patients revealed that the 
DNA-binding domain, the HMG box of SOX6, might be a dominant epitope of IgGs
against SOX6. RT-PCR and Northern blot analysis revealed that the SOX6 gene was
more highly expressed in glioma tissues than in normal adult tissues, except
testis. Western blot analysis with an anti-SOX6 antibody demonstrated that the
SOX6 protein was expressed in glioma tissues, but not in normal adult brain
tissue. Immunohistochemical analysis with the anti-SOX6 antibody showed that all 
the glioma tissues analysed expressed SOX6 in tumor cells, but only a few
SOX6-positive cells were detected in non-neoplastic tissues from the cerebral
cortex. In summary, these results indicate that the developmentally regulated
transcription factor SOX6 is aberrantly expressed in glioma and specifically
recognized by IgGs from glioma patients' sera.

PMID: 14691456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Oct 15;31(20):5941-8.

Sox6 regulation of cardiac myocyte development.

Cohen-Barak O(1), Yi Z, Hagiwara N, Monzen K, Komuro I, Brilliant MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Arizona College of Medicine,
Steele Memorial Children's Research Center 1501 N. Campbell Avenue, Tucson, AZ
85724, USA.

A mouse mutation (p100H/p100H) has been identified that is associated with
cardioskeletal myopathy, heart block, delayed growth and early postnatal death.
The gene that is disrupted in this mutation encodes the transcription factor
Sox6. P19CL6 cells were used as an in vitro cardiomyocyte differentiation system 
and revealed that Sox6 is expressed exclusively when the cells are committed to
differentiate to beating cardiac myocytes. We used the yeast two-hybrid system to
identify the Prtb (Proline-rich transcript of the brain) protein as a Sox6
interactor, and subsequently confirmed the interaction by co-immunoprecipitation.
Prtb expression in P19CL6 cells increased with differentiation to beating
cardiomyocytes. Using the P19CL6 cells stably transfected with noggin, an
antagonist of BMP (Bone Morphogenic Protein), we found that BMP expression is
required for Sox6 expression in cardiomyocyte differentiation. Surprisingly, the 
expression of the alpha1c-subunit gene of the L-type Ca2+ channel decreased in
P19CL6 cells as they differentiated to beating cardiac cells. Ectopic expression 
of Sox6 or Prtb alone in P19CL6 cells caused down-regulation of L-type Ca2+
alpha1c expression, but when Sox6 and Prtb were co-transfected to the cells,
L-type Ca2+ alpha1c remained at basal levels. A similar relationship of Sox6 and 
L-type Ca2+ alpha1c expression was seen in vivo (comparing wild-type and
p(100H)/p(100H) mutant mice). Thus, Sox6 is within the BMP pathway in cardiac
differentiation, interacts with Prtb and may play a critical role in the
regulation of a cardiac L-type Ca2+ channel.

PMCID: PMC219484
PMID: 14530442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Dev Biol. 2003 May 15;257(2):292-301.

Analysis of the molecular cascade responsible for mesodermal limb chondrogenesis:
Sox genes and BMP signaling.

Chimal-Monroy J(1), Rodriguez-Leon J, Montero JA, Gañan Y, Macias D, Merino R,
Hurle JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular y Fisiología, Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas, UNAM, México DF 04510, México.

Here, we have studied how Sox genes and BMP signaling are functionally coupled
during limb chondrogenesis. Using the experimental model of TGFbeta1-induced
interdigital digits, we dissect the sequence of morphological and molecular
events during in vivo chondrogenesis. Our results show that Sox8 and Sox9 are the
most precocious markers of limb cartilage, and their induction is independent and
precedes the activation of BMP signaling. Sox10 appears also to cooperate with
Sox9 and Sox8 in the establishment of the digit cartilages. In addition, we show 
that experimental induction of Sox gene expression in the interdigital mesoderm
is accompanied by loss of the apoptotic response to exogenous BMPs. L-Sox5 and
Sox6 are respectively induced coincident and after the expression of Bmpr1b in
the prechondrogenic aggregate, and their activation correlates with the induction
of Type II Collagen and Aggrecan genes in the differentiating cartilages. The
expression of Bmpr1b precedes the appearance of morphological changes in the
prechondrogenic aggregate and establishes a landmark from which the maintenance
of the expression of all Sox genes and the progress of cartilage differentiation 
becomes dependent on BMPs. Moreover, we show that Ventroptin precedes Noggin in
the modulation of BMP activity in the developing cartilages. In summary, our
findings suggest that Sox8, Sox9, and Sox10 have a cooperative function
conferring chondrogenic competence to limb mesoderm in response to BMP signals.
In turn, BMPs in concert with Sox9, Sox6, and L-Sox5 would be responsible for the
execution and maintenance of the cartilage differentiation program.

PMID: 12729559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Jul;17(7):1332-43. Epub 2003 Apr 3.

Induction of the Sry-related factor SOX6 contributes to bone morphogenetic
protein-2-induced chondroblastic differentiation of C3H10T1/2 cells.

Fernández-Lloris R(1), Viñals F, López-Rovira T, Harley V, Bartrons R, Rosa JL,
Ventura F.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Ciències Fisiològiques II, Campus de Bellvitge, Universitat de 
Barcelona, 08907 L' Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.

Chondrogenesis leads to the formation of mature cartilage and generates initial
skeletal elements that serve as templates for endochondral bone formation. Bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are involved in several developmental and
organogenetic processes and have been identified as key regulators in
chondrogenesis. In the present study we sought to determine the transcriptional
mechanisms contributing to the induction of chondrogenic markers by BMP-2.
Time-course studies with BMP-2-stimulated C3H10T1/2 cells showed a dose-dependent
appearance of Alcian-blue-positive material and up-regulated expression of
type-II collagen mRNA. This last effect required new protein synthesis because
addition of cycloheximide completely blocked the induction of type-II collagen
mRNA. A region encompassing the chondrocyte-specific enhancer, localized in
intron I of type-II collagen alpha1 chain (Col2a1) gene, is sufficient to confer 
BMP-2-dependent transcriptional induction of type-II collagen gene expression.
Analysis of the expression levels of chondrogenic Sry-type high-mobility group
(HMG) box proteins (SOX) transcription factors demonstrated a time-dependent
induction of Sox6 expression by BMP-2 that correlated with the appearance of
BMP-2- induced protein complexes bound to the chondrocyte-specific enhancer.
Preincubation of nuclear extracts with SOX6 and SOX9 antibodies markedly reduced 
the intensity of these bands. Forced expression of SOX6 mimicked the BMP-2
effect, whereas coexpression of SOX9 promoted a synergistic interaction between
both factors in transcription from the chondrocyte-specific enhancer. Moreover,
overexpression of a SOX6 mutated form, devoid of its high-mobility group domain, 
was sufficient to prevent transcriptional induction of the chondrocyte-specific
enhancer by BMP-2. Taken together, these results indicate that SOX6 is an
important downstream mediator of BMP-2 signaling in chondrogenesis.

PMID: 12677004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Development. 2003 Mar;130(6):1135-48.

Sox5 and Sox6 are required for notochord extracellular matrix sheath formation,
notochord cell survival and development of the nucleus pulposus of intervertebral
discs.

Smits P(1), Lefebvre V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering and Orthopaedic Research Center,
Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

The notochord has major roles in vertebral column formation: indirectly by
inducing sclerotome cell differentiation; and directly by forming the nucleus
pulposus of intervertebral discs. Sox5 and Sox6 encode Sry-related HMG box
transcription factors that act redundantly to promote chondroblast
differentiation in all cartilages of the mouse embryo. We show that Sox5 and Sox6
are expressed in the notochord cell lineage and required for notochord late
development. In Sox5(-/-)/Sox6(-/-) embryos, the notochord formed a typical
rod-like structure. It fulfilled its inductive functions, as indicated by
expression of sonic hedgehog and sclerotome specification. However, the notochord
failed to become surrounded with an extracellular matrix sheath. This phenotype
was associated with a downregulation of extracellular matrix genes, including the
genes for collagen 2, aggrecan and perlecan in both notochord cells and
surrounding chondrocytic cells of presumptive inner annuli and vertebral bodies. 
The mutant notochord then underwent an aberrant, fatal dismantling after
sclerotome cell migration. Its cells became removed first from intervertebral
spaces and then from vertebral bodies, and it progressively underwent apoptosis. 
Meanwhile, the development of inner annuli and vertebral bodies was dramatically 
impaired. Consequently, the vertebral column of Sox5(-/-)/Sox6(-/-) fetuses
consisted of a very deficient cartilage and was devoid of nuclei pulposi. In
Sox5(-/-)/Sox6(+/-) and more severely in Sox5(+/-)/Sox6(-/-) embryos, the
notochord sheath was thinner, but cells survived. By birth, nuclei pulposi were
rudimentary, and its cells poorly swelled and still expressing sonic hedgehog.
Hence, Sox5 and Sox6 are required for notochord extracellular matrix sheath
formation, notochord cell survival and formation of nuclei pulposi. Through these
roles and essential roles in cartilage formation, they are central
transcriptional regulators of vertebral column development.

PMID: 12571105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Genes Dev. 2002 Nov 1;16(21):2813-28.

The transcription factor Sox9 has essential roles in successive steps of the
chondrocyte differentiation pathway and is required for expression of Sox5 and
Sox6.

Akiyama H(1), Chaboissier MC, Martin JF, Schedl A, de Crombrugghe B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

To examine whether the transcription factor Sox9 has an essential role during the
sequential steps of chondrocyte differentiation, we have used the Cre/loxP
recombination system to generate mouse embryos in which either Sox9 is missing
from undifferentiated mesenchymal cells of limb buds or the Sox9 gene is
inactivated after chondrogenic mesenchymal condensations. Inactivation of Sox9 in
limb buds before mesenchymal condensations resulted in a complete absence of both
cartilage and bone, but markers for the different axes of limb development showed
a normal pattern of expression. Apoptotic domains within the developing limbs
were expanded, suggesting that Sox9 suppresses apoptosis. Expression of Sox5 and 
Sox6, two other Sox genes involved in chondrogenesis, was no longer detected.
Moreover, expression of Runx2, a transcription factor needed for osteoblast
differentiation, was also abolished. Embryos, in which Sox9 was deleted after
mesenchymal condensations, exhibited a severe generalized chondrodysplasia,
similar to that in Sox5; Sox6 double-null mutant mice. Most cells were arrested
as condensed mesenchymal cells and did not undergo overt differentiation into
chondrocytes. Furthermore, chondrocyte proliferation was severely inhibited and
joint formation was defective. Although Indian hedgehog, Patched1, parathyroid
hormone-related peptide (Pthrp), and Pth/Pthrp receptor were expressed, their
expression was down-regulated. Our experiments further suggested that Sox9 is
also needed to prevent conversion of proliferating chondrocytes into hypertrophic
chondrocytes. We conclude that Sox9 is required during sequential steps of the
chondrocyte differentiation pathway.

PMCID: PMC187468
PMID: 12414734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Gene. 2002 Sep 18;298(1):59-68.

Identification and characterization of the human long form of Sox5 (L-SOX5) gene.

Ikeda T(1), Zhang J, Chano T, Mabuchi A, Fukuda A, Kawaguchi H, Nakamura K,
Ikegawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Bone and Joint Diseases, SNP Research Center, RIKEN (The
Institute of Physical and Chemical Research), c/o Institute of Medical Science,
University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

The Sox (Sry-type HMG box) group of transcription factors, which is defined by a 
high-mobility group (HMG) DNA-binding domain, is categorized into six
subfamilies. Sox5 and Sox6 belong to the group D subfamily, which is
characterized by conserved N-terminal domains including a leucine-zipper, a
coiled-coil domain and a Q-box. Group D Sox genes are expressed as long and short
transcripts that exhibit differential expression patterns. In mouse, the long
form of Sox5, L-Sox5, is co-expressed and interacts with Sox6; together, these
two proteins appear to play a key role in chondrogenesis and myogenesis. In
humans, however, only the short form of Sox5 has previously been identified. To
gain insight into Sox5 function, we have identified and characterized human
L-SOX5. The human L-SOX5 cDNA encodes a 763-amino-acid protein that is 416
residues longer than the short form and contains all of the characteristic motifs
of group D Sox proteins. The predicted L-SOX5 protein shares 97% amino acid
identity with its mouse counterpart and 59% identity with human SOX6. The L-SOX5 
gene contains 18 exons and shows similar genomic structure to SOX6. We have
identified two transcription start sites in L-SOX5 and multiple alternatively
spliced mRNA variants that are distinct from the short form. Unlike the short
form, which shows testis-specific expression, L-SOX5 is expressed in multiple
tissues. Like SOX6, L-SOX5 shows strong expression in chondrocytes and striated
muscles, indicating a likely role in human cartilage and muscle development.

PMID: 12406576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Biochem J. 2003 Jan 1;369(Pt 1):103-15.

The TATA-containing core promoter of the type II collagen gene (COL2A1) is the
target of interferon-gamma-mediated inhibition in human chondrocytes: requirement
for Stat1 alpha, Jak1 and Jak2.

Osaki M(1), Tan L, Choy BK, Yoshida Y, Cheah KS, Auron PE, Goldring MB.

Author information: 
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Rheumatology Division, and New England
Baptist Bone & Joint Institute, Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) inhibits the synthesis of the cartilage-specific
extracellular matrix protein type II collagen, and suppresses the expression of
the type II collagen gene ( COL2A1 ) at the transcriptional level. To further
examine this mechanism, the responses of COL2A1 regulatory sequences to IFN-gamma
and the role of components of the Janus kinase/signal transducer and activators
of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway were examined in the immortalized human
chondrocyte cell line, C-28/I2. IFN-gamma inhibited the mRNA levels of COL2A1 and
aggrecan, but not Sox9, L-Sox5 and Sox6, all of which were expressed by these
cells as markers of the differentiated phenotype. IFN-gamma suppressed the
expression of luciferase reporter constructs containing sequences of the COL2A1
promoter spanning -6368 to +125 bp in the absence and presence of the intronic
enhancer and stimulated activity of the gamma-interferon-activated site (GAS)
luciferase reporter vector, associated with induction of Stat1 alpha-binding
activity in nuclear extracts. These responses to IFN-gamma were blocked by
overexpression of the JAK inhibitor, JAK-binding protein (JAB), or reversed by
dominant-negative Stat1 alpha Y701F containing a mutation at Tyr-701, the JAK
phosphorylation site. IFN-gamma had no effect on COL2A1 promoter expression in
Jak1 (U4A)-, Jak2 (gamma 2A)- and Stat1 alpha (U3A)-deficient cell lines. In the 
U3A cell line, the response to IFN-gamma was rescued by overexpression of Stat1
alpha, but not by either Stat1 alpha Y701F or Stat1 beta. Functional analysis
using deletion constructs showed that the IFN-gamma response was retained in the 
COL2A1 core promoter region spanning -45 to +11 bp, containing the TATA-box and
GC-rich sequences but no Stat1-binding elements. Inhibition of COL2A1 promoter
activity by IFN-gamma persisted in the presence of multiple deletions within the 
-45/+11 bp region. Our results indicate that repression of COL2A1 gene
transcription by IFN-gamma requires Jak1, Jak2 and Stat1 alpha and suggest that
this response involves indirect interaction of activated Stat1 alpha with the
general transcriptional machinery that drives constitutive COL2A1 expression.

PMCID: PMC1223055
PMID: 12223098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Biol Pharm Bull. 2002 Jun;25(6):705-9.

cDNA cloning of the Sry-related gene Sox6 from rat with tissue-specific
expression.

Narahara M(1), Yamada A, Hamada-Kanazawa M, Kawai Y, Miyake M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kobe-Gakuin University, Japan.
narahara@pharm.kobegakuin.ac.jp

A cDNA encoding rat homologue of the previously characterized mouse Sox6 was
isolated by a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) cloning strategy. Comparison of
this eDNA with homologous mouse, human and rainbow trout cDNA exhibited an
overall amino acid sequence identity of 99.6, 89.3 and 76.3% respectively. The
leucine-zipper and HMG-box motif were almost completely conserved between these
homologues. The expression of Sox6 was determined in rat by Northern
hybridization and Real-time quantitative reverse transcription (RT)-PCR. rSox6
(rat Sox6) was specifically expressed in the neonatal brain and adult testis with
Northern blotting. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR for the determination of Sox6
mRNA was examined. The rSox6 was expressed in the neonatal brain and adult testis
as well as by Northern blotting and also expressed in the adult eyeball and
slightly in the ovary.

PMID: 12081133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Bone Miner Metab. 2002;20(3):121-30.

Toward understanding the functions of the two highly related Sox5 and Sox6 genes.

Lefebvre V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland
Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid Avenue, ND-20, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

PMID: 11984693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Feb 5;99(3):1146-51. Epub 2002 Jan 29.

A direct role of SRY and SOX proteins in pre-mRNA splicing.

Ohe K(1), Lalli E, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale, Université Louis Pasteur, B.P. 163, 67404
Illkirch-Strasbourg, France.

The mammalian testis determining factor SRY and its related Sox factors are
critical developmental regulators. They share significant similarity in their
high mobility group (HMG) domain and display discrete patterns of tissue-specific
expression. Here we show that SRY and the Sox protein SOX6 colocalize with
splicing factors in the nucleus and are dynamically redistributed following the
blockage of splicing in living cells. Anti-SOX6 antibodies supershift the
spliceosomal complex from assembled splicing reactions and inhibit splicing in
vitro of multiple pre-mRNA substrates. Most importantly, SOX6-depleted nuclear
extracts have impaired splicing activity, which is efficiently restored by
addition of the recombinant SOX6 HMG domain and also by recombinant SRY and the
SOX9 HMG domain. These results reveal an unexpected biological function of the
SRY, SOX6, and SOX9 gene products and provide a functional link to the
biochemical mechanisms operating in mammalian sex determination and in other
developmental processes regulated by Sox genes.

PMCID: PMC122158
PMID: 11818535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Biochem J. 2001 Dec 1;360(Pt 2):461-70.

Regulation of type-II collagen gene expression during human chondrocyte
de-differentiation and recovery of chondrocyte-specific phenotype in culture
involves Sry-type high-mobility-group box (SOX) transcription factors.

Stokes DG(1), Liu G, Dharmavaram R, Hawkins D, Piera-Velazquez S, Jimenez SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, 233 S. 10th Street, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

During ex vivo growth as monolayer cultures, chondrocytes proliferate and undergo
a process of de-differentiation. This process involves a change in morphology and
a change from expression of chondrocyte-specific genes to that of genes that are 
normally expressed in fibroblasts. Transfer of the monolayer chondrocyte culture 
to three-dimensional culture systems induces the cells to re-acquire a
chondrocyte-specific phenotype and produce a cartilaginous-like tissue in vitro. 
We investigated mechanisms involved in the control of the de-differentiation and 
re-differentiation process in vitro. De-differentiated chondrocytes re-acquired
their chondrocyte-specific phenotype when cultured on poly-(2-hydroxyethyl
methacrylate) (polyHEMA) as assayed by morphology, reverse transcriptase PCR of
chondrocyte-specific mRNA, Western-blot analysis and chondrocyte-specific
promoter activity. Essentially, full recovery of the chondrocyte-specific
phenotype was observed when cells that had been cultured for 4 weeks on plastic
were transferred to culture on polyHEMA. However, after subsequent passages on
plastic, the phenotype recovery was incomplete or did not occur. The activity of 
a gene reporter construct containing the promoter and enhancer from the human
type-II collagen gene (COL2A1) was modulated by the culture conditions, so that
its transcriptional activity was repressed in monolayer cultures and rescued to
some extent when the cells were switched to polyHEMA cultures. The binding of
Sry-type high-mobility-group box (SOX) transcription factors to the enhancer
region was modulated by the culture conditions, as were the mRNA levels for SOX9.
A transfected human type-II collagen reporter construct was activated in
de-differentiated cells by ectopic expression of SOX transcription factors. These
results underscore the overt change in phenotype that occurs when chondrocytes
are cultured as monolayers on tissue-culture plastic substrata.

PMCID: PMC1222247
PMID: 11716775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Dev Cell. 2001 Aug;1(2):277-90.

The transcription factors L-Sox5 and Sox6 are essential for cartilage formation.

Smits P(1), Li P, Mandel J, Zhang Z, Deng JM, Behringer RR, de Crombrugghe B,
Lefebvre V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

L-Sox5 and Sox6 are highly identical Sry-related transcription factors
coexpressed in cartilage. Whereas Sox5 and Sox6 single null mice are born with
mild skeletal abnormalities, Sox5; Sox6 double null fetuses die with a severe,
generalized chondrodysplasia. In these double mutants, chondroblasts poorly
differentiate. They express the genes for all essential cartilage extracellular
matrix components at low or undetectable levels and initiate proliferation after 
a long delay. All cartilages are thus extracellular matrix deficient and remain
rudimentary. While chondroblasts in the center of cartilages ultimately activate 
prehypertrophic chondrocyte markers, epiphyseal chondroblasts ectopically
activate hypertrophic chondrocyte markers. Thick intramembranous bone collars
develop, but the formation of cartilage growth plates and endochondral bones is
disrupted. L-Sox5 and Sox6 are thus redundant, potent enhancers of chondroblast
functions, thereby essential for endochondral skeleton formation.

PMID: 11702786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2001;9 Suppl A:S69-75.

L-Sox5, Sox6 and Sox9 control essential steps of the chondrocyte differentiation 
pathway.

Lefebvre V(1), Behringer RR, de Crombrugghe B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston 77030, USA. lefebvr@bme.ri.ccf.org

OBJECTIVE: This work was carried out to identify transcription factors
controlling the differentiation of mesenchymal cells into chondrocytes.
DESIGN: We delineated a cartilage-specific enhancer in the collagen type 2 gene
(Col2a1) and identified transcription factors responsible for the activity of
this enhancer in chondrocytes. We then analyzed the ability of these
transcription factors to activate specific genes of the chondrocyte
differentiation program and control cartilage formation in vivo.
RESULTS: A 48-bp sequence in the first intron of Col2a1 drove gene expression
specifically in cartilage in transgenic mouse embryos. The transcription factors 
L-Sox5, Sox6, and Sox9 bound and cooperatively activated this enhancer in vitro. 
They belong to the Sry-related family of HMG box DNA-binding proteins, which
includes many members implicated in cell fate determination in various lineages. 
L-Sox5, Sox6, and Sox9 were coexpressed in all precartilaginous condensations in 
mouse embryos and continued to be expressed in chondrocytes until the cells
underwent final hypertrophy. Whereas L-Sox5 and Sox6 are highly homologous
proteins, they are totally different from Sox9 outside the HMG box domain. The
three proteins cooperatively activated the Col2a1- and aggrecan genes in cultured
cells. Heterozygous mutations in SOX9 in humans lead to campomelic dysplasia, a
severe and generalized skeletal malformation syndrome. Embryonic cells with a
homozygous Sox9 mutation were unable to form cartilage in vivo and activate
essential chondrocyte marker genes. Preliminary data indicated that the mutation 
of Sox5 and Sox6 in the mouse led to severe skeletal malformations.
CONCLUSIONS: L-Sox5, Sox6, and Sox9 play essential roles in chondrocyte
differentiation and, thereby, in cartilage formation. Their discovery will help
to understand further the molecular mechanisms controlling chondrogenesis in
vivo, uncover genetic mechanisms underlying cartilage diseases, and develop novel
strategies for cartilage repair.

PMID: 11680692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Bone Miner Res. 2001 Oct;16(10):1837-45.

Accelerated up-regulation of L-Sox5, Sox6, and Sox9 by BMP-2 gene transfer during
murine fracture healing.

Uusitalo H(1), Hiltunen A, Ahonen M, Gao TJ, Lefebvre V, Harley V, Kähäri VM,
Vuorio E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Turku,
Finland.

Fracture repair is the best-characterized situation in which activation of
chondrogenesis takes place in an adult organism. To better understand the
mechanisms that regulate chondrogenic differentiation of mesenchymal progenitor
cells during fracture repair, we have investigated the participation of
transcription factors L-Sox5, Sox6, and Sox9 in this process. Marked
up-regulation of L-Sox5 and Sox9 messenger RNA (mRNA) and smaller changes in Sox6
mRNA levels were observed in RNAse protection assays during early stages of
callus formation, followed by up-regulation of type II collagen production.
During cartilage expansion, the colocalization of L-Sox5, Sox6, and Sox9 by
immunohistochemistry and type II collagen transcripts by in situ hybridization
confirmed a close relationship of these transcription factors with the
chondrocyte phenotype and cartilage production. On chondrocyte hypertrophy,
production of L-Sox5, Sox9 and type II collagen were down-regulated markedly and 
that of type X collagen was up-regulated. Finally, using adenovirus mediated bone
morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP-2) gene transfer into fracture site we showed
accelerated up-regulation of the genes for all three Sox proteins and type II
collagen in fractures treated with BMP-2 when compared with control fractures.
These data suggest that L-Sox5, Sox6, and Sox9 are involved in the activation and
maintenance of chondrogenesis during fracture healing and that enhancement of
chondrogenesis by BMP-2 is mediated via an L-Sox5/Sox6/Sox9-dependent pathway.

PMID: 11585348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Aug 15;29(16):3347-55.

SOX6 binds CtBP2 to repress transcription from the Fgf-3 promoter.

Murakami A(1), Ishida S, Thurlow J, Revest JM, Dickson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Fgf-3 is expressed in a complex pattern during mouse development. Previously, an 
essential regulatory element PS4A was identified in the promoter region, and
shown to bind at least three factors. To identify the transcription factor(s), we
used a yeast one-hybrid screen and obtained a novel Sox6 cDNA (SOX6D). When
introduced into cells it strongly repressed activity from both an Fgf-3 reporter 
gene as well as an artificial promoter containing three PS4A elements. In situ
hybridisation analysis showed that Sox6 and Fgf-3 are co-expressed in the otic
vesicle of E9.5 mouse embryos in a mutually exclusive pattern, consistent with a 
repression of Fgf-3 transcription by SOX6. To characterise additional factor(s)
involved in Fgf-3 gene repression, a yeast two-hybrid screen was used with the
N-terminal portion of SOX6D. Mouse CtBP2 cDNA clones were isolated and shown to
bind SOX6 in yeast and mammalian cells. Furthermore, mutational analysis of SOX6 
showed that binding to CtBP2, and its responsiveness to this co-repressor, were
dependent on a short amino acid sequence motif PLNLSS. Co-expression studies in
NIH3T3 cells showed that SOX6 and CtBP2 co-operate to repress activity from the
Fgf-3 promoter through the enhancer element PS4A. These results show that SOX6
can recruit CtBP2 to repress transcription from the Fgf-3 promoter.

PMCID: PMC55854
PMID: 11504872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Endocrinol. 2001 Jun;169(3):573-9.

Dexamethasone enhances SOX9 expression in chondrocytes.

Sekiya I(1), Koopman P, Tsuji K, Mertin S, Harley V, Yamada Y, Shinomiya K,
Nifuji A, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Tokyo, Japan.

SOX9 is a transcription factor that activates type II procollagen (Col2a1) gene
expression during chondrocyte differentiation. Glucocorticoids are also known to 
promote chondrocyte differentiation via unknown molecular mechanisms. We
therefore investigated the effects of a synthetic glucocorticoid, dexamethasone
(DEX), on Sox9 gene expression in chondrocytes prepared from rib cartilage of
newborn mice. Sox9 mRNA was expressed at high levels in these chondrocytes.
Treatment with DEX enhanced Sox9 mRNA expression within 24 h and this effect was 
observed at least up to 48 h. The effect of DEX was dose dependent, starting at
0.1 nM and maximal at 10 nM. The half life of Sox9 mRNA was approximately 45 min 
in the presence or absence of DEX. Western blot analysis revealed that DEX also
enhanced the levels of SOX9 protein expression. Treatment with DEX enhanced
Col2a1 mRNA expression in these chondrocytes and furthermore, DEX enhanced the
activity of Col2-CAT (chloramphenicol acetyltransferase) construct containing a
1.6 kb intron fragment where chondrocyte-specific Sry/Sox- consensus sequence is 
located. The enhancing effect of DEX was specific to SOX9, as DEX did not alter
the levels of Sox6 mRNA expression. These data suggest that DEX promotes
chondrocyte differentiation through enhancement of SOX9.

PMID: 11375127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Matrix Biol. 2001 Apr;20(2):123-7.

Induction of periosteal callus formation by bone morphogenetic protein-2
employing adenovirus-mediated gene delivery.

Uusitalo H(1), Hiltunen A, Ahonen M, Kähäri VM, Aro H, Vuorio E.

Author information: 
(1)Skeletal Research Program, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, FIN-20520 Turku, Finland.

Although the chondrogenic response of periosteum is well established in healing
fractures, the mechanisms mediating the proliferation and differentiation of
periosteal chondroprogenitor cells are poorly understood. In the present study we
demonstrate that bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2), introduced by
adenovirus-mediated gene transfer, alone is capable of inducing callus formation 
at the site of periosteal injection. Both immunohistochemistry and Northern
analysis demonstrated activation of type II collagen production between days 4
and 7 after the injection, followed by activation of type X collagen expression. 
The activation of chondrogenesis was associated with increased expression of
L-Sox5 and Sox9, suggesting that the BMP-2 effect is mediated via Sox proteins.
This capacity of adenovirus-mediated overproduction of BMP-2 to induce
chondrogenesis (and subsequent endochondral ossification) should be useful for
tissue engineering of cartilage and bone.

PMID: 11334713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Gene. 2001 Mar 7;265(1-2):157-64.

Cloning, characterization and chromosome mapping of the human SOX6 gene.

Cohen-Barak O(1), Hagiwara N, Arlt MF, Horton JP, Brilliant MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Arizona College of Medicine,
Steele Memorial Children's Research Center, 1501 North Campbell Ave, 85724,
Tucson, AZ, USA.

The Sox gene family encodes an important group of transcription factors harboring
the conserved high-mobility group (HMG) box originally identified in the mouse
and human testis determining gene Sry. We have cloned and sequenced SOX6, a
member of the human Sox gene family. SOX6 cDNAs isolated from a human myoblast
cDNA library show 94.3% amino acid identity to mouse Sox6 throughout the gene,
and 100% identity in the critical HMG box and coiled-coil domains. The human SOX6
gene was localized to chromosome 11p15.2-11p15.3 in a region of shared synteny
with distal mouse chromosome 7. An analysis of the genomic structure of the human
SOX6 gene revealed 16 exons. We identified three SOX6 cDNAs that are generated by
alternative splicing. Northern blot analysis revealed that SOX6 is expressed in a
wide variety of tissues, most abundantly in skeletal muscle, suggesting an
important role for SOX6 in muscle. Mice homozygous for a null mutation of Sox6
(p(100H)) die suddenly within the first 2 weeks after birth, most likely from
cardiac conduction defects (Hagiwara et al., 2000). Thus, there is a possibility 
that human SOX6 is similarly involved in an, as yet, unidentified human cardiac
disorder.

PMID: 11255018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. FEBS Lett. 2000 Sep 15;481(2):147-51.

Characterization of Solt, a novel SoxLZ/Sox6 binding protein expressed in adult
mouse testis.

Yamashita A(1), Ito M, Takamatsu N, Shiba T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, School of Science, Kitasato University, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Sagamihara, 228, Kanagawa, Japan.

SoxLZ/Sox6, a member of the Sox protein family, contains a leucine zipper motif
in addition to an HMG box, which is its DNA binding domain. Here we have
identified a novel SoxLZ/Sox6 binding protein, termed Solt, which we obtained
independently using both a far-Western blot and a yeast two-hybrid screen. Like
SoxLZ/Sox6 mRNA, Solt mRNA was exclusively expressed in the testis in mouse. Solt
contains an unusual leucine zipper, which bound to the leucine zipper region of
SoxLZ/Sox6 in vitro. In transient transfection assays in CHO cells with
SoxLZ/Sox6 containing the transactivational region of herpes simplex virus VP16, 
expression of a reporter gene that carries a cis binding region for Sox proteins 
was significantly enhanced by the co-expression of Solt and
Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV.

PMID: 10996314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Matrix Biol. 2000 Sep;19(5):389-94.

Transcriptional mechanisms of chondrocyte differentiation.

de Crombrugghe B(1), Lefebvre V, Behringer RR, Bi W, Murakami S, Huang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas, M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.
bdecromb@mdanderson.org

With the goal of identifying master transcription factors that control the
genetic program of differentiation of mesenchymal cells into chondrocytes, we
first delineated a 48-bp chondrocyte-specific enhancer element in the gene for
proalpha1(II) collagen (Col2a1), an early and abundant marker of chondrocytes.
Our experiments have demonstrated that the HMG-box-containing transcription
factor, Sox9 which binds and activates this enhancer element, is required for
chondrocyte differentiation and for expression of a series of
chondrocyte-specific marker genes including Col2a1, Col9a2, Col11a2 and Aggrecan.
In the absence of Sox9 the block in differentiation occurs at the stage of
mesenchymal condensation, suggesting the hypothesis that Sox9 might also control 
expression of cell surface proteins needed for mesenchymal condensation. Since
Sox9 also contains a potent transcription activation domain, it is a typical
transcription factor. Two other members of the Sox family, L-Sox5 and Sox6, also 
bind to the 48-bp Col2a1 enhancer and together with Sox9 activate this enhancer
as well as the endogenous Col2a1 and aggrecan genes. L-Sox5 and Sox6 have a high 
degree of sequence identity to each other and are likely to have redundant
functions. Except for the HMG-box, L-Sox5 and Sox6 have no similarity to Sox9
and, hence, are likely to have a complementary function to that of Sox9. Our
experiments suggest the hypothesis that, like Sox9, Sox5 and Sox6 might also be
needed for chondrocyte differentiation. Other experiments, have provided evidence
that the Sox9 polypeptide and the Sox9 gene are targets of signaling molecules
that are known to control discrete steps of chondrogenesis in the growth plate of
endochondral bones. Protein kinase A (PKA) phosphorylation of Sox9 increases its 
DNA binding and transcriptional activity. Since PKA-phosphorylated-Sox9 is found 
in the prehypertrophic zone of the growth plate, the same location where the gene
for the receptor of the parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) is expressed 
and since PTHrP signaling is mediated by cyclic AMP, we have hypothesized that
Sox9 is a target for PTHrP signaling. Other experiments have also shown that
fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) increase the expression of Sox9 in chondrocytes 
in culture and that this activation is mediated by the mitogen-activated protein 
kinase pathway. These results favor the hypothesis that in achondroplasia, a
disease caused by activating mutations in FGF receptor 3, there might also be an 
abnormally high Sox9 expression.

PMID: 10980415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Apr 11;97(8):4180-5.

Sox6 is a candidate gene for p100H myopathy, heart block, and sudden neonatal
death.

Hagiwara N(1), Klewer SE, Samson RA, Erickson DT, Lyon MF, Brilliant MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Arizona College of Medicine,
Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

The mouse p locus encodes a gene that functions in normal pigmentation. We have
characterized a radiation-induced mutant allele of the mouse p locus that is
associated with a failure-to-thrive syndrome, in addition to diminished
pigmentation. Mice homozygous for this mutant allele, p(100H), show delayed
growth and die within 2 wk after birth. We have discovered that the mutant mice
develop progressive atrioventricular heart block and significant ultrastructural 
changes in both cardiac and skeletal muscle cells. These observations are common 
characteristics described in human myopathies. The karyotype of p(100H)
chromosomes indicated that the mutation is associated with a chromosome 7
inversion. We demonstrate here that the p(100H) chromosomal inversion disrupts
both the p gene and the Sox6 gene. Normal Sox6 gene expression has been examined 
by Northern blot analysis and was found most abundantly expressed in skeletal
muscle in adult mouse tissues, suggesting an involvement of Sox6 in muscle
maintenance. The p(100H) mutant is thus a useful animal model in the elucidation 
of myopathies at the molecular level.

PMCID: PMC18189
PMID: 10760285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 2;274(14):9327-34.

Testis expression of hormone-sensitive lipase is conferred by a specific promoter
that contains four regions binding testicular nuclear proteins.

Blaise R(1), Grober J, Rouet P, Tavernier G, Daegelen D, Langin D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 317, Institut Louis Bugnard, Université Paul Sabatier, Hôpital
Rangueil, F-31403 Toulouse Cedex 4, France.

The testicular isoform of hormone-sensitive lipase (HSLtes) is encoded by a
testis-specific exon and 9 exons common to the testis and adipocyte isoforms. In 
mouse, HSLtes mRNA appeared during spermiogenesis in round spermatids. Two
constructs containing 1.4 and 0.5 kilobase pairs (kb) of the human HSLtes gene
5'-flanking region cloned upstream of the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene 
were microinjected into mouse oocytes. Analyses of enzyme activity in male and
female transgenic mice showed that 0.5 kb of the HSLtes promoter was sufficient
to direct expression only in testis. Cell transfection experiments showed that
CREMtau, a testis-specific transcriptional activator, does not transactivate the 
HSLtes promoter. Using gel retardation assays, four testis-specific binding
regions (TSBR) were identified using testis and liver nuclear extracts. The
testis-specific protein binding on TSBR4 was selectively competed by a probe
containing a SRY/Sox protein DNA recognition site. Sox5 and Sox6 which are
expressed in post-meiotic germ cells bound TSBR4. Mutation of the AACAAAG motif
in TSBR4 abolished the binding. Moreover, binding of the high mobility group
domain of Sox5 induced a bend within TSBR4. Together, our results showed that 0.5
kb of the human HSLtes promoter bind Sox proteins and contain cis-acting elements
essential for the testis specificity of HSL.

PMID: 10092610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. EMBO J. 1998 Oct 1;17(19):5718-33.

A new long form of Sox5 (L-Sox5), Sox6 and Sox9 are coexpressed in chondrogenesis
and cooperatively activate the type II collagen gene.

Lefebvre V(1), Li P, de Crombrugghe B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Box 11, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
veronique_lefebvre@molgen.tmc.edu

Transcripts for a new form of Sox5, called L-Sox5, and Sox6 are coexpressed with 
Sox9 in all chondrogenic sites of mouse embryos. A coiled-coil domain located in 
the N-terminal part of L-Sox5, and absent in Sox5, showed >90% identity with a
similar domain in Sox6 and mediated homodimerization and heterodimerization with 
Sox6. Dimerization of L-Sox5/Sox6 greatly increased efficiency of binding of the 
two Sox proteins to DNA containing adjacent HMG sites. L-Sox5, Sox6 and Sox9
cooperatively activated expression of the chondrocyte differentiation marker
Col2a1 in 10T1/2 and MC615 cells. A 48 bp chondrocyte-specific enhancer in this
gene, which contains several HMG-like sites that are necessary for enhancer
activity, bound the three Sox proteins and was cooperatively activated by the
three Sox proteins in non-chondrogenic cells. Our data suggest that L-Sox5/Sox6
and Sox9, which belong to two different classes of Sox transcription factors,
cooperate with each other in expression of Col2a1 and possibly other genes of the
chondrocytic program.

PMCID: PMC1170900
PMID: 9755172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Med. 1996 Jul;2(4):405-12.

SOX genes: architects of development.

Prior HM(1), Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Ocular Genetics Research Group, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

Development in higher organisms involves complex genetic regulation at the
molecular level. The emerging picture of development control includes several
families of master regulatory genes which can affect the expression of
down-stream target genes in developmental cascade pathways. One new family of
such development regulators is the SOX gene family. The SOX genes are named for a
shared motif called the SRY box a region homologous to the DNA-binding domain of 
SRY, the mammalian sex determining gene. Like SRY, SOX genes play important roles
in chordate development. At least a dozen human SOX genes have been identified
and partially characterized (Tables 1 and 2). Mutations in SOX9 have recently
been linked to campomelic dysplasia and autosomal sex reversal, and other SOX
genes may also be associated with human disease.

PMCID: PMC2230175
PMID: 8827711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Sep 11;23(17):3365-72.

The Sry-related HMG box-containing gene Sox6 is expressed in the adult testis and
developing nervous system of the mouse.

Connor F(1), Wright E, Denny P, Koopman P, Ashworth A.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Centre for Cell and Molecular Biology, Chester Beatty Laboratories,
London, UK.

We have cloned and sequenced a full-length cDNA for the HMG box-containing,
SRY-related gene Sox6 from mouse. The deduced protein sequence of Sox6 has
considerable homology with that of the previously determined Sox5 sequence. It
seems likely that these genes have diverged more recently than other members of
the SOX gene family, although the two genes map to different chromosomes in the
mouse. In common with Sox5, Sox6 is highly expressed in the adult mouse testis
and the HMG domains of both proteins bind to the sequence 5'-AACAAT-3'. This
suggests that the two genes may have overlapping functions in the regulation of
gene expression during spermatogenesis in the adult mouse. However, Sox6 may have
an additional role in the mouse embryo, where it is specifically expressed in the
developing nervous system.

PMCID: PMC307212
PMID: 7567444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


