
1. Cancer Lett. 2016 May 28;375(1):100-7. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2016.02.044. Epub
2016 Mar 2.

SOX7 is associated with the suppression of human glioma by HMG-box dependent
regulation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

Zhao T(1), Yang H(2), Tian Y(3), Xie Q(4), Lu Y(2), Wang Y(2), Su N(5), Dong
B(1), Liu X(1), Wang C(1), Jiang C(6), Liu Q(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, China. (2)Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, The
Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Beijing Shijiantan Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, China. (5)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai
Chang Zheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, China. Electronic address: jiangchuanlusox@163.com.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, China. Electronic address: liuxiaoqiansox@163.com.

SOX7 has been recently recognized as a tumor suppressor belonging to the SOX
(SRY-related HMG-box) family of a transcription factor. However, its role in
human gliomas is unknown. Our study showed that SOX7 expression was significantly
downregulated in human gliomas. Statistical analysis showed that SOX7 suppression
was associated with higher histological grades of tumors in glioma tissues. SOX7 
could suppress tumor properties both in vivo and in vitro, and depletion of the
HMG domain abolishes its tumor suppressive roles. In vitro assays demonstrated
that SOX7 could downregulate Wnt/ß-catenin transcription and decrease the
expression of Cyclin D1 and c-Myc, while the mutant SOX7 lost these functions.
These results suggested that the HMG-box is a key domain of SOX7 for negatively
regulating the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway when functioning as a tumor
suppressor in a glioma.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26944317  [PubMed - in process]


2. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2016 Feb;24(1):233-6. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2016.01.044.

[Role of SOX7 in Hematopoietic System Development and Hematological
Malignancies].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang WM(1), Wang J(1), Jing HM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing 100191,
China. (2)Department of Hematology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing
100191, China. E-mail: jinghm@yahoo.com.

The sex-determining region Y-box 7 (Sox7) is a important member of SOX family
containing high mobi- lity group (HMG), mapped to human chromosome 8p23.1.
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway plays an important role in cell survival,
differentiation, self-renewal, proliferation and apoptosis, and is closely
related with carcinogenesis. SOX7 gene is likely to be a tumor suppressor gene in
MDS and other hematological malignancies. As a negative regulator of the
WNT/ß-catenin signaling pathway, the function loss of this gene can lead to
carcinogenesis. The methylation of SOX7 gene leads to the silence of this gene,
resulting in tumorigenesis. The decision of hematopoietic stem cells to
self-renew or differentiate is a stochastic process, but SOX7 can promote the
differentiation into all blood cell types. This review focuses on the role of
SOX7 in hematopoietic system development and hematological malignancies.

PMID: 26913427  [PubMed - in process]


3. BMC Cancer. 2016 Feb 3;16(1):53. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2090-y.

Cooperation of Sox4 with ß-catenin/p300 complex in transcriptional regulation of 
the Slug gene during divergent sarcomatous differentiation in uterine
carcinosarcoma.

Inoue H(1), Takahashi H(2), Hashimura M(3), Eshima K(4), Akiya M(5), Matsumoto
T(6), Saegusa M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, 1-15-1 Kitasato, Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa,
252-0374, Japan. dm13008y@st.kitasato-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Pathology, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, 252-0374, Japan.
hitakaha@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Pathology, 1-15-1 Kitasato,
Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, 252-0374, Japan. mhashimu@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp. 
(4)Department of Immunology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, 252-0374, Japan.
eshima@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp. (5)Department of Pathology, 1-15-1 Kitasato,
Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, 252-0374, Japan. platysmanejp@yahoo.co.jp.
(6)Department of Pathology, 1-15-1 Kitasato, Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa,
252-0374, Japan. matsumoto@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp. (7)Department of Pathology,
1-15-1 Kitasato, Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, 252-0374, Japan.
msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Uterine carcinosarcoma (UCS) represents a true example of cancer
associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which exhibits cancer
stem cell (CSC)-like traits. Both Sox and ß-catenin signal transductions play key
roles in the regulation of EMT/CSC properties, but little is known about their
involvement in UCS tumorigenesis. Herein, we focused on the functional roles of
the Sox/ß-catenin pathway in UCSs.
METHODS: EMT/CSC tests and transfection experiments were carried out using three 
endometrial carcinoma (Em Ca) cell lines. Immunohistochemical investigation was
also applied for a total of 32 UCSs.
RESULTS: Em Ca cells cultured in STK2, a serum-free medium for mesenchymal stem
cells, underwent changes in morphology toward an EMT appearance through
downregulation of E-cadherin, along with upregulation of Slug, known as a target 
gene of ß-catenin. The cells also showed CSC properties with an increase in the
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) 1(high) activity population and spheroid formation,
as well as upregulation of Sox4, Sox7, and Sox9. Of these Sox factors,
overexpression of Sox4 dramatically led to transactivation of the Slug promoter, 
and the effects were further enhanced by cotransfection of Sox7 or Sox9. Sox4 was
also able to promote ß-catenin-mediated transcription of the Slug gene through
formation of transcriptional complexes with ß-catenin and p300, independent of
TCF4 status. In clinical samples, both nuclear ß-catenin and Slug scores were
significantly higher in the sarcomatous elements as compared to carcinomatous
components in UCSs, and were positively correlated with Sox4, Sox7, and Sox9
scores.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggested that Sox4, as well as Sox7 and Sox9, may
contribute to regulation of EMT/CSC properties to promote development of
sarcomatous components in UCSs through transcriptional regulation of the Slug
gene by cooperating with the ß-catenin/p300 signal pathway.

PMCID: PMC4739330
PMID: 26841870  [PubMed - in process]


4. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 2;10(12):e0143650. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143650.
eCollection 2015.

Sox7, Sox17, and Sox18 Cooperatively Regulate Vascular Development in the Mouse
Retina.

Zhou Y(1), Williams J(1,)(2), Smallwood PM(1,)(2), Nathans J(1,)(3,)(4,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, 21205, United States of America. (2)Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, 21205, United States of America. (3)Department of Neuroscience, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, 21205, United States 
of America. (4)Department of Ophthalmology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, 21205, United States of America.

Vascular development and maintenance are controlled by a complex transcriptional 
program, which integrates both extracellular and intracellular signals in
endothelial cells. Here we study the roles of three closely related SoxF family
transcription factors-Sox7, Sox17, and Sox18 -in the developing and mature mouse 
vasculature using targeted gene deletion on a mixed C57/129/CD1 genetic
background. In the retinal vasculature, each SoxF gene exhibits a distinctive
pattern of expression in different classes of blood vessels. On a mixed genetic
background, vascular endothelial-specific deletion of individual SoxF genes has
little or no effect on vascular architecture or differentiation, a result that
can be explained by overlapping function and by reciprocal regulation of gene
expression between Sox7 and Sox17. By contrast, combined deletion of Sox7, Sox17,
and Sox18 at the onset of retinal angiogenesis leads to a dense capillary plexus 
with a nearly complete loss of radial arteries and veins, whereas the presence of
a single Sox17 allele largely restores arterial identity, as determined by
vascular smooth muscle cell coverage. In the developing retina, expression of all
three SoxF genes is reduced in the absence of Norrin/Frizzled4-mediated canonical
Wnt signaling, but SoxF gene expression is unaffected by reduced VEGF signaling
in response to deletion of Neuropilin1 (Npn1). In adulthood, Sox7, Sox17, and
Sox18 act in a largely redundant manner to maintain blood vessel function, as
adult onset vascular endothelial-specific deletion of all three SoxF genes leads 
to massive edema despite nearly normal vascular architecture. These data reveal
critical and partially redundant roles for Sox7, Sox17 and Sox18 in vascular
growth, differentiation, and maintenance.

PMCID: PMC4667919
PMID: 26630461  [PubMed - in process]


5. Clin Exp Med. 2015 Oct 29. [Epub ahead of print]

Overexpression of miR-664 is associated with enhanced osteosarcoma cell migration
and invasion ability via targeting SOX7.

Bao Y(1,)(2), Chen B(1,)(3), Wu Q(2), Hu K(2), Xi X(2), Zhu W(2), Zhong X(2),
Chen J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Spinal Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, 510515, Guangdong Province, China. (2)Department of
Orthopaedics, Yuebei People's Hospital, Shantou University, Shaoguan, 512026,
Guangdong Province, China. (3)Spinal Surgery, The First People's Hospital of
Chenzhou, Chenzhou, 423000, Hunan Province, China. (4)Department of Orthopedic
Spinal Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 510515,
Guangdong Province, China. kenwu307@163.com.

Osteosarcoma (OS) is one of the most common types of primary sarcoma of bone in
children and young adults, and the long-term prognosis for OS patients still
remains dismal due to the lack of effective early diagnostic biomarkers.
Identifying sensitive and specific biomarkers in carcinogenesis may improve
diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for this malignancy. The expression of
miR-664 in osteosarcoma cell lines and osteosarcoma tissues was examined using
real-time PCR. The effects of miR-664 on osteosarcoma cell migration and invasion
were evaluated by cell invasion assays, migration assays, and three-dimension
spheroid invasion assay. The effect of miR-664 on SOX7 was determined by
luciferase assays and Western blot assay. The clinical association between
miR-664 and SOX7 was analyzed by real-time PCR and Western blot assay. Expression
of miR-664 was found to be upregulated in OS cell lines and tissues.
Overexpression of miR-664 was associated with increased migration and invasive
abilities of OS cells in vitro, whereas downregulation of miR-664 appeared to
inhibit their migration and invasive potential. Furthermore, using biological
approaches, we showed that miR-664 directly targeted and suppressed expression of
the tumor suppressor SOX7. Additionally, the expression of miR-664 was negatively
correlated with SOX7 expression in OS clinical tissues. Our findings suggest that
miR-664 functions as an oncogene miRNA and has an important role in promoting
human OS cell invasion and migration by suppressing SOX7 expression.
Consequently, miR-664 may have potential as a novel diagnostic and therapeutic
target of osteosarcoma.

PMID: 26515813  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Oct 16;15:37. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0079-4.

Sox7 is dispensable for primitive endoderm differentiation from mouse ES cells.

Kinoshita M(1), Shimosato D(2,)(3), Yamane M(4), Niwa H(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pluripotent cell studies, RIKEN, Centre for Developmental
Biology, 2-2-3, Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0047, Japan.
mk704@cam.ac.uk. (2)Laboratory for Pluripotent cell studies, RIKEN, Centre for
Developmental Biology, 2-2-3, Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo,
650-0047, Japan. d56t10@hotmail.co.jp. (3)Laboratory for Development and
Regenerative Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1
Kusunokicho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0017, Japan. d56t10@hotmail.co.jp.
(4)Laboratory for Pluripotent cell studies, RIKEN, Centre for Developmental
Biology, 2-2-3, Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0047, Japan.
m-yamane@cdb.riken.jp. (5)Laboratory for Pluripotent cell studies, RIKEN, Centre 
for Developmental Biology, 2-2-3, Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo,
650-0047, Japan. niwa@kumamoto-u.ac.jp. (6)Laboratory for Development and
Regenerative Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1
Kusunokicho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0017, Japan. niwa@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.
(7)Present address: Department of Pluripotent Stem Cell Biology, Institure of
Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku,
Kumamoto, 860-0811, Japan. niwa@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Primitive endoderm is a cell lineage segregated from the epiblast in 
the blastocyst and gives rise to parietal and visceral endoderm. Sox7 is a member
of the SoxF gene family that is specifically expressed in primitive endoderm in
the late blastocyst, although its function in this cell lineage remains unclear.
RESULTS: Here we characterize the function of Sox7 in primitive endoderm
differentiation using mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells as a model system. We show 
that ectopic expression of Sox7 in ES cells has a marginal effect on triggering
differentiation into primitive endoderm-like cells. We also show that targeted
disruption of Sox7 in ES cells does not affect differentiation into primitive
endoderm cells in embryoid body formation as well as by forced expression of
Gata6.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that Sox7 function is supplementary and not
essential for this differentiation from ES cells.

PMCID: PMC4609079
PMID: 26475439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Genes Dev. 2015 Aug 1;29(15):1618-30. doi: 10.1101/gad.263210.115.

mafba is a downstream transcriptional effector of Vegfc signaling essential for
embryonic lymphangiogenesis in zebrafish.

Koltowska K(1), Paterson S(1), Bower NI(1), Baillie GJ(1), Lagendijk AK(1), Astin
JW(2), Chen H(1), Francois M(1), Crosier PS(2), Taft RJ(1), Simons C(1), Smith
KA(1), Hogan BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genomics of Development and Disease, Institute for Molecular
Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Brisbane, Queensland 4072,
Australia; (2)Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, School of Medical
Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland 1023, New Zealand.

The lymphatic vasculature plays roles in tissue fluid balance, immune cell
trafficking, fatty acid absorption, cancer metastasis, and cardiovascular
disease. Lymphatic vessels form by lymphangiogenesis, the sprouting of new
lymphatics from pre-existing vessels, in both development and disease contexts.
The apical signaling pathway in lymphangiogenesis is the VEGFC/VEGFR3 pathway,
yet how signaling controls cellular transcriptional output remains unknown. We
used a forward genetic screen in zebrafish to identify the transcription factor
mafba as essential for lymphatic vessel development. We found that mafba is
required for the migration of lymphatic precursors after their initial sprouting 
from the posterior cardinal vein. mafba expression is enriched in sprouts
emerging from veins, and we show that mafba functions cell-autonomously during
lymphatic vessel development. Mechanistically, Vegfc signaling increases mafba
expression to control downstream transcription, and this regulatory relationship 
is dependent on the activity of SoxF transcription factors, which are essential
for mafba expression in venous endothelium. Here we identify an indispensable
Vegfc-SoxF-Mafba pathway in lymphatic development.

© 2015 Koltowska et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4536310
PMID: 26253536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Yonago Acta Med. 2015 Mar;58(1):15-22. Epub 2015 Mar 27.

P19 Cells Overexpressing Lhx1 Differentiate into the Definitive Endoderm by
Recapitulating an Embryonic Developmental Pathway.

Hasegawa A(1), Shirayoshi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Regenerative Medicine and Therapeutics, Department of Genetic
Medicine and Regenerative Therapeutics, Institute of Regenerative Medicine and
Biofunction, Tottori University Graduate School of Medical Science, Yonago
683-8503, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Epiblasts occur at the last pluripotent stage of embryonic
development and are important in elucidating how the three germ layers are
formed. However, little is known of the molecular mechanisms of their
development. We have shown that LIM homeobox 1 (Lhx1) was involved in epiblast
development in embryonic stem cells, especially meso- and endodermal
differentiation. However, since epiblasts in embryoid bodies spontaneously
develop into a further stage, it is difficult to study their development in this 
system.
METHODS: Mouse embryonal carcinoma P19 cells which have properties similar to
those of epiblasts provided new avenues of investigation into the regulatory
mechanism of epiblasts.
RESULTS: Overexpression of Lhx1 in P19 cells induced expression of organizer
marker genes (Cer1, Gsc) and endoderm marker genes (Gata6, Foxa2, Sox17) but not 
extra-embryonic endoderm marker genes (Sox7 or Hnf4alpha).
CONCLUSION: This study suggested that Lhx1 overexpression caused P19 cells to
differentiate into an endodermal lineage. Thus, P19 cells and their derivatives
can be a useful model system to study how the three germ layers are formed.

PMCID: PMC4502295
PMID: 26190893  [PubMed]


9. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Sep;167A(9):2052-64. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37120. Epub 2015 
Jun 11.

Inside the 8p23.1 duplication syndrome; eight microduplications of likely or
uncertain clinical significance.

Barber JC(1), Rosenfeld JA(2), Graham JM(3), Kramer N(3), Lachlan KL(4), Bateman 
MS(5), Collinson MN(5), Stadheim BF(6), Turner CL(7), Gauthier JN(8), Reimschisel
TE(8), Qureshi AM(9), Dabir TA(10), Humphreys MW(11), Marble M(12), Huang T(13), 
Beal SJ(5), Massiah J(5), Taylor EJ(5), Wynn SL(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, University of Southampton, 
Southampton, UK. (2)Signature Genomic Laboratories, PerkinElmer Inc., Spokane,
Washington. (3)Medical Genetics Institute, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los
Angeles, California. (4)Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, University Hospital
Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK. (5)Wessex Regional Genetics
Laboratory, Salisbury NHS Foundation Trust, Salisbury, UK. (6)Department of
Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(7)Department of Clinical Genetics, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital (Heavitree), 
Exeter, UK. (8)Division of Developmental Medicine and the Centre for Child
Development, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee.
(9)Center for Pediatric and Congenital Heart Disease, The Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio. (10)Medical Genetics Department, Belfast Health and Social Care 
Trust, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, Northern Ireland. (11)Northern Ireland
Regional Genetics Centre, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast City
Hospital, Belfast, Northern Ireland. (12)Children's Hospital of New Orleans, New 
Orleans, Louisiana. (13)School of Medicine, University of California, Irvine,
California. (14)Unique, Caterham, UK.

The 8p23.1 duplication syndrome (8p23.1 DS) is a recurrent genomic condition with
an estimated prevalence of 1 in 58,000. The core 3.68<U+2009>Mb duplication contains 32 
genes of which five are currently candidates for the phenotypic features. Here we
describe four patients and five families with eight microduplications of 8p23.1
ranging from 187 to 1082<U+2009>kb in size and one atypical duplication of 4<U+2009>Mb. These
indicate that a minimal region of overlap (MRO) in medial 8p23.1 can give rise to
features of 8p23.1 DS including developmental delay, dysmorphism, macrocephaly
and otitis media, but not congenital heart disease (CHD). This MRO spans 776<U+2009>kb
(chr8:10,167,881-10,943,836 hg19) and contains SOX7 and seven of the other 32
core 8p23.1 DS genes. In centromeric 8p23.1, microduplications including GATA4
can give rise to non-syndromic CHD but the clinical significance of two smaller
centromeric microduplications without GATA4 was uncertain due to severe
neurological profiles not usually found in 8p23.1 DS. The clinical significance
of three further 8p23.1 microduplications was uncertain due to additional genetic
factors without which the probands might not have come to medical attention.
Variable expressivity was indicated by the almost entirely unaffected parents in 
all five families and the mildly affected sibling in one. Intronic interruptions 
of six genes by microduplication breakpoint intervals had no apparent additional 
clinical consequences. Our results suggest that 8p23.1 DS is an oligogenetic
condition largely caused by the duplication and interactions of the SOX7 and
GATA4 transcription factors.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26097203  [PubMed - in process]


10. Blood. 2015 Jun 18;125(25):3928-36. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-06-580993. Epub 2015 
May 4.

Suppression of SOX7 by DNA methylation and its tumor suppressor function in acute
myeloid leukemia.

Man CH(1), Fung TK(2), Wan H(1), Cher CY(1), Fan A(1), Ng N(1), Ho C(1), Wan
TS(3), Tanaka T(4), So CW(2), Kwong YL(1), Leung AY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; (2)Leukaemia and Stem Cell Biology Laboratory,
Department of Haematological Medicine, King's College London, London, United
Kingdom; (3)Department of Pathology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; and. (4)Laboratory of Immunobiology,
School of Pharmacy, Hyogo University of Health Sciences, Kobe, Japan.

SOX7 belongs to the SOX (Sry-related high-mobility group [HMG] box) gene family, 
a group of transcription factors containing in common a HMG box domain. Its role 
in hematologic malignancies and, in particular, acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is
completely unknown. Here, we showed that SOX7 expression was regulated by DNA
hypermethylation in AML but not in acute lymphoblastic leukemia or normal bone
marrow cells. In cell lines (KG1, ML2, and K562) and in primary CD34(+) AML
samples, SOX7 expression could be induced by the DNA demethylating agent
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. Overexpression of SOX7 in K562 cells inhibited cell
proliferation, with cell cycle delay in S/G2/M phases and reduced clonogenic
activity. Apoptosis was unaffected. Ectopic expression of SOX7 in K562 and THP-1 
cells, as well as primary CD33(+)CD34(+) AML cells, abrogated leukemia
engraftment in xenogeneic transplantation. SOX7 expression inhibited the
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway through direct protein binding to ß-catenin, and the
antileukemia effects of SOX7 in THP-1 cells were significantly reduced by
deletion of its ß-catenin binding site. The results provided unequivocal evidence
for a novel tumor suppressor role of SOX7 in AML via a negative modulatory effect
on the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 25940713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Eur J Neurosci. 2015 May;41(11):1430-7. doi: 10.1111/ejn.12910. Epub 2015 Apr 30.

SOX7 interferes with ß-catenin activity to promote neuronal apoptosis.

Wang C(1), Qin L(2), Min Z(3), Zhao Y(1), Zhu L(1), Zhu J(1), Yu S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Medical College, Xiamen University,
Xiang'an South Road, Xiamen, Fujian, 361005, China. (2)Zhongshan School of
Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (3)Clinical
Laboratory Center of Molecular Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

SOX7 mediates various developmental processes. However, its role in neuronal
apoptosis remains unclear. In the present study, we investigated the expression
pattern and role of SOX7 in potassium deprivation-induced rat cerebellar granule 
neuron apoptosis. Our results showed that both mRNA and protein levels of SOX7
were upregulated when potassium was deprived. SOX7 overexpression promoted
neuronal apoptosis, whereas knockdown of SOX7 protected neurons against
apoptosis. Moreover, we found that ß-catenin activity was suppressed during
apoptosis and that ß-catenin inhibition was crucial for potassium
deprivation-induced neuronal apoptosis. This suppression was mediated by an
interaction between SOX7 and ß-catenin but not by protein degradation. Lastly, we
showed that ß-catenin inhibition mediated the pro-apoptotic effect of SOX7.
Together, our findings demonstrated that SOX7 interfered with ß-catenin activity 
to promote neuronal apoptosis, which acted as a novel signaling mechanism in
neuronal cell death.

© 2015 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25847511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Development. 2015 May 1;142(9):1695-704. doi: 10.1242/dev.117275. Epub 2015 Apr
1.

Sox7 controls arterial specification in conjunction with hey2 and efnb2 function.

Hermkens DM(1), van Impel A(2), Urasaki A(2), Bussmann J(2), Duckers HJ(3),
Schulte-Merker S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute - Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences and
University Medical Centre Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The
Netherlands Erasmus MC Rotterdam, 's-Gravendijkwal 230, 3015 CE Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (2)Hubrecht Institute - Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and
Sciences and University Medical Centre Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht,
The Netherlands. (3)Erasmus MC Rotterdam, 's-Gravendijkwal 230, 3015 CE
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Hubrecht Institute - Royal Netherlands Academy of 
Arts and Sciences and University Medical Centre Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT
Utrecht, The Netherlands Cells-in-Motion Cluster of Excellence (EXC 1003 - CiM), 
University of Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany Institute for Cardiovascular
Organogenesis and Regeneration, Faculty of Medicine, Westfälische
Wilhelms-Universität Münster (WWU), Mendelstrasse 7, 48149 Münster, Germany
schultes@ukmuenster.de.

SoxF family members have been linked to arterio-venous specification events and
human pathological conditions, but in contrast to Sox17 and Sox18, a detailed in 
vivo analysis of a Sox7 mutant model is still lacking. In this study we generated
zebrafish sox7 mutants to understand the role of Sox7 during vascular
development. By in vivo imaging of transgenic zebrafish lines we show that sox7
mutants display a short circulatory loop around the heart as a result of aberrant
connections between the lateral dorsal aorta (LDA) and either the venous primary 
head sinus (PHS) or the common cardinal vein (CCV). In situ hybridization and
live observations in flt4:mCitrine transgenic embryos revealed increased
expression levels of flt4 in arterial endothelial cells at the exact location of 
the aberrant vascular connections in sox7 mutants. An identical circulatory short
loop could also be observed in newly generated mutants for hey2 and efnb2. By
genetically modulating levels of sox7, hey2 and efnb2 we demonstrate a genetic
interaction of sox7 with hey2 and efnb2. The specific spatially confined effect
of loss of Sox7 function can be rescued by overexpressing the Notch intracellular
domain (NICD) in arterial cells of sox7 mutants, placing Sox7 upstream of Notch
in this aspect of arterial development. Hence, sox7 levels are crucial in
arterial specification in conjunction with hey2 and efnb2 function, with mutants 
in all three genes displaying shunt formation and an arterial block.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25834021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Cytogenet. 2014 Dec 9;7(1):94. doi: 10.1186/s13039-014-0094-3. eCollection
2014.

8p23.1 duplication syndrome: narrowing of critical interval to 1.80 Mbp.

Weber A(1), Köhler A(1), Hahn A(2), Müller U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Justus-Liebig-Universität, Schlangenzahl 14, 35392 
Giessen, Germany. (2)Klinik für Kinderneurologie und Sozialpädiatrie,
Justus-Liebig-Universität, Giessen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: A 3.68 Mbp duplication of 8p23.1 defines the 8p23.1 duplication
syndrome. The main features of this syndrome are developmental delay and/or
learning problems.
RESULTS: Here we present a patient with a 1.80 Mbp duplication in 8p23.1 and
characteristic signs and symptoms of the syndrome, including delay of motor and
speech development and intellectual disability.
DISCUSSION: The case indicates that genes within this interval, in particular
dosage sensitive genes SOX7 and TNKS1, and possibly MIR124-1 and MIR598 as well
suffice to cause the pathognomonic features of the 8p23.1 duplication syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4268894
PMID: 25520754  [PubMed]


14. J Pathol. 2015 May;236(1):17-29. doi: 10.1002/path.4497. Epub 2015 Feb 17.

UV exposure modulates hemidesmosome plasticity, contributing to long-term
pigmentation in human skin.

Coelho SG(1), Valencia JC, Yin L, Smuda C, Mahns A, Kolbe L, Miller SA, Beer JZ, 
Zhang G, Tuma PL, Hearing VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Human skin colour, ie pigmentation, differs widely among individuals, as do their
responses to various types of ultraviolet radiation (UV) and their risks of skin 
cancer. In some individuals, UV-induced pigmentation persists for months to years
in a phenomenon termed long-lasting pigmentation (LLP). It is unclear whether LLP
is an indicator of potential risk for skin cancer. LLP seems to have similar
features to other forms of hyperpigmentation, eg solar lentigines or age spots,
which are clinical markers of photodamage and risk factors for precancerous
lesions. To investigate what UV-induced molecular changes may persist in
individuals with LLP, clinical specimens from non-sunburn-inducing repeated UV
exposures (UVA, UVB or UVA + UVB) at 4 months post-exposure (short-term LLP) were
evaluated by microarray analysis and dataset mining. Validated targets were
further evaluated in clinical specimens from six healthy individuals (three LLP+ 
and three LLP-) followed for more than 9 months (long-term LLP) who initially
received a single sunburn-inducing UVA + UVB exposure. The results support a
UV-induced hyperpigmentation model in which basal keratinocytes have an impaired 
ability to remove melanin that leads to a compensatory mechanism by neighbouring 
keratinocytes with increased proliferative capacity to maintain skin homeostasis.
The attenuated expression of SOX7 and other hemidesmosomal components (integrin
a6ß4 and plectin) leads to increased melanosome uptake by keratinocytes and
points to a spatial regulation within the epidermis. The reduced density of
hemidesmosomes provides supporting evidence for plasticity at the
epidermal-dermal junction. Altered hemidesmosome plasticity, and the sustained
nature of LLP, may be mediated by the role of SOX7 in basal keratinocytes. The
long-term sustained subtle changes detected are modest, but sufficient to create 
dramatic visual differences in skin colour. These results suggest that the
hyperpigmentation phenomenon leading to increased interdigitation develops in
order to maintain normal skin homeostasis in individuals with LLP.

Copyright © 2014 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4398603 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25488118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Tumour Biol. 2015 Mar;36(3):1913-21. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2794-z. Epub 2014
Nov 19.

MiR-492 contributes to cell proliferation and cell cycle of human breast cancer
cells by suppressing SOX7 expression.

Shen F(1), Cai WS, Feng Z, Li JL, Chen JW, Cao J, Xu B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Guangzhou First People's Hospital, Guangzhou
Medical University, 1 Panfu Road, Yuexiu District, Guangzhou, 510180, People's
Republic of China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have emerged as important regulators that potentially play
critical roles in cancer cell biological processes. Previous studies have shown
that miR-492 plays an important role in cell tumorigenesis in multiple kinds of
human cancer cells. However, the underlying mechanisms of this microRNA in breast
cancer remain largely unknown. In the present study, we investigated miR-492's
role in cell proliferation of breast cancer. MiR-492 expression was markedly
upregulated in breast cancer tissues and breast cancer cells. Overexpression of
miR-492 promoted the proliferation and anchorage-independent growth of breast
cancer cells. Bioinformatics analysis further revealed sex-determining region
Y-box 7 (SOX7), a putative tumor suppressor, as a potential target of miR-492.
Data from luciferase reporter assays showed that miR-492 directly binds to the
3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of SOX7 messenger RNA (mRNA) and repressed
expression at both transcriptional and translational levels. Ectopic expression
of miR-492 led to downregulation of SOX7 protein, which resulted in the
upregulation of cyclin D1 and c-Myc. In functional assays, SOX7 silenced in
miR-492-in-transfected ZR-75-30 cells has positive effect to promote cell
proliferation, suggesting that direct SOX7 downregulation is required for
miR-492-induced cell proliferation and cell cycle of breast cancer. In sum, these
results suggest that miR-492 represents a potential onco-miR and participates in 
breast cancer carcinogenesis by suppressing SOX7 expression.

PMID: 25407488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Ovarian Res. 2014 Sep 5;7:87. doi: 10.1186/s13048-014-0087-1.

Reduced expression of SOX7 in ovarian cancer: a novel tumor suppressor through
the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

Liu H, Yan ZQ, Li B, Yin SY, Sun Q, Kou JJ, Ye D, Ferns K, Liu HY, Liu SL.

BACKGROUND: Products of the SOX gene family play important roles in the life
process. One of the members, SOX7, is associated with the development of a
variety of cancers as a tumor suppression factor, but its relevance with ovarian 
cancer was unclear. In this study, we investigated the involvement of SOX7 in the
progression and prognosis of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) and the involved
mechanisms.
METHODS: Expression profiles in two independent microarray data sets were
analyzed for SOX7 between malignant and normal tissues. The expression levels of 
SOX7 in EOC, borderline ovarian tumors and normal ovarian tissues were measured
by immunohistochemistry. We also measured levels of COX2 and cyclin-D1 to examine
their possible involvement in the same signal transduction pathway as SOX7.
RESULTS: The expression of SOX7 was significantly reduced in ovarian cancer
tissues compared with normal controls, strongly indicating that SOX7 might be a
negative regulator in the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway in ovarian cancer. By
immunohistochemistry staining, the protein expression of SOX7 showed a consistent
trend with that of the gene expression microarray analysis. By contrast, the
protein expression level of COX2 and cyclin-D1 increased as the tumor malignancy 
progressed, suggesting that SOX7 may function through the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
pathway as a tumor suppressor. In comparison between the protein expression
levels of SOX7 with pathological features of the cancer, we found that SOX7 was
down-regulated mainly in serous cystadenocarcinoma and advanced stages of the
cancers.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of SOX7 correlates with tumor progression as a tumor 
suppressor, possibly through the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway in ovarian
cancers, suggesting that SOX7 may be a promising prognostic marker.

PMCID: PMC4172779
PMID: 25297608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2014 Jun;52(6):460-3.

[Analysis of genomic copy number variations in two unrelated neonates with 8p
deletion and duplication associated with congenital heart disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Mei M(1), Yang L(1), Zhan G(1), Wang H(1), Ma D(1), Zhou W(1), Huang G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 201102, China. (2)Children's
Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 201102, China. Email: gyhuang@shmu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To screen for genomic copy number variations (CNVs) in two unrelated
neonates with multiple congenital abnormalities using Affymetrix SNP chip and try
to find the critical region associated with congenital heart disease.
METHOD: Two neonates were tested for genomic copy number variations by using
Cytogenetic SNP chip.Rare CNVs with potential clinical significance were selected
of which deletion segments' size was larger than 50 kb and duplication segments' 
size was larger than 150 kb based on the analysis of ChAs software, without false
positive CNVs and segments of normal population. The identified CNVs were
compared with those of the cases in DECIPHER and ISCA databases.
RESULT: Eleven rare CNVs with size from 546.6-27 892 kb were identified in the 2 
neonates. The deletion region and size of case 1 were 8p23.3-p23.1 (387 912-11
506 771 bp) and 11.1 Mb respectively, the duplication region and size of case 1
were 8p23.1-p11.1 (11 508 387-43 321 279 bp) and 31.8 Mb respectively. The
deletion region and size of case 2 were 8p23.3-p23.1 (46 385-7 809 878 bp) and
7.8 Mb respectively, the duplication region and size of case 2 were 8p23.1-p11.21
(12 260 914-40 917 092 bp) and 28.7 Mb respectively. The comparison with Decipher
and ISCA databases supported previous viewpoint that 8p23.1 had been associated
with congenital heart disease and the region between 7 809 878-11 506 771 bp may 
play a role in the severe cardiac defects associated with 8p23.1 deletions. Case 
1 had serious cardiac abnormalities whose GATA4 was located in the duplication
segment and the copy number increased while SOX7 was located in the deletion
segment and the copy number decreased.
CONCLUSION: The region between 7 809 878-11 506 771 bp in 8p23.1 is associated
with heart defects and copy number variants of SOX7 and GATA4 may result in
congenital heart disease.

PMID: 25190168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Nov 15;23(22):2687-99. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0297. Epub 2014
Sep 26.

The SOX transcription factors as key players in pluripotent stem cells.

Abdelalim EM(1), Emara MM, Kolatkar PR.

Author information: 
(1)Qatar Biomedical Research Institute , Qatar Foundation, Education City, Doha, 
Qatar .

Pluripotent stem cells (PSCs), including embryonic stem cells (ESCs), and induced
PSCs (iPSCs) are able to self-renew and differentiate into a multitude of
specialized cellular lineages. In these cells, the pluripotential identity is
maintained by a group of transcription factors (TFs). Among these factors, SOX
TFs play an essential role, not only in regulating pluripotency but also in
mediating self-renewal and differentiation. Some SOX TFs are highly expressed in 
undifferentiated PSCs, while others are upregulated upon differentiation to
promote specific lineage differentiation. Further roles of SOX factors in
pluripotency are highlighted through their critical involvement in iPSCs
generation. To perform these multiple functions and activities, SOX TFs are
strongly associated with a complex regulatory network(s) that involves the
binding of SOX factors to variant trans-acting partners to activate or suppress
specific genes. Although, SOX2 has attracted special attention as a critical
factor in maintaining PSCs characteristics and as an integral component that is
required to reprogram somatic cells into pluripotency, new reports widely
appreciated that other SOX TFs, such as SOX1, SOX3, or reengineered SOX7 and
SOX17, can compensate for the absence of SOX2 and thus play a fundamental role
during the reprogramming process and maintaining pluripotency. These findings
indicate that the recent progress has greatly expanded our knowledge about the
role of SOX factors in PSCs. Thus, in this review we summarize what is currently 
known about the roles of SOX factors in PSCs and their role in somatic cell
reprogramming. Also, we intend to provide an update on their relationship with
other factors in regulating the characteristics and early differentiation of
PSCs.

PMID: 25127330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;31(4):433-7. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2014.04.005.

[Analysis of 22 patients with congenital cleft lip and palate using
high-resolution chromosome microarray].

[Article in Chinese]

Lei T(1), Zhang Y, Wang H, Li F, Cui Y, Fu F, Li R, Xie G, Zhang Y, Liao C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Perinatology and Birth Health, Women and Children's Medical
Center of Guangzhou, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510623,
P.R. China. canliao@hotmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the value of chromosome microarray analysis (CMA) for
identifying the etiology of patients with congenital cleft lip and palate.
METHODS: Twenty-two patients with no identifiable chromosomal aberrations by
conventional cytogenetic technique were selected. DNA was extracted and
hybridized with Affymetrix CytoScan(TM) HD arrays following the manufacturer's
protocol. The data were analyzed with a CHAS v2.0 software.
RESULTS: CMA analysis has identified submicroscopic copy number variants (CNVs)
in all of the cases, which have ranged from 100 kb to 1.8 Mb. Potential
pathogenic CNVs were identified in 5 patients (22.7%), which involved
microdeletions and microduplications on 8p23.1, 10q22.2-q22.3, 6q26, 20p12.1 and 
18q12.3. MYST4, MACROD2 and SOX7 genes are likely the causative genes.
CONCLUSION: CMA is an effective method for identification of etiology in patients
with cleft lip and palate. CMA should be provided for patients with cleft lip and
palate but a normal karyotype. Especially for those with additional structural
abnormalities, there is a high risk for submicroscopic chromosomal aberrations.

PMID: 25119905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Tumour Biol. 2014 Nov;35(11):10731-6. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2018-6. Epub 2014
Jul 30.

miR-24 promotes the proliferation and invasion of HCC cells by targeting SOX7.

Ma Y(1), She XG, Ming YZ, Wan QQ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Transplant Surgery, the Third Affiliated Hospital, Central
South University, Hunan, China.

Accumulating evidence shows that microRNAs (miRNAs) are involved in the
development and progression of multiple tumors, including hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Recent studies have found that miR-24 acts as an oncogene in
several tumors; however, the function of miR-24 in HCC remains unclear. In this
study, we found that miR-24 was increased in HCC tissues and cell lines.
Inhibition of miR-24 by inhibitor significantly suppressed HCC cells
proliferation, migration, and invasion. Furthermore, the sex-determining region Y
(SRY)-box 7 (SOX7), a putative tumor suppressor, was found to be a target of
miR-24 in HCC cells. Forced expression of SOX7 substantially attenuated the
oncogenic effects of miR-24. Those results strongly suggest that miR-24 plays
important role in HCC development partially by targeting SOX7.

PMID: 25073511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Int J Dev Biol. 2014;58(1):1-8. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.130323mw.

Sox7 in vascular development: review, insights and potential mechanisms.

Wat JJ(1), Wat MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, Rice University, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.

Cardiovascular development is crucial to the survival of higher organisms,
integrally transporting oxygen and nutrients and in later life, facilitating
immune function. Only in recent years has the molecular basis of the formation of
this ancient conduit system been explored. While transcription factors are
essential to specify and differentiate core cellular and structural components of
the developing heart and vessels, only a subset of these essential factors are
currently known. A transcription factor of emerging importance in the
cardiovascular system is Sox7, a member of the F group of Sox genes, as Sox7
removal in recent animal and cellular studies has resulted in disruptions of
cardiovascular development. However, the molecular mechanisms of Sox7 action have
largely remained obscure. In this paper, we first review the highly conserved and
robust cardiovascular expression pattern of Sox7 across multiple species. We then
provide evidence of a compelling role for Sox7 in vascular development,
elucidating major pathways in which Sox7 functions, including VEGF/Flk1
signaling, Wnt signaling, and Notch pathway. Furthermore, we propose mechanisms
connecting all of these important developmental pathways through Sox7, in a way
not previously postulated in the developing vascular system. The emerging picture
reveals Sox7 as an important developmental gene that connects other vascular
regulators and that has significance in human disease.

PMID: 24860989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. PLoS One. 2014 May 9;9(5):e97433. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097433. eCollection 
2014.

The suppressive role of SOX7 in hepatocarcinogenesis.

Wang C(1), Guo Y(2), Wang J(3), Min Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences of Medical College, Xiamen University,
Xiamen, Fujian, China. (2)Department of Hepatic Surgery, the Third Affiliated
Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (3)Department of
Gynaecology and Obstetrics, the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (4)Clinical Laboratory Center of
Molecular Medicine, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

SOX7 is a transcription factor mediating various developmental processes.
However, its role in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains unclear. Here, we
assessed the role of SOX7 in hepatocarcinogenesis. We found HCC samples exhibited
lower levels of SOX7 mRNA and protein expression than non-tumor samples, and the 
expression of SOX7 was negatively correlated with tumor size. SOX7 expression was
also reduced in four HCC cell lines (SMMC-7721, Hep3B, HepG2 and Huh 7).
Overexpression of SOX7 could inhibit HCC cell growth, with G1to S phase arrest.
In SOX7-overexpression cells, cyclin D1 and c-myc, two cell cycle promoters, were
down-regulated. Moreover, ectopic expression of cyclin D1 or c-myc could override
G1 to S pahse arrest induced by SOX7. Furthermore, overexpression of SOX7
suppressed tumor formation with down-regulation of cyclin D1 and c-myc in vivo.
The expression of Ki-67, a proliferation marker, was also reduced in
SOX7-overexpression tumors. Taken together, our study suggests that SOX7 plays an
important inhibitory role in hepatocarcinogenesis, and might be a novel target
for HCC therapy.

PMCID: PMC4016311
PMID: 24816720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Jul;34(1):197-204. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1759. Epub 2014 Apr
25.

Decreased expression of Sox7 correlates with the upregulation of the
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway and the poor survival of gastric cancer patients.

Cui J(1), Xi H(1), Cai A(1), Bian S(1), Wei B(1), Chen L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Chinese People's Liberation Army General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, P.R. China.

Sox7 is a tumor suppressor gene that plays an important role in the inhibition
and progression of cancer. In the present study, we sought to investigate Sox7
expression in gastric cancer (GC) and its association with the Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway. We also wished to determine its clinicopathological
significance and prognostic implications. Sox7 expression and its effects on the 
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in vitro were assessed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction using the AGS, MKN-45 and GES-1 gastric
cell lines. We also used immunohistochemistry on paraffin-embedded tissue samples
and western blot analysis on fresh tissue samples from patients with GC. The
results revealed that Sox7 expression was significantly lower in the GC samples
than in distal normal tissues, which was in accordance with our results obtained 
from our in vitro experiments on the cell lines. However, the expression levels
of ß-catenin were significantly higher. Sox7 and ß-catenin expression
significantly correlated with the depth of invasion, lymph node metastasis,
distant metastasis and the TNM stage. Patient samples that were Sox7-negative
correlated with a significantly shorter survival time. Multivariate survival
analysis revealed that Sox7 and ß-catenin had an independent effect on the
survival of GC patients. Sox7 and ß-catenin expression in GC had a negative liner
correlation with each other. Our findings suggest that Sox7 plays an important
role in inhibiting tumorigenesis and progression, and may be a potential marker
for predicting the prognosis of patients with GC.

PMID: 24788044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Sep 1;23(17):2004-13. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0525. Epub 2014 
Jun 17.

Sox7 is regulated by ETV2 during cardiovascular development.

Behrens AN(1), Zierold C, Shi X, Ren Y, Koyano-Nakagawa N, Garry DJ, Martin CM.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota , Minneapolis, Minnesota.

Vasculogenesis/angiogenesis is one of the earliest processes that occurs during
embryogenesis. ETV2 and SOX7 were previously shown to play a role in endothelial 
development; however, their mechanistic interaction has not been defined. In the 
present study, concomitant expression of Etv2 and Sox7 in endothelial progenitor 
cells was verified. ETV2 was shown to be a direct upstream regulator of Sox7 that
binds to ETV2 binding elements in the Sox7 upstream regulatory region and
activates transcription. We observed that SOX7 over-expression can mimic ETV2 and
increase endothelial progenitor cells in embryonic bodies (EBs), while knockdown 
of Sox7 is able to block ETV2-induced increase in endothelial progenitor cell
formation. Angiogenic sprouting was increased by ETV2 over-expression in EBs, and
it was significantly decreased in the presence of Sox7 shRNA. Collectively, these
studies support the conclusion that ETV2 directly regulates Sox7, and that ETV2
governs endothelial development by regulating transcriptional networks which
include Sox7.

PMCID: PMC4142794
PMID: 24762086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Exp Med. 2014 May 5;211(5):987-1000. doi: 10.1084/jem.20132203. Epub 2014 Apr
14.

Identification of a human splenic marginal zone B cell precursor with
NOTCH2-dependent differentiation properties.

Descatoire M(1), Weller S, Irtan S, Sarnacki S, Feuillard J, Storck S,
Guiochon-Mantel A, Bouligand J, Morali A, Cohen J, Jacquemin E, Iascone M,
Bole-Feysot C, Cagnard N, Weill JC, Reynaud CA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Necker-Enfants Malades, INSERM U1151-CNRS UMR 8253, Sorbonne Paris
Cité, Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Médecine-Site Broussais, 75014
Paris, France.

Erratum in
    J Exp Med. 2014 May 5;21(5):1005. Sarnacki, Sabine [added].

Mouse splenic marginal zone precursors (MZPs) differentiate into marginal zone B 
(MZB) cells under a signaling pathway involving Notch2 and its ligand, delta-like
1 ligand (Dll1). We report the identification of an MZP subset in the spleen of
young children. These MZPs differentiate into MZ-like B cells in vitro in the
presence of OP9 cells expressing human DLL1, as demonstrated by the up-regulation
of classical MZB cell markers. A set of diagnostic genes discriminating
IgM(+)IgD(+)CD27(+) blood and splenic MZB cells from switched B cells was
identified (up-regulation of SOX7, down-regulation of TOX, COCH, and HOPX), and
their expression during the induction assay mirrored the one of MZB cells.
Moreover, Alagille patients with a NOTCH2 haploinsufficiency display a marked
reduction of IgM(+)IgD(+)CD27(+) B cells in blood, whereas their switched memory 
B cells are not affected. Altogether, these results argue in favor of the
existence of a rodent-like MZB cell lineage in humans.

PMCID: PMC4010902
PMID: 24733829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Dev Biol. 2014 Jun 15;390(2):116-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.03.018. Epub 2014 
Mar 31.

SoxF factors and Notch regulate nr2f2 gene expression during venous
differentiation in zebrafish.

Swift MR(1), Pham VN(1), Castranova D(1), Bell K(1), Poole RJ(2), Weinstein
BM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genomics of Differentiation, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London,
London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom. (3)Program in Genomics of Differentiation,
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: flyingfish2@nih.gov.

Initial embryonic determination of artery or vein identity is regulated by
genetic factors that work in concert to specify the endothelial cell<U+05F3>s (EC) fate,
giving rise to two structurally unique components of the circulatory loop. The
Shh/VEGF/Notch pathway is critical for arterial specification, while the orphan
receptor nr2f2 (COUP-TFII) has been implicated in venous specification. Studies
in mice have shown that nr2f2 is expressed in venous but not arterial ECs, and
that it preferentially induces markers of venous cell fate. We have examined the 
role of nr2f2 during early arterial-venous development in the zebrafish trunk. We
show that expression of a subset of markers of venous endothelial identity
requires nr2f2, while the expression of nr2f2 itself requires sox7 and sox18 gene
function. However, while sox7 and sox18 are expressed in both the cardinal vein
and the dorsal aorta during early trunk development, nr2f2 is expressed only in
the cardinal vein. We show that Notch signaling activity present in the dorsal
aorta suppresses expression of nr2f2, restricting nr2f2-dependent promotion of
venous differentiation to the cardinal vein.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4104406
PMID: 24699544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jun;34(11):1976-90. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01485-13. Epub 2014 Mar 
24.

Sox17-mediated maintenance of fetal intra-aortic hematopoietic cell clusters.

Nobuhisa I(1), Osawa M, Uemura M, Kishikawa Y, Anani M, Harada K, Takagi H, Saito
K, Kanai-Azuma M, Kanai Y, Iwama A, Taga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Regulation, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

During mouse development, definitive hematopoiesis is first detected around
embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5) in the aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region, which
exhibits intra-aortic cell clusters. These clusters are known to contain
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). On the other hand, it is not clear how the cells
in such clusters maintain their HSC phenotype and how they are triggered to
differentiate. Here we found that an endodermal transcription factor marker,
Sox17, and other F-group (SoxF) proteins, Sox7 and Sox18, were expressed in E10.5
intra-aortic cell clusters. Forced expression of any of these SoxF proteins,
particularly Sox17, in E10.5 AGM CD45(low) c-Kit(high) cells, which are the major
component of intra-aortic clusters, led to consistent formation of cell clusters 
in vitro during several passages of cocultures with stromal cells.
Cluster-forming cells with constitutive Sox17 expression retained long-term bone 
marrow reconstitution activity in vivo. Notably, shutdown of exogenously
introduced Sox17 gene expression resulted in immediate hematopoietic
differentiation. These results indicate that SoxF proteins, especially Sox17,
contribute to the maintenance of cell clusters containing HSCs in the
midgestation AGM region. Furthermore, SoxF proteins play a pivotal role in
controlling the HSC fate decision between indefinite self-renewal and
differentiation during fetal hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC4019068
PMID: 24662049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 18;9(2):e88796. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088796. eCollection
2014.

Mir-184 post-transcriptionally regulates SOX7 expression and promotes cell
proliferation in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Wu GG(1), Li WH(1), He WG(1), Jiang N(2), Zhang GX(3), Chen W(4), Yang HF(5), Liu
QL(1), Huang YN(1), Zhang L(6), Zhang T(2), Zeng XC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Zengcheng People's Hospital (BoJi-Affiliated
Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University), Zengcheng, China. (2)Liver Transplantation
Center, Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine,
Guangzhou, China. (4)Department of Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery, Second
Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Pathology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou
University of Chinese Medicine (Guangdong Provincial Hospital of TCM), Guangzhou,
China. (6)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Zengcheng People's Hospital
(BoJi-Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University), Zengcheng, China.
(7)Department of General Surgery, Zengcheng People's Hospital (BoJi-Affiliated
Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University), Zengcheng, China ; Department of Clinical
Laboratory, Zengcheng People's Hospital (BoJi-Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen 
University), Zengcheng, China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common human malignancies and
the third leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide. The development and
progression of HCC is a complicated process, involving the deregulation of
multiple genes that are essential to cell biological processes. Recently,
microRNAs (miRNAs) have been suggested to be closely associated with
tumorigenesis. Our study showed that miR-184 is upregulated in HCC cell lines and
tissues. Overexpression of miR-184 in HCC cells increased cell proliferation,
tumorigenicity, and cell cycle progression, whereas inhibition of miR-184 reduced
cell proliferation, tumorigenicity, and cell cycle progression. Additionally, we 
identified SOX7 as a direct target of miR-184. Ectopic expression of miR-184 led 
to downregulation of the SOX7 protein, resulting in upregulation of c-Myc, Cyclin
D1, and phosphorylation of Rb. Our findings suggested that miR-184 represents a
potential onco-miR and plays an important role in HCC progression by suppressing 
SOX7 expression.

PMCID: PMC3928300
PMID: 24558429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cell J. 2014 Feb 3;16(1):63-72. Epub 2014 Feb 3.

Stauprimide Priming of Human Embryonic Stem Cells toward Definitive Endoderm.

Tahamtani Y(1), Azarnia M(1), Farrokhi A(2), Moradmand A(2), Mirshahvaladi S(2), 
Aghdami N(2), Baharvand H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Kharazmi University, Tehran, Iran. (2)Department of
Stem Cells and Developmental Biology at Cell Science Research Center, Royan
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: In vitro production of a definitive endoderm (DE) is an important
issue in stem cell-related differentiation studies and it can assist with the
production of more efficient endoderm derivatives for therapeutic applications.
Despite tremendous progress in DE differentiation of human embryonic stem cells
(hESCs), researchers have yet to discover universal, efficient and cost-effective
protocols.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this experimental study, we have treated hESCs with 200
nM of Stauprimide (Spd) for one day followed by activin A (50 ng/ml; A50) for the
next three days (Spd-A50). In the positive control group, hESCs were treated with
Wnt3a (25 ng/ml) and activin A (100 ng/ml) for the first day followed by activin 
A for the next three days (100 ng/ml; W/A100-A100).
RESULTS: Gene expression analysis showed up regulation of DE-specific marker
genes (SOX17, FOXA2 and CXCR4) comparable to that observed in the positive
control group. Expression of the other lineage specific markers did not
significantly change (p<0.05). We also obtained the same gene expression results 
using another hESC line. The use of higher concentrations of Spd (400 and 800 nM)
in the Spd-A50 protocol caused an increase in the expression SOX17 as well as a
dramatic increase in mortality rate of the hESCs. A lower concentration of
activin A (25 ng/ml) was not able to up regulate the DE-specific marker genes.
Then, A50 was replaced by inducers of definitive endoderm; IDE1/2 (IDE1 and
IDE2), two previously reported small molecule (SM) inducers of DE, in our
protocol (Spd-IDE1/2). This replacement resulted in the up regulation of visceral
endoderm (VE) marker (SOX7) but not DE-specific markers. Therefore, while the
Spd-A50 protocol led to DE production, we have shown that IDE1/2 could not fully 
replace activin A in DE induction of hESCs.
CONCLUSION: These findings can assist with the design of more efficient
chemically-defined protocols for DE induction of hESCs and lead to a better
understanding of the different signaling networks that are involved in DE
differentiation of hESCs.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Royan Institute (ACECR).The full text is avalible 
in: www.celljournal.org.

PMCID: PMC3933440
PMID: 24518969  [PubMed]


30. Histol Histopathol. 2014 Apr;29(4):439-45. Epub 2013 Nov 29.

SOX7: from a developmental regulator to an emerging tumor suppressor.

Stovall DB(1), Cao P(1), Sui G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, and Center for
Cancer Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC,
USA. (2)Department of Cancer Biology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, and Center 
for Cancer Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem,
NC, USA. gsui@wakehealth.edu.

SOX7 belongs to the SOX (SRY-related HMG-box) family of transcription factors
that have been shown to regulate multiple biological processes, such as
hematopoiesis, vasculogenesis and cardiogenesis during embryonic development.
Recent studies indicate that several SOX family members play important roles in
tumorigenesis. In this review, we introduce SOX7 gene and protein structures, and
discuss its expression and functional role in cancer development and progression.
SOX7 is frequently downregulated in many human cancers and its reduced expression
correlates with poor prognoses of several cancers. Functional studies reveal many
tumor suppressive properties of SOX7 in prostate, colon, lung, and breast
cancers. To date, although a few target genes of SOX7 have been identified,
SOX7-mediated gene expression has not been investigated in a cancer-relevant
context. Our recent studies not only for the first time demonstrate a tumor
suppressive role of SOX7 in a xenograft mouse model, but also unravel that many
genes regulating cell death, growth and apoptosis are affected by SOX7, strongly 
supporting a pivotal role of SOX7 in tumorigenesis. Thus, currently available
data clearly indicate a tumor suppressive role of SOX7, but the mechanisms
underlying its gene expression and tumor suppressive activity remain
undetermined. The research of SOX7 in cancers remains a fertile area to be
explored.

PMCID: PMC4107680
PMID: 24288056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Blood. 2014 Feb 13;123(7):1102-12. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-04-495432. Epub 2013
Nov 22.

VEGFD regulates blood vascular development by modulating SOX18 activity.

Duong T(1), Koltowska K, Pichol-Thievend C, Le Guen L, Fontaine F, Smith KA,
Truong V, Skoczylas R, Stacker SA, Achen MG, Koopman P, Hogan BM, Francois M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
QLD, Australia;

Vascular endothelial growth factor-D (VEGFD) is a potent pro-lymphangiogenic
molecule during tumor growth and is considered a key therapeutic target to
modulate metastasis. Despite roles in pathological neo-lymphangiogenesis, the
characterization of an endogenous role for VEGFD in vascular development has
remained elusive. Here, we used zebrafish to assay for genetic interactions
between the Vegf/Vegf-receptor pathway and SoxF transcription factors and
identified a specific interaction between Vegfd and Sox18. Double knockdown
zebrafish embryos for Sox18/Vegfd and Sox7/Vegfd exhibit defects in arteriovenous
differentiation. Supporting this observation, we found that Sox18/Vegfd double
but not single knockout mice displayed dramatic vascular development defects. We 
find that VEGFD-mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase-extracellular
signal-regulated kinase signaling modulates SOX18-mediated transcription,
functioning at least in part by enhancing nuclear concentration and
transcriptional activity in vascular endothelial cells. This work suggests that
VEGFD-mediated pathologies include or involve an underlying dysregulation of
SOXF-mediated transcriptional networks.

PMID: 24269955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2013 Dec;36(6):469-83. doi: 10.1007/s13402-013-0151-7. Epub
2013 Sep 25.

Impact of SOX18 expression in cancer cells and vessels on the outcome of invasive
ductal breast carcinoma.

Pula B(1), Olbromski M, Wojnar A, Gomulkiewicz A, Witkiewicz W, Ugorski M,
Dziegiel P, Podhorska-Okolow M.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Specialist Hospital, Research and Development Center, Wroclaw,
Poland.

PURPOSE: SOX18 is a transcription factor known to be involved in hair follicle,
blood and lymphatic vessel development, as well as wound healing processes
(together with SOX7 and SOX17). In addition, it has been reported that SOX18 may 
affect the growth of cancer cells in vitro. Until now, the exact role of SOX18
expression in invasive ductal breast carcinoma (IDC) has remained unknown.
METHODS: In this study, we have investigated SOX18 expression in cancer cells and
endothelial cells in 122 IDC samples using immunohistochemistry (IHC). SOX18
expression was also determined using real-time PCR and Western blotting in a
series of breast cancer-derived cell lines (i.e., MCF-7, BT-474, SK-BR-3,
MDA-MB-231, BO2).
RESULTS: Using IHC, we observed SOX18 nuclear expression in cancer cells, as well
as in blood and lymphatic vessels of the IDC samples tested. SOX18 expression in 
the IDC samples correlated with a higher malignancy grade (Grade 2 and Grade 3
versus Grade 1; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009, respectively) and VEGF-D expression
(r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.27, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007). SOX18 expression was also associated with HER2 positivity 
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02). A significantly higher SOX18 expression was found in the
HER2-positive cell line BT-474, and a significantly lower expression in the
triple negative cell lines MDA-MB-231 and BO2. Laser capture microdissection of
IDC samples revealed significantly higher mRNA SOX7, SOX17 and SOX18 expression
levels in the vessels as compared to the cancer cells (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0002,
p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001, respectively). SOX18 positive intratumoral and peritumoral
microvessel counts (MVC) were associated with higher malignancy grades (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04 
and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02, respectively). Moreover, peritumoral SOX18 positive MVC were found 
to act as an independent marker for a poor prognosis (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04).
CONCLUSION: SOX18 expression may serve as a marker for a poor prognosis in IDC.

PMID: 24065215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cells Tissues Organs. 2013;198(2):111-26. doi: 10.1159/000353942. Epub 2013 Sep
21.

Culture of mouse amniotic fluid-derived cells on irradiated STO feeders results
in the generation of primitive endoderm cell lines capable of self-renewal in
vitro.

Babic AM(1), Jang S, Nicolov E, Voicu H, Luckey CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Genomic Medicine, The Methodist Hospital, Houston,
Tex., USA.

The cells present in amniotic fluid (AF) are currently used for prenatal
diagnosis of fetal anomalies but are also a potential source of cells for cell
therapy. To better characterize putative progenitor cell populations present in
AF, we used culture conditions that support self-renewal to determine if these
promoted the generation of stable cell lines from AF-derived cells (AFC). Cells
isolated from E11.5 mouse were cultured on irradiated STO fibroblast feeder
layers in human embryonic germ cell derivation conditions. The cultures grew
multicellular epithelial colonies that could be repropagated from single cells.
Reverse transcription semiquantitative polymerase chain reaction of established
cell lines revealed that they belonged to the extraembryonic endoderm (ExEn)
expressing high levels of Gata6, Gata4, Sox17, Foxa2 and Sox7 mRNA. Hierarchical 
clustering based on the whole transcriptome expression profile of the AFC lines
(AFCL) shows significant correlation between transcription profiles of AFCL and
blastocyst-derived XEN, an ExEn cell line. In vitro differentiation of AFCL
results in the generation of cells expressing albumin and a-fetoprotein (AFP),
while intramuscular injection of AFCL into immunodeficient mice produced
AFP-positive tumors with primitive endodermal appearance. Hence, E11.5 mouse AF
contains cells that efficiently produce XEN lines. These AF-derived XEN lines do 
not spontaneously differentiate into embryonic-type cells but are phenotypically 
stable and have the capacity for extensive expansion. The lack of requirement for
reprogramming factors to turn AF-derived progenitor cells into stable cell lines 
capable of massive expansion together with the known ability of ExEn to
contribute to embryonic tissue suggests that this cell type may be a candidate
for banking for cell therapies.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMCID: PMC3914766
PMID: 24060676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Am J Pathol. 2013 Nov;183(5):1645-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.07.025. Epub
2013 Sep 5.

The regulation of SOX7 and its tumor suppressive role in breast cancer.

Stovall DB(1), Wan M, Miller LD, Cao P, Maglic D, Zhang Q, Stampfer MR, Liu W, Xu
J, Sui G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.

Both epigenetic silencing and genetic deletion of tumor suppressors contribute to
the development and progression of breast cancer. SOX7 is a transcription factor 
important to development, and its down-regulation has been reported in tumor
tissues and cell lines of prostate, colon, and lung cancers. However, the
regulation of SOX7 expression and its functional role in breast cancer have not
been reported. The current study demonstrates that SOX7 mRNA and protein
expression are down-regulated in breast cancer tissues and cell lines compared
with adjacent normal tissues and nontumorigenic cells, respectively. The SOX7
promoter is hypermethylated in breast cancer cell lines compared with
nontumorigenic cells, and the inhibition of DNA methylation increases SOX7 mRNA
levels. With shRNA-mediated SOX7 silencing, nontumorigenic immortal breast cells 
display increased proliferation, migration, and invasion and form structures that
resemble that of breast cancer cells in a three-dimensional culture system.
Conversely, ectopic SOX7 expression inhibits proliferation, migration, and
invasion of breast cancer cells in vitro and tumor growth in vivo. Importantly,
we discovered that SOX7 transcript levels positively correlated with clinical
outcome of 674 breast cancer patients. Overall, our data suggest that SOX7 acts
as a tumor suppressor in breast cancer. SOX7 expression is likely regulated by
multiple mechanisms and potentially serves as a prognostic marker for breast
cancer patients.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3814686
PMID: 24012678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 29;8(8):e72515. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072515. eCollection
2013.

A potential relationship among beta-defensins haplotype, SOX7 duplication and
cardiac defects.

Long F(1), Wang X, Fang S, Xu Y, Sun K, Chen S, Xu R.

Author information: 
(1)Scientific Research Center, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai JiaoTong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the pathogenesis of a patient born with congenital heart 
defects, who had appeared normal in prenatal screening.
METHODS: In routine prenatal screening, G-banding was performed to analyse the
karyotypes of the family and fluorescence in situ hybridization was used to
investigate the 22q11.2 deletion in the fetus. After birth, the child was found
to be suffering from heart defects by transthoracic echocardiography. In the
following study, sequencing was used to search for potential mutations in pivotal
genes. SNP-array was employed for fine mapping of the aberrant region and
quantitative real-time PCR was used to confirm the results. Furthermore, other
patients with a similar phenotype were screened for the same genetic variations. 
To compare with a control, these variations were also assessed in the general
population.
RESULTS: The child and his mother each had a region that was deleted in the
beta-defensin repeats, which are usually duplicated in the general population.
Besides, the child carried a SOX7-gene duplication. While this duplication was
not detected in his mother, it was found in two other patients with cardiac
defects who also had the similar deletion in the beta-defensin repeats.
CONCLUSION: The congenital heart defects of the child were probably caused by a
SOX7-gene duplication, which may be a consequence of the partial haplotype of
beta-defensin regions at 8p23.1. To our knowledge, this is the first congenital
heart defect case found to have the haplotype of beta-defensin and the
duplication of SOX7.

PMCID: PMC3757027
PMID: 24009689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Stem Cells. 2013 Dec;31(12):2632-46. doi: 10.1002/stem.1522.

Sox transcription factors require selective interactions with Oct4 and specific
transactivation functions to mediate reprogramming.

Aksoy I(1), Jauch R, Eras V, Chng WB, Chen J, Divakar U, Ng CK, Kolatkar PR,
Stanton LW.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore.

The unique ability of Sox2 to cooperate with Oct4 at selective binding sites in
the genome is critical for reprogramming somatic cells into induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs). We have recently demonstrated that Sox17 can be converted
into a reprogramming factor by alteration of a single amino acid (Sox17EK) within
its DNA binding HMG domain. Here we expanded this study by introducing analogous 
mutations to 10 other Sox proteins and interrogated the role of N-and C-termini
on the reprogramming efficiency. We found that point-mutated Sox7 and Sox17 can
convert human and mouse fibroblasts into iPSCs, but Sox4, Sox5, Sox6, Sox8, Sox9,
Sox11, Sox12, Sox13, and Sox18 cannot. Next we studied regions outside the HMG
domain and found that the C-terminal transactivation domain of Sox17 and Sox7
enhances the potency of Sox2 in iPSC assays and confers weak reprogramming
potential to the otherwise inactive Sox4EK and Sox18EK proteins. These results
suggest that the glutamate (E) to lysine (K) mutation in the HMG domain is
necessary but insufficient to swap the function of Sox factors. Moreover, the HMG
domain alone fused to the VP16 transactivation domain is able to induce
reprogramming, albeit at low efficiency. By molecular dissection of the
C-terminus of Sox17, we found that the ß-catenin interaction region contributes
to the enhanced reprogramming efficiency of Sox17EK. To mechanistically
understand the enhanced reprogramming potential of Sox17EK, we analyzed
ChIP-sequencing and expression data and identified a subset of candidate genes
specifically regulated by Sox17EK and not by Sox2.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23963638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jul 16;110(29):11893-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1300805110. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

Analysis of Dll4 regulation reveals a combinatorial role for Sox and Notch in
arterial development.

Sacilotto N(1), Monteiro R, Fritzsche M, Becker PW, Sanchez-Del-Campo L, Liu K,
Pinheiro P, Ratnayaka I, Davies B, Goding CR, Patient R, Bou-Gharios G, De Val S.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Ltd, Nuffield Department of Clinical
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom.

The mechanisms by which arterial fate is established and maintained are not
clearly understood. Although a number of signaling pathways and transcriptional
regulators have been implicated in arterio-venous differentiation, none are
essential for arterial formation, and the manner in which widely expressed
factors may achieve arterial-specific gene regulation is unclear. Using both
mouse and zebrafish models, we demonstrate here that arterial specification is
regulated combinatorially by Notch signaling and SoxF transcription factors, via 
direct transcriptional gene activation. Through the identification and
characterization of two arterial endothelial cell-specific gene enhancers for the
Notch ligand Delta-like ligand 4 (Dll4), we show that arterial Dll4 expression
requires the direct binding of both the RBPJ/Notch intracellular domain and SOXF 
transcription factors. Specific combinatorial, but not individual, loss of SOXF
and RBPJ DNA binding ablates all Dll4 enhancer-transgene expression despite the
presence of multiple functional ETS binding sites, as does knockdown of
sox7;sox18 in combination with loss of Notch signaling. Furthermore, triple
knockdown of sox7, sox18 and rbpj also results in ablation of endogenous dll4
expression. Fascinatingly, this combinatorial ablation leads to a loss of
arterial markers and the absence of a detectable dorsal aorta, demonstrating the 
essential roles of SoxF and Notch, together, in the acquisition of arterial
identity.

PMCID: PMC3718163
PMID: 23818617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Apr 4;32:17. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-32-17.

SOX7 is down-regulated in lung cancer.

Hayano T(1), Garg M, Yin D, Sudo M, Kawamata N, Shi S, Chien W, Ding LW, Leong G,
Mori S, Xie D, Tan P, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Oncology Programme, Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore.

BACKGROUND: SOX7 is a transcription factor belonging to the SOX family. Its role 
in lung cancer is unknown.
METHODS: In this study, whole genomic copy number analysis was performed on a
series of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines and samples from
individuals with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations using a
SNP-Chip platform. SOX7 was measured in NSCLC samples and cell lines, and forced 
expressed in one of these lines.
RESULTS: A notable surprise was that the numerous copy number (CN) changes
observed in samples of Asian, non-smoking EGFR mutant NSCLC were nearly the same 
as those CN alterations seen in a large collection of NSCLC from The Cancer
Genome Atlas which is presumably composed of predominantly Caucasians who often
smoked. However, four regions had CN changes fairly unique to the Asian EGFR
mutant group. We also examined CN changes in NSCLC lines. The SOX7 gene was
homozygously deleted in one (HCC2935) of 10 NSCLC cell lines and heterozygously
deleted in two other NSCLC lines. Expression of SOX7 was significantly
downregulated in NSCLC cell lines (8/10, 80%) and a large collection of NSCLC
samples compared to matched normal lung (57/62, 92%, p= 0.0006).
Forced-expression of SOX7 in NSCLC cell lines markedly reduced their cell growth 
and enhanced their apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that SOX7 is a novel tumor suppressor gene
silenced in the majority of NSCLC samples.

PMCID: PMC3648366
PMID: 23557216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Jun;33(6):1238-47. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.300254. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

Sox18 genetically interacts with VegfC to regulate lymphangiogenesis in
zebrafish.

Cermenati S(1), Moleri S, Neyt C, Bresciani E, Carra S, Grassini DR, Omini A, Goi
M, Cotelli F, François M, Hogan BM, Beltrame M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomolecolari e Biotecnologie, Universita' degli Studi
di Milano, Milan, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: Lymphangiogenesis is regulated by transcription factors and by growth 
factor pathways, but their interplay has not been extensively studied so far. We 
addressed this issue in zebrafish.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Mutations in the transcription factor-coding gene SOX18 and
in VEGFR3 cause lymphedema, and the VEGFR3/Flt4 ligand VEGFC plays an
evolutionarily conserved role in lymphangiogenesis. Here, we report a strong
genetic interaction between Sox18 and VegfC in the early phases of lymphatic
development in zebrafish. Knockdown of sox18 selectively impaired lymphatic
sprouting from the cardinal vein and resulted in defective lymphatic thoracic
duct formation. Sox18 and the related protein Sox7 play redundant roles in
arteriovenous differentiation. We used a novel transgenic line that enables
inducible expression of a dominant-negative mutant form of mouse Sox18 protein.
Our data led us to conclude that Sox18 is crucially involved in lymphangiogenesis
after arteriovenous differentiation. Combined partial knockdown of sox18 and
vegfc, using subcritical doses of specific morpholinos, revealed a synergistic
interaction in both venous and lymphatic sprouting from the cardinal vein and
greatly impaired thoracic duct formation.
CONCLUSIONS: This interaction suggests a previously unappreciated crosstalk
between the growth factor and transcription factor pathways that regulate
lymphangiogenesis in development and disease.

PMID: 23520166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57501. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057501. Epub 2013 Feb 27.

ß-catenin is essential for efficient in vitro premyogenic mesoderm formation but 
can be partially compensated by retinoic acid signalling.

Wong J(1), Mehta V, Voronova A, Coutu J, Ryan T, Shelton M, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

Previous studies have shown that P19 cells expressing a dominant negative
ß-catenin mutant (ß-cat/EnR) cannot undergo myogenic differentiation in the
presence or absence of muscle-inducing levels of retinoic acid (RA). While RA
could upregulate premyogenic mesoderm expression, including Pax3/7 and Meox1,
only Pax3/7 and Gli2 could be upregulated by RA in the presence of ß-cat/EnR.
However, the use of a dominant negative construct that cannot be compensated by
other factors is limiting due to the possibility of negative chromatin
remodelling overriding compensatory mechanisms. In this study, we set out to
determine if ß-catenin function is essential for myogenesis with and without RA, 
by creating P19 cells with reduced ß-catenin transcriptional activity using an
shRNA approach, termed P19[shß-cat] cells. The loss of ß-catenin resulted in a
reduction of skeletal myogenesis in the absence of RA as early as premyogenic
mesoderm, with the loss of Pax3/7, Eya2, Six1, Meox1, Gli2, Foxc1/2, and Sox7
transcript levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation identified an association of
ß-catenin with the promoter region of the Sox7 gene. Differentiation of
P19[shß-cat] cells in the presence of RA resulted in the upregulation or lack of 
repression of all of the precursor genes, on day 5 and/or 9, with the exception
of Foxc2. However, expression of Sox7, Gli2, the myogenic regulatory factors and 
terminal differentiation markers remained inhibited on day 9 and overall skeletal
myogenesis was reduced. Thus, ß-catenin is essential for in vitro formation of
premyogenic mesoderm, leading to skeletal myogenesis. RA can at least partially
compensate for the loss of ß-catenin in the expression of many myogenic precursor
genes, but not for myoblast gene expression or overall myogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3583846
PMID: 23460868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Mar;161A(3):561-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35596. Epub 2013
Feb 12.

8p23.1 duplication detected by array-CGH with complete atrioventricular septal
defect and unilateral hand preaxial hexadactyly.

Zhang Y(1), Li Y, Wang Y, Shan B, Duan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Kunming
Medical University, Yunnan Province, P R China.

8p23.1 duplication syndrome is a genomic condition with variable phenotype.
Isolated 8p23.1 duplication is rare. Here, we report on additional isolated
8p23.1 duplication in a fetus with complete atrioventricular septal defect and
right hand preaxial hexadactyly diagnosed by array comparative genomic
hybridization (array-CGH). Array-CGH indicated an ~1.43 Mb duplication between
8p23.1 olfactory receptor/defensin repeats (ORDRs) in this case, which contains
27 genes of which 21 are known and 6 are novel, including GATA4 and SOX7 and one 
micro-RNA gene. In order to better understanding the genotype-phenotype
association of 8p23.1 duplications, we summarized the present case and 10
previously reported patients with isolated 8p23.1 duplications between ORDRs and 
found that minor anomalies (6/11), congenital heart defect (6/11), developmental 
delay (5/11), and neurodevelopmental problems (5/11) are recurrent manifestations
in 8p23.1 duplication patients. Thus, we suggest that 8p23.1 duplications between
ORDRs generally result in clinical phenotypes and the phenotypes vary between
patients. Because true duplications and euchromatic variants (EVs) of 8p23.1 are 
cytogenetically indistinguishable and usually lead to different clinical results,
it is necessary to differentiate 8p23.1 duplications from EVs using molecular
cytogenetic techniques.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23404914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Mar;161A(3):487-500. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35767. Epub 2013 
Jan 23.

8p23.1 duplication syndrome; common, confirmed, and novel features in six further
patients.

Barber JC(1), Rosenfeld JA, Foulds N, Laird S, Bateman MS, Thomas NS, Baker S,
Maloney VK, Anilkumar A, Smith WE, Banks V, Ellingwood S, Kharbutli Y, Mehta L,
Eddleman KA, Marble M, Zambrano R, Crolla JA, Lamb AN.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine,
University of Southampton, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, UK.
john.barber@soton.ac.uk

The 8p23.1 duplication syndrome is a relatively rare genomic condition that has
been confirmed with molecular cytogenetic methods in only 11 probands and five
family members. Here, we describe another prenatal and five postnatal patients
with de novo 8p23.1 duplications analyzed with oligonucleotide array comparative 
genomic hybridization (oaCGH). Of the common features, mild or moderate
developmental delays and/or learning difficulties have been found in 11/12
postnatal probands, a variable degree of mild dysmorphism in 8/12 and congenital 
heart disease (CHD) in 4/5 prenatal and 3/12 postnatal probands. Behavioral
problems, cleft lip and/or palate, macrocephaly, and seizures were confirmed as
additional features among the new patients, and novel features included neonatal 
respiratory distress, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), ocular
anomalies, balance problems, hypotonia, and hydrocele. The core duplication of
3.68<U+2009>Mb contains 31 genes and microRNAs of which only GATA4, TNKS, SOX7, and XKR6
are likely to be dosage sensitive genes and MIR124-1 and MIR598 have been
implicated in neurocognitive phenotypes. A combination of the duplication of
GATA4, SOX7, and related genes may account for the variable penetrance of CHD.
Two of the duplications were maternal and intrachromosomal in origin with
maternal heterozygosity for the common inversion between the repeats in 8p23.1.
These additional patients and the absence of the 8p23.1 duplications in published
controls, indicate that the 8p23.1 duplication syndrome may now be considered a
pathogenic copy number variation (pCNV) with an estimated population prevalence
of 1 in 58,000.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23345203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Oncotarget. 2012 Dec;3(12):1546-56.

Down-regulation of Sox7 is associated with aberrant activation of Wnt/b-catenin
signaling in endometrial cancer.

Chan DW(1), Mak CS, Leung TH, Chan KK, Ngan HY.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, LKS Faculty of Medicine, the
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, PRChina.

Although the mortality rate of endometrial cancer is comparatively low in
gynecologic malignancies, a rising trend of this cancer has been observed for the
past decade. The understanding of the molecular mechanism will favor for the
clinical management of this disease. Aberrant activation of Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway plays a major role in the pathogenesis of endometrioid
adenocarcinoma including this cancer type. In this study, we reported that Sox7, 
one of Sox transcriptional factors, was frequently underexpressed in endometrial 
cancer and importantly, it was associated with dysregulation of the Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling activity. Immunohistochemical and quantitative RT-PCR analyses showed
that Sox7 was underexpressed and was associated with high-grade tumor (P=0.021), 
increased expressions of ß-catenin (P=0.038) and its downstream targets; CyclinD1
(P less than 0.001) and FGF9 (P less than 0.001). In addition, using HEK293T cell
model, we found that Sox7 was able to inhibit TCF/LEF-1-dependent luciferase
activity induced by Wnt-1. This was further proved by that Sox7 could
significantly suppress the expressions of Wnt targets; Cyclin D1 and C-myc in
endometrial cells. Immuno-fluorescent microscopy revealed that Sox7 was
co-localizaed with either mutant ß-catenin or TCF4 protein in nucleus, while
co-immunopreciptation assay demonstrated that Sox7 could physically interact with
not only wild-type but also mutant ß-catenin, as well as TCF4 proteins.
Functionally, enforced expression of Sox7 could significantly inhibit endometrial
or endometrioid ovarian cancer cells (OEA) harboring either wild-type or mutant
ß-catenin. These data suggest Sox7 is a negative regulator of Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway through impeding the transcriptional machinery of
ß-catenin/TCF/LEF-1 transcriptional complex, and the loss of expression may be
involved in the pathogenesis of endometrial cancer.

PMCID: PMC3681493
PMID: 23295859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Dec;158A(12):3148-58. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35665. Epub 2012
Nov 19.

Congenital diaphragmatic hernia interval on chromosome 8p23.1 characterized by
genetics and protein interaction networks.

Longoni M(1), Lage K, Russell MK, Loscertales M, Abdul-Rahman OA, Baynam G, Bleyl
SB, Brady PD, Breckpot J, Chen CP, Devriendt K, Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Grix AW,
Rope AF, Shimokawa O, Strauss B, Wieczorek D, Zackai EH, Coletti CM, Maalouf FI, 
Noonan KM, Park JH, Tracy AA, Lee C, Donahoe PK, Pober BR.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Surgical Research Laboratories, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. mlongoni@partners.org

Chromosome 8p23.1 is a common hotspot associated with major congenital
malformations, including congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) and cardiac
defects. We present findings from high-resolution arrays in patients who carry a 
loss (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>18) or a gain (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1) of sub-band 8p23.1. We confirm a region involved 
in both diaphragmatic and heart malformations. Results from a novel CNVConnect
algorithm, prioritizing protein-protein interactions between products of genes in
the 8p23.1 hotspot and products of previously known CDH causing genes, implicated
GATA4, NEIL2, and SOX7 in diaphragmatic defects. Sequence analysis of these genes
in 226 chromosomally normal CDH patients, as well as in a small number of
deletion 8p23.1 patients, showed rare unreported variants in the coding region;
these may be contributing to the diaphragmatic phenotype. We also demonstrated
that two of these three genes were expressed in the E11.5-12.5 primordial mouse
diaphragm, the developmental stage at which CDH is thought to occur. This
combination of bioinformatics and expression studies can be applied to other
chromosomal hotspots, as well as private microdeletions or microduplications, to 
identify causative genes and their interaction networks.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3761361
PMID: 23165946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Med Genet. 2012 Oct;49(10):650-9. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101135.

De novo copy number variants are associated with congenital diaphragmatic hernia.

Yu L(1), Wynn J, Ma L, Guha S, Mychaliska GB, Crombleholme TM, Azarow KS, Lim FY,
Chung DH, Potoka D, Warner BW, Bucher B, LeDuc CA, Costa K, Stolar C, Aspelund G,
Arkovitz MS, Chung WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New
York 10032, USA.

BACKGROUND: Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a common birth defect with
significant morbidity and mortality. Although the aetiology of CDH remains poorly
understood, studies from animal models and patients with CDH suggest that genetic
factors play an important role in the development of CDH. Chromosomal anomalies
have been reported in CDH.
METHODS: In this study, the authors investigated the frequency of chromosomal
anomalies and copy number variants (CNVs) in 256 parent-child trios of CDH using 
clinical conventional cytogenetic and microarray analysis. The authors also
selected a set of CDH related training genes to prioritise the genes in those
segmental aneuploidies and identified the genes and gene sets that may contribute
to the aetiology of CDH.
RESULTS: The authors identified chromosomal anomalies in 16 patients (6.3%) of
the series including three aneuploidies, two unbalanced translocation, and 11
patients with de novo CNVs ranging in size from 95 kb to 104.6 Mb. The authors
prioritised the genes in the CNV segments and identified KCNA2, LMNA, CACNA1S,
MYOG, HLX, LBR, AGT, GATA4, SOX7, HYLS1, FOXC1, FOXF2, PDGFA, FGF6, COL4A1,
COL4A2, HOMER2, BNC1, BID, and TBX1 as genes that may be involved in diaphragm
development. Gene enrichment analysis identified the most relevant gene ontology 
categories as those involved in tissue development (p=4.4×10(-11)) or regulation 
of multicellular organismal processes (p=2.8×10(-10)) and 'receptor binding'
(p=8.7×10(-14)) and 'DNA binding transcription factor activity' (p=4.4×10(-10)).
CONCLUSIONS: The present findings support the role of chromosomal anomalies in
CDH and provide a set of candidate genes including FOXC1, FOXF2, PDGFA, FGF6,
COL4A1, COL4A2, SOX7, BNC1, BID, and TBX1 for further analysis in CDH.

PMCID: PMC3696999
PMID: 23054247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e43857. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043857. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Cytoplasmic plaque formation in hemidesmosome development is dependent on SoxF
transcription factor function.

Oommen S(1), Francois M, Kawasaki M, Murrell M, Kawasaki K, Porntaveetus T,
Ghafoor S, Young NJ, Okamatsu Y, McGrath J, Koopman P, Sharpe PT, Ohazama A.

Author information: 
(1)Craniofacial Development and Stem Cell Biology, and Biomedical Research
Centre, Dental Institute, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.

Hemidesmosomes are composed of intricate networks of proteins, that are an
essential attachment apparatus for the integrity of epithelial tissue. Disruption
leads to blistering diseases such as epidermolysis bullosa. Members of the Sox
gene family show dynamic and diverse expression patterns during development and
mutation analyses in humans and mice provide evidence that they play a remarkable
variety of roles in development and human disease. Previous studies have
established that the mouse mutant ragged-opossum (Ra(op)) expresses a
dominant-negative form of the SOX18 transcription factor that interferes with the
function of wild type SOX18 and of the related SOXF-subgroup proteins SOX7 and
-17. Here we show that skin and oral mucosa in homozygous Ra(op) mice display
extensive detachment of epithelium from the underlying mesenchymal tissue, caused
by tearing of epithelial cells just above the plasma membrane due to
hemidesmosome disruption. In addition, several hemidesmosome proteins expression 
were found to be dysregulated in the Ra(op) mice. Our data suggest that SOXF
transcription factors play a role in regulating formation of cytoplasmic plaque
protein assembly, and that disrupted SOXF function results in epidermolysis
bullosa-like skin phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3433475
PMID: 22962592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Feb;21(2):173-81. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.155. Epub 2012 Aug
29.

Rare DNA copy number variants in cardiovascular malformations with extracardiac
abnormalities.

Lalani SR(1), Shaw C, Wang X, Patel A, Patterson LW, Kolodziejska K, Szafranski
P, Ou Z, Tian Q, Kang SH, Jinnah A, Ali S, Malik A, Hixson P, Potocki L, Lupski
JR, Stankiewicz P, Bacino CA, Dawson B, Beaudet AL, Boricha FM, Whittaker R, Li
C, Ware SM, Cheung SW, Penny DJ, Jefferies JL, Belmont JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. seemal@bcm.tmc.edu

Clinically significant cardiovascular malformations (CVMs) occur in 5-8 per 1000 
live births. Recurrent copy number variations (CNVs) are among the known causes
of syndromic CVMs, accounting for an important fraction of cases. We hypothesized
that many additional rare CNVs also cause CVMs and can be detected in patients
with CVMs plus extracardiac anomalies (ECAs). Through a genome-wide survey of 203
subjects with CVMs and ECAs, we identified 55 CNVs >50<U+2009>kb in length that were not
present in children without known cardiovascular defects (n=872). Sixteen unique 
CNVs overlapping these variants were found in an independent CVM plus ECA cohort 
(n=511), which were not observed in 2011 controls. The study identified 12/16
(75%) novel loci including non-recurrent de novo 16q24.3 loss (4/714) and de novo
2q31.3q32.1 loss encompassing PPP1R1C and PDE1A (2/714). The study also narrowed 
critical intervals in three well-recognized genomic disorders of CVM, such as the
cat-eye syndrome region on 22q11.1, 8p23.1 loss encompassing GATA4 and SOX7 and
17p13.3-p13.2 loss. An analysis of protein-interaction databases shows that the
rare inherited and de novo CNVs detected in the combined cohort are enriched for 
genes encoding proteins that are direct or indirect partners of proteins known to
be required for normal cardiac development. Our findings implicate rare variants 
such as 16q24.3 loss and 2q31.3-q32.1 loss, and delineate regions within
previously reported structural variants known to cause CVMs.

PMCID: PMC3548268
PMID: 22929023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Pathol Oncol Res. 2012 Oct;18(4):1039-45. Epub 2012 Jul 10.

Decreased expression of SOX7 is correlated with poor prognosis in lung
adenocarcinoma patients.

Li B(1), Ge Z, Song S, Zhang S, Yan H, Huang B, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Hepatobiliary and Enteric Surgery Research Center of Ministry of
Health, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Xiangya Road 87, Changsha,
Hunan, China.

Lung adenocarcinoma is the most frequently histologic subtype and the most
histologically heterogeneous form of lung cancer. De-regulation of Wnt/ß-catenin 
signaling pathway is implicated in lung carcinogenesis. SOX7, as a member of high
mobility group (HMG) transcription factor family, plays a role in the modulation 
of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway. However, the expression pattern and
clinicopathological significance of SOX7 in patients with lung adenocarcinoma is 
still unclear. To address this problem, the SOX7 mRNA expression was detected by 
quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).
Immunohistochemical studies were performed on 288 pairs of adjacent normal lung
and lung adenocarcinoma tissues with complete follow-up records. Association of
SOX7 protein expression with clinical outcomes was evaluated using the
Kaplan-Meier method and a multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression model.
SOX7 mRNA expression was significantly down-regulated in lung adenocarcinoma
compared with matched adjacent normal tissues (P < 0.001). SOX7 protein was
expressed in the cytoplasm of lung adenocarcinoma cells in 106/288 (36.8 %) of
cases, whereas its immunoreactivities were predominantly located in the cytoplasm
of the adjacent normal tissues. The reduced SOX7 expression was correlated with
poor differentiation (P = 0.002), lymph node metastasis (P = 0.011) and advanced 
TNM stage (P = 0.006). Regarding patient survival, the overall survival and the
disease-free survival rates were both significantly lower in patients with
SOX7-negative tumors than in those with SOX7-positive tumors (P = 0.018 and
0.013, respectively). Multivariate analysis using a Cox proportional-hazards
model demonstrated that SOX7 expression status was an independent prognostic
factor predicting the overall survival and the disease-free survival of patients 
with lung adenocarcinoma (P = 0.021 and 0.016, respectively).Our data suggest
that the decreased expression of SOX7 is an important feature of lung
adenocarcinoma. The expression level of SOX protein may be a useful prognostic
marker for patients with lung adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 22777918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Sep 15;21(18):4115-25. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds241. Epub 2012 Jun
20.

Mouse model reveals the role of SOX7 in the development of congenital
diaphragmatic hernia associated with recurrent deletions of 8p23.1.

Wat MJ(1), Beck TF, Hernández-García A, Yu Z, Veenma D, Garcia M, Holder AM, Wat 
JJ, Chen Y, Mohila CA, Lally KP, Dickinson M, Tibboel D, de Klein A, Lee B, Scott
DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Recurrent microdeletions of 8p23.1 that include GATA4 and SOX7 confer a high risk
of both congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) and cardiac defects. Although
GATA4-deficient mice have both CDH and cardiac defects, no humans with cardiac
defects attributed to GATA4 mutations have been reported to have CDH. We were
also unable to identify deleterious GATA4 sequence changes in a CDH cohort. This 
suggested that haploinsufficiency of another 8p23.1 gene may contribute, along
with GATA4, to the development of CDH. To determine if haploinsufficiency of
SOX7-another transcription factor encoding gene-contributes to the development of
CDH, we generated mice with a deletion of the second exon of Sox7. A portion of
these Sox7(<U+0394>ex2/+) mice developed retrosternal diaphragmatic hernias located in
the anterior muscular portion of the diaphragm. Anterior CDH is also seen in
Gata4(+/-) mice and has been described in association with 8p23.1 deletions in
humans. Immunohistochemistry revealed that SOX7 is expressed in the vascular
endothelial cells of the developing diaphragm and may be weakly expressed in some
diaphragmatic muscle cells. Sox7(<U+0394>ex2/<U+0394>ex2) embryos die prior to diaphragm
development with dilated pericardial sacs and failure of yolk sac remodeling
suggestive of cardiovascular failure. Similar to our experience screening GATA4, 
no clearly deleterious SOX7 sequence changes were identified in our CDH cohort.
We conclude that haploinsufficiency of Sox7 or Gata4 is sufficient to produce
anterior CDH in mice and that haploinsufficiency of SOX7 and GATA4 may each
contribute to the development of CDH in individuals with 8p23.1 deletions.

PMCID: PMC3428158
PMID: 22723016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2012;227(2):119-28.

Methylation of the CpG island near SOX7 gene promoter is correlated with the poor
prognosis of patients with myelodysplastic syndrome.

Fan R(1), Zhang LY, Wang H, Yang B, Han T, Zhao XL, Wang W, Wang XQ, Lin GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Huashan Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R.
China.

Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), characterized by the decreased production of
blood cells, often progresses to acute myeloid leukemia (AML), a sign of poor
prognosis of MDS. In AML, the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway is aberrantly activated,
suggesting that the increased pathway activity may be correlated with the
development and prognosis of MDS. SOX7 protein, encoded by the sex-determining
region Y-box 7 (SOX7) gene, inhibits the activity of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway.
Because the DNA methylation can regulate the transcription of SOX7 gene, we used 
the methylation-specific PCR to investigate the methylation status of the CpG
island in MDS patients to determine the potential correlation of the SOX7
methylation with the development and prognosis of MDS. We found that the CpG
island of the SOX7 gene was methylated in 58.1% (97/167) of MDS patients, but not
in any healthy control. Furthermore, the percentage of patients with the
methylated CpG island of the SOX7 gene was significantly higher in patients at
advanced stages of MDS than in the patients at early stages. The increased
percentages of this SOX7 methylation were also correlated with age, marrow blast 
levels, and International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) risk. After prognostic
analysis, we found that patients with the methylated CpG island of the SOX7 gene 
had shorter overall survival and cumulative survival than patients with
unmethylated CpG island. Our findings suggest that the methylation of the CpG
island of the SOX7 gene can be used as a predictive factor for the development
and prognosis of MDS patients.

PMID: 22706399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. BMC Cancer. 2012 Jun 15;12:248. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-248.

SOXs in human prostate cancer: implication as progression and prognosis factors.

Zhong WD(1), Qin GQ, Dai QS, Han ZD, Chen SM, Ling XH, Fu X, Cai C, Chen JH, Chen
XB, Lin ZY, Deng YH, Wu SL, He HC, Wu CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Clinical Molecular Medicine
and Diagnostics, Guangzhou First Municipal People's Hospital, Affiliated
Guangzhou Medical College, Guangzhou 510180, China. zhongwd2009@live.cn

BACKGROUND: SOX genes play an important role in a number of developmental
processes. Potential roles of SOXs have been demonstrated in various neoplastic
tissues as tumor suppressors or promoters depending on tumor status and types.
The aim of this study was to investigate the involvement of SOXs in the
progression and prognosis of human prostate cancer (PCa).
METHODS: The gene expression changes of SOXs in human PCa tissues compared with
non-cancerous prostate tissues was detected using gene expression microarray, and
confirmed by real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (QRT-PCR) analysis and immunohositochemistry. The roles of these genes
in castration resistance were investigated in LNCaP xenograft model of PCa.
RESULTS: The microarray analysis identified three genes (SOX7, SOX9 and SOX10) of
SOX family that were significantly dis-regulated in common among four PCa
specimens. Consistent with the results of the microarray, differential mRNA and
protein levels of three selected genes were found in PCa tissues by QRT-PCR
analysis and immunohistochemistry. Additionally, we found that the
immunohistochemical staining scores of SOX7 in PCa tissues with higher serum PSA 
level (P = 0.02) and metastasis (P = 0.03) were significantly lower than those
with lower serum PSA level and without metastasis; the increased SOX9 protein
expression was frequently found in PCa tissues with higher Gleason score (P =
0.02) and higher clinical stage (P < 0.0001); the down-regulation of SOX10 tend
to be found in PCa tissues with higher serum PSA levels (P = 0.03) and advanced
pathological stage (P = 0.01). Moreover, both univariate and multivariate
analyses showed that the down-regulation of SOX7 and the up-regulation of SOX9
were independent predictors of shorter biochemical recurrence-free survival.
Furthermore, we discovered that SOX7 was significantly down-regulated and SOX9
was significantly up-regulated during the progression to castration resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data offer the convince evidence that the dis-regulation of
SOX7, SOX9 and SOX10 may be associated with the aggressive progression of PCa.
SOX7 and SOX9 may be potential markers for prognosis in PCa patients.
Interestingly, the down-regulation of SOX7 and the up-regulation of SOX9 may be
important mechanisms for castration-resistant progression of PCa.

PMCID: PMC3583167
PMID: 22703285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Jul;30(1):133-41. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.983. Epub 2012 Apr
25.

Screening for differential methylation status in human placenta in preeclampsia
using a CpG island plus promoter microarray.

Jia RZ(1), Zhang X, Hu P, Liu XM, Hua XD, Wang X, Ding HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, P.R. China.

The development of preeclampsia (PE) seriously affects the health of the mother
and the child, but the precise pathogenesis of PE remains elusive. The placenta
is considered to play a key role and DNA methylation may be associated with
altered placental development and function. The aim of this study was to perform 
a genome-wide analysis of the DNA methylation profile in placentas from
pregnancies with severe preeclampsia. The authors analyzed normal and placental
tissues with PE for aberrant DNA methylation using methylated DNA
immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) and a human CpG island plus promoter microarray. The 
methylation status of identified candidate genes were validated by bisulfite
sequencing PCR (BSP). Microarray analysis identified 296 genes that showed
significantly aberrant DNA methylation in preeclampsia (PE). These genes were
located more frequently in chromosome 1 (10.5%, P=0.005), chromosome 12 (8.1%,
P=0.062) and chromosome 19 (7.4%, P=0.117). Functional analysis divided these
genes into different functional networks. In addition, the methylation profile of
six of these genes (CAPN2, EPHX2, ADORA2B, SOX7, CXCL1 and CDX1) in nine patients
with PE was validated by BSP. This study demonstrated aberrant patterns of DNA
methylation in PE, which may be involved in the pathophysiology of PE. Future
work will assess the potential prognostic and therapeutic value for these
findings in PE.

PMID: 22552323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Development. 2012 May;139(9):1587-98. doi: 10.1242/dev.071282.

SOX7 regulates the expression of VE-cadherin in the haemogenic endothelium at the
onset of haematopoietic development.

Costa G(1), Mazan A, Gandillet A, Pearson S, Lacaud G, Kouskoff V.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Stem Cell Research Group, University of Manchester,
Wilmslow Road, Manchester M20 4BX, UK.

At early stages of vertebrate ontogeny, blood and endothelial cells develop from 
a common mesodermal progenitor, the haemangioblast. Upon haematopoietic
commitment, the haemangioblast generates blood precursors through populations of 
endothelial cells with haemogenic properties. Although several transcription
factors have been implicated in haemangioblast differentiation, the precise
mechanisms governing cell fate decisions towards the generation of haemogenic
endothelium precursors remain largely unknown. Under defined conditions,
embryonic stem (ES) cells can be differentiated into haemangioblast-like
progenitors that faithfully recapitulate early embryonic haematopoiesis. Here, we
made use of mouse ES cells as a model system to understand the role of SOX7, a
member of a large family of transcription factors involved in a wide range of
developmental processes. During haemangioblast differentiation, SOX7 is expressed
in haemogenic endothelium cells and is downregulated in nascent blood precursors.
Gain-of-function assays revealed that the enforced expression of Sox7 in
haemangioblast-derived blast colonies blocks further differentiation and sustains
the expression of endothelial markers. Thus, to explore the transcriptional
activity of SOX7, we focused on the endothelial-specific adhesion molecule
VE-cadherin. Similar to SOX7, VE-cadherin is expressed in haemogenic endothelium 
and is downregulated during blood cell formation. We show that SOX7 binds and
activates the promoter of VE-cadherin, demonstrating that this gene is a novel
downstream transcriptional target of SOX7. Altogether, our findings suggest that 
SOX7 is involved in the transcriptional regulation of genes expressed in the
haemogenic endothelium and provide new clues to decipher the molecular pathways
that drive early embryonic haematopoiesis.

PMID: 22492353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Lab Invest. 2012 Apr;92(4):511-21. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2011.196. Epub 2012 Jan
9.

Sox4 functions as a positive regulator of ß-catenin signaling through
upregulation of TCF4 during morular differentiation of endometrial carcinomas.

Saegusa M(1), Hashimura M, Kuwata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Kanagawa,
Japan. msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Sox factors function as either activators or repressors of ß-catenin/TCF
transcription depending on the cellular context and associated interacting
proteins. Our previous study provided evidence that alteration in ß-catenin
signaling is an essential event during transdifferentiation toward the morular
phenotype of endometrial carcinomas (Em Cas). Here, we focused on related
functional roles of Sox factors. Of eight Sox factors investigated, Sox4 could
enhance ß-catenin/TCF4 transcription, through upregulation of TCF4 at the
transcription level, without any direct ß-catenin association. Cells stably
overexpressing Sox4 showed significant decreases in proliferation rate, along
with increases in expression of p21(WAF1), as well as TCF4, in contrast to
increased cell growth observed with knockdown. Of these factors, only Sox7 could 
transcriptionally upregulate Sox4 expression, but it also resulted in not only
inhibition of Sox4-meditated activation of ß-catenin/TCF4-driven transcription,
but also repression of its own promoter activity, indicating the existence of
very complex feedback loop for Sox-mediated signal cascades. Finally, Sox4
immunoreactivity was frequently pronounced in morular lesions of Em Cas, the
expression being positively correlated with status of ß-catenin, TCF4, and Sox7, 
and inversely with cell proliferation. These data therefore suggest that Sox4 may
serve as a positive regulator of ß-catenin signaling through alteration in TCF4
expression during morular differentiation of Em Ca cells, leading to inhibition
of cell proliferation. In addition, Sox7 may also participate in the process,
having complex roles in modulation of signaling.

PMID: 22231735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. World J Gastroenterol. 2011 Nov 28;17(44):4922-7. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v17.i44.4922.

SOX7 is involved in aspirin-mediated growth inhibition of human colorectal cancer
cells.

Zhou X(1), Huang SY, Feng JX, Gao YY, Zhao L, Lu J, Huang BQ, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Genetics and Cytology, School of Life Science, Northeast
Normal University, Changchun 130024, Jilin Province, China.

AIM: To confirm the role of sex-determining region Y-box 7 (Sox7) in
aspirin-mediated growth inhibition of COX-independent human colorectal cancer
cells.
METHODS: The cell survival percentage was examined by MTT (Moto-nuclear cell
direc cytotoxicity) assay. SOX7 expression was assessed by using reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting. SB203580 was used
to inhibit the p38MAPK signal pathway. SOX7 promoter activity was detected by
Luciferase reporter assay.
RESULTS: SOX7 was upregulated by aspirin and was involved in aspirin-mediated
growth inhibition of SW480 human colorectal cancer cells. The p38MAPK pathway
played a role in aspirin-induced SOX7 expression, during which the AP1
transcription factors c-Jun and c-Fos upregulated SOX7 promoter activities.
RESULTS: SOX7 is upregulated by aspirin and is involved in aspirin-mediated
growth inhibition of human colorectal cancer SW480 cells.

PMCID: PMC3235637
PMID: 22171135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Cells Tissues Organs. 2012;195(6):507-23. doi: 10.1159/000329864. Epub 2011 Nov
25.

Induction and selection of Sox17-expressing endoderm cells generated from murine 
embryonic stem cells.

Schroeder IS(1), Sulzbacher S, Nolden T, Fuchs J, Czarnota J, Meisterfeld R,
Himmelbauer H, Wobus AM.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research Gatersleben,
Germany.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells offer a valuable source for generating
insulin-producing cells. However, current differentiation protocols often result 
in heterogeneous cell populations of various developmental stages. Here we show
the activin A-induced differentiation of mouse ES cells carrying a homologous
dsRed-IRES-puromycin knock-in within the Sox17 locus into the endoderm lineage.
Sox17-expressing cells were selected by fluorescence-assisted cell sorting (FACS)
and characterized at the transcript and protein level. Treatment of ES cells with
high concentrations of activin A for 10 days resulted in up to 19% Sox17-positive
cells selected by FACS. Isolated Sox17-positive cells were characterized by
defini- tive endoderm-specific Sox17/Cxcr4/Foxa2 transcripts, but lacked
pluripotency-associated Oct4 mRNA and protein. The Sox17-expressing cells showed 
downregulation of extraembryonic endoderm (Sox7, Afp, Sdf1)-, mesoderm (Foxf1,
Meox1)- and ectoderm (Pax6, NeuroD6)-specific transcripts. The presence of Hnf4a,
Hes1 and Pdx1 mRNA demonstrated the expression of primitive gut/foregut
cell-specific markers. Ngn3, Nkx6.1 and Nkx2.2 transcripts in Sox17-positive
cells were determined as properties of pancreatic endocrine progenitors.
Immunocytochemistry of activin A-induced Sox17-positive embryoid bodies revealed 
coexpression of Cxcr4 and Foxa2. Moreover, the histochemical demonstration of
E-cadherin-, Cxcr4-, Sox9-, Hnf1ß- and Ngn3-positive epithelial-like structures
underlined the potential of Sox17-positive cells to further differentiate into
the pancreatic lineage. By reducing the heterogeneity of the ES cell progeny,
Sox17-expressing cells are a suitable model to evaluate the effects of growth and
differentiation factors and of culture conditions to delineate the
differentiation process for the generation of pancreatic cells in vitro.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22123608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2011 Jul;36(7):585-91. doi:
10.3969/j.issn.1672-7347.2011.07.001.

[Transcriptomic regulation and molecular mechanism of polygenic tumor at
different stages].

[Article in Chinese]

Li X(1), Shen S, Wu M, Li X, Xiong W, Lu J, Zhou M, Ma J, Xiang J, Zeng Z, Xiang 
B, Zhou Y, Xiao L, Zhou H, Fan S, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Disease Genomic Research Center, Central South University, Changsha 410078,
China.

The research team on the National Key Scientific Program of China:
"Transcriptomic regulation and molecular mechanism research of polygenic tumor at
different stages" has focused on the field of transcriptomics of 4 common
polygenic tumors, including nasopharyngeal carcinoma(NPC), breast cancer,
colorectal cancer, and glioma. Extensive laboratory work has been carried out on 
the expression and regulation of tumor transcriptomics; identification of tumor
suppressor/susceptible genes; mechanism of tumor epigenetics including miRNAs,
and comparative study of specific gene/protein cluster of tumor transcriptomics
and proteomics. Genes including SPLUNC1, LTF, BRD7, NOR1, BRCA1/2, PALB2, AF1Q,
SOX17, NGX6, SOX7, and LRRC4 have been identified as the key transcriptional
regulation genes during the stage of tumor initiation and invasion.
Accordingly,the NPC gene signal regulation network of "SPLUNC1-miR-141-target
genes", the breast cancer interaction signal pathway of "miR-193b-uPA",the glioma
signal network of "miR-381- LRRC4-MEK/ERK/AKT", and the miRNA-target gene network
of colorectal cancer metastasis related gene NGX6 have been thoroughly
elucidated. These fruitful Results imply that the changes of key molecules in
crucial signal pathway will cause severe dysfunction in signal transduction and
gene regulation network in polygenic tumors, indicating that in the category of
pathogenesis,these tumors may further classify as the "Disease of gene signal
transduction and gene regulation network disorder". The researches have laid
solid foundation for revealing the molecular mechanism and transcriptomic
regulation of polygenic tumors at different stages.

PMID: 21873780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2011 Dec;12(6):697-710. doi: 10.1007/s10162-011-0286-z. 
Epub 2011 Aug 19.

Serial analysis of gene expression in the chicken otocyst.

Sinkkonen ST(1), Starlinger V, Galaiya DJ, Laske RD, Myllykangas S, Oshima K,
Heller S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery and Molecular & Cellular
Physiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305-5739, USA.

The inner ear arises from multipotent placodal precursors that are gradually
committed to the otic fate and further differentiate into all inner ear cell
types, with the exception of a few immigrating neural crest-derived cells. The
otocyst plays a pivotal role during inner ear development: otic progenitor cells 
sub-compartmentalize into non-sensory and prosensory domains, giving rise to
individual vestibular and auditory organs and their associated ganglia. The genes
and pathways underlying this progressive subdivision and differentiation process 
are not entirely known. The goal of this study was to identify a comprehensive
set of genes expressed in the chicken otocyst using the serial analysis of gene
expression (SAGE) method. Our analysis revealed several hundred transcriptional
regulators, potential signaling proteins, and receptors. We identified a
substantial collection of genes that were previously known in the context of
inner ear development, but we also found many new candidate genes, such as SOX4, 
SOX5, SOX7, SOX8, SOX11, and SOX18, which previously were not known to be
expressed in the developing inner ear. Despite its limitation of not being
all-inclusive, the generated otocyst SAGE library is a practical bioinformatics
tool to study otocyst gene expression and to identify candidate genes for
developmental studies.

PMCID: PMC3214236
PMID: 21853378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 2;286(35):30740-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.220665. Epub 2011 
Jul 5.

Sox factors transcriptionally regulate ROBO4 gene expression in developing
vasculature in zebrafish.

Samant GV(1), Schupp MO, François M, Moleri S, Kothinti RK, Chun CZ, Sinha I,
Sellars S, Leigh N, Pramanik K, Horswill MA, Remadevi I, Li K, Wilkinson GA,
Tabatabai NM, Beltrame M, Koopman P, Ramchandran R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Developmental Vascular Biology Program,
Department of Pediatrics, Children's Research Institute, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA.

Despite their importance as members of the Roundabout (Robo) family in the
control of axonal and vascular patterning, the transcriptional regulation of
these genes is poorly understood. In this study, we show that members of the
Sry-related high mobility box (Sox) transcription factor family as being
transcriptional regulators of roundabout4 (robo4), a Robo gene family member that
participates in sprouting angiogenesis in vivo, in zebrafish. Double whole mount 
in situ hybridization analysis in zebrafish embryos revealed co-localization of
the vascular relevant Sox factors sox7 or sox18 mRNA with robo4 transcripts in
developing intersomitic vessels. A 3-kb human ROBO4 promoter element was able to 
drive reporter expression in zebrafish to recapitulate the endogenous temporal
intersomitic vessel expression pattern of robo4. EMSA analysis confirmed binding 
of Sox18 to a canonical Sox binding site (from -1170 bp to -1176 bp) in the ROBO4
promoter (3 kb), and mutation analysis indicated that this site was partially
responsible for ROBO4 promoter activity in ECs. A combination of gain- and
loss-of-function analysis identified Sox7 and Sox18 co-regulation of robo4 but
not fli1a transcripts in zebrafish. Finally, Sox-mediated robo4 transcriptional
regulation is conserved across evolution. These studies imply Sox-mediated
transcriptional regulation of Robo4 in the developing embryonic vasculature.

PMCID: PMC3162435
PMID: 21730073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Exp Hematol. 2011 Oct;39(10):986-998.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2011.06.010. Epub 
2011 Jul 1.

Characterization of Sry-related HMG box group F genes in zebrafish hematopoiesis.

Chung MI(1), Ma AC, Fung TK, Leung AY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Haematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, Department of
Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, University of Hong Kong, China.

OBJECTIVE: The roles of Sry-related HMG box (Sox) genes in zebrafish
hematopoiesis are not clearly defined. In this study, we have characterized the
sequence homology, gene expression, hematopoietic functions, and regulation of
sox genes in F group (SoxF) in zebrafish embryos.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of zebrafish SoxF genes were analyzed by
whole-mount in situ hybridization, reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction, and real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction of
erythroid cells obtained from Tg(gata1:GFP) embryos by fluorescence-activated
cell sorting. Roles of SoxF genes were analyzed in zebrafish embryos using
morpholino knockdown and analyzed by whole-mount in situ hybridization and
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Embryo patterning and 
vascular development were analyzed.
RESULTS: All members, except sox17, contained a putative ß-catenin binding site. 
sox7 and 18 expressed primarily in the vasculature. sox17 expressed in the
intermediate cell mass and its knockdown significantly reduced primitive
erythropoiesis at 18 hours post-fertilization (hpf). Definitive hematopoiesis was
unaffected. Concomitant sox7 and sox18 knockdown disrupted vasculogenesis and
angiogenesis, but not hematopoiesis. sox32 knockdown delayed medial migration of 
hematopoietic and endothelial progenitors at 18 hpf and abolished cmyb expression
at the caudal hematopoietic tissue at 48 hpf. These defects could be prevented by
delaying its knockdown using a caged sox32 morpholino uncaged at 10 hpf.
Knockdown of SoxF genes significantly upregulated their own expression and that
of sox32 also upregulated sox18 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: sox17 helped to maintain primitive hematopoiesis, whereas sox7 and
sox18 regulated angiogenesis and vasculogenesis. sox32 affected both vascular and
hematopoietic development through its effects on medial migration of the
hematopoietic and endothelial progenitors.

Copyright © 2011 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21726513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Tissue Eng Part A. 2011 Nov;17(21-22):2651-61. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2010.0587.
Epub 2011 Sep 6.

New simple and rapid method for purification of mesenchymal stem cells from the
human umbilical cord Wharton jelly.

Montanucci P(1), Basta G, Pescara T, Pennoni I, Di Giovanni F, Calafiore R.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Internal Medicine and Endocrine and Metabolic Sciences (Di.M.I.),
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

We have developed a simple and rapid method for isolation of human umbilical cord
matrix stem cells (hUCMS). The umbilical cord contains a virtual inexhaustible
source of adult stem cells. We have substantially modified, simplified, and
improved previously reported hUCMS isolation procedures in terms of either used
enzyme type, or digestion time, and substantially enhanced the final product
yield and purity. The isolated hUCMS were positive for CD90, CD117, and SCF, and 
negative for CD31 and CD45 surface markers. mRNA and related proteins (i.e.,
Sox2, Oct4a, Nanog, ABCG2, and c-Myc) that coincide with an uncommitted cell
status also were detected. hUCMS express genes and proteins for CD90 and Nestin
that are associated with mesenchymal stem cells, as well as other genes that
specifically relate to different embryonic germ layers, namely, Vimentin, Sox7,
Sox17, FoxA2, E-cadherin, and N-cadherin. hUCMS showed multilineage cell
differentiation potential into adipogenic, osteogenic, and neural cell
phenotypes, under the influence of lineage-specific, differentiation culture
media. Moreover, the basal expression of endocrine cell markers makes these cells
seemingly suitable for endocrine cell phenotype differentiation. Noteworthy,
Activin A induced hUCMS to acquire definitive endoderm cell markers.

PMID: 21679124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Stem Cell Res. 2011 May;6(3):276-85. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2011.02.004. Epub 2011
Mar 2.

Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells into pancreatic endoderm in
patterned size-controlled clusters.

Van Hoof D(1), Mendelsohn AD, Seerke R, Desai TA, German MS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, University of California San Francisco, 35 Medical Center
Way, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Pancreatic ß-cells function optimally when clustered in islet-like structures.
However, nutrient and oxygen deprivation limits the viability of cells at the
core of excessively large clusters. Hence, production of functional ß-cells from 
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) for patients with diabetes would benefit from 
the growth and differentiation of these cells in size-controlled aggregates. In
this study, we controlled cluster size by seeding hESCs onto glass cover slips
patterned by the covalent microcontact-printing of laminin in circular patches of
120 µm in diameter. These were used as substrates to grow and differentiate hESCs
first into SOX17-positive/SOX7-negative definitive endoderm, after which many
clusters released and formed uniformly sized three-dimensional clusters. Both
released clusters and those that remained attached differentiated into
HNF1ß-positive primitive gut tube-like cells with high efficiency. Further
differentiation yielded pancreatic endoderm-like cells that co-expressed PDX1 and
NKX6.1. Controlling aggregate size allows efficient production of
uniformly-clustered pancreatic endocrine precursors for in vivo engraftment or
further in vitro maturation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21513906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Tissue Eng Part A. 2011 Aug;17(15-16):1901-9. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2010.0563.
Epub 2011 Apr 25.

Geometric control of cardiomyogenic induction in human pluripotent stem cells.

Bauwens CL(1), Song H, Thavandiran N, Ungrin M, Massé S, Nanthakumar K, Seguin C,
Zandstra PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Although it has been observed that aggregate size affects cardiac development, an
incomplete understanding of the cellular mechanisms underlying human pluripotent 
stem cell-derived cardiomyogenesis has limited the development of robust
defined-condition cardiac cell generation protocols. Our objective was thus to
elucidate cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the endogenous control of 
human embryonic stem cell (hESC) cardiac tissue development, and to test the
hypothesis that hESC aggregate size influences extraembryonic endoderm (ExE)
commitment and cardiac inductive properties. hESC aggregates were generated with 
100, 1000, or 4000 cells per aggregate using microwells. The frequency of
endoderm marker (FoxA2 and GATA6)-expressing cells decreased with increasing
aggregate size during early differentiation. Cardiogenesis was maximized in
aggregates initiated from 1000 cells, with frequencies of 0.49±0.06 cells
exhibiting a cardiac progenitor phenotype (KDR(low)/C-KIT(neg)) on day 5 and
0.24±0.06 expressing cardiac Troponin T on day 16. A direct relationship between 
ExE and cardiac differentiation efficiency was established by forming aggregates 
with varying ratios of SOX7 (a transcription factor required for ExE development)
overexpressing or knockdown hESCs to unmanipulated hESCs. We demonstrate, in a
defined, serum-free cardiac induction system, that robust and efficient cardiac
differentiation is a function of endogenous ExE cell concentration, a parameter
that can be directly modulated by controlling hESC aggregate size.

PMID: 21417693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 30;5(11):e14146. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014146.

Differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells into endoderm without embryoid body
formation.

Kim PT(1), Hoffman BG, Plesner A, Helgason CD, Verchere CB, Chung SW, Warnock GL,
Mui AL, Ong CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Pluripotent embryonic stem cells hold a great promise as an unlimited source of
tissue for treatment of chronic diseases such as Type 1 diabetes. Herein, we
describe a protocol using all-trans-retinoic acid, basic fibroblast growth factor
and dibutyryl cAMP (DBcAMP) in the absence of embryoid body formation, for
differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells into definitive endoderm that may 
serve as pancreatic precursors. The produced cells were analyzed by quantitative 
PCR, immunohistochemistry and static insulin release assay for markers of
trilaminar embryo, and pancreas. Differentiated cells displayed increased Sox17
and Foxa2 expression consistent with definitive endoderm production. There was
minimal production of Sox7, an extraembryonic endoderm marker, and Oct4, a marker
of pluripotency. There was minimal mesoderm or neuroectoderm formation based on
expression levels of the markers brachyury and Sox1, respectively. Various assays
revealed that the cell clusters generated by this protocol express markers of the
pancreatic lineage including insulin I, insulin II, C-peptide, PDX-1,
carboxypeptidase E, pan-cytokeratin, amylase, glucagon, PAX6, Ngn3 and Nkx6.1.
This protocol using all-trans-retinoic acid, DBcAMP, in the absence of embryoid
bodies, generated cells that have features of definitive endoderm that may serve 
as pancreatic endocrine precursors.

PMCID: PMC2994751
PMID: 21152387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Dev Biol. 2011 Feb 15;350(2):393-404. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.007. Epub 2010
Dec 10.

The primitive endoderm lineage of the mouse blastocyst: sequential transcription 
factor activation and regulation of differentiation by Sox17.

Artus J(1), Piliszek A, Hadjantonakis AK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065, 
USA.

Cells of the primitive endoderm (PrE) and the pluripotent epiblast (EPI), the two
lineages specified within the inner cell mass (ICM) of the mouse blastocyst stage
embryo, are segregated into adjacent tissue layers by the end of the
preimplantation period. The PrE layer which emerges as a polarized epithelium
adjacent to the blastocoel, with a basement membrane separating it from the EPI, 
has two derivatives, the visceral and parietal endoderm. In this study we have
investigated the localization of two transcriptional regulators of the SOX
family, SOX17 and SOX7, within the PrE and its derivatives. We noted that SOX17
was first detected in a salt-and-pepper distribution within the ICM, subsequently
becoming restricted to the nascent PrE epithelium. This dynamic distribution of
SOX17 resembled the localization of GATA6 and GATA4, two other PrE
lineage-specific transcription factors. By contrast, SOX7 was only detected in
PrE cells positioned in contact with the blastocoel, raising the possibility that
these cells are molecularly distinct. Our observations support a model of
sequential GATA6 > SOX17 > GATA4 > SOX7 transcription factor activation within
the PrE lineage, perhaps correlating with the consecutive periods of cell lineage
'naïvete', commitment and sorting. Furthermore our data suggest that
co-expression of SOX17 and SOX7 within sorted PrE cells could account for the
absence of a detectable phenotype of Sox17 mutant blastocysts. However, analysis 
of implantation-delayed blastocysts, revealed a role for SOX17 in the maintenance
of PrE epithelial integrity, with the absence of SOX17 leading to premature
delamination and migration of parietal endoderm.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3461954
PMID: 21146513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Diabet Med. 2010 Oct;27(10):1195-200. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2010.03046.x.

Genetic investigation in an Italian child with an unusual association of atrial
septal defect, attributable to a new familial GATA4 gene mutation, and neonatal
diabetes due to pancreatic agenesis.

D'Amato E(1), Giacopelli F, Giannattasio A, D'Annunzio G, Bocciardi R, Musso M,
Lorini R, Ravazzolo R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Genoa, IRCCS G. Gaslini, Italy.
edamato@village.it

AIMS: Permanent neonatal diabetes is a rare condition affecting 1 in
300,000-400,000 live births; only in 60% of cases it is possible to identify the 
genetic defect. The condition of pancreatic agenesis is rarer still. Only two
genes are known to determine this phenotype: PDX-1 and PTF1A. Congenital heart
defects are among the most common developmental anomalies, affecting 1% of
newborns, and the GATA4 gene is less frequently involved in these disorders. An
Italian child with pancreatic agenesis and an atrial septal defect was
genetically investigated to elucidate whether the association of the two
pathologies was casual, or represented a new pancreatic/cardiac syndrome.
METHODS: A panel of pancreas development genes, including GCK, Kir6.2, PTF1A,
PDX-1, HNF-1A, NgN3, SOX17, SOX7, SOX9, INS, HNF1-B and SUR1 plus the GATA4 gene,
were screened for characterization of pancreatic agenesis and cardiac defect.
RESULTS: Screening for genes causing permanent neonatal diabetes was negative. A 
novel mutation in GATA4 (c1512C>T) was detected and functional characterization
confirmed a reduced activity of the protein. In the family members, the GATA4
mutation co-segregates with a cardiac phenotype, but not with pancreatic
agenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe the first report of pancretic agenesis with an
associated cardiac defect and a mutation in the GATA4 gene. We could not
establish that the GATA4 mutation was causative for pancreatic agenesis and
further genetic investigation to detect the genetic cause of the pancreas
agenesis was unsuccessful. We conclude that, the two pathologies are attributable
to two independent events.

© 2010 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2010 Diabetes UK.

PMID: 20854389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Blood. 2010 May 13;115(19):3895-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-10-247395. Epub 2010
Mar 12.

Contrasting effects of Sox17- and Sox18-sustained expression at the onset of
blood specification.

Serrano AG(1), Gandillet A, Pearson S, Lacaud G, Kouskoff V.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Haematopoiesis Group, Cancer Research, UK.

We have previously shown that Sox7 was transiently expressed at the onset of
blood specification and was implicated in the regulation of cell survival,
proliferation, and maturation of hematopoietic precursors. Here, we assessed,
using embryonic stem cell differentiation as a model system, whether Sox17 and
Sox18, 2 close homologs of Sox7, may act similarly to Sox7 at the onset of
hematopoietic development. Sox18-enforced expression led to the enhanced
proliferation of early hematopoietic precursors while blocking their maturation, 
phenotype highly reminiscent of Sox7-enforced expression. In striking contrast,
Sox17-enforced expression dramatically increased the apoptosis of these early
precursors. Similarly to Sox7, Sox18 was transiently expressed during early
hematopoiesis, but its expression was predominantly observed in CD41(+) cells,
contrasting with Sox7, mostly expressed in Flk1(+) cells. Conversely, Sox17
remained marginally expressed during blood specification. Overall, our data
uncover contrasting effect and expression pattern for Sox18 and Sox17 at the
onset of hematopoiesis specification.

PMID: 20228271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Reprod Dev. 2010 Mar;77(3):273-84. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21144.

Molecular cloning and characterization of the germ cell-related nuclear orphan
receptor in chickens.

Lee SI(1), Kim JK, Park HJ, Jang HJ, Lee HC, Min T, Song G, Han JY.

Author information: 
(1)WCU Biomodulation Major, Department of Agricultural Biotechnology and Research
Institute for Agriculture and Life Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Korea.

Nuclear receptor subfamily 6, group A, member 1 (NR6A1), also known as germ cell 
nuclear factor/retinoid receptor-related testis-associated receptor and neuronal 
cell nuclear factor, is a member of the nuclear orphan receptor superfamily.
NR6A1 has been cloned in various species including humans and mice, but it has
been scarcely investigated in avian species. In the present study, we cloned the 
chicken NR6A1 (cNR6A1) from a testis cDNA library. The cloned cNR6A1 sequence was
mapped to chromosome 17 and contained an open reading frame of 1.4 kb encoding
445 amino acids. Multiple alignment analysis of the cNR6A1 protein-coding
sequence with NR6A1s from humans, mice, boars, rats, zebrafish, and Xenopus
showed high degrees of homology, 89%, 90%, 89%, 88%, 83%, and 87%, respectively. 
Using RNA interference, changes in the expression of pluripotency-, germ cell-,
and differentiation-related key genes by silencing of cNR6A1 were validated in
chicken blastoderm-derived embryonic stem cells. Among those genes, the relative 
expression levels of POU5F1, CRIPTO, DAZL, DDX4, BMP15, GSC, and SOX7 changed
significantly compared to the control group. We also confirmed that the activity 
of alkaline phosphatase, known as a pluripotency marker, was maintained by cNR6A1
gene silencing in chicken blastodermal cells. Collectively, our data suggest that
cNR6A1 may play an important role during chicken embryonic development and
differentiation.

PMID: 20020523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Blood. 2009 Nov 26;114(23):4813-22. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-226290. Epub 2009 
Oct 2.

Sox7-sustained expression alters the balance between proliferation and
differentiation of hematopoietic progenitors at the onset of blood specification.

Gandillet A(1), Serrano AG, Pearson S, Lie-A-Ling M, Lacaud G, Kouskoff V.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Stem Cell Haematopoiesis Group, Paterson Institute for
Cancer Research, University of Manchester, Wilmslow Road, Manchester, United
Kingdom.

The molecular mechanisms that regulate the balance between proliferation and
differentiation of precursors at the onset of hematopoiesis specification are
poorly understood. By using a global gene expression profiling approach during
the course of embryonic stem cell differentiation, we identified Sox7 as a
potential candidate gene involved in the regulation of blood lineage formation
from the mesoderm germ layer. In the present study, we show that Sox7 is
transiently expressed in mesodermal precursors as they undergo specification to
the hematopoietic program. Sox7 knockdown in vitro significantly decreases the
formation of both primitive erythroid and definitive hematopoietic progenitors as
well as endothelial progenitors. In contrast, Sox7-sustained expression in the
earliest committed hematopoietic precursors promotes the maintenance of their
multipotent and self-renewing status. Removal of this differentiation block
driven by Sox7-enforced expression leads to the efficient differentiation of
hematopoietic progenitors to all erythroid and myeloid lineages. This study
identifies Sox7 as a novel and important player in the molecular regulation of
the first committed blood precursors. Furthermore, our data demonstrate that the 
mere sustained expression of Sox7 is sufficient to completely alter the balance
between proliferation and differentiation at the onset of hematopoiesis.

PMID: 19801444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Mar;42(3):445-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2009.08.017.
Epub 2009 Sep 3.

SoxF genes: Key players in the development of the cardio-vascular system.

Francois M(1), Koopman P, Beltrame M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Qld 4072, Australia. m.francois@imb.uq.edu.au

SoxF genes (Sox7, Sox17 and Sox18) encode a group of transcription factors that
have a pivotal role in cardio-vascular development. SOXF factors orchestrate
endothelial cell fate or direct cell differentiation in developing heart, blood
vessels and lymphatic vessels. Their roles are highly conserved throughout animal
evolution. SOXF activity is finely tuned with a variety of cell type-specific
co-factors and partner proteins to effect transcription of genes critical for
endothelial cell phenotype and function. Because SOXF factors play a central role
in cardiogenesis, vasculogenesis and lymphangiogenesis, SOXF gene mutations
figure prominently in the aetiology of human vascular disease.

Crown Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19733255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Development. 2009 Jul;136(14):2385-91. doi: 10.1242/dev.034827. Epub 2009 Jun 10.

Sox7 and Sox17 are strain-specific modifiers of the lymphangiogenic defects
caused by Sox18 dysfunction in mice.

Hosking B(1), François M, Wilhelm D, Orsenigo F, Caprini A, Svingen T, Tutt D,
Davidson T, Browne C, Dejana E, Koopman P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Qld 4072, Australia.

Developmental defects caused by targeted gene inactivation in mice are commonly
subject to strain-specific modifiers that modulate the severity of the phenotype.
Although several genetic modifier loci have been mapped in mice, the gene(s)
residing at these loci are mostly unidentified, and the molecular mechanisms of
modifier action remain poorly understood. Mutations in Sox18 cause a variable
phenotype in the human congenital syndrome
hypotrichosis-lymphedema-telangiectasia, and the phenotype of Sox18-null mice
varies from essentially normal to completely devoid of lymphatic vasculature and 
lethal, depending on the strain of the mice, suggesting a crucial role for
strain-specific modifiers in this system. Here we show that two closely related
Group F Sox factors, SOX7 and SOX17, are able to functionally substitute for
SOX18 in vitro and in vivo. SOX7 and SOX17 are not normally expressed during
lymphatic development, excluding a conventional redundancy mechanism. Instead,
these genes are activated specifically in the absence of SOX18 function, and only
in certain strains. Our studies identify Sox7 and Sox17 as modifiers of the Sox18
mutant phenotype, and reveal their mechanism of action as a novel mode of
strain-specific compensatory upregulation.

PMID: 19515696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Stem Cells. 2009 Jun;27(6):1231-43. doi: 10.1002/stem.57.

SOX15 and SOX7 differentially regulate the myogenic program in P19 cells.

Savage J(1), Conley AJ, Blais A, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

In this study, we have identified novel roles for Sox15 and Sox7 as regulators of
muscle precursor cell fate in P19 cells. To examine the role of Sox15 and Sox7
during skeletal myogenesis, we isolated populations of P19 cells with either gene
stably integrated into the genome, termed P19[Sox15] and P19[Sox7]. Both SOX
proteins were sufficient to upregulate the expression of the muscle precursor
markers Pax3/7, Meox1, and Foxc1 in aggregated cells. In contrast to the
P19[Sox7] cell lines, which subsequently differentiated into skeletal muscle,
myogenesis failed to progress past the precursor stage in P19[Sox15] cell lines, 
shown by the lack of MyoD and myosin heavy chain (MHC) expression. P19[Sox15]
clones showed elevated and sustained levels of the inhibitory factors Msx1 and
Id1, which may account for the lack of myogenic progression in these cells.
Stable expression of a Sox15 dominant-negative protein resulted in the loss of
Pax3/7 and Meox1 transcripts, as well as myogenic regulatory factor (MRF) and MHC
expression. These results suggest that Sox15, or genes that are bound by Sox15,
are necessary and sufficient for the acquisition of the muscle precursor cell
fate. On the other hand, knockdown of endogenous Sox15 caused a decrease in Pax3 
and Meox1, but not MRF expression, suggesting that other factors can compensate
in the absence of Sox15. Taken together, these results show that both Sox7 and
Sox15 are able to induce the early stages of myogenesis, but only Sox7 is
sufficient to initiate the formation of fully differentiated skeletal myocytes.

PMID: 19489079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Differentiation. 2009 Mar;77(3):248-55. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2008.10.012. Epub
2008 Dec 2.

Lineage specification of Flk-1+ progenitors is associated with divergent Sox7
expression in cardiopoiesis.

Nelson TJ(1), Chiriac A, Faustino RS, Crespo-Diaz RJ, Behfar A, Terzic A.

Author information: 
(1)Marriott Heart Disease Research Program, Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, 
Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905,
USA.

Embryonic stem cell differentiation recapitulates the diverse phenotypes of a
developing embryo, traceable according to markers of lineage specification. At
gastrulation, the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor, Flk-1
(KDR), identifies a mesoderm-restricted potential of embryonic stem cells. The
multi-lineage propensity of Flk-1(+) progenitors mandates the mapping of
fate-modifying co-factors in order to stratify differentiating cytotypes and
predict lineage competency. Here, Flk-1-based selection of early embryonic stem
cell progeny separated a population depleted of pluripotent (Oct4, Sox2) and
endoderm (Sox17) markers. The gene expression profile of the Flk-1(+) population 
was notable for a significant upregulation in the vasculogenic Sox7 transcription
factor, which overlapped with the emergence of primordial cardiac transcription
factors GATA-4, Myocardin and Nkx2.5. Sorting the parental Flk-1(+) pool with the
chemokine receptor CXCR4 to enrich the cardiopoietic subpopulation uncovered
divergent Sox7 expression, with a 7-fold induction in non-cardiac compared to
cardiac progenitors. Bioinformatic resolution sequestered a framework of gene
expression relationship between Sox transcription factor family members and the
Flk-1/CXCR4 axes with significant integration of beta-catenin signaling. Thus,
differential Sox7 gene expression presents a novel biomarker profile, and
possible regulatory switch, to distinguish cardiovascular pedigrees within
Flk-1(+) multi-lineage progenitors.

PMCID: PMC2701443
PMID: 19272523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Gene Expr. 2008;14(4):217-27.

Identification of genes that exhibit changes in expression on the 8p chromosomal 
arm by the Systematic Multiplex RT-PCR (SM RT-PCR) and DNA microarray
hybridization methods.

Yamamoto F(1), Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Development Program, Burnham Institute for Medical Research, 10901 N.
Torrey Pines Rd., La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. fyamamoto@burnham.org

Losses of the p-arm of chromosome 8 are frequently observed in breast, prostate, 
and other types of cancers. Using the Systematic Multiplex RT-PCR (SM RT-PCR)
method and the DNA microarray hybridization method, we examined the expression of
273 genes located on the p-arm of chromosome 8 in five breast and three prostate 
human cancer cell lines. We observed frequent decreases in expression of two
dozen genes and increases in expression of several genes on this chromosomal arm.
These changes in gene expression of the cell lines were later confirmed by
real-time qRT-PCR. Additionally and more importantly, we found that a number of
these variations were also observed in the majority of clinical cases of breast
cancer we examined. These included downregulation of the MYOM2, NP_859074,
NP_001034551, NRG1, PHYIP (PHYHIP), Q7Z2R7, SFRP1, and SOX7 genes, and
upregulation of the ESCO2, NP_115712 (GINS4), Q6P464, and TOPK (PBK) genes.

PMID: 19110721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cancer Lett. 2009 May 8;277(1):29-37. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2008.11.014. Epub
2008 Dec 23.

SOX7, down-regulated in colorectal cancer, induces apoptosis and inhibits
proliferation of colorectal cancer cells.

Zhang Y(1), Huang S, Dong W, Li L, Feng Y, Pan L, Han Z, Wang X, Ren G, Su D,
Huang B, Lu J.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University,
Changchun, China.

The sex-determining region Y-box 7 (Sox7) is a member of high mobility group
(HMG) transcription factor family, essential for embryonic development and
endoderm differentiation. Deregulation of Wnt signaling pathway is a hallmark of 
colorectal cancer. Our results showed that the expression level of SOX7 was
frequently down-regulated in human colorectal cancer cell lines and in primary
colorectal tumor tissues, and the SOX7 silencing was partially due to the
aberrant DNA methylation of the gene. Restoration of SOX7 induced colorectal
cancer cell apoptosis, inhibited cell proliferation and colony formation. In
addition, SOX7 efficiently suppressed beta-catenin-mediated transcriptional
activity.

PMID: 19108950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Oct 9;3(4):355-6. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.09.010.

Expandable endodermal progenitors: new tools to explore endoderm and its
derivatives.

Semb H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Center, Lund University, BMC B10, S-221 84 Lund, Sweden.
henrik.semb@med.lu.se

Comment on
    Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Oct 9;3(4):402-15.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Aug 7;3(2):182-95.

In the two recent issues of Cell Stem Cell, Rossant and colleagues (Seguin et
al., 2008) produced expandable endoderm from hESCs by constitutive expression of 
Sox transcription factors, while Brickman and associates (Morrison et al., 2008) 
used a reporter gene strategy to isolate replicating anterior definitive endoderm
from mESCs.

PMID: 18940723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Sep;6(9):1421-30. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-2175.

Sox7 Is an independent checkpoint for beta-catenin function in prostate and colon
epithelial cells.

Guo L(1), Zhong D, Lau S, Liu X, Dong XY, Sun X, Yang VW, Vertino PM, Moreno CS, 
Varma V, Dong JT, Zhou W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, The Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta
VA Medical Center, Atlanta, George, USA.

The presence of somatic beta-catenin mutations in some prostate cancers implies
that aberrant WNT signaling is involved in the cancer development. Although
beta-catenin stability is regulated by a multicomponent destruction complex,
mutational alterations of beta-catenin or other components of the destruction
complexes are rare in prostate tumors. Therefore, beta-catenin may be regulated
by another protein in the prostate. In fact, recent linkage and somatic deletion 
analyses in prostate cancers reveal a 1.4-Mb candidate tumor suppressor locus on 
8p23.1, which includes the Sox7 gene. Here we show that Sox7 protein expression
was indeed down-regulated in 47% (15 of 32) of prostate adenocarcinomas. In
addition, Sox7 mRNA was down-regulated in 60% of snap-frozen tumors. This
down-regulation was found to be due to tumor-specific promoter hypermethylation, 
which was present in 48% (10 of 21) of primary prostate tumors and 44% (11 of 25)
of prostate cancer cell lines/xenografts. We discovered that Sox7 protein
physically interacts with beta-catenin and suppresses beta-catenin-mediated
transcription by depleting active beta-catenin. Furthermore, in HCT116 colorectal
cancer cell lines with Sox7 inactivation, ectopic Sox7 expression suppressed cell
proliferation and inhibited transcription that was activated by an endogenous
mutant beta-catenin. Although nearly all colorectal cancers contain mutations in 
beta-catenin or adenomatous polyposis coli/axin, epigenetic silencing of Sox7 was
still observed. These data suggest that Sox7 is a tumor suppressor that functions
as an independent checkpoint for beta-catenin transcriptional activity.
Inactivation of Sox7 could promote the development of a majority of colorectal
tumors and approximately half of prostate tumors.

PMCID: PMC2652859
PMID: 18819930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Nov 6;3(5):543-54. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.08.004. Epub
2008 Sep 18.

Sall4 regulates distinct transcription circuitries in different
blastocyst-derived stem cell lineages.

Lim CY(1), Tam WL, Zhang J, Ang HS, Jia H, Lipovich L, Ng HH, Wei CL, Sung WK,
Robson P, Yang H, Lim B.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, 138672
Singapore.

Stem cells self-renew or differentiate under the governance of a
stem-cell-specific transcriptional program, with each transcription factor
orchestrating the activities of a particular set of genes. Here we demonstrate
that a single transcription factor is able to regulate distinct core circuitries 
in two different blastocyst-derived stem cell lines, embryonic stem cells (ESCs) 
and extraembryonic endoderm (XEN) cells. The transcription factor Sall4 is
required for early embryonic development and for ESC pluripotency. Sall4 is also 
expressed in XEN cells, and depletion of Sall4 disrupts self-renewal and induces 
differentiation. Genome-wide analysis reveals that Sall4 is regulating different 
gene sets in ESCs and XEN cells, and depletion of Sall4 targets in the respective
cell types induces differentiation. With Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog, Sall4 forms a
crucial interconnected autoregulatory network in ESCs. In XEN cells, Sall4
regulates the key XEN lineage-associated genes Gata4, Gata6, Sox7, and Sox17. Our
findings demonstrate how Sall4 functions as an essential stemness factor for two 
different stem cell lines.

PMID: 18804426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Aug 7;3(2):182-95. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.06.018.

Establishment of endoderm progenitors by SOX transcription factor expression in
human embryonic stem cells.

Séguin CA(1), Draper JS, Nagy A, Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, Program in Developmental and Stem Cell
Biology, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada. cseguin@sickkids.ca

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Oct 9;3(4):355-6.

In this study, we explore endoderm cell fate regulation through the expression of
lineage-determining transcription factors. We demonstrate that stable endoderm
progenitors can be established from human ES cells by constitutive expression of 
SOX7 or SOX17, producing extraembryonic endoderm and definitive endoderm
progenitors, respectively. In teratoma assays and growth factor-mediated
differentiation, SOX7 cells appear restricted to the extraembryonic endoderm, and
SOX17 cells demonstrate a mesendodermal phenotype in teratomas and the ability to
undergo endoderm maturation in vitro in the absence of cytokine-mediated endoderm
induction. These endoderm progenitor cells maintain a stable phenotype through
many passages in culture, thereby providing new tools to explore the pathways of 
endoderm differentiation.

PMID: 18682240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Lab Invest. 2009 Apr;89(4):385-97. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2008.67. Epub 2008 Jul 
28.

Genome-wide analysis of genetic alterations in Barrett's adenocarcinoma using
single nucleotide polymorphism arrays.

Wiech T(1), Nikolopoulos E, Weis R, Langer R, Bartholomé K, Timmer J, Walch AK,
Höfler H, Werner M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

We performed genome-wide analysis of copy-number changes and loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) in Barrett's esophageal adenocarcinoma by single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) microarrays to identify associated genomic alterations. DNA
from 27 esophageal adenocarcinomas and 14 matching normal tissues was subjected
to SNP microarrays. The data were analyzed using dChipSNP software. Copy-number
changes occurring in at least 25% of the cases and LOH occurring in at least 19% 
were regarded as relevant changes. As a validation, fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) of 8q24.21 (CMYC) and 8p23.1 (SOX7) was performed.
Previously described genomic alterations in esophageal adenocarcinomas could be
confirmed by SNP microarrays, such as amplification on 8q (CMYC, confirmed by
FISH) and 20q13 or deletion/LOH on 3p (FHIT) and 9p (CDKN2A). Moreover, frequent 
gains were detected on 2p23.3, 7q11.22, 13q31.1, 14q32.31, 17q23.2 and 20q13.2
harboring several novel candidate genes. The highest copy numbers were seen on
8p23.1, the location of SOX7, which could be demonstrated to be involved in
amplification by FISH. A nuclear overexpression of the transcription factor SOX7 
could be detected by immunohistochemistry in two amplified tumors. Copy-number
losses were seen on 18q21.32 and 20p11.21, harboring interesting candidate genes,
such as CDH20 and CST4. Finally, a novel LOH region could be identified on 6p in 
at least 19% of the cases. In conclusion, SNP microarrays are a valuable tool to 
detect DNA copy-number changes and LOH at a high resolution. Using this
technique, we identified several novel genes and DNA regions associated with
esophageal adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 18663352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biol Chem. 2008 Sep 26;283(39):26705-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801485200. Epub 2008
Jul 28.

Crossveinless-2 controls bone morphogenetic protein signaling during early
cardiomyocyte differentiation in P19 cells.

Harada K(1), Ogai A, Takahashi T, Kitakaze M, Matsubara H, Oh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, Translational Research Center, Kyoto 
University Hospital, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. kharada_kuhp@yahoo.co.jp

Increasing evidence indicates that bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are crucial
for cardiac induction, specification, and development. Although signaling of BMPs
is tightly regulated through soluble BMP-binding proteins, how they regulate BMP 
signaling during cardiac differentiation remains unknown. To identify molecules
responsible for BMP signaling during early cardiomyocyte differentiation of P19
cells, cDNA subtraction was performed. We found a bimodal expression of the
BMP-binding protein Crossveinless-2 (Cv2) during cardiomyocyte differentiation;
Cv2 is temporally expressed earlier than cardiac transcription factors such as
Nkx2.5 and Tbx5 and acts as a suppressor for BMP signaling in P19 cells. We
established a P19 clonal cell line harboring a cardiac alpha-myosin heavy chain
promoter-driven enhanced green fluorescent protein gene to monitor cardiac
differentiation by flow cytometry. Treatment with BMP2 during the first 2 days of
differentiation suppressed cardiomyocyte differentiation through activation of
down-stream targets Smad1/5/8 protein and Id1 gene, whereas treatment with Cv2
conversely inhibited Smad1/5/8 activation and Id1 expression, leading to
increased generation of cardiac cells. RNA interference-mediated knockdown (KD)
of endogenous Cv2 showed increased Smad1/5/8 activation and impaired
cardiomyocyte differentiation. Expression of cardiac mesoderm markers was
reduced, whereas expression of Id1 and endoderm markers such as Sox7, Hnf4, and
E-cadherin was induced in Cv2-kinase dead cells. These phenotypes were rescued by
the addition of Cv2 protein to the culture media during the first 2 days of
differentiation or co-culture with parental cells. These data suggest that Cv2
may specify cardiac mesodermal lineage through inhibition of BMP signaling at
early stage of cardiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3258913
PMID: 18662983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mech Dev. 2008 Jul;125(7):571-86. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2008.03.001. Epub 2008 Mar
17.

A functional screen for genes involved in Xenopus pronephros development.

Kyuno J(1), Massé K, Jones EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Warwick University, Gibbet Hill Road,
Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.

In Xenopus, the pronephros is the functional larval kidney and consists of two
identifiable components; the glomus, the pronephric tubules, which can be divided
into four separate segments, based on marker gene expression. The simplicity of
this organ, coupled with the fact that it displays the same basic organization
and function as more complex mesonephros and metanephros, makes this an
attractive model to study vertebrate kidney formation. In this study, we have
performed a functional screen specifically to identify genes involved in
pronephros development in Xenopus. Gain-of-function screens are performed by
injecting mRNA pools made from a non-redundant X. tropicalis full-length plasmid 
cDNA library into X. laevis eggs, followed by sib-selection to identify the
single clone that caused abnormal phenotypes in the pronephros. Out of 768 egg
and gastrula stage cDNA clones, 31 genes, approximately 4% of the screened
clones, affected pronephric marker expression examined by whole mount in situ
hybridization or antibody staining. Most of the positive clones had clear
expression patterns in pronephros and predicted/established functions highly
likely to be involved in developmental processes. In order to carry out a more
detailed study, we selected Sox7, Cpeb3, P53csv, Mecr and Dnajc15, which had
highly specific expression patterns in the pronephric region. The over-expression
of these five selected clones indicated that they caused pronephric abnormalities
with different temporal and spatial effects. These results suggest that our
strategy to identify novel genes involved in pronephros development was highly
successful, and that this strategy is effective for the identification of novel
genes involved in late developmental events.

PMID: 18472403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Dev Biol. 2008 May 15;317(2):405-16. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.01.028. Epub 2008 
Feb 7.

Zebrafish Sox7 and Sox18 function together to control arterial-venous identity.

Pendeville H(1), Winandy M, Manfroid I, Nivelles O, Motte P, Pasque V, Peers B,
Struman I, Martial JA, Voz ML.

Author information: 
(1)GIGA-Research - Unité de Biologie Moléculaire et Génie Génétique, Tour B34,
Université de Liège, B-4000 Sart Tilman, Belgium. h.pendeville@ulg.ac.be

Sox7 and Sox18 are members of the F-subgroup of Sox transcription factors family 
and are mostly expressed in endothelial compartments. In humans, dominant
mutations in Sox18 are the underlying cause of the severe
hypotrichosis-lymphedema-telangiectasia disorder characterized by vascular
defects. However little is known about which vasculogenic processes Sox7 and
Sox18 regulate in vivo. We cloned the orthologs of Sox7 and Sox18 in zebrafish,
analysed their expression pattern and performed functional analyses. Both genes
are expressed in the lateral plate mesoderm during somitogenesis. At later
stages, Sox18 is expressed in all axial vessels whereas Sox7 expression is mainly
restricted to the dorsal aorta. Knockdown of Sox7 or Sox18 alone failed to reveal
any phenotype. In contrast, blocking the two genes simultaneously led to embryos 
displaying dysmorphogenesis of the proximal aorta and arteriovenous shunts, all
of which can account for the lack of circulation observed in the trunk and tail. 
Gene expression analyses performed with general endothelial markers on double
morphants revealed that Sox7 and Sox18 are dispensable for the initial
specification and positioning of the major trunk vessels. However, morphants
display ectopic expression of the venous Flt4 marker in the dorsal aorta and a
concomitant reduction of the artery-specific markers EphrinB2a and Gridlock. The 
striking similarities between the phenotype of Sox7/Sox18 morphants and Gridlock 
mutants strongly suggest that Sox7 and Sox18 control arterial-venous identity by 
regulating Gridlock expression.

PMID: 18377889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Blood. 2008 Mar 1;111(5):2657-66. Epub 2007 Dec 19.

Sox18 and Sox7 play redundant roles in vascular development.

Cermenati S(1), Moleri S, Cimbro S, Corti P, Del Giacco L, Amodeo R, Dejana E,
Koopman P, Cotelli F, Beltrame M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomolecolari e Biotecnologie, Università degli Studi 
di Milano, Via Celoria 26, Milan, Italy.

Mutations in SOX18 cause the human hypotrichosis-lymphedema-telangiectasia (HLT) 
syndrome. Their murine counterparts are the spontaneous ragged mutants, showing
combined defects in hair follicle, blood vessel, and lymphatic vessel
development. Mice null for Sox18 display only mild coat defects, suggesting a
dominant-negative effect of Sox18/ragged mutations and functional redundancy
between Sox18 and other Sox-F proteins. We addressed this point in zebrafish. The
zebrafish homologs of Sox18 and of Sox7 are expressed in angioblasts and in the
endothelial component of nascent blood vessels in embryos. Knockdown of either
gene, using moderate doses of specific morpholinos, had minimal effects on
vessels. In contrast, simultaneous knockdown of both genes resulted in multiple
fusions between the major axial vessels. With combined use of transgenic lines
and molecular markers, we could show that endothelial cells are specified, but
fail to acquire a correct arteriovenous identity. Venous endothelial cell
differentiation was more severely affected than arterial. Thus, sox7 and sox18
play redundant but collectively essential roles in the establishment of proper
arteriovenous identity in zebrafish. Our data suggest that a defect in
arteriovenous identity could be responsible for the formation of telangiectases
in patients with HLT.

PMID: 18094332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Circ Res. 2008 Jan 4;102(1):12-5. Epub 2007 Nov 21.

Redundant roles for sox7 and sox18 in arteriovenous specification in zebrafish.

Herpers R(1), van de Kamp E, Duckers HJ, Schulte-Merker S.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2008 Jan 4;102(1):1-2.

The specification of arteries and veins is an essential process in establishing
and maintaining a functional blood vessel system. Incorrect arteriovenous
specification disrupts embryonic development but has also been diagnosed in human
syndromes such as hypotrichosis-lymphedema-telangiectasia, characterized by
defects in blood and lymphatic vessels and associated with mutations in SOX18.
Here we characterize the role of sox7 and sox18 during zebrafish vasculogenesis. 
Sox7 and sox18 are specifically expressed in the developing vasculature, and
simultaneous loss of their function results in a severe loss of the arterial
identity of the presumptive aorta which instead expresses venous markers,
followed by dramatic arteriovenous shunt formations. Our study identifies members
of the Sox family as key factors in specifying arteriovenous identity and will
help to better understand hypotrichosis-lymphedema-telangiectasia and other
diseases.

PMID: 18032732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Cell Sci. 2007 Nov 1;120(Pt 21):3859-69. Epub 2007 Oct 16.

Sox17 plays a substantial role in late-stage differentiation of the
extraembryonic endoderm in vitro.

Shimoda M(1), Kanai-Azuma M, Hara K, Miyazaki S, Kanai Y, Monden M, Miyazaki J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2
Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Sox17 is a Sry-related HMG-box transcription factor developmentally expressed in 
both the definitive endoderm and extraembryonic endoderm (ExE). Although
Sox17(-/-) mouse embryos have a defective definitive gut endoderm, their
developing ExE is morphologically intact. Here, we aimed to investigate the role 
of Sox17 in ExE development by using an in vitro differentiation system of
embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Although forced Sox17 expression in ESCs did not
affect ExE commitment, it facilitated the differentiation of ESC-derived
primitive endoderm cells into visceral and parietal endoderm cells. This event
was inhibited by the forced expression of Nanog, a negative regulator of
differentiation of ESCs into the ExE. Although Sox17(-/-) ESCs could
differentiate into primitive endoderm cells, further differentiation was severely
impaired. These results indicate a substantial involvement of Sox17 in the late
stage of ExE differentiation in vitro. Furthermore, the expression of
Sox7--another Sox factor, concomitantly expressed with Sox17 in the developing
ExE--was suppressed during the in vitro differentiation of Sox17(-/-) ESCs, but
it was maintained at a high level in the extraembryonic tissues of Sox17(-/-)
embryos. These findings possibly explain the discrepancy between the ExE
phenotype derived from Sox17(-/-) ESCs and that of Sox17(-/-) embryos.

PMID: 17940068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Aug 31;360(3):539-44. Epub 2007 Jun 25.

Redundant roles of Sox17 and Sox18 in early cardiovascular development of mouse
embryos.

Sakamoto Y(1), Hara K, Kanai-Azuma M, Matsui T, Miura Y, Tsunekawa N, Kurohmaru
M, Saijoh Y, Koopman P, Kanai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, The University of Tokyo, Yayoi 1-1-1,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

Sox7, -17 and -18 constitute the Sox subgroup F (SoxF) of HMG box transcription
factor genes, which all are co-expressed in developing vascular endothelial cells
in mice. Here we characterized cardiovascular phenotypes of Sox17/Sox18-double
and Sox17-single null embryos during early-somite stages. Whole-mount PECAM
staining demonstrated the aberrant heart looping, enlarged cardinal vein and mild
defects in anterior dorsal aorta formation in Sox17 single-null embryos. The
Sox17/Sox18 double-null embryos showed more severe defects in formation of
anterior dorsal aorta and head/cervical microvasculature, and in some cases,
aberrant differentiation of endocardial cells and defective fusion of the
endocardial tube. However, the posterior dorsal aorta and allantoic
microvasculature was properly formed in all of the Sox17/Sox18 double-null
embryos. The anomalies in both anterior dorsal aorta and head/cervical
vasculature corresponded with the weak Sox7 expression sites. This suggests the
region-specific redundant activities of three SoxF members along the
anteroposterior axis of embryonic vascular network.

PMID: 17610846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Differentiation. 2007 Jul;75(6):536-45. Epub 2007 Jul 2.

The Sox axis, Nodal signaling, and germ layer specification.

Zhang C(1), Klymkowsky MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology University of
Colorado at Boulder Boulder, CO 80309-0347, USA.

Asymmetries in the egg, established during oogenesis, set the stage for a cascade
of intercellular signaling events leading to differential gene expression and
subsequent tissue and organ formation. Maternally supplied Sox-type transcription
factors have recently emerged as key components in the patterning of the early
embryo and the regulation of embryonic stem cell differentiation. In
deuterostomes, B1-type Soxs are asymmetrically localized to the future
animal/ectodermal region where they act to suppress mesendodermal, and favor
neuroectodermal differentiation, while vegetally localized F-type Soxs are
involved in mesendodermal differentiation. Here, we review past observations and 
present new data from studies on the clawed frog Xenopus laevis. Animally
localized Sox3 acts to inhibit Nodal (Xnr5 and Xnr6) expression, and induces the 
expression of genes (Ectodermin, Xema, and Coco) whose products repress Nodal
signaling. Vegetally localized Sox7 positively regulates Nodal (Xnr4, Xnr5, and
Xnr6) expression, as well as the expression of genes involved in mesodermal
(Xmenf, Slug, and Snail) and endodermal (Endodermin and Sox17beta)
differentiation. Given the evolutionary strategy of using common regulatory
networks, it seems likely that a homologous Sox-Axis is active during embryonic
development in many metazoans.

PMID: 17608734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Aug;1770(8):1085-97. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Array-based functional screening for genes that regulate vascular endothelial
differentiation of Flk1-positive progenitors derived from embryonic stem cells.

Yamauchi F(1), Okada M, Kato K, Jakt LM, Iwata H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho,
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Functional genomics is a central topic of current biological research, where a
reverse genetic approach is one of the most promising strategies to discover
functions of novel genes. Such an approach requires high-throughput methodologies
to assess biological functions for a huge number of genes. We have developed a
transfection array that permits parallel introduction of multiple plasmids
separately into living cells. The feasibility of this array was examined in an
assay system. Eleven genes were over-expressed alone, or in combination in
vascular progenitors derived from embryonic stem cells. Endothelial
differentiation of the cells was monitored through a stably transformed EGFP
reporter construct that is expressed only in endothelial cells. Transcriptional
activators that promote endothelial differentiation, such as Ets1 and Sox7, were 
identified. In addition, the assays also revealed an inhibitory effect on
endothelial differentiation by several of the factors. These results demonstrate 
the feasibility of the transfection array for use in cell-based, high-throughput 
functional assays.

PMID: 17532144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Cell Sci. 2006 Sep 1;119(Pt 17):3513-26. Epub 2006 Aug 8.

Redundant roles of Sox17 and Sox18 in postnatal angiogenesis in mice.

Matsui T(1), Kanai-Azuma M, Hara K, Matoba S, Hiramatsu R, Kawakami H, Kurohmaru 
M, Koopman P, Kanai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, The University of Tokyo, Yayoi 1-1-1,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

Sox7, Sox17 and Sox18 constitute group F of the Sox family of HMG box
transcription factor genes. Dominant-negative mutations in Sox18 underlie the
cardiovascular defects observed in ragged mutant mice. By contrast, Sox18(-/-)
mice are viable and fertile, and display no appreciable anomaly in their
vasculature, suggesting functional compensation by the two other SoxF genes.
Here, we provide direct evidence for redundant function of Sox17 and Sox18 in
postnatal neovascularization by generating Sox17(+/-) -Sox18(-/-) double mutant
mice. Whereas Sox18(-/-) and Sox17(+/-) -Sox18(+/-) mice showed no vascular
defects, approximately half of the Sox17(+/-) -Sox18(-/-) pups died before
postnatal day 21 (P21). They showed reduced neovascularization in the liver
sinusoids and kidney outer medulla vasa recta at P7, which most likely caused the
ischemic necrosis observed by P14 in hepatocytes and renal tubular epithelia.
Those that survived to adulthood showed similar, but milder, vascular anomalies
in both liver and kidney, and females were infertile with varying degrees of
vascular abnormalities in the reproductive organs. These anomalies corresponded
with sites of expression of Sox7 and Sox17 in the developing postnatal
vasculature. In vitro angiogenesis assays, using primary endothelial cells
isolated from the P7 livers, showed that the Sox17(+/-) -Sox18(-/-) endothelial
cells were defective in endothelial sprouting and remodeling of the vasculature
in a phenotype-dependent manner. Therefore, our findings indicate that Sox17 and 
Sox18, and possibly all three SoxF genes, are cooperatively involved in mammalian
vascular development.

PMID: 16895970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Dev Dyn. 2005 Dec;234(4):878-91.

SOX7 and SOX18 are essential for cardiogenesis in Xenopus.

Zhang C(1), Basta T, Klymkowsky MW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado,
Boulder, 80309, USA.

Early in vertebrate development, endodermal signals act on mesoderm to induce
cardiogenesis. The F-type SOXs SOX7 and SOX18beta are expressed in the
cardiogenic region of the early Xenopus embryo. Injection of RNAs encoding SOX7
or SOX18beta, but not the related F-type SOX, SOX17, leads to the nodal-dependent
expression of markers of cardiogenesis in animal cap explants. Injection of
morpholinos directed against either SOX7 or SOX18mRNAs lead to a partial
inhibition of cardiogenesis in vivo, while co-injection of SOX7 and SOX18
morpholinos strongly inhibited cardiogenesis. SOX7 RNA rescued the effects of the
SOX18 morpholino and visa versa, indicating that the proteins have redundant
functions. In animal cap explants, it appears that SOX7 and SOX18 act indirectly 
through Xnr2 to induce mesodermal (Eomesodermin, Snail, Wnt11), organizer
(Cerberus) and endodermal (endodermin, Hex) tissues, which then interact to
initiate cardiogenesis. Versions of SOX7 and SOX18 with their C-terminal,
beta-catenin interaction domains replaced by a transcriptional activator domain
failed to antagonize beta-catenin activation of Siamois, but still induced
cardiogenesis. These observations identify SOX7 and SOX18 as important, and
previously unsuspected, regulators of cardiogenesis in Xenopus.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC1473172
PMID: 16193513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Dev Biol. 2005 Feb 15;278(2):526-41.

SOX7 is an immediate-early target of VegT and regulates Nodal-related gene
expression in Xenopus.

Zhang C(1), Basta T, Fawcett SR, Klymkowsky MW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Porter 
Biosci. Building, Boulder, CO 80309-0347, USA.

In zebrafish, the divergent F-type SOX casanova acts downstream of Nodal
signaling to specify endoderm. While no casanova orthologs have been identified
in tetrapods, the F-type SOX, SOX7, is supplied maternally in Xenopus (Fawcett
and Klymkowsky, 2004. GER 4, 29). Subsequent RT-PCR and section-based in situ
hybridization analyses indicate that SOX7 mRNA is localized to the vegetal region
of the blastula-stage embryo. Overexpression and maternal depletion studies
reveal that the T-box transcription factor VegT, which initiates mesoendodermal
differentiation, directly regulates SOX7 expression. SOX7, but not SOX17 (another
F-type SOX), binds to sites within the Xnr5 promoter and SOX7, but not SOX17,
induces expression of the Nodal-related genes Xnr1, Xnr2, Xnr4, Xnr5, and Xnr6,
the homeodomain transcription factor Mixer, and the endodermal marker SOX17beta; 
both SOX7 and SOX17 induce expression of the pan-endodermal marker endodermin.
SOX7's induction of Xnr expression in animal caps is independent of Mixer and
Nodal signaling. In animal caps, VegT's ability to induce Mixer and Edd appears
to depend upon SOX7 activity. Whole embryo experiments suggests that vegetal
factors partially compensate for the absence of SOX7. Based on the antagonistic
effects of SOX7 and SOX3 (Zhang et al., 2004. Dev. Biol. 273, 23) and their
common binding sites in the Xnr5 promoter, we propose a model in which
competitive interactions between these two proteins are involved in refining the 
domain of endodermal differentiation.

PMID: 15680368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 25;280(8):7244-52. Epub 2004 Dec 7.

Identification of an enhancer that controls up-regulation of fibronectin during
differentiation of embryonic stem cells into extraembryonic endoderm.

Shirai T(1), Miyagi S, Horiuchi D, Okuda-Katayanagi T, Nishimoto M, Muramatsu M, 
Sakamoto Y, Nagata M, Hagiwara K, Okuda A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Research Center for Genomic Medicine,
Saitama Medical School, 1397-1 Yamane, Hidaka, Saitama 350-1241, Japan.

The extraembryonic endoderm is derived from inner cell mass cells of the
blastocyst during early mouse embryogenesis. Formation of the extraembryonic
endoderm, which later contributes to the yolk sac, appears to be a prerequisite
for subsequent differentiation of the inner cell mass. While embryonic stem cells
can be induced to differentiate into extraembryonic endoderm cells in vitro, the 
molecular mechanisms underlying this process are poorly understood. We used a
promoter trap approach to search for genes that are expressed in embryonic stem
cells and are highly up-regulated during differentiation to the extraembryonic
endoderm fate. We showed that fibronectin fits this expression profile. Moreover 
we identified an enhancer in the 12th intron of the fibronectin locus that
recapitulated the endogenous pattern of fibronectin expression. This enhancer
carries Sox protein-binding sequences, and our analysis demonstrated that Sox7
and Sox17, which are highly expressed in the extraembryonic endoderm, were
involved in enhancer activity.

PMID: 15590650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;24(23):10492-503.

Sox7 plays crucial roles in parietal endoderm differentiation in F9 embryonal
carcinoma cells through regulating Gata-4 and Gata-6 expression.

Futaki S(1), Hayashi Y, Emoto T, Weber CN, Sekiguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Sekiguchi Biomatrix Signaling Project, Japanese Science and Technology Agency,
Aichi Medical University, 21 Karimata, Yazako Nagakute-cho, Aichi-gun, Aichi
480-1195, Japan.

During early rodent development, the parietal endoderm appears from an inner cell
mass and produces large amounts of basement membrane components, such as
laminin-1 and collagen IV. To elucidate the regulatory network for gene
expression during these procedures, we constructed a series of short interfering 
RNA expression vectors targeted to various transcription factors, transfected
them into F9 embryonal carcinoma cells, and evaluated the effects of the gene
silencing on the induction of parietal endoderm differentiation and basement
membrane component production by treating F9 cells with all trans-retinoic acid
and dibutyryl cyclic AMP. Among the transcription factors tested, silencing of
Sox7 or combined silencing of Gata-4 and Gata-6 resulted in suppression of cell
shape changes and laminin-1 production, which are the hallmarks of parietal
endoderm differentiation. In cells silenced for Sox7, induction of Gata-4 and
Gata-6 by retinoic acid and cyclic AMP treatment was inhibited, while induction
of Sox7 was not affected in cells silenced for Gata-4 and Gata-6, indicating that
Sox7 is an upstream regulatory factor for these Gata factors. Nevertheless,
silencing of Sox7 did not totally cancel the action of retinoic acid, since
upregulation of coup-tf2, keratin 19, and retinoic acid receptor beta2 was not
abolished in Sox7-silenced F9 cells. Although overexpression of Sox7 alone was
insufficient to induce parietal endoderm differentiation, overexpression of
Gata-4 or Gata-6 in Sox7-silenced F9 cells restored the differentiation into
parietal endoderm. Sox7 is therefore required for the induction of Gata-4 and
Gata-6, and the interplay among these transcription factors plays a crucial role 
in parietal endoderm differentiation.

PMCID: PMC529033
PMID: 15542856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 3;279(36):38055-61. Epub 2004 Jun 25.

SOX7 and SOX17 regulate the parietal endoderm-specific enhancer activity of mouse
laminin alpha1 gene.

Niimi T(1), Hayashi Y, Futaki S, Sekiguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Sekiguchi Biomatrix Signaling Project, ERATO, Japan Science and Technology
Agency, Aichi Medical University, Karimata, Yazako, Nagakute, Aichi 480-1195,
Japan.

Laminin-1 is the major component of embryonic basement membrane and consists of
alpha1, beta1, and gamma1 chains. The expression of laminin-1 is induced in mouse
F9 embryonal carcinoma cells upon differentiation into parietal endoderm cells.
We recently identified a parietal endoderm-specific enhancer in the mouse laminin
alpha1 (Lama1) gene and showed that Sp1/Sp3 and YY1 transcription factors were
involved in the enhancer activity. Although here we identified that NF-Y binds to
the enhancer sequence between Sp1/Sp3- and YY1-binding sites, all these
transcription factors are ubiquitously expressed and thus are not sufficient to
explain parietal endoderm-specific enhancer activity. In the present study, we
further showed that SOX7 and SOX17 are involved in the regulation of parietal
endoderm-specific enhancer activity of the mouse Lama1 gene. Northern blot
analysis revealed that the steady-state levels of mouse Sox7 and Sox17 mRNAs
increased in parallel with that of Lama1 mRNA during the differentiation of F9
cells. Both SOX7 and SOX17 markedly trans-activated the transcription of the
Lama1 enhancer-reporter construct in undifferentiated F9 cells in a manner
dependent on high mobility group box-mediated DNA binding. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays and mutational analyses revealed that SOX7 and SOX17 bound 
specifically to two SOX-binding sites within the Lama1 enhancer, and that these
SOX-binding sites functioned synergistically to confer the trans-activation by
SOX7 and SOX17. Furthermore, this trans-activation was dependent on the integrity
of the binding sites for Sp1/Sp3 and NF-Y located at upstream of the two
SOX-binding sites. These results indicate that the transcription of the mouse
Lama1 gene during the differentiation of F9 cells is controlled by a combination 
of the actions of the ubiquitous factors, Sp1/Sp3 and NF-Y, and the parietal
endoderm-specific factors, SOX7 and SOX17.

PMID: 15220343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 2;279(27):28564-73. Epub 2004 Apr 13.

SOX7 and GATA-4 are competitive activators of Fgf-3 transcription.

Murakami A(1), Shen H, Ishida S, Dickson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. amurakam@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Fgf-3 is expressed in a dynamic and complex spatiotemporal pattern during mouse
development. Previous studies identified GATA-4 as a transcription factor that
binds the key regulatory element PS4A of the Fgf-3 promoter and stimulates
transcription. Here we show that members of the SOX family of transcription
factors also bind PS4A and differentially modulate transcription. At least five
SOX genes, Sox2, Sox6, Sox7, Sox13, and Sox17, were expressed in F9 cells, and of
these, Sox7 and Sox17 were dramatically induced in parallel with Fgf-3 following 
differentiation into parietal endoderm-like cells with retinoic acid and
dibutyryl cAMP. Complexes could be detected on PS4A with SOX2, SOX7, and SOX17 by
using nuclear extracts from differentiated F9 cells. However, only Sox7
expression markedly activated the Fgf-3 promoter in these cells. By contrast,
SOX2 was a poor activator of Fgf-3 transcription, and when Sox2 was coexpressed
with Gata4, it negatively modulated the strong activation mediated by GATA-4.
More detailed analyses showed that SOX7 competes with GATA-4 for PS4A occupancy
and to activate the Fgf-3 promoter. In situ hybridization analysis showed that
Sox7 is co-expressed with Fgf-3 and Gata4 in the parietal endoderm of E7.5 mouse 
embryos. In culture, GATA-4-deficient embryonal stem cells were shown to express 
Fgf-3 upon differentiation into embryoid bodies, although at lower levels than
were found in wild type embryonal stem cells. This Fgf-3 expression was virtually
abolished when Sox7 expression was suppressed by RNA interference. These results 
show that SOX7 is a potent activator of Fgf-3 transcription.

PMID: 15082719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Jan;4(1):29-33.

Embryonic expression of Xenopus laevis SOX7.

Fawcett SR(1), Klymkowsky MW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO 80309-0347, USA.

SOX7, first described in Xenopus laevis by Shiozawa et al. [Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1309(1996)73], is a member, along with SOXs 17 and 18, of the F subgroup of 
SOX-type transcription factors. As part of a study of maternal SOX proteins that 
may modulate beta-catenin signaling, we isolated a XSOX7 cDNA from oocyte RNA and
examined the pattern of XSOX7 expression during early development. While present 
maternally cell-type specific expression was first observed in the ciliated cells
within the epidermis of early neurula stage embryos. As development proceeds, the
pattern of XSOX7 expression becomes increasingly complex. XSOX7 is expressed in
the aortic arch, the olfactory pit, the stomodeal depression, the procardiac
tube, within cells of the developing embryonic vasculature, in the notochord, and
within the hindbrain. XSOX7 expression continues within the hindbrain in 3-day
old ( approximately stage 40) larvae. Given its widespread expression, XSOX7 is
likely to be involved in a number of developmental processes.

PMID: 14678825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 12;278(50):50691-701. Epub 2003 Sep 10.

Molecular basis of constitutive production of basement membrane components. Gene 
expression profiles of Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm tumor and F9 embryonal carcinoma
cells.

Futaki S(1), Hayashi Y, Yamashita M, Yagi K, Bono H, Hayashizaki Y, Okazaki Y,
Sekiguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Sekiguchi Biomatrix Signaling Project, ERATO, Japanese Science and Technology 
Agency (JST), Aichi Medical University, 21 Karimata, Yazako Nagakute-cho,
Aichi-gun, Aichi, 480-1195, Japan.

Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm (EHS) tumors produce large amounts of basement membrane
(BM) components that are widely used as cell culture substrates mimicking BM
functions. To delineate the tissue/organ origin of the tumor and the mechanisms
operating in the BM overproduction, a genome-wide expression profile of EHS tumor
was analyzed using RIKEN cDNA microarrays containing approximately 40,000 mouse
cDNA clones. Expression profiles of F9 embryonal carcinoma cells that produce
laminin-1 and other BM components upon differentiation into parietal
endoderm-like cells (designated F9-PE) were also analyzed. Hierarchical
clustering analysis showed that the gene expression profiles of EHS and F9-PE
were the most similar among 49 mouse tissues/organs in the RIKEN Expression Array
Database, suggesting that EHS tumor is parietal endoderm-derived. Quantitative
PCR analysis confirmed that not only BM components but also the machineries
required for efficient production of BM components, such as enzymes involved in
post-translational modification and molecular chaperones, were highly expressed
in both EHS and F9-PE. Pairs of similar transcription factor isoforms, such as
Gata4/Gata6, Sox7/Sox17, and Cited1/Cited2, were also highly expressed in both
EHS tumor and F9-PE. Time course analysis of F9 differentiation showed that
up-regulation of the transcription factors was associated with those of BM
components, suggesting their involvement in parietal endoderm specification and
overproduction of the BM components.

PMID: 12968032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Dev Dyn. 2003 Jul;227(3):402-8.

Expression of Sox transcription factors in the developing mouse pancreas.

Lioubinski O(1), Müller M, Wegner M, Sander M.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Neurobiologie, Hamburg, Germany.

Previous work has identified members of the homeodomain and basic
helix-loop-helix families of transcription factors as critical determinants of
mammalian pancreatic development. Here, we describe the identification of HMG-box
transcription factors of the Sox gene family in the mouse pancreas. We detected
transcripts for Sox11, Sox4, Sox13, Sox5, Sox9, Sox8, Sox10, Sox7, Sox17, Sox18, 
Sox15, and Sox30 in embryonic pancreas and found Sox4, Sox9, and Sox13 in adult
pancreatic islets. Expression of seven of these Sox factors was studied in more
detail by in situ hybridization from the stage of early pancreatic outgrowth to
birth. Expression of Sox11 was found in the mesenchyme surrounding the pancreatic
buds, whereas Sox4 and Sox9 were confined to the pancreatic epithelium and later 
to islets. Sox13 and L-Sox5 showed expression in most of the pancreatic
epithelial cells between embryonic days 12.5 and 14.5. Sox8 and Sox10 were
detected in a thin layer of cells surrounding the islets. The expression patterns
of Sox genes in the embryonic pancreas suggest that they could have important and
possibly redundant functions in pancreas development.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12815626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Int J Mol Med. 2002 Sep;10(3):339-44.

Expression of human SOX18 in normal tissues and tumors.

Saitoh T(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Cell Biology Section, Genetics Division, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, Tsukiji 5-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

SOX proteins are a family of transcription factors with high-mobility-group
DNA-binding domain (HMG box) homologous to SRY, which play key roles in
embryogenesis. Xenopus Sox17alpha, Sox17beta, Sox3 and mouse Sox7 are reported to
be negative regulators of the WNT-beta-catenin-TCF signaling pathway. SOX7,
SOX17, and SOX18 constitute a subfamily among the SOX gene family. Here,
expression of SOX18 mRNA was investigated using Northern blot analysis, RNA dot
blot analysis, and cDNA-PCR. SOX18 mRNA was significantly highly expressed in
ventricles and inter-ventricular septum of adult heart among various normal human
tissues. SOX18 mRNA was relatively highly expressed in stomach and jejunum in the
gastrointestinal tract. SOX18 mRNA was relatively highly expressed in TMK1 and
MKN45 among 7 gastric cancer cell lines. SOX18 mRNA was expressed in all out of 7
pancreatic cancer cell lines, and was relatively highly expressed in PANC-1,
Hs700T, Hs766T and MIA PaCa-2. Expression level of SOX18 mRNA in MCF-7 cells
(breast cancer) was not affected by beta-estradiol. SOX18 mRNA was expressed in
all out of 5 embryonal tumor cell lines, and was relatively highly expressed in
NT2 with the potential to differentiate into neuronal cells. Expression level of 
SOX18 mRNA in NT2 cells was down-regulated by all-trans retinoic acid. This is
the first report on comprehensive expression analyses of SOX18 mRNA in normal
human tissues and tumors.

PMID: 12165811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Int J Mol Med. 2002 Apr;9(4):363-8.

Expression of human SOX7 in normal tissues and tumors.

Katoh M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Cell Biology Section, Genetics Division, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, Tsukiji 5-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.
mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

SOX transcription factors with high-mobility-group DNA-binding domain (HMG box)
play key roles in embryogenesis. Some members of the SOX family are negative
regulators of the WNT-beta-catenin-TCF signaling pathway. We have previously
cloned and characterized human SOX17, constituting a subfamily with SOX7 and
SOX18. Another group mapped SOX7 gene to human chromosome 8p22, and reported
almost ubiquitous expression of 5.0-kb SOX7 mRNA in human normal tissues. Here,
expression of SOX7 mRNA was investigated by using SOX7 specific probe, which
hybridized to 3.8-kb human SOX7 mRNA, but not to 5.0-kb mRNA. SOX7 mRNA was
relatively highly expressed in adult lung, trachea, lymph node, placenta, fetal
lung, and heart. In adult heart, SOX7 mRNA was more highly expressed in
ventricules, inter-ventricular septum and apex than in atriums. SOX7 mRNA was
significantly up-regulated in pancreatic cancer cell lines BxPC-3, PSN-1, Hs766T,
and in 4 cases out of 8 cases of primary gastric cancer. SOX7 mRNA was relatively
highly expressed in a gastric cancer cell line MKN45, esophageal cancer cell
lines TE2, TE3, TE4, TE5, TE7, TE8, TE11, TE12, and TE13. On the other hand, SOX7
mRNA was significantly down-regulated in 7 out of 18 cases of primary colorectal 
tumors, in 4 out of 9 cases of primary breast cancer, in 4 out of 14 cases of
primary kidney tumors, and also in some cases of primary lung and prostate
cancer. SOX7 gene might be one of cancer-associated genes on human chromosome
8p22.

PMID: 11891528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Int J Mol Med. 2002 Feb;9(2):153-7.

Molecular cloning and characterization of human SOX17.

Katoh M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Cell Biology Section, Genetics Division, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

SOX proteins are a family of transcription factors with high-mobility-group
DNA-binding domain (HMG box) homologous to SRY, which are implicated in
embryogenesis. Xenopus Sox17 alpha, Sox17 beta, and Sox3 are reported to
negatively modulate the WNT - beta-catenin - TCF signaling pathway. Here, human
SOX17 gene fragments were identified in human genome draft sequences by using
bioinformatics, and SOX17 cDNAs were isolated by using cDNA-PCR. Human SOX17 was 
found to encode a 414-amino-acid protein with a HMG box, which was homologous to 
SOX18 and SOX7. SOX17 gene, consisting of 2 exons, was located in human
chromosome 8q12-q13 region. SOX17 mRNAs of 2.5- and 2.2-kb in size were detected 
in adult heart, lung, spleen, testis, ovary, placenta, fetal lung, and kidney. In
normal gastrointestinal tract, SOX17 mRNA was preferentially expressed in
esophagus, stomach and small intestine than in colon and rectum. SOX17 mRNA was
almost undetectable in human cancer cell lines HL-60, HeLa S3, K-562, MOLT-4,
Raji, SW480, A549, G-361, and also in 66 cases of human primary tumors derived
from various tissues, except one case of primary cervical cancer. This is the
first report on molecular cloning and characterization of human SOX17.

PMID: 11786926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2001 Nov;11(8):318-24.

SOX18 and the transcriptional regulation of blood vessel development.

Downes M(1), Koopman P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Australia.

SOX18 is a transcription factor that is transiently expressed in nascent
endothelial cells during embryonic development and adult neovascularization. This
protein belongs to the SOX family of transcription factors, which are proving to 
be some of the key regulators of cell-type specification in the vertebrate
embryo. Natural mutations in the Sox18 gene have been shown to result in
cardiovascular dysfunction, in some cases leading to death. Available evidence
thus implicates Sox18 as an important regulator of vascular development, most
likely playing a key role in endothelial cell specification. However, the genetic
knockout of Sox18 in mice has produced a confounding result that complicates our 
understanding of the molecular mode of action of the SOX18 protein. We speculate 
that Sox18 may act in a redundant fashion with closely related genes such as Sox7
and/or Sox17.

PMID: 11728880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Nov 1;29(21):4274-83.

SOX7 transcription factor: sequence, chromosomal localisation, expression,
transactivation and interference with Wnt signalling.

Takash W(1), Cañizares J, Bonneaud N, Poulat F, Mattéi MG, Jay P, Berta P.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Group, Institut de Génétique Humaine, UPR1142 CNRS,
141 rue de la Cardonille, 34396 Montpellier Cedex 5, France.

The Sox gene family consists of several genes related by encoding a 79 amino acid
DNA-binding domain known as the HMG box. This box shares strong sequence
similarity to that of the testis determining protein SRY. SOX proteins are
transcription factors having critical roles in the regulation of diverse
developmental processes in the animal kingdom. We have characterised the human
SOX7 gene and compared it to its mouse orthologue. Chromosomal mapping analyses
localised mouse Sox7 on band D of mouse chromosome 14, and assigned human SOX7 in
a region of shared synteny on human chromosome 8 (8p22). A detailed expression
analysis was performed in both species. Sox7 mRNA was detected during embryonic
development in many tissues, most abundantly in brain, heart, lung, kidney,
prostate, colon and spleen, suggesting a role in their respective differentiation
and development. In addition, mouse Sox7 expression was shown to parallel mouse
Sox18 mRNA localisation in diverse situations. Our studies also demonstrate the
presence of a functional transactivation domain in SOX7 protein C-terminus, as
well as the ability of SOX7 protein to significantly reduce
Wnt/beta-catenin-stimulated transcription. In view of these and other findings,
we suggest different modes of action for SOX7 inside the cell including
repression of Wnt signalling.

PMCID: PMC60197
PMID: 11691915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Gene. 2001 Jan 10;262(1-2):239-47.

Cloning and functional analysis of the Sry-related HMG box gene, Sox18.

Hosking BM(1), Wyeth JR, Pennisi DJ, Wang SC, Koopman P, Muscat GE.

Author information: 
(1)University of Queensland, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Centre for
Molecular and Cellular Biology, Ritchie Research Laboratories, B402A, St Lucia,
4072, Queensland, Australia.

The Sox gene family (Sry like HMG box gene) is characterised by a conserved DNA
sequence encoding a domain of approximately 80 amino acids which is responsible
for sequence specific DNA binding. We initially published the identification and 
partial cDNA sequence of murine Sox18, a new member of this gene family, isolated
from a cardiac cDNA library. This sequence allowed us to classify Sox18 into the 
F sub-group of Sox proteins, along with Sox7 and Sox17. Recently, we demonstrated
that mutations in the Sox18 activation domain underlie cardiovascular and hair
follicle defects in the mouse mutation, ragged (Ra) (Pennisi et al., 2000.
Mutations in Sox18 underlie cardiovascular and hair follicle defecs in ragged
mice. Nat. Genet. 24, 434-437). Ra homozygotes lack vibrissae and coat hairs,
have generalised oedema and an accumulation of chyle in the peritoneum. Here we
have investigated the genomic sequences encoding Sox18. Screening of a mouse
genomic phage library identified four overlapping clones, we sequenced a 3.25 kb 
XbaI fragment that defined the entire coding region and approximately 1.5 kb of
5' flanking sequences. This identified (i) an additional 91 amino acids upstream 
of the previously designated methionine start codon in the original cDNA, and
(ii) an intron encoded within the HMG box/DNA binding domain in exactly the same 
position as that found in the Sox5, -13 and -17 genes. The Sox18 gene encodes a
protein of 468 aa. We present evidence that suggests HAF-2, the human HMG-box
activating factor -2 protein, is the orthologue of murine Sox18. HAF-2 has been
implicated in the regulation of the Human IgH enhancer in a B cell context.
Random mutagenesis coupled with GAL4 hybrid analysis in the activation domain
between amino acids 252 and 346, of Sox18, implicated the phosphorylation motif, 
SARS, and the region between amino acid residues 313 and 346 as critical
components of Sox18 mediated transactivation. Finally, we examined the expression
of Sox18 in multiple adult mouse tissues using RT-PCR. Low-moderate expression
was observed in spleen, stomach, kidney, intestine, skeletal muscle and heart.
Very abundant expression was detected in lung tissue.

PMID: 11179689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Dec;20(24):9331-6.

Mice null for sox18 are viable and display a mild coat defect.

Pennisi D(1), Bowles J, Nagy A, Muscat G, Koopman P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane 4072,
Australia.

We have previously shown that Sox18 is expressed in developing vascular
endothelium and hair follicles during mouse embryogenesis and that point
mutations in Sox18 are the underlying cause of cardiovascular and hair follicle
defects in ragged (Ra) mice. Here we describe the analysis of Sox18(-/-) mice
produced by gene targeting. Despite the profound defects seen in Ra mice,
Sox18(-/-) mice have no obvious cardiovascular defects and only a mild coat
defect with a reduced proportion of zigzag hairs. A reduction in the amount of
pheomelanin pigmentation in hair shafts was also observed; later-forming hair
follicles showed a reduced subapical pheomelanin band, giving Sox18(-/-) mice a
slightly darker appearance than Sox18(+/+) and Sox18(+/-) siblings. Sox18(-/-)
mice are viable and fertile and show no difference in the ability to thrive
relative to littermates. Because of the mild effect of the mutation on the
phenotype of Sox18(-/-) mice, we conclude that the semidominant nature of the Ra 
mutations is due to a trans-dominant negative effect mediated by the mutant SOX18
proteins rather than haploinsufficiency as has been observed for other SOX genes.
Due to the similarity of SOX18 to other subgroup F SOX proteins, SOX7 and -17,
and the overlap in expression of these genes, functional redundancy amongst these
SOX proteins could also account for the mild phenotype of Sox18(-/-) mice.

PMCID: PMC102189
PMID: 11094083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 May 14;1445(2):225-31.

Isolation and characterization of a mouse SRY-related cDNA, mSox7.

Taniguchi K(1), Hiraoka Y, Ogawa M, Sakai Y, Kido S, Aiso S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

SOX is a family of SRY-related genes, which encode transcriptional factors
involved in development. In this study, we newly isolated and sequenced mouse
cDNA clones for mSox7. The mSox7 gene encodes 380 amino acids containing an
SRY-type HMG box. Genomic Southern analysis suggested that the mSox7 gene was a
single-copy gene. Tissue specific expression of mSox7 was investigated by
Northern analysis. The expression was restricted to the ovary and heart, and the 
size of the transcripts was estimated to be 3.6 knt. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay indicated that recombinant mSox7 polypeptide was capable of binding
to a nucleotide sequence, AACAAT. Immunohistochemical study revealed that mSox7
protein was localized in oocytes in the mouse ovary.

PMID: 10320775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1996 Nov 11;1309(1-2):73-6.

Cloning and characterization of Xenopus laevis xSox7 cDNA.

Shiozawa M(1), Hiraoka Y, Komatsu N, Ogawa M, Sakai Y, Aiso S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

A family of SRY-related genes has been termed SOX. We have isolated and sequenced
a cDNA encoding a novel Sox protein from Xenopus laevis ovary. This cDNA contains
an open reading frame (ORF) coding for 362 amino acids, which encompasses an HMG 
box and exhibits a strong (90%) identity to that of mouse Sox7; the cDNA was
named xSox7 in this study. Northern analysis revealed that the xSox7 mRNA was 2.0
kb in length. Various adult frog tissues were tested by reverse
transcription/polymerase chain reaction for xSox7 mRNA, and the results showed
that xSox7 is expressed in a wide range of tissues. Furthermore, electrophoretic 
mobility shif assay indicated that recombinant xSox7 is capable of binding to
AACAAT sequence.

PMID: 8950180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


