
1. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2016 Jan 20;24(1):62-8. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1007-3418.2016.01.012.

[Meta-analysis of anti-GP210 antibody and anti-SP100 antibody detection for
diagnosis of primary biliary cirrhosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Deng HM(1), Hu SL(1), Chen WX(2), Huang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laborator of Molecular Biology for Infectious Diseases, Ministry of
Education, Institute for Viral Hepatitis, Department of Infectious Diseases, the 
Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400010,
China. (2)Department of Laboratory, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing 400010, China.

OBJECTIVE: To conduct a systematic review of studies assessing the association of
anti-GP210 antibody and anti-SP100 antibody with diagnosis of primary biliary
cirrhosis (PBC) using meta-analysis.
METHODS: Five research literature databases, including the Cochrane Library,
MEDLINE, VIP, CNKI and WanFang, were searched for studies of anti-GP210 antibody 
and anti-SP100 antibody in diagnosis of PBC. Meta-disc statistical software was
used for analysis.
RESULTS: The meta-analysis included a total of 25 studies on anti-GP210 antibody 
and 21 studies on anti-SP100 antibody. The diagnostic odds ratio, sensitivity,
and specificity of anti-GP210 antibody for diagnosis of PBC were 24.854
(11.957-51.660), 0.272 (0.257-0.288), and 0.985 (0.982-0.988), respectively, and 
for anti-SP100 antibody they were 9.133 (4.739-17.600), 0.231 (0.213-0.249), and 
0.977 (0.973-0.981), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Both anti-GP210 antibody and anti-SP100 antibody show high
specificity but low sensitivity in diagnosis of PBC.

PMID: 26983392  [PubMed - in process]


2. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2015 Dec;40(12):1333-9. doi:
10.11817/j.issn.1672-7347.2015.12.008.

[Clinical features of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

He L(1), Lai Y(2), Lai L(1), Luo K(1), Wang W(1), Tian Y(1), Gong G(1), Zhang
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Liver Disease, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha 410011, China. (2)Grade 2012, School of Biomedical
Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200240, China.

OBJECTIVE: To determine features of the clinical manifestation in patients with
primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), and to provide a scientific basis for diagnosis 
of PBC.<U+2029>
METHODS: A total of 102 patients with PBC treated in the Second Xiangya Hospital,
Central South University, from January 2013 to January 2015 were retrospectively 
analyzed. The patients' general condition, clinical manifestations, serum
biochemical and immunological parameters were detected.<U+2029>
RESULTS: Of the 102 PBC patients, 91 (89.21%) patients were female. The main
symptoms in these patients were fatigue, poor appetite, dry mouth, nausea,
vomiting, pruritus, stomachache, and abdominal distension. The major signs were
jaundice, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, edema, and ascites. The main features of
serum biochemical parameters in these patients included the increase of alkaline 
phosphatase and gamma glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT), especially the GGT. The
anti-mitochondrial antibodies-M2 (AMA-M2) in 81 and 21 patients was positive and 
negative, respectively. The differences between the AMA-MA positive and negative 
groups were not statistically significant (P>0.05). According to clinical
manifestation, 102 patients were classified into 2 groups: A non-cirrhosis group 
(n=56) and a cirrhosis group (n=46). The positive rates in these 2 groups, such
as ANA, AMA-M2, anti-gp210, anti-Sp100, anti-Ro52, anti-PML, were 54.35%, 89.13%,
41.30%, 13.04%, 43.38% and 10.87% vs 57.14%, 71.43%, 42.86%, 12.5%, 51.79% and
3.71%, respectively, with no significant difference between them (P>0.05).
However, there was significant difference in the positive rate of anti-3E-EPO
between the above 2 groups (86.78% vs 58.93%, P<0.05). The positive rates of
AMA-M2 and anti-3E-EPO in 30 patients diagnosed by hepatic histopathological
examination were higher than those of other antibodies.<U+2029>
CONCLUSION: PBC mainly affects middle-aged women, and its clinical manifestation 
is various. The autoantibody tests play an important role in diagnosis of PBC.
Checking for AMA-A2 and anti-3E-BPO can improve the positive rate of PBC. Liver
histopathological examination may provide useful information on disease severity,
which can determine the histological stage when the patient's serum
autoantibodies are negative.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 26739075  [PubMed - in process]


3. Viruses. 2015 Dec 23;8(1). pii: E2. doi: 10.3390/v8010002.

TRIM19/PML Restricts HIV Infection in a Cell Type-Dependent Manner.

Kahle T(1), Volkmann B(2), Eissmann K(3), Herrmann A(4), Schmitt S(5,)(6),
Wittmann S(7), Merkel L(8), Reuter N(9), Stamminger T(10), Gramberg T(11).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical and Molecular Virology, Friedrich-Alexander University
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. tanja_sanchez@yahoo.com. (2)Institute
of Clinical and Molecular Virology, Friedrich-Alexander University
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. bavolkma@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de.
(3)Institute of Clinical and Molecular Virology, Friedrich-Alexander University
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
kristin.eissmann@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de. (4)Institute of Clinical and Molecular
Virology, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen,
Germany. alexandra.herrmann@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de. (5)Institute of Clinical
and Molecular Virology, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054
Erlangen, Germany. sven.schmitt3@gmx.de. (6)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and
Pharmacology, University Hospital Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
sven.schmitt3@gmx.de. (7)Institute of Clinical and Molecular Virology,
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
sabine.wittmann@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de. (8)Institute of Clinical and Molecular 
Virology, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen,
Germany. lamerkel@viro.med.uni.erlangen.de. (9)Institute of Clinical and
Molecular Virology, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054
Erlangen, Germany. nina.reuter@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de. (10)Institute of
Clinical and Molecular Virology, Friedrich-Alexander University
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. tsstammi@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de.
(11)Institute of Clinical and Molecular Virology, Friedrich-Alexander University 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. thomas.gramberg@fau.de.

The promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) is the main structural component of the 
nuclear matrix structures termed nuclear domain 10 (ND10) or PML nuclear bodies
(PML-NBs). PML and ND10 structures have been shown to mediate an intrinsic immune
response against a variety of different viruses. Their role during retroviral
replication, however, is still controversially discussed. In this study, we
analyzed the role of PML and the ND10 components Daxx and Sp100 during retroviral
replication in different cell types. Using cell lines exhibiting a shRNA-mediated
knockdown, we found that PML, but not Daxx or Sp100, inhibits HIV and other
retroviruses in a cell type-dependent manner. The PML-mediated block to
retroviral infection was active in primary human fibroblasts and murine embryonic
fibroblasts but absent from T cells and myeloid cell lines. Quantitative PCR
analysis of HIV cDNA in infected cells revealed that PML restricts infection at
the level of reverse transcription. Our findings shed light on the controversial 
role of PML during retroviral infection and show that PML contributes to the
intrinsic restriction of retroviral infections in a cell type-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC4728562
PMID: 26703718  [PubMed - in process]


4. DNA Repair (Amst). 2016 Jan;37:12-21. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2015.10.006. Epub
2015 Nov 2.

Two stages of XRCC1 recruitment and two classes of XRCC1 foci formed in response 
to low level DNA damage induced by visible light, or stress triggered by heat
shock.

Solarczyk KJ(1), Kordon M(1), Berniak K(1), Dobrucki JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biophysics Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University ul. Gronostajowa 7, 30-387 Kraków, Poland.
(2)Division of Cell Biophysics Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University ul. Gronostajowa 7, 30-387 Kraków, Poland.
Electronic address: jerzy.dobrucki@uj.edu.pl.

Induction of local photosensitised DNA damage has been used to study recruitment 
of repair factors, spatial organisation and subsequent stages of the repair
processes. However, the damage induced by a focused laser beam interacting with a
photosensitiser may not fully reflect the types of damage and repair encountered 
in cells of an animal under typical conditions in vivo. We report on two
characteristic stages of recruitment of XRCC1 (a protein engaged in BER and SSB
repair pathways), in response to low level DNA damage induced by visible light.
We demonstrate that, when just a few DNA breaks are induced in a small region of 
the nucleus, the recruited XRCC1 is initially distributed uniformly throughout
this region, and rearranges into several small stationary foci within minutes. In
contrast, when heavy damage of various types (including oxidative damage) is
induced in cells pre-sensitized with a DNA-binding drug ethidium bromide, XRCC1
is also recruited but fails to rearrange from the stage of the uniform
distribution to the stage of several small foci, indicating that this heavy
damage interferes with the progress and completion of the repair processes. We
hypothesize that that first stage may reflect recruitment of XRCC1 to
poly(ADP-ribose) moieties in the region surrounding the single-strand break,
while the second-binding directly to the DNA lesions. We also show that moderate 
damage or stress induces formation of two types of XRCC1-containing foci
differing in their mobility. A large subset of DNA damage-induced XRCC1 foci is
associated with a major component of PML nuclear bodies - the Sp100 protein.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26630398  [PubMed - in process]


5. J Virol. 2015 Nov 25;90(3):1657-67. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02545-15.

An Adenovirus DNA Replication Factor, but Not Incoming Genome Complexes, Targets 
PML Nuclear Bodies.

Komatsu T(1), Nagata K(2), Wodrich H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiologie Fondamentale et Pathogénicité, MFP CNRS UMR 5234, Université de 
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France Department of Infection Biology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan. (2)Department of Infection Biology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan. (3)Microbiologie
Fondamentale et Pathogénicité, MFP CNRS UMR 5234, Université de Bordeaux,
Bordeaux, France harald.wodrich@u-bordeaux.fr.

Promyelocytic leukemia protein nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) are subnuclear domains
implicated in cellular antiviral responses. Despite the antiviral activity,
several nuclear replicating DNA viruses use the domains as deposition sites for
the incoming viral genomes and/or as sites for viral DNA replication, suggesting 
that PML-NBs are functionally relevant during early viral infection to establish 
productive replication. Although PML-NBs and their components have also been
implicated in the adenoviral life cycle, it remains unclear whether incoming
adenoviral genome complexes target PML-NBs. Here we show using immunofluorescence
and live-cell imaging analyses that incoming adenovirus genome complexes neither 
localize at nor recruit components of PML-NBs during early phases of infection.
We further show that the viral DNA binding protein (DBP), an early expressed
viral gene and essential DNA replication factor, independently targets PML-NBs.
We show that DBP oligomerization is required to selectively recruit the PML-NB
components Sp100 and USP7. Depletion experiments suggest that the absence of one 
PML-NB component might not affect the recruitment of other components toward DBP 
oligomers. Thus, our findings suggest a model in which an adenoviral DNA
replication factor, but not incoming viral genome complexes, targets and
modulates PML-NBs to support a conducive state for viral DNA replication and
argue against a generalized concept that PML-NBs target incoming viral
genomes.IMPORTANCE: The immediate fate upon nuclear delivery of genomes of
incoming DNA viruses is largely unclear. Early reports suggested that incoming
genomes of herpesviruses are targeted and repressed by PML-NBs immediately upon
nuclear import. Genome localization and/or viral DNA replication has also been
observed at PML-NBs for other DNA viruses. Thus, it was suggested that PML-NBs
may immediately sense and target nuclear viral genomes and hence serve as sites
for deposition of incoming viral genomes and/or subsequent viral DNA replication.
Here we performed a detailed analyses of the spatiotemporal distribution of
incoming adenoviral genome complexes and found, in contrast to the expectation,
that an adenoviral DNA replication factor, but not incoming genomes, targets
PML-NBs. Thus, our findings may explain why adenoviral genomes could be observed 
at PML-NBs in earlier reports but argue against a generalized role for PML-NBs in
targeting invading viral genomes.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4719639 [Available on 2016-07-15]
PMID: 26608315  [PubMed - in process]


6. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Nov 13;11(11):e1005280. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005280.
eCollection 2015.

PML/TRIM19-Dependent Inhibition of Retroviral Reverse-Transcription by Daxx.

Dutrieux J(1), Maarifi G(1), Portilho DM(2), Arhel NJ(2), Chelbi-Alix MK(1),
Nisole S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Paris Descartes University, Paris, France. (2)University Institute of
Hematology, Saint-Louis Hospital, Paris, France.

PML (Promyelocytic Leukemia protein), also known as TRIM19, belongs to the family
of tripartite motif (TRIM) proteins. PML is mainly expressed in the nucleus,
where it forms dynamic structures known as PML nuclear bodies that recruit many
other proteins, such as Sp100 and Daxx. While the role of PML/TRIM19 in antiviral
defense is well documented, its effect on HIV-1 infection remains unclear. Here
we show that infection by HIV-1 and other retroviruses triggers the formation of 
PML cytoplasmic bodies, as early as 30 minutes post-infection. Quantification of 
the number and size of PML cytoplasmic bodies revealed that they last
approximately 8 h, with a peak at 2 h post-infection. PML re-localization is
blocked by reverse-transcription inhibitors and is not observed following
infection with unrelated viruses, suggesting it is specifically triggered by
retroviral reverse-transcription. Furthermore, we show that PML interferes with
an early step of retroviral infection since PML knockdown dramatically increases 
reverse-transcription efficiency. We demonstrate that PML does not inhibit
directly retroviral infection but acts through the stabilization of one of its
well-characterized partners, Daxx. In the presence of PML, cytoplasmic Daxx is
found in the vicinity of incoming HIV-1 capsids and inhibits
reverse-transcription. Interestingly, Daxx not only interferes with exogenous
retroviral infections but can also inhibit retrotransposition of endogenous
retroviruses, thus identifying Daxx as a broad cellular inhibitor of
reverse-transcription. Altogether, these findings unravel a novel antiviral
function for PML and PML nuclear body-associated protein Daxx.

PMCID: PMC4643962
PMID: 26566030  [PubMed - in process]


7. J Virol. 2015 Oct 21;90(2):694-704. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02137-15.

Interferon Kappa Inhibits Human Papillomavirus 31 Transcription by Inducing Sp100
Proteins.

Habiger C(1), Jäger G(2), Walter M(2), Iftner T(1), Stubenrauch F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Virology, Institute for Medical Virology and
Epidemiology of Viral Diseases, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. 
(2)Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, MFT Services, University
Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (3)Division of Experimental Virology,
Institute for Medical Virology and Epidemiology of Viral Diseases, University
Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany frank.stubenrauch@med.uni-tuebingen.de.

High-risk human papillomaviruses (hr-HPV) establish persistent infections in
keratinocytes, which can lead to cancer of the anogenital tract. Interferons
(IFNs) are a family of secreted cytokines that induce IFN-stimulated genes
(ISGs), many of which display antiviral activities. Transcriptome studies have
indicated that established hr-HPV-positive cell lines display a reduced
expression of ISGs, which correlates with decreased levels of interferon kappa
(IFN-<U+03BA>), a type I IFN constitutively expressed in keratinocytes. Prior studies
have also suggested that IFN-ß has anti-hr-HPV activity but the underlying
mechanisms are not well understood. The downregulation of IFN-<U+03BA> by hr-HPV raises 
the possibility that IFN-<U+03BA> has anti-HPV activity. Using doxycycline-inducible
IFN-<U+03BA> expression in CIN612-9E cells, which maintain extrachromosomally
replicating HPV31 genomes, we demonstrated that IFN-<U+03BA> inhibits the growth of
these cells and reduces viral transcription and replication. Interestingly, the
initiation of viral early transcription was already inhibited at 4 to 6 h after
IFN-<U+03BA> expression. This was also observed with recombinant IFN-ß, suggesting a
common mechanism of IFNs. Transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis identified 
1,367 IFN-<U+03BA>-regulated genes, of which 221 were modulated >2-fold. The majority of
those (71%) matched known ISGs, confirming that IFN-<U+03BA> acts as a bona fide type I 
IFN in hr-HPV-positive keratinocytes. RNA interference (RNAi) and cotransfection 
experiments indicated that the inhibition of viral transcription is mainly due to
the induction of Sp100 proteins by IFN-<U+03BA>. Consistent with published data showing 
that Sp100 acts as a restriction factor for HPV18 infection, our results suggest 
that hr-HPV target IFN-<U+03BA> to prevent Sp100 expression and identify Sp100 as an ISG
with anti-HPV activity.IMPORTANCE: High-risk HPV can establish persistent
infections which may progress to anogenital cancers. hr-HPV interfere with the
expression of interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes (ISGs), which is due to reduced
levels of IFN-<U+03BA>, an IFN that is constitutively expressed in human keratinocytes. 
This study reveals that IFN-<U+03BA> rapidly inhibits HPV transcription and that this is
due to the induction of Sp100 proteins. Thus, Sp100 represents an ISG for hr-HPV.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4702707 [Available on 2016-06-30]
PMID: 26491169  [PubMed - in process]


8. Am J Clin Pathol. 2015 Oct;144(4):601-6. doi: 10.1309/AJCPQV4A7QAEEFEV.

The Significance of Autoantibody Changes Over Time in Primary Biliary Cirrhosis.

Tana MM(1), Shums Z(2), Milo J(2), Norman GL(2), Leung PS(3), Gershwin ME(3),
Noureddin M(4), Kleiner DE(4), Zhao X(4), Heller T(4), Hoofnagle JH(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; michele.tana@ucsf.edu. (2)Inova
Diagnostics, San Diego, CA; and. (3)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and
Clinical Immunology, University of California, Davis, CA. (4)From the National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD;

OBJECTIVES: In primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), the antimitochondrial antibody is
a cornerstone of diagnosis, but there have been conflicting reports about the
correlation of autoantibodies with disease stage and prognosis. We studied
whether autoantibody levels changed over time and sought correlations with
clinical outcomes in a cohort of patients with PBC.
METHODS: We tested serial serum samples from patients with PBC at a research
institution for several autoantibodies. Long-term clinical follow-up data were
used to calculate the slopes (change over time) for autoantibodies, platelet
count, Ishak fibrosis score, biopsy copper, and number of portal areas with bile 
ducts. An adverse clinical outcome was defined as hepatic decompensation,
development of hepatocellular carcinoma, liver transplantation, or liver-related 
death. We performed linear or logistic regression or Fisher exact test as
appropriate, adjusting for multiple comparisons.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven patients with PBC with 145 serum samples were studied. Of
the cohort, 85% was white, 81% was female, and median follow-up time was 20
years. Of the autoantibodies tested, only sp100 changed significantly over time. 
The sp100 slope was inversely associated with the Ishak fibrosis slope (parameter
estimate, -0.05; P = .0003).
CONCLUSIONS: While changes in most autoantibodies over time do not seem to
correlate with clinical outcomes in PBC, a change in the sp100 autoantibody level
may have prognostic utility with respect to the development of fibrosis on liver 
biopsy.

Copyright© by the American Society for Clinical Pathology.

PMID: 26386081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Jul 15;8(7):10696-704. eCollection 2015.

Long-term action of propofol on cognitive function and hippocampal neuroapoptosis
in neonatal rats.

Han D(1), Jin J(2), Fang H(2), Xu G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Dongfang Hospital, Tongji University Shanghai,
China. (2)Department of Anesthesiology, Jinshan Hospital, Fudan University
Shanghai 201508, China. (3)Center Laboratory, Jinshan Hospital, Fudan University 
Shanghai 201508, China.

Propofol is a short-acting anesthetic and generally is utilized for the induction
and maintenance of anesthesia in pediatrics and adults. However, whether repeated
use of propofol affects long-term cognitive function remains unclear. This study 
investigated the effects of propofol on cognitive function and hippocampal
neuroapoptosis in neonatal rat. A total of 112 male newborn 7-day old
Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly divided into 8 groups (n=14 rats per group) and
intraperitoneally injected either with saline or propofol at 50, 100, and 150
mg/kg/day for 5 consecutive days. Four non-surgical groups were assigned as Con1,
P50, P100, and P150. Four surgical groups were received an appendicectomy under
propofol anesthesia and assigned as Con2, SP50, SP100, SP150. After 2 months
raising, cognitive function, hippocampal neuroapoptosis, and intracephalic
inflammatory cytokines were evaluated. There was no obvious effect on the
cognitive function and neuroapoptosis after repeated use of propofol at a low
dose for 5 days, whereas repeated use of propofol at a middle/high dose
significantly increase the expression of apoptotic factors (caspase-3 and Bax),
pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1ß, IL-6, and TNF-a), and impair the cognitive
function. Thus, our data suggest that repeated use of propofol at a low dose may 
be safe during the period of brain growth spurt. Using propofol at a recommended 
or higher dose for anaesthesia may lead to the cognitive defects, attributed to
hippocampal neuroapoptosis and the overexpression of pro-inflammatory cytokines
in the brain.

PMCID: PMC4565244
PMID: 26379861  [PubMed]


10. J Immunol Res. 2015;2015:526518. doi: 10.1155/2015/526518. Epub 2015 Aug 11.

SP140L, an Evolutionarily Recent Member of the SP100 Family, Is an Autoantigen in
Primary Biliary Cirrhosis.

Saare M(1), Hämarik U(1), Venta R(2), Panarina M(3), Zucchelli C(4), Pihlap M(1),
Remm A(1), Kisand K(1), Toots U(5), Möll K(5), Salupere R(6), Musco G(4), Uibo
R(3), Peterson P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Group, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational
Medicine, University of Tartu, 50411 Tartu, Estonia. (2)Institute of Technology, 
University of Tartu, 50411 Tartu, Estonia. (3)Department of Immunology, Institute
of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, 50411 Tartu,
Estonia. (4)Biomolecular NMR Laboratory, Dulbecco Telethon Institute c/o S.
Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy. (5)Icosagen AS, 61713
Tartumaa, Estonia. (6)Department of Internal Medicine, Tartu University Hospital,
51014 Tartu, Estonia.

The SP100 family members comprise a set of closely related genes on chromosome
2q37.1. The widely expressed SP100 and the leukocyte-specific proteins SP110 and 
SP140 have been associated with transcriptional regulation and various human
diseases. Here, we have characterized the SP100 family member SP140L. The genome 
sequence analysis showed the formation of SP140L gene through rearrangements of
the two neighboring genes, SP100 and SP140, during the evolution of higher
primates. The SP140L expression is interferon-inducible with high transcript
levels in B cells and other peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Subcellularly,
SP140L colocalizes with SP100 and SP140 in nuclear structures that are devoid of 
SP110, PML, or p300 proteins. Similarly to SP100 and SP140 protein, we detected
serum autoantibodies to SP140L in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis using
luciferase immunoprecipitation system and immunoblotting assays. In conclusion,
our results show that SP140L is phylogenetically recent member of SP100 proteins 
and acts as an autoantigen in primary biliary cirrhosis patients.

PMCID: PMC4548144
PMID: 26347895  [PubMed - in process]


11. J Immunol. 2015 Sep 1;195(5):2312-24. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500035. Epub 2015
Jul 29.

Small Ubiquitin-like Modifier Alters IFN Response.

Maarifi G(1), Maroui MA(1), Dutrieux J(1), Dianoux L(1), Nisole S(2), Chelbi-Alix
MK(2).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité Mixte de Recherche S 1124, Université Paris Descartes, 75006
Paris, France. (2)INSERM Unité Mixte de Recherche S 1124, Université Paris
Descartes, 75006 Paris, France sebastien.nisole@inserm.fr
mounira.chelbi-alix@parisdescartes.fr.

IFNs orchestrate immune defense through induction of hundreds of genes. Small
ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) is involved in various cellular functions, but
little is known about its role in IFN responses. Prior work identified STAT1
SUMOylation as an important mode of regulation of IFN-<U+03B3> signaling. In this study,
we investigated the roles of SUMO in IFN signaling, gene expression, protein
stability, and IFN-induced biological responses. We first show that SUMO
overexpression leads to STAT1 SUMOylation and to a decrease in IFN-induced STAT1 
phosphorylation. Interestingly, IFNs exert a negative retrocontrol on their own
signaling by enhancing STAT1 SUMOylation. Furthermore, we show that expression of
each SUMO paralog inhibits IFN-<U+03B3>-induced transcription without affecting that of 
IFN-a. Further, we focused on IFN-induced gene products associated to
promyelocytic leukemia (PML) nuclear bodies, and we show that neither IFN-a nor
IFN-<U+03B3> could increase PML and Sp100 protein expression because they enhanced their
SUMO3 conjugation and subsequent proteasomal degradation. Because it is known
that SUMO3 is important for the recruitment of RING finger protein 4, a
poly-SUMO-dependent E3 ubiquitin ligase, and that PML acts as a positive
regulator of IFN-induced STAT1 phosphorylation, we went on to show that RING
finger protein 4 depletion stabilizes PML and is correlated with a positive
regulation of IFN signaling. Importantly, inhibition of IFN signaling by SUMO is 
associated with a reduction of IFN-induced apoptosis, cell growth inhibition,
antiviral defense, and chemotaxis. Conversely, inhibition of SUMOylation results 
in higher IFN-<U+03B3>-induced STAT1 phosphorylation and biological responses.
Altogether, our results uncover a new role for SUMO in the modulation of IFN
response.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26223657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Viruses. 2015 Jun 5;7(6):2884-907. doi: 10.3390/v7062751.

Contribution of the Major ND10 Proteins PML, hDaxx and Sp100 to the Regulation of
Human Cytomegalovirus Latency and Lytic Replication in the Monocytic Cell Line
THP-1.

Wagenknecht N(1), Reuter N(2), Scherer M(3), Reichel A(4), Müller R(5),
Stamminger T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical and Molecular Virology, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Schlossgarten 4, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
nadine.wagenknecht@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de. (2)Institute of Clinical and
Molecular Virology, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Schlossgarten 4, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. nina.reuter@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de.
(3)Institute of Clinical and Molecular Virology, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Schlossgarten 4, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
myriam.scherer@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de. (4)Institute of Clinical and Molecular
Virology, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Schlossgarten 4,
91054 Erlangen, Germany. aareiche@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de. (5)Institute of
Clinical and Molecular Virology, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Schlossgarten 4, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
regina.mueller@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de. (6)Institute of Clinical and Molecular
Virology, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Schlossgarten 4,
91054 Erlangen, Germany. thomas.stamminger@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de.

Promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies, also termed nuclear domain 10 (ND10), have
emerged as nuclear protein accumulations mediating an intrinsic cellular defense 
against viral infections via chromatin-based mechanisms, however, their
contribution to the control of herpesviral latency is still controversial. In
this study, we utilized the monocytic cell line THP-1 as an in vitro latency
model for human cytomegalovirus infection (HCMV). Characterization of THP-1 cells
by immunofluorescence andWestern blot analysis confirmed the expression of all
major ND10 components. THP-1 cells with a stable, individual knockdown of PML,
hDaxx or Sp100 were generated. Importantly, depletion of the major ND10 proteins 
did not prevent the terminal cellular differentiation of THP-1 monocytes. After
construction of a recombinant, endotheliotropic human cytomegalovirus expressing 
IE2-EYFP, we investigated whether the depletion of ND10 proteins affects the
onset of viral IE gene expression. While after infection of differentiated,
THP-1-derived macrophages as well as during differentiation-induced reactivation 
from latency an increase in the number of IE-expressing cells was readily
detectable in the absence of the major ND10 proteins, no effect was observed in
non-differentiated monocytes. We conclude that PML, hDaxx and Sp100 primarily act
as cellular restriction factors during lytic HCMV replication and during the
dynamic process of reactivation but do not serve as key determinants for the
establishment of HCMV latency.

PMCID: PMC4488718
PMID: 26057166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Dongwuxue Yanjiu. 2015 May 18;36(3):142-51.

Selective recruitment of host factors by HSV-1 replication centers.

Lang FC(1), Li X(1), Vladmirova O(2), Li ZR(1), Chen GJ(3), Xiao Y(3), Li LH(3), 
Lu DF(1), Han HB(4), Zhou JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of Chinese
Academy of Sciences & Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Kunming Yunnan 650223, China;University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. (2)The Wistar Institute, Gene Expression and 
Regulation Program, Philadelphia PA 19104, USA. (3)Key Laboratory of Animal
Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of Chinese Academy of Sciences & Yunnan
Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming
Yunnan 650223, China. (4)Biology & Chemistry Engineering College, Panzhihua
University, Panzhihua Sichuan 617000, China. (5)Key Laboratory of Animal Models
and Human Disease Mechanisms of Chinese Academy of Sciences & Yunnan Province,
Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming Yunnan 650223,
China. zhoujm@mail.kiz.ac.cn.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) enters productive infection after infecting
epithelial cells, where it controls the host nucleus to make viral proteins,
starts viral DNA synthesis and assembles infectious virions. In this process,
replicating viral genomes are organized into replication centers to facilitate
viral growth. HSV-1 is known to use host factors, including host chromatin and
host transcription regulators, to transcribe its genes; however, the invading
virus also encounters host defense and stress responses to inhibit viral growth. 
Recently, we found that HSV-1 replication centers recruit host factor CTCF but
exclude <U+03B3>H2A.X. Thus, HSV-1 replication centers may selectively recruit cellular 
factors needed for viral growth, while excluding host factors that are
deleterious for viral transcription or replication. Here we report that the viral
replication centers selectively excluded modified histone H3, including
heterochromatin mark H3K9me3, H3S10P and active chromatin mark H3K4me3, but not
unmodified H3. We found a dynamic association between the viral replication
centers and host RNA polymerase II. The centers also recruited components of the 
DNA damage response pathway, including 53BP1, BRCA1 and host antiviral protein
SP100. Importantly, we found that ATM kinase was needed for the recruitment of
CTCF to the viral centers. These results suggest that the HSV-1 replication
centers took advantage of host signaling pathways to actively recruit or exclude 
host factors to benefit viral growth.

PMID: 26018857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. BMC Med Genomics. 2015 Mar 29;8:14. doi: 10.1186/s12920-015-0088-y.

Gene expression network analysis reveals new transcriptional regulators as novel 
factors in human ischemic cardiomyopathy.

Herrer I(1), Roselló-Lletí E(2), Ortega A(3), Tarazón E(4), Molina-Navarro MM(5),
Triviño JC(6), Martínez-Dolz L(7), Almenar L(8), Lago F(9), Sánchez-Lázaro I(10),
González-Juanatey JR(11), Salvador A(12), Portolés M(13), Rivera M(14).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiocirculatory Unit, Health Research Institute of La Fe University
Hospital, Avd de Fernando Abril Martorell, 106, 46026, Valencia, Spain.
isaherrer@gmail.com. (2)Cardiocirculatory Unit, Health Research Institute of La
Fe University Hospital, Avd de Fernando Abril Martorell, 106, 46026, Valencia,
Spain. esther_rosello_lleti@hotmail.com. (3)Cardiocirculatory Unit, Health
Research Institute of La Fe University Hospital, Avd de Fernando Abril Martorell,
106, 46026, Valencia, Spain. anaortegagutierrez@hotmail.com. (4)Cardiocirculatory
Unit, Health Research Institute of La Fe University Hospital, Avd de Fernando
Abril Martorell, 106, 46026, Valencia, Spain. estamel@alumni.uv.es.
(5)Cardiocirculatory Unit, Health Research Institute of La Fe University
Hospital, Avd de Fernando Abril Martorell, 106, 46026, Valencia, Spain.
micaela.molina.navarro@googlemail.com. (6)Genomic Systems, Paterna, Valencia,
Spain. jc.trivino@sistemasgenomicos.com. (7)Heart Failure and Transplantation
Unit, Cardiology Department, La Fe University Hospital, Valencia, Spain.
lmartinezd@meditex.es. (8)Heart Failure and Transplantation Unit, Cardiology
Department, La Fe University Hospital, Valencia, Spain. lualmenar@gmail.com.
(9)Cellular and Molecular Cardiology Unit, Department of Cardiology and Institute
of Biomedical Research, University Clinical Hospital, Santiago Compostela, Spain.
francisca.lago.paz@sergas.es. (10)Heart Failure and Transplantation Unit,
Cardiology Department, La Fe University Hospital, Valencia, Spain.
ignaciosanchezlazaro@gmail.com. (11)Cellular and Molecular Cardiology Unit,
Department of Cardiology and Institute of Biomedical Research, University
Clinical Hospital, Santiago Compostela, Spain.
jose.ramon.gonzalez.juanatey@sergas.es. (12)Heart Failure and Transplantation
Unit, Cardiology Department, La Fe University Hospital, Valencia, Spain.
salvador_ant@gva.es. (13)Cardiocirculatory Unit, Health Research Institute of La 
Fe University Hospital, Avd de Fernando Abril Martorell, 106, 46026, Valencia,
Spain. portoles_man@gva.es. (14)Cardiocirculatory Unit, Health Research Institute
of La Fe University Hospital, Avd de Fernando Abril Martorell, 106, 46026,
Valencia, Spain. miguelrivera492@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Ischemic cardiomyopathy (ICM) is characterized by transcriptomic
changes that alter cellular processes leading to decreased cardiac output.
Because the molecular network of ICM is largely unknown, the aim of this study
was to characterize the role of new transcriptional regulators in the molecular
mechanisms underlying the responses to ischemia.
METHODS: Myocardial tissue explants from ICM patients and control (CNT) subjects 
were analyzed by RNA-Sequencing (RNA-Seq) and quantitative Real-Time PCR.
RESULTS: Enrichment analysis of the ICM transcriptomic profile allowed the
characterization of novel master regulators. We found that the expression of the 
transcriptional regulators SP100 (-1.5-fold, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), CITED2 (-3.8-fold,
p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), CEBPD (-4.9-fold, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and BCL3 (-3.3-fold, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) were lower 
in ICM than in CNT. To gain insights into the molecular network defined by the
transcription factors, we identified CEBPD, BCL3, and HIF1A target genes in the
RNA-Seq datasets. We further characterized the biological processes of the target
genes by gene ontology annotation. Our results suggest that CEBPD-inducible genes
with roles in the inhibition of apoptosis are downregulated and that
BCL3-repressible genes are involved in the regulation of cellular metabolism in
ICM. Moreover, our results suggest that CITED2 downregulation causes increased
expression of HIF1A target genes. Functional analysis of HIF1A target genes
revealed that hypoxic and stress response genes are activated in ICM. Finally, we
found a significant correlation between the mRNA levels of BCL3 and the mRNA
levels of both CEBPD (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.73, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) and CITED2 (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.56, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
Interestingly, CITED2 mRNA levels are directly related to ejection fraction (EF) 
(r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.54, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that changes in the expression of SP100, CITED2,
CEBPD, and BCL3 affect their transcription regulatory networks, which
subsequently alter a number of biological processes in ICM patients. The
relationship between CITED2 mRNA levels and EF emphasizes the importance of this 
transcription factor in ICM. Moreover, our findings identify new mechanisms used 
to interpret gene expression changes in ICM and provide valuable resources for
further investigation of the molecular basis of human cardiac ischemic response.

PMCID: PMC4386080
PMID: 25884818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Food Sci Technol. 2015 Mar;52(3):1507-15. doi: 10.1007/s13197-013-1145-1. Epub 
2013 Aug 15.

Physicochemical properties and sensory characteristics of sausage formulated with
surimi powder.

Santana P(1), Huda N(1), Yang TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fish and Meat Processing Laboratory, Food Technology Programme, School of
Industrial Technology, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Minden, 11800 Penang Malaysia.

The objectives of this study were to determine the physicochemical properties and
sensory characteristics of fish sausage made with 100 % threadfin bream
(Nemipterus japonicus) surimi powder (SP100), a mix of 50 % surimi powder and
50 % frozen surimi (SP50), and a control (100 % frozen surimi). No significant
differences in protein content and folding test results (P<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05) were detected 
among the SP100 and SP50 samples and the control. Gel strength of SP100 was lower
(P<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05) than that of the control. The texture profile analysis (TPA) values
(hardness, cohesiveness, springiness, and chewiness) of SP100 were significantly 
lower (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) than those of the control. However, the TPA values of SP100 and 
SP50 were still within the textural range of Malaysian commercial fish sausages. 
The water holding capacity, and emulsion stability of SP100 were significantly
lower (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) than those of SP50 and the control. Of the cooking properties
measured, SP100 had lower (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) cooking yield, moisture retention, and fat
retention than the control. Quantitative descriptive analysis (QDA) performed by 
12 trained panelists showed that sensory characteristic (hardness, cohesiveness, 
springiness, and chewiness) scores of SP100 were lower than those of SP50 and the
control. The use of surimi powder in fish sausage did not differ with that of
control in the term of color, odor, or oiliness scored by panelists. The drying
process impacted the texture properties of surimi when it was used in fish
sausage. However, the use of surimi powder in fish sausage formulation is still
accepted since the TPA values of SP100 and SP50 were still within the textural
range of Malaysian commercial fish sausages.

PMCID: PMC4348288
PMID: 25745219  [PubMed]


16. Nucleus. 2015;6(2):154-64. doi: 10.1080/19491034.2015.1022701. Epub 2015 Feb 27.

The tumor suppressor SHIP1 colocalizes in nucleolar cavities with p53 and
components of PML nuclear bodies.

Ehm P(1), Nalaskowski MM, Wundenberg T, Jücker M.

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Biochemistry and Signal Transduction ; University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf ; Hamburg , Germany.

The inositol 5-phosphatase SHIP1 is a negative regulator of signaling processes
in haematopoietic cells. By converting PI(3,4,5)P3 to PtdIns(3,4)P2 at the plasma
membrane, SHIP1 modifies PI3-kinase mediated signaling. We have recently
demonstrated that SHIP1 is a nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling protein and SHIP1
nuclear puncta partially colocalize with FLASH, a component of nuclear bodies. In
this study, we demonstrate that endogenous SHIP1 localizes to intranucleolar
regions of both normal and leukemic haematopoietic cells. In addition, we report 
that ectopically expressed SHIP1 accumulates in nucleolar cavities and
colocalizes with the tumor suppressor protein p53 and components of PML nuclear
bodies (e.g. SP100, SUMO-1 and CK2). Moreover, SHIP1 also colocalizes in
nucleolar cavities with components of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. By using 
confocal microscopy data, we generated 3D-models revealing the enormous extent of
the SHIP1 aggresomes in the nucleolus. Furthermore, treatment of cells with the
proteasome inhibitor MG132 causes an enlargement of nucleolar SHIP1 containing
structures. Unexpectedly, this accumulation can be partially prevented by
treatment with the inhibitor of nuclear protein export Leptomycin B. In recent
years, several proteins aggregating in nucleolar cavities were shown to be key
factors of neurodegenerative diseases and cancerogenesis. Our findings support
current relevance of nuclear localized SHIP1.

PMCID: PMC4615814
PMID: 25723258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Virol. 2015 Apr;89(8):4214-26. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03658-14. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Identification of three redundant segments responsible for herpes simplex virus 1
ICP0 to fuse with ND10 nuclear bodies.

Zheng Y(1), Gu H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, 
USA. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Wayne State University, Detroit,
Michigan, USA haidong.gu@wayne.edu.

Infected cell protein 0 (ICP0) of herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) is a key
regulator in both lytic and latent infections. In lytic infection, an important
early event is the colocalization of ICP0 to nuclear domain 10 (ND10), the
discrete nuclear bodies that impose restrictions on viral expression. ICP0
contains an E3 ubiquitin ligase that degrades promyelocytic leukemia protein
(PML) and Sp100, two major components of ND10, and disperses ND10 to alleviate
repression. We previously reported that the association between ICP0 and ND10 is 
a dynamic process that includes three steps: adhesion, fusion, and retention.
ICP0 residues 245 to 474, defined as ND10 entry signal (ND10-ES), is a region
required for the fusion step. Without ND10-ES, ICP0 adheres at the ND10 surface
but fails to enter. In the present study, we focus on characterizing ND10-ES.
Here we report the following. (i) Fusion of ICP0 with ND10 relies on specific
sequences located within ND10-ES. Replacement of ND10-ES by the corresponding
region from ORF61 of varicella-zoster virus did not rescue ND10 fusion. (ii)
Three tandem ND10 fusion segments (ND10-FS1, ND10-FS2, and ND10-FS3),
encompassing 200 amino acids within ND10-ES, redundantly facilitate fusion. Each 
of the three segments is sufficient to independently drive the fusion process,
but none of the segments by themselves are necessary for ND10 fusion. Only when
all three segments are deleted is fusion blocked. (iii) The SUMO interaction
motif located within ND10-FS2 is not required for ND10 fusion but is required for
the complete degradation of PML, suggesting that PML degradation and ND10 fusion 
are regulated by different molecular mechanisms.IMPORTANCE: ND10 nuclear bodies
are part of the cell-intrinsic antiviral defenses that restrict viral gene
expression upon virus infection. As a countermeasure, infected cell protein 0
(ICP0) of herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) localizes to ND10s, degrades the ND10
organizer, and disperses ND10 components in order to alleviate repression. We
studied the ICP0-ND10 association to delineate elements important for this
dynamic interaction and to understand its role in viral replication and host
defense. In this work, we show that ICP0 contains three redundant segments to
ensure an effective mergence of ICP0 with ND10 nuclear bodies. This is the first 
study to systematically investigate ICP0 elements that are important for
ICP0-ND10 fusion.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4442361
PMID: 25631093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Jan 7;21(1):283-91. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i1.283.

Autoantibodies in Chinese patients with chronic hepatitis B: prevalence and
clinical associations.

Li BA(1), Liu J(1), Hou J(1), Tang J(1), Zhang J(1), Xu J(1), Song YJ(1), Liu
AX(1), Zhao J(1), Guo JX(1), Chen L(1), Wang H(1), Yang LH(1), Lu J(1), Mao
YL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bo-An Li, Jia Liu, Jun Hou, Jian Zhang, Jun Xu, Yong-Ji Song, Ai-Xia Liu, Jing
Zhao, Jing-Xia Guo, Lin Chen, Han Wang, Li-Hua Yang, Yuan-Li Mao, Center of
Clinical Laboratory Medicine, 302 Military Hospital of China, Beijing 100039,
China.

AIM: To investigate the prevalence of autoantibodies and their associations with 
clinical features in Chinese patients with chronic hepatitis B (CHB).
METHODS: A total of 325 Chinese patients with CHB were enrolled in this
retrospective, hospital-based study. Patients with chronic hepatitis C (CHC),
autoimmune hepatitis (AIH), or primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) were included,
with healthy donors acting as controls. A panel of autoantibodies that
serologically define AIH and PBC was tested by indirect immunofluorescence assay 
and line immunoassay. The AIH-related autoantibody profile included homogeneous
anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA-H), smooth-muscle antibodies, anti-liver kidney
microsome type 1, anti-liver cytosolic antigen type 1, and anti-soluble liver
antigen/liver pancreas; the PBC-related antibodies were characterized by
ANA-nuclear dots/membranous rim-like, anti-mitochondrial antibodies-M2 (AMA-M2), 
anti-BPO (recombinant antigen targeted by AMA-M2), anti-Sp100, anti-promyelocytic
leukemia protein (anti-PML), and anti-gp210. The dichotomization of clustering
was used to unequivocally designate the AIH or PBC profiles for each case.
Anti-Ro52 antibodies were also tested.
RESULTS: The prevalence of any autoantibody in CHB amounted to 58.2%, which was
similar to the 66.2% prevalence in CHC, significantly higher than the 6.7% in the
healthy controls (P < 0.001), and lower than the 100% found in AIH and PBC (P =
0.004 and P < 0.001, respectively). There were more anti-PML and anti-gp210
antibodies among the CHB patients than the CHC patients (11.1% vs 0%, P = 0.003; 
12.6% vs 0%, P < 0.001, respectively). The prevalence and titer of AMA, anti-BPO,
anti-PML, and anti-gp210 were higher in PBC than in those with CHB. Among the CHB
patients, the prevalence of ANA, especially ANA-H, was significantly lower in
patients with compensated and decompensated cirrhosis compared with patients
without cirrhosis. Thirty-eight cases of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in CHB
showed a significant difference compared with non-HCC patients in the prevalence 
of anti-PML (0% vs 12.5%, P = 0.013). Dichotomization of the autoantibodies
revealed that the PBC profile was more prevalent in patients with CHB than in
those with CHC, and that it was strongly correlated with both compensated and
decompensated cirrhosis. In contrast, the prevalence of the AIH profile was
significantly higher in non-cirrhosis patients with CHB than in those with
compensated cirrhosis (18.5% vs 8.2%, P = 0.039). Moreover, the AIH profile was
also closely associated with hepatitis B e-antigen positivity.
CONCLUSION: ANA-H could be an indicator of early-stage CHB. Dichotomizing the
autoantibody profiles revealed that the PBC profile is strongly associated with
cirrhosis in CHB.

PMCID: PMC4284347
PMID: 25574103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 10;9(11):e112509. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112509.
eCollection 2014.

High levels of soluble CTLA-4 are present in anti-mitochondrial antibody
positive, but not in antibody negative patients with primary biliary cirrhosis.

Saverino D(1), Pesce G(2), Antola P(2), Porcelli B(3), Brusca I(4), Villalta
D(5), Tampoia M(6), Tozzoli R(7), Tonutti E(8), Alessio MG(9), Bagnasco M(2),
Bizzaro N(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine - Section of Human Anatomy, University of 
Genova, Genova, Italy. (2)Autoimmunity Unit, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Genova, Genova, Italy. (3)Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Siena, Siena, Italy. (4)Department of Clinical Pathology, Buccheri 
La Ferla Hospital, Palermo, Italy. (5)Allergology and Clinical Immunology, S.
Maria degli Angeli Hospital, Pordenone, Italy. (6)Laboratory of Clinical
Pathology, University Hospital, Bari, Italy. (7)Clinical Pathology, Department of
Laboratory Medicine, S. Maria degli Angeli Hospital, Pordenone, Italy.
(8)Immunopathology and Allergology Unit, S. Maria della Misericordia Hospital,
Udine, Italy. (9)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Biochemistry Laboratory,
Riuniti Hospital, Bergamo, Italy. (10)Laboratory of Clinical Pathology, San
Antonio Hospital, Tolmezzo, Udine, Italy.

Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is a chronic autoimmune cholestatic liver disease
frequently characterized by anti-mitochondrial autoantibodies (AMA). A minority
of patients are AMA-negative. Cytotoxic-T-Lymphocyte-Antigen-4 (CTLA-4) is a
surface molecule expressed on activated T-cells delivering a critical negative
immunoregulatory signal. A soluble form of CTLA-4 (sCTLA-4) has been detected at 
high concentrations in several autoimmune diseases, and its possible functional
meaning has been suggested. We aimed to evaluate sCTLA-4 concentration in sera of
patients with PBC and to correlate it to immunological abnormalities associated
with the disease. Blood samples were collected from 82 PBC-patients diagnosed
according to international criteria (44 AMA-positive/MIT3-positive and 38
AMA-negative-MIT3-negative), and 65 controls. sCTLA-4 levels were evaluated by
ELISA and Western blot. Increased sCTLA-4 concentrations were found in all
AMA-positive PBC-patients, but in none of the AMA-negative ones, nor in normal
controls or in controls with unrelated liver diseases. sCTLA-4 presence was
associated with autoantibodies against MIT3, but not with nuclear autoantibodies 
(sp100, gp210). This is the first study to demonstrate that levels of sCTLA-4 are
elevated in sera of PBC patients. However, they are clearly restricted to
patients with AMA positivity, suggesting an immunological difference with respect
to AMA-negative ones.

PMCID: PMC4226553
PMID: 25383768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 19;289(51):35326-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.611962. Epub
2014 Nov 3.

Human macrophage SCN5A activates an innate immune signaling pathway for antiviral
host defense.

Jones A(1), Kainz D(1), Khan F(1), Lee C(1), Carrithers MD(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Neurology and Program in Cellular and Molecular
Pathology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706 and. (2)From the Department of Neurology and Program in Cellular 
and Molecular Pathology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53706 and the William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans
Hospital, Madison, Wisconsin 53705 carrithers@neurology.wisc.edu.

Pattern recognition receptors contain a binding domain for pathogen-associated
molecular patterns coupled to a signaling domain that regulates transcription of 
host immune response genes. Here, a novel mechanism that links pathogen
recognition to channel activation and downstream signaling is proposed. We
demonstrate that an intracellular sodium channel variant, human macrophage SCN5A,
initiates signaling and transcription through a calcium-dependent isoform of
adenylate cyclase, ADCY8, and the transcription factor, ATF2. Pharmacological
stimulation with a channel agonist or treatment with cytoplasmic poly(I:C), a
mimic of viral dsRNA, activates this pathway to regulate expression of
SP100-related genes and interferon ß. Electrophysiological analysis reveals that 
the SCN5A variant mediates nonselective outward currents and a small, but
detectable, inward current. Intracellular poly(I:C) markedly augments an inward
voltage-sensitive sodium current and inhibits the outward nonselective current.
These results suggest human macrophage SCN5A initiates signaling in an innate
immune pathway relevant to antiviral host defense. It is postulated that SCN5A is
a novel pathogen sensor and that this pathway represents a channel
activation-dependent mechanism of transcriptional regulation.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4271219
PMID: 25368329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Liver Int. 2015 Feb;35(2):642-51. doi: 10.1111/liv.12690. Epub 2014 Oct 10.

Anti-kelch-like 12 and anti-hexokinase 1: novel autoantibodies in primary biliary
cirrhosis.

Norman GL(1), Yang CY, Ostendorff HP, Shums Z, Lim MJ, Wang J, Awad A,
Hirschfield GM, Milkiewicz P, Bloch DB, Rothschild KJ, Bowlus CL, Adamopoulos IE,
Leung PS, Janssen HJ, Cheung AC, Coltescu C, Gershwin ME.

Author information: 
(1)Inova Diagnostics, San Diego, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Liver Int. 2015 Feb;35(2):299-301.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Using high-density human recombinant protein microarrays, we
identified two potential biomarkers, kelch-like 12 (KLHL12) and hexokinase-1
(HK1), in primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC). The objective of this study was to
determine the diagnostic value of anti-KLHL12/HK1 autoantibodies in PBC. Initial 
discovery used sera from 22 patients with PBC and 62 non-PBC controls. KLHL12 and
HK1 proteins were then analysed for immunoglobulin reactivity by immunoblot and
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in two independent cohorts of PBC and
disease/healthy control patients.
METHODS: Serum samples from 100 patients with PBC and 165 non-PBC disease
controls were analysed by immunoblot and samples from 366 patients with PBC, 174 
disease controls, and 80 healthy donors were tested by ELISA.
RESULTS: Anti-KLHL12 and anti-HK1 antibodies were each detected more frequently
in PBC compared with non-PBC disease controls (P < 0.001). Not only are both
markers highly specific for PBC (=95%) but they also yielded higher sensitivity
than anti-gp210 and anti-sp100 antibodies. Combining anti-HK1 and anti-KLHL12
with available markers (MIT3, gp210 and sp100), increased the diagnostic
sensitivity for PBC. Most importantly, anti-KLHL12 and anti-HK1 antibodies were
present in 10-35% of anti-mitochondrial antibody (AMA)-negative PBC patients and 
adding these two biomarkers to conventional PBC assays dramatically improved the 
serological sensitivity in AMA-negative PBC from 55% to 75% in immunoblot and
48.3% to 68.5% in ELISA.
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of tests for highly specific anti-KLHL12 and anti-HK1
antibodies to AMA and ANA serological assays significantly improves efficacy in
the clinical detection and diagnosis of PBC, especially for AMA-negative
subjects.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4305042
PMID: 25243383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Biochimie. 2014 Dec;107 Pt B:247-56. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2014.09.002. Epub 2014
Sep 21.

Sodium arsenite induces apoptosis and Epstein-Barr virus reactivation in
lymphoblastoid cells.

Zebboudj A(1), Maroui MA(2), Dutrieux J(2), Touil-Boukoffa C(3), Bourouba M(3),
Chelbi-Alix MK(2), Nisole S(4).

Author information: 
(1)LBCM, FSB, Université des Sciences et de la Technologie Houari Boumediene
(USTHB), BP 32, El Alia, Bab Ezzouar, 16111 Algiers, Algeria; INSERM UMR-S 1124, 
Université Paris Descartes, 45 rue des Saints-Pères, 75006 Paris, France.
(2)INSERM UMR-S 1124, Université Paris Descartes, 45 rue des Saints-Pères, 75006 
Paris, France. (3)LBCM, FSB, Université des Sciences et de la Technologie Houari 
Boumediene (USTHB), BP 32, El Alia, Bab Ezzouar, 16111 Algiers, Algeria.
(4)INSERM UMR-S 1124, Université Paris Descartes, 45 rue des Saints-Pères, 75006 
Paris, France. Electronic address: sebastien.nisole@inserm.fr.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is associated with several malignancies, including
carcinomas, such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and lymphomas, such as Burkitt's
lymphoma and Hodgkin's lymphoma. The Latent Membrane Protein 1 (LMP1) is the
major oncogene protein of EBV as its expression is responsible for the induction 
of cell transformation, immortalization and proliferation. Arsenic trioxide was
shown to induce a cytotoxic effect on nasopharyngeal cancer cells associated with
LMP1 down-regulation. However, the effect of arsenic on EBV-associated
lymphoproliferative malignancies has been less studied. We investigated the
effect of two different arsenical compounds, arsenic trioxide (As2O3) and sodium 
arsenite (NaAsO2) on the induction of cell death in P3HR1 cells, an Epstein-Barr 
virus-positive Burkitt lymphoma derived cell line. Both compounds inhibited cell 
growth and induced cell death. By flow-cytometry and Western blot analysis, we
provide evidence that NaAsO2 induced caspase-dependent apoptosis whereas As2O3
triggered autophagic cell death. Furthermore, we show that NaAsO2 treatment led
to a dramatic decrease of the expression level of LMP1 and the cellular protein
PML. Importantly, this down-regulation was associated with a reactivation of EBV 
lytic cycle through the induction of immediate-early proteins Zta and Rta. These 
results are in agreement with a model in which LMP1 maintains EBV in a latent
state by stabilizing PML expression. Altogether, our results suggest that NaAsO2 
would represent a better therapeutic candidate than As2O3 in EBV-induced B
lymphoma for its capacity to promote viral reactivation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. and Société française de biochimie et biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

PMID: 25241256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Clin Chim Acta. 2015 Jan 1;438:135-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2014.08.024. Epub 2014
Aug 27.

Autoantibody profiling of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis using a
multiplexed line-blot assay.

Villalta D(1), Sorrentino MC(2), Girolami E(3), Tampoia M(4), Alessio MG(5),
Brusca I(6), Daves M(7), Porcelli B(8), Barberio G(9), Bizzaro N(10); Study Group
on Autoimmune Diseases of the Italian Society of Laboratory Medicine.

Author information: 
(1)Allergologia e Immunologia Clinica, A.O. S. Maria degli Angeli, Pordenone,
Italy. Electronic address: danilo.villalta@aopn.sanita.fvg.it. (2)Laboratorio
Analisi Chimico-Cliniche e Microbiologiche, ISMETT, Palermo, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Oncoematologia Pediatrica e Medicina Trasfusionale, Ospedale
Bambino Gesù, Roma, Italy. (4)Patologia Clinica, Policlinico Consorziale di Bari,
Italy. (5)Laboratorio Analisi Chimico-Cliniche, Ospedali Riuniti di Bergamo,
Italy. (6)Patologia Clinica, Ospedale Buccheri La Ferla, Palermo, Italy.
(7)Laboratorio Centrale, Ospedale Civile, Merano, BZ, Italy. (8)Dipartimento di
Biotecnologie Mediche, Università di Siena, Italy. (9)Patologia Clinica, Ospedale
Cà Foncello, Treviso, Italy. (10)Patologia Clinica, Ospedale San Antonio,
Tolmezzo, UD, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the autoantibody profile in patients with primary biliary 
cirrhosis (PBC) using a new multiplexed line-blot assay specifically designed for
the diagnosis of autoimmune liver diseases.
METHODS: Sera of 58 consecutive PBC patients and 191 disease controls (144 with
autoimmune liver diseases other than PBC, and 67 with non-autoimmune chronic
liver diseases) were tested by both the multiplexed line-blot Autoimmune Liver
Disease Profile 2 (ALD2) and by IIF on HEp-2 cells and on rat
kidney/liver/stomach tissues. ALD2 contains the following PBC-associated
antigens: AMA-M2, natively purified from bovine heart; M2-E3, a recombinant
fusion protein including the E2 subunits of PDC, BCOADC and OGDC; sp100, PML and 
gp210 recombinant proteins.
RESULTS: With the ALD2 assay, a positive reaction to AMA-M2, M2-E3, sp100, PML
and gp210 in PBC patients was observed in 77.6%, 84.5%, 34.5%, 15.1% and 18.9%,
respectively, of the PBC sera. The overall sensitivity and specificity for PBC
were 98.3% and 93.7%. Using IIF, positivity rates to AMA, and to antinuclear
autoantibodies with membranous/rim-like and multiple nuclear dot patterns were
86.2%, 8.6% and 22.4%, respectively. The overall sensitivity and specificity for 
PBC of the IIF method were 86.2% and 97.9%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The ALD2 line-blot showed a good diagnostic accuracy for PBC and a
higher sensitivity than the IIF method to detect sp100 and gp210 autoantibodies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25172039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Semin Liver Dis. 2014 Aug;34(3):334-40. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1383732. Epub 2014
Jul 24.

Clinical significance of autoantibodies in primary biliary cirrhosis.

Nakamura M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Clinical Research Center in National Hospital Organization (NHO),
Nagasaki Medical Center, Omura, Nagasaki, Japan.

Antimitochondrial, anti-gp210, anti-sp100, and anticentromere antibodies are
specifically detected in primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC). In clinical practice,
they are useful for the diagnosis of PBC or for evaluating disease severity,
clinical phenotype, and long-term outcome. In the typical or classical form of
PBC which shows slow progressive loss of small bile ducts with a parallel
increase in liver fibrosis, anti-gp210 antibodies are a strong risk factor for
progression to jaundice and hepatic failure, whereas the presence of
anticentromere antibodies is a risk factor for progression to cirrhosis and
portal hypertension. Of note, the autoimmune repertoire, which is established
during the early stage of the disease process, can influence the clinical
phenotype and the long-term prognosis of PBC. Because the natural course of PBC
is being altered by treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid, the clinical
significance of these PBC-specific autoantibodies awaits re-evaluation in various
ethnicities.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

PMID: 25057956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jul 17;10(7):e1004274. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004274.
eCollection 2014.

Influence of ND10 components on epigenetic determinants of early KSHV latency
establishment.

Günther T(1), Schreiner S(2), Dobner T(2), Tessmer U(1), Grundhoff A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Virus Genomics, Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for
Experimental Virology, Hamburg, Germany. (2)Research Unit Viral Transformation,
Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg,
Germany.

We have previously demonstrated that acquisition of intricate patterns of
activating (H3K4me3, H3K9/K14ac) and repressive (H3K27me3) histone modifications 
is a hallmark of KSHV latency establishment. The precise molecular mechanisms
that shape the latent histone modification landscape, however, remain unknown.
Promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML-NB), also called nuclear domain 10
(ND10), have emerged as mediators of innate immune responses that can limit viral
gene expression via chromatin based mechanisms. Consequently, although ND10
functions thus far have been almost exclusively investigated in models of
productive herpesvirus infection, it has been proposed that they also may
contribute to the establishment of viral latency. Here, we report the first
systematic study of the role of ND10 during KSHV latency establishment, and link 
alterations in the subcellular distribution of ND10 components to a temporal
analysis of histone modification acquisition and host cell gene expression during
the early infection phase. Our study demonstrates that KSHV infection results in 
a transient interferon response that leads to induction of the ND10 components
PML and Sp100, but that repression by ND10 bodies is unlikely to contribute to
KSHV latency establishment. Instead, we uncover an unexpected role for soluble
Sp100 protein, which is efficiently and permanently relocalized from
nucleoplasmic and chromatin-associated fractions into the insoluble matrix. We
show that LANA expression is sufficient to induce Sp100 relocalization, likely
via mediating SUMOylation of Sp100. Furthermore, we demonstrate that depletion of
soluble Sp100 occurs precisely when repressive H3K27me3 marks first accumulate on
viral genomes, and that knock-down of Sp100 (but not PML or Daxx) facilitates
H3K27me3 acquisition. Collectively, our data support a model in which non-ND10
resident Sp100 acts as a negative regulator of polycomb repressive complex-2
(PRC2) recruitment, and suggest that KSHV may actively escape ND10 silencing
mechanisms to promote establishment of latent chromatin.

PMCID: PMC4102598
PMID: 25033267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 10;9(7):e101916. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101916.
eCollection 2014.

Meta-analysis assessment of GP210 and SP100 for the diagnosis of primary biliary 
cirrhosis.

Hu SL(1), Zhao FR(2), Hu Q(1), Chen WX(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Laboratory Medicine, the Second Hospital Affiliated to
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China. (2)The Department of Gynecology
and obstetrics, Youyang People's Hospital, Chongqing, China.

PURPOSE: To conduct a systematic review of included studies assessing the
association of GP210 and SP100 with the risk of primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC)
using meta-analysis.
METHODS: Five databases, the Cochrane Library, MEDLINE, VIP, CNKI, WANFANG were
used to detect the role of GP210 and SP100 in diagnosis of PBC. Approximately
13,000 participants from several countries were included in this analysis.
Meta-DiSc statistical software was used for analysis.
RESULTS: 25 studies on GP210 and 21 studies on SP100 were included in the
meta-analysis. The DOR, sensitivity, specificity of GP210 in diagnosis of PBC
were 24.854 (11.957-51.660), 0.272 (0.257-0.288), 0.985 (0.982-0.988),
respectively, and they were 9.133 (4.739-17.600), 0.231 (0.213-0.249), 0.977
(0.973-0.981) for SP100.
CONCLUSION: Our meta-analysis indicated both GP210 and SP100 had high specificity
but low sensitivity in diagnosis of PBC.

PMCID: PMC4092088
PMID: 25010534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Virol. 2014 Jun;88(11):6076-92. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00469-14. Epub 2014 Mar 12.

Sp100 isoform-specific regulation of human adenovirus 5 gene expression.

Berscheminski J(1), Wimmer P, Brun J, Ip WH, Groitl P, Horlacher T, Jaffray E,
Hay RT, Dobner T, Schreiner S.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology,
Hamburg, Germany.

Promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) are nuclear structures that
accumulate intrinsic host factors to restrict viral infections. To ensure viral
replication, these must be limited by expression of viral early regulatory
proteins that functionally inhibit PML-NB-associated antiviral effects. To
benefit from the activating capabilities of Sp100A and simultaneously limit
repression by Sp100B, -C, and -HMG, adenoviruses (Ads) employ several features to
selectively and individually target these isoforms. Ads induce relocalization of 
Sp100B, -C, and -HMG from PML-NBs prior to association with viral replication
centers. In contrast, Sp100A is kept at the PML tracks that surround the newly
formed viral replication centers as designated sites of active transcription. We 
concluded that the host restriction factors Sp100B, -C, and -HMG are potentially 
inactivated by active displacement from these sites, whereas Sp100A is retained
to amplify Ad gene expression. Ad-dependent loss of Sp100 SUMOylation is another 
crucial part of the virus repertoire to counteract intrinsic immunity by
circumventing Sp100 association with HP1, therefore limiting chromatin
condensation. We provide evidence that Ad selectively counteracts antiviral
responses and, at the same time, benefits from PML-NB-associated components which
support viral gene expression by actively recruiting them to PML track-like
structures. Our findings provide insights into novel strategies for manipulating 
transcriptional regulation to either inactivate or amplify viral gene
expression.IMPORTANCE: We describe an adenoviral evasion strategy that involves
isoform-specific and active manipulation of the PML-associated restriction factor
Sp100. Recently, we reported that the adenoviral transactivator E1A targets
PML-II to efficiently activate viral transcription. In contrast, the
PML-associated proteins Daxx and ATRX are inhibited by early viral factors. We
show that this concept is more intricate and significant than originally
believed, since adenoviruses apparently take advantage of specific
PML-NB-associated proteins and simultaneously inhibit antiviral measures to
maintain the viral infectious program. Specifically, we observed Ad-induced
relocalization of the Sp100 isoforms B, C, and HMG from PML-NBs juxtaposed with
viral replication centers. In contrast, Sp100A is retained at Ad-induced PML
tracks that surround the newly formed viral replication centers, acting as
designated sites of active transcription. The host restriction factors Sp100B,
-C, and -HMG are potentially inactivated by active displacement from these sites,
whereas Sp100A is retained to amplify Ad gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4093896
PMID: 24623443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Feb 20;10(2):e1003962. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003962.
eCollection 2014.

Reversible silencing of cytomegalovirus genomes by type I interferon governs
virus latency.

Dag F(1), Dölken L(2), Holzki J(1), Drabig A(1), Weingärtner A(1), Schwerk J(3), 
Lienenklaus S(4), Conte I(1), Geffers R(5), Davenport C(6), Rand U(3), Köster
M(3), Weiß S(4), Adler B(7), Wirth D(3), Messerle M(8), Hauser H(3), Cicin-ain
L(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department for Vaccinology/Immune Aging and Chronic Infection, Helmholtz
Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany. (2)Department of Medicine, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (3)Department of Gene
Regulation and Differentiation, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research,
Braunschweig, Germany. (4)Department of Molecular Immunology, Helmholtz Centre
for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany. (5)Department for Genome
Analytics, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatric Pneumology and Neonatology, Medical School Hannover,
Hannover, Germany. (7)Department of Virology, Max von Pettenkofer Institute,
Ludwig Maximillian University, Munich, Germany. (8)Department for Virology,
Medical School Hannover, Hannover, Germany. (9)Department for Vaccinology/Immune 
Aging and Chronic Infection, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research,
Braunschweig, Germany ; Department for Virology, Medical School Hannover,
Hannover, Germany.

Herpesviruses establish a lifelong latent infection posing the risk for virus
reactivation and disease. In cytomegalovirus infection, expression of the major
immediate early (IE) genes is a critical checkpoint, driving the lytic
replication cycle upon primary infection or reactivation from latency. While it
is known that type I interferon (IFN) limits lytic CMV replication, its role in
latency and reactivation has not been explored. In the model of mouse CMV
infection, we show here that IFNß blocks mouse CMV replication at the level of IE
transcription in IFN-responding endothelial cells and fibroblasts. The
IFN-mediated inhibition of IE genes was entirely reversible, arguing that the
IFN-effect may be consistent with viral latency. Importantly, the response to
IFNß is stochastic, and MCMV IE transcription and replication were repressed only
in IFN-responsive cells, while the IFN-unresponsive cells remained permissive for
lytic MCMV infection. IFN blocked the viral lytic replication cycle by
upregulating the nuclear domain 10 (ND10) components, PML, Sp100 and Daxx, and
their knockdown by shRNA rescued viral replication in the presence of IFNß.
Finally, IFNß prevented MCMV reactivation from endothelial cells derived from
latently infected mice, validating our results in a biologically relevant
setting. Therefore, our data do not only define for the first time the molecular 
mechanism of IFN-mediated control of CMV infection, but also indicate that the
reversible inhibition of the virus lytic cycle by IFNß is consistent with the
establishment of CMV latency.

PMCID: PMC3930589
PMID: 24586165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Virol. 2014 May;88(10):5437-43. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00542-14. Epub 2014 Feb 26.

The stability of herpes simplex virus 1 ICP0 early after infection is defined by 
the RING finger and the UL13 protein kinase.

Zhu Z(1), Du T, Zhou G, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1)-infected cell protein 0 (ICP0) is a
multifunctional protein that plays a key role in overcoming numerous facets of
host innate immunity. A key function of ICP0 that requires an intact RING finger 
domain is that of an ubiquitin E3 ligase: ICP0 interacts with at least three
ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes of which one, UbcH5a, is required for degradation
of PML and SP100. A preceding report showed that ICP0 is highly unstable at very 
early times after infection but becomes stable at later times. We report here
that (i) the degradation of ICP0 is not infected cell specific, (ii) the
degradation does not require the interaction of ICP0 with either UbcH5a, UbcH6,
or UbcH9, (iii) ICP0 is degraded both early and late in cells infected with a
mutant lacking the UL13 protein kinase, (iv) ICP0 encoded by wild-type virus or
the <U+0394>UL13 mutant is stable in cells transfected with a plasmid encoding UL13
before infection, (v) ICP0 carrying mutations in the RING finger domain is stable
both early and late in infection, and, finally, (vi) in cells infected with both 
wild type and RING finger mutant only the wild-type ICP0 is rapidly degraded at
early times. The results suggest that the stability of ICP0 is mediated by the
UL13 protein kinase and that the target of proteolysis is a site at or near the
RING domain of ICP0.IMPORTANCE: ICP0, a major regulatory protein of HSV-1, turns 
over rapidly early in infection but becomes stable at late times. We report that 
stabilization requires the presence of UL13 protein kinase and that an ICP0 with 
mutations in RING finger is stable. In mixed infections mutant ICP0 is stable,
whereas the wild-type ICP0 is degraded. Our findings suggest that the lifestyle
of HSV-1 requires an ICP0 that turns over rapidly if late proteins are absent.

PMCID: PMC4019132
PMID: 24574411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jan;10(1):e1003863. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003863. Epub
2014 Jan 16.

Kaposi's sarcoma associated herpesvirus tegument protein ORF75 is essential for
viral lytic replication and plays a critical role in the antagonization of
ND10-instituted intrinsic immunity.

Full F(1), Jungnickl D(1), Reuter N(1), Bogner E(2), Brulois K(3), Scholz B(1),
Stürzl M(4), Myoung J(5), Jung JU(3), Stamminger T(1), Ensser A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical and Molecular Virology, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany. (2)Institut
für Medizinische Virologie, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 
(3)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America. (4)Division of Molecular and Experimental Surgery, Universitätsklinikum 
Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(5)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Emeryville, California, United
States of America.

Nuclear domain 10 (ND10) components are restriction factors that inhibit
herpesviral replication. Effector proteins of different herpesviruses can
antagonize this restriction by a variety of strategies, including degradation or 
relocalization of ND10 proteins. We investigated the interplay of Kaposi's
Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus (KSHV) infection and cellular defense by nuclear
domain 10 (ND10) components. Knock-down experiments in primary human cells show
that KSHV-infection is restricted by the ND10 components PML and Sp100, but not
by ATRX. After KSHV infection, ATRX is efficiently depleted and Daxx is dispersed
from ND10, indicating that these two ND10 components can be antagonized by KSHV. 
We then identified the ORF75 tegument protein of KSHV as the viral factor that
induces the disappearance of ATRX and relocalization of Daxx. ORF75 belongs to a 
viral protein family (viral FGARATs) that has homologous proteins in all
gamma-herpesviruses. Isolated expression of ORF75 in primary cells induces a
relocalization of PML and dispersal of Sp100, indicating that this viral effector
protein is able to influence multiple ND10 components. Moreover, by constructing 
a KSHV mutant harboring a stop codon at the beginning of ORF75, we could
demonstrate that ORF75 is absolutely essential for viral replication and the
initiation of viral immediate-early gene expression. Using recombinant viruses
either carrying Flag- or YFP-tagged variants of ORF75, we could further
corroborate the role of ORF75 in the antagonization of ND10-mediated intrinsic
immunity, and show that it is independent of the PML antagonist vIRF3. Members of
the viral FGARAT family target different ND10 components, suggesting that the
ND10 targets of viral FGARAT proteins have diversified during evolution. We
assume that overcoming ND10 intrinsic defense constitutes a critical event in the
replication of all herpesviruses; on the other hand, restriction of herpesviral
replication by ND10 components may also promote latency as the default outcome of
infection.

PMCID: PMC3894210
PMID: 24453968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Virol. 2014 Apr;88(7):3874-84. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03018-13. Epub 2014 Jan 22.

Inefficient type I interferon-mediated antiviral protection of primary mouse
neurons is associated with the lack of apolipoprotein l9 expression.

Kreit M(1), Paul S, Knoops L, De Cock A, Sorgeloos F, Michiels T.

Author information: 
(1)Université Catholique de Louvain, de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium.

We examined the antiviral response promoted by type I interferons (IFN) in
primary mouse neurons. IFN treatment of neuron cultures strongly upregulated the 
transcription of IFN-stimulated genes but conferred a surprisingly low resistance
to infection by neurotropic viruses such as Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis
virus (TMEV) or vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV). Response of primary mouse
neurons to IFN treatment was heterogeneous, as many neurons failed to express the
typical IFN response marker Mx1 after IFN treatment. This heterogeneous response 
of primary neurons correlated with a low level of basal expression of
IFN-stimulated genes, such as Stat1, that are involved in signal transduction of 
the IFN response. In addition, transcriptomic analysis identified 15
IFN-responsive genes whose expression was low in IFN-treated primary neurons
compared to that of primary fibroblasts derived from the same mice (Dhx58, Gvin1,
Sp100, Ifi203 isoforms 1 and 2, Irgm2, Lgals3bp, Ifi205, Apol9b, Ifi204, Ifi202b,
Tor3a, Slfn2, Ifi35, Lgals9). Among these genes, the gene coding for
apolipoprotein L9b (Apol9b) displayed antiviral activity against Theiler's virus 
when overexpressed in L929 cells or in primary neurons. Accordingly, knocking
down Apol9b expression in L929 cells increased viral replication. Therefore, we
identified a new antiviral protein induced by interferon, ApoL9b, whose lack of
expression in primary neurons likely contributes to the high sensitivity of these
cells to viral infection.IMPORTANCE: The type I interferon (IFN) response is an
innate immune defense mechanism that is critical to contain viral infection in
the host until an adaptive immune response can be mounted. Neurons are a paradigm
for postmitotic, highly differentiated cells. Our data show that primary mouse
neurons that are exposed to type I interferon remain surprisingly susceptible to 
viral infection. On one hand, the low level of basal expression of some factors
in neurons might prevent a rapid response of these cells. On the other hand, some
genes that are typically activated by type I interferon in other cell types are
expressed at much lower levels in neurons. Among these genes is the gene encoding
apolipoprotein L9, a protein that proved to have antiviral activity against the
neurotropic Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus. Our data suggest important 
functional differences in the IFN response mounted by specific cell populations.

PMCID: PMC3993554
PMID: 24453359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Anal Chem. 2014 Jan 21;86(2):967-72. doi: 10.1021/ac403753r. Epub 2014 Jan 6.

Visualizing and quantifying protein polySUMOylation at the single-molecule level.

Yang Y(1), Zhang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Single-molecule Detection and Imaging Laboratory, Shenzhen Institutes of
Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences , Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055,
China.

Protein polySUMOylation, the attachment of small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)
chains to the target protein, is associated with a variety of physiological
processes. However, the analysis of protein polySUMOylation is often complicated 
by the heterogeneity of SUMO-target conjugates. Here, we develop a new strategy
to visualize and quantify polySUMOylation at the single-molecule level by
integrating the tetracysteine (TC) tag labeling technology and total internal
reflection fluorescence (TIRF)-based single-molecule imaging. As a
proof-of-concept, we employ the human SUMO-2 as the model. The addition of TC tag
to SUMO-2 can specifically translate the SUMO-mediated modification into visible 
fluorescence signal without disturbing the function of SUMO-2. The SUMO monomers 
display homogeneous fluorescence spots at the single-molecule level, whereas the 
mixed SUMO chains exhibit nonuniform fluorescence spots with a wide range of
intensities. Analysis of the number and the brightness of fluorescence spots
enable quantitative measurement of the polySUMOylation degree inside the cells
under different physiological conditions. Due to the frequent occurrence of
posttranslational modification by polymeric chains in cells, this single-molecule
strategy has the potential to be broadly applied for studying protein
posttranslational modification in normal cellular physiology and disease
etiology.

PMID: 24383460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 3;289(1):299-311. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.519934. Epub 2013
Nov 25.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase-mediated licensing of interferon regulatory
factor 3/7 reinforces the cell response to virus.

Schmid S(1), Sachs D, tenOever BR.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Microbiology and.

The induction of the intrinsic antiviral defense in mammals relies on the
accumulation of foreign genetic material. As such, complete engagement of this
response is limited to replication-competent viruses. Interferon regulatory
factors (IRFs) are mediators of this defense with shared enhancer elements but
display a spectrum of transcriptional potential. Here we describe a mechanism
designed to enhance this response should a pathogen not be successfully
inhibited. We find that activation of IRF7 results in the induction of MAP3K8 and
restructuring of the antiviral transcriptome. MAP3K8 mediates the phosphorylation
and repression of IRF3 homodimers to promote greater transcriptional activity
through utilization of IRF3:IRF7 heterodimers. Among the genes influenced by the 
MAP3K8/IRF7 signaling axis are members of the SP100 gene family that serve as
general transcriptional enhancers of the antiviral defense. We propose that this 
feed forward loop serves to reinforce the cellular response and is reserved for
imminent threats to the host.

PMCID: PMC3879553
PMID: 24275658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Feb;1842(2):326-37. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.11.020.
Epub 2013 Nov 22.

The biophysical and biochemical properties of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE)
protein.

Perniola R(1), Musco G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics - Neonatal Intensive Care, V. Fazzi Regional
Hospital, Piazza F. Muratore, I-73100, Lecce, Italy. Electronic address:
rperniola@hotmail.com. (2)Biomolecular NMR Laboratory, Center of Translational
Genomics and Bioinformatics, Dulbecco Telethon Institute at San Raffaele
Scientific Institute, Via Olgettina 58, I-20132, Milan, Italy. Electronic
address: musco.giovanna@hsr.it.

AIRE (for autoimmune regulator) is a multidomain protein that performs a
fundamental function in the thymus and possibly in the secondary lymphoid organs:
the regulation, especially in the sense of activation, of the process of gene
transcription in cell lines deputed to the presentation of self-antigens to the
maturing T lymphocytes. The apoptosis of the elements bearing T-cell receptors
with critical affinity for the exhibited self-antigens prevents the escape of
autoreactive clones and represents a simple and efficient mechanism of deletional
self-tolerance. However, AIRE action relies on an articulated complex of
biophysical and biochemical properties, in most cases attributable to single
subspecialized domains. Here a thorough review of the matter is presented, with a
privileged look at the pathogenic changes of AIRE that interfere with such
properties and lead to the impairment in its chief function.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24275490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. MBio. 2013 Nov 5;4(6):e00845-13. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00845-13.

Sp100 provides intrinsic immunity against human papillomavirus infection.

Stepp WH(1), Meyers JM, McBride AA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Most DNA viruses associate with, and reorganize, nuclear domain 10 (ND10) bodies 
upon entry into the host nucleus. In this study, we examine the roles of the ND10
components PML, Sp100, and Daxx in the establishment of human papillomavirus type
18 (HPV18) infection of primary human keratinocytes. HPV18 DNA or HPV18
quasivirus was introduced into primary human keratinocytes depleted of each ND10 
protein by small interfering RNA technology, and genome establishment was
determined by using a quantitative immortalization assay and measurements of
viral transcription and DNA replication. Keratinocyte depletion of Sp100 resulted
in a substantial increase in the number of HPV18-immortalized colonies and a
corresponding increase in viral transcription and DNA replication. However, Sp100
repressed viral transcription and replication only during the initial stages of
viral establishment, suggesting that Sp100 acts as a repressor of incoming HPV
DNA.IMPORTANCE: The intrinsic immune system provides a first-line defense against
invading pathogens. Host cells contain nuclear bodies (ND10) that are important
for antiviral defense, yet many DNA viruses localize here upon cell entry.
However, viruses also disrupt, reorganize, and modify individual components of
the bodies. In this study, we show that one of the ND10 components, Sp100, limits
the infection of human skin cells by human papillomavirus (HPV). HPVs are
important pathogens that cause many types of infection of the cutaneous and
mucosal epithelium and are the causative agents of several human cancers.
Understanding how host cells counteract HPV infection could provide insight into 
antimicrobial therapies that could limit initial infection.

PMCID: PMC3892783
PMID: 24194542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Virol. 2013 Dec;87(24):13287-96. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02304-13. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

Two overlapping regions within the N-terminal half of the herpes simplex virus 1 
E3 ubiquitin ligase ICP0 facilitate the degradation and dissociation of PML and
dissociation of Sp100 from ND10.

Perusina Lanfranca M(1), Mostafa HH, Davido DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas,
USA.

Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) establishes a lifelong latent infection in sensory
neurons and can reactivate from latency under stress conditions. To promote lytic
infection, the virus must interact with specific cellular factors to evade the
host's antiviral defenses. The HSV-1 E3 ubiquitin ligase, infected cell protein 0
(ICP0), activates transcription of viral genes, in part, by mediating the
degradation of certain cellular proteins that play a role in host antiviral
mechanisms. One component of the cellular defenses that ICP0 disrupts is the
suborganelle, nuclear domain 10 (ND10), by inducing the degradation and
dissociation of the major organizer of ND10, a promyelocytic leukemia (PML) and
ND10 constituent, Sp100. Because previously identified domains in ICP0 explain
only partially how it directs the degradation and dissociation of PML and Sp100, 
we hypothesized that additional regions within ICP0 may contribute to these
activities, which in turn facilitate efficient viral replication. To test this
hypothesis, we used a series of ICP0 truncation mutants and examined PML protein 
levels and PML and Sp100 immunofluorescence staining in human embryonic lung
cells. Our results demonstrate that two overlapping regions within the central
N-terminal portion of ICP0 (residues 212 to 311) promoted the dissociation and
degradation of PML and dissociation of Sp100 (residues 212 to 427). In
conclusion, we have identified two additional regions in ICP0 involved in
altering ND10 antiviral defenses in a cell culture model of HSV-1 infection.

PMCID: PMC3838275
PMID: 24089549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2013 May;21(5):359-62. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1007-3418.2013.05.011.

[Clinical features of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis and anti-SP100
autoantibody positivity].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang YM(1), Bao WM, You LY, Jiang HJ, Yang JH.

Author information: 
(1)The Center of Hepatology, the 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical
University, Kunming, China. tangyingmei_med@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the clinical features of patients with primary biliary
cirrhosis (PBC) and positive expression of sp100 autoantibody in order to
generate a clinical screening profile that may help to increase early diagnosis
and timely initiation of therapy.
METHODS: The clinical data of 70 patients who were diagnosed with PBC by liver
biopsy between January 2006 to December 2009 at the Second Affiliated Hospital of
Kunming Medical University of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Medicine were
retrospectively collected for analysis. The patients were divided according to
expression of anti-sp100: positive patients, n = 12; negative patients, n = 58.
The groups were comparatively analyzed for differences in clinical, biochemical, 
immunological, and histopathological parameters. Normally distributed data was
compared by t-test, and non-normally data was compared by rank-sum test.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference in age among the sp100-positive and 
sp100-negative patients (51.6 +/- 9.5 vs. 50.0 +/- 14.7 years, P more than 0.05).
The sp100-positive group had significantly more women (80.0% vs. 61.9%, X2 =
0.32, P more than 0.05) and more patients with atypical symptoms (18.2% vs.
13.8%) but the difference of the latter did not reach statistical significance.
The sp100-positive group had significantly higher levels of alkaline phosphatase 
(ALP; 466 vs. 163 U/L, Z = 3.71), gamma-glutamyl-transpeptidase (GGT; 728 vs. 154
U/L, Z = 3.38), and immunoglobulin M (IgM; 4.25 +/- 2.86 vs. 2.81 +/- 2.15, t =
2.06, P less than 0.05). Forty of the total patients tested negative for
antimitochondrial (AMA)-M2 antibodies, and eight of those were sp100-positive
(20.0%) while 18 were antinuclear (ANA) antibody-positive (45.0%). There were
significantly more AMA-M2-negative/ANA-positive patients than sp100-positive
patients (P = 0.021). Anti-sp100 expression was not associated with the
pathological stage of PBC (R1 = 5.500, P more than 0.05).
CONCLUSION: SP100-positive PBC may show a bias towards the female sex, and may be
characterized by enhanced serum levels of ALP, GGT, and IgM. Further clinical
differences may manifest as the disease progresses, and changes in
autoantibodies' expression and liver function markers should be carefully
monitored in follow-up.

PMID: 24025137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cancer Res. 2013 Aug 1;73(15):4960-1. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1715.

Retraction: Sp100 as a potent tumor suppressor: accelerated senescence and rapid 
malignant transformation of human fibroblasts through modulation of an embryonic 
stem cell program.

Negorev DG, Vladimirova OV, Kossenkov AV, Demarest RM, Showe MK, Rauscher FJ 3rd,
Showe LC, Nikonova EV, Capobianco AJ.

Retraction of
    Negorev DG, Vladimirova OV, Kossenkov AV, Nikonova EV, Demarest RM, Capobianco
AJ, Showe MK, Rauscher FJ 3rd, Showe LC, Maul GG. Cancer Res. 2010 Dec
1;70(23):9991-10001.

PMCID: PMC3843944
PMID: 23907639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Virol. 2013 Oct;87(19):10412-22. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00425-13. Epub 2013 Jul 17.

Virion factors that target Daxx to overcome intrinsic immunity.

Schreiner S(1), Wodrich H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology,
Hamburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2013 Dec;87(23):13085.

PML nuclear bodies and their associated functions are part of an intrinsic
cellular mechanism aimed at maintaining transcriptional control over viral gene
expression and preventing replication of invading viruses. To overcome these
barriers, many viruses express early nonstructural, multifunctional proteins to
support the viral replication cycle or modulate host immune responses. Virion
proteins constituting the invading particle are traditionally investigated for
their role in transport during entry or egress and in the assembly of new
virions. The additional functions of virion proteins have largely been ignored,
in contrast to those of their nonstructural counterparts. A number of recent
reports suggest that several virion proteins may also play vital roles in gene
activation processes, in particular by counteracting intrinsic immune mechanisms 
mediated by the PML nuclear body-associated cellular factors Daxx, ATRX, and
Sp100. These virion proteins share several features with their more potent
nonstructural counterparts, and they may serve to bridge the gap in the early
phase of an infection until immediate early viral gene expression is established.
In this review, we discuss how virion proteins are an integral part of gene
regulation among several viral families and to what extent structural proteins of
incoming virions may contribute to species barrier, latency, and oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3807389
PMID: 23864634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Virol. 2013 Sep;87(18):10244-54. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01487-13. Epub 2013 Jul 17.

Interaction of herpes simplex virus ICP0 with ND10 bodies: a sequential process
of adhesion, fusion, and retention.

Gu H(1), Zheng Y, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, 
USA. haidong.gu@wayne.edu

On entry into the nucleus, herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) DNA localizes to
nuclear bodies known as ND10. Gene repression imposed by ND10 is released by a
viral protein, ICP0, via degradation of the ND10 constituents promyelocytic
leukemia protein (PML) and Sp100 and the subsequent dispersal of ND10 bodies. In 
order to understand the dynamic interaction between ICP0 and ND10, we carried out
deletion mapping to identify the domains of ICP0 responsible for its association 
with ND10. Here, we report the following. (i) An ND10 entry signal (ND10-ES),
located between residues 245 and 474, is required for ICP0 to penetrate and fuse 
with ND10. ICP0 lacking ND10-ES adheres to the surface of ND10 but fails to
enter. (ii) In the absence of ND10-ES, the E3 ubiquitin ligase of ICP0
facilitates the transient adhesion of the truncated ICP0 to the ND10 surface,
whereas the presence of ND10-ES in ICP0 renders ND10 fusion regardless of the E3 
ligase activity. (iii) The C terminus of ICP0 is required for retention of ICP0
in ND10 but plays no role in the recruitment process. (iv) The adverse effects of
an inactive RING domain on viral replication are partially reversed by deleting
either ND10-ES or the C-terminal retention domain, suggesting that additional
ICP0 functions require the release of ICP0 from ND10. Based on these results, we 
conclude that association of ICP0 and ND10 is a dynamic process, in which three
sequential steps--adhesion, fusion, and retention--are adopted to stabilize the
interaction. A faithful execution of these steps defines the ultimate
productivity of the virus.

PMCID: PMC3753982
PMID: 23864622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Immunoassay Immunochem. 2013;34(4):346-55. doi: 10.1080/15321819.2012.741088.

Detection of anti-SP100 antibodies in primary biliary cirrhosis. Comparison of
ELISA and immunofluorescence.

Bauer A(1), Habior A, Kraszewska E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Centre of
Postgraduate Education, Warsaw, Poland. alabauer@wp.pl

Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is, which a chronic, autoimmune liver disease.
Some patients have antinuclear antibodies anti-Sp100, which are considered to be 
disease-specific. We compared an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and
indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) for detection of anti-Sp100. The sensitivity of
anti-Sp100 determined by ELISA and IIF was 44% and 34%, respectively. Specificity
was 99% for ELISA and 98% for IIF, respectively. The positive and negative
predictive value (PPV, NPV) for anti-Sp100 determined by ELISA were 98%, 60% and 
95%, 56% for IIF respectively. IIF required substantial experience in
interpreting subjective patterns, whereas ELISA was more sensitive, cheaper, less
time consuming, and produced clear-cut quantitative results.

PMID: 23859785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Virology. 2013 Sep 1;443(2):338-48. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.05.024. Epub 2013
Jul 3.

Death-domain associated protein-6 (DAXX) mediated apoptosis in hantavirus
infection is counter-balanced by activation of interferon-stimulated nuclear
transcription factors.

Khaiboullina SF(1), Morzunov SP, Boichuk SV, Palotás A, St Jeor S, Lombardi VC,
Rizvanov AA.

Author information: 
(1)Whittemore Peterson Institute, University of Nevada-Reno, Reno, USA.
sv.khaiboullina@gmail.com

Hantaviruses are negative strand RNA species that replicate predominantly in the 
cytoplasm. They also activate numerous cellular responses, but their involvement 
in nuclear processes is yet to be established. Using human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVECs), this study investigates the molecular finger-print of
nuclear transcription factors during hantavirus infection. The
viral-replication-dependent activation of pro-myelocytic leukemia protein (PML)
was followed by subsequent localization in nuclear bodies (NBs). PML was also
found in close proximity to activated Sp100 nuclear antigen and
interferon-stimulated gene 20 kDa protein (ISG-20), but co-localization with
death-domain associated protein-6 (DAXX) was not observed. These data demonstrate
that hantavirus triggers PML activation and localization in NBs in the absence of
DAXX-PLM-NB co-localization. The results suggest that viral infection interferes 
with DAXX-mediated apoptosis, and expression of interferon-activated Sp100 and
ISG-20 proteins may indicate intracellular intrinsic antiviral attempts.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 23830076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Autoimmunity. 2013 Nov;46(7):471-9. doi: 10.3109/08916934.2013.801461. Epub 2013 
Jun 19.

Clinical significance of the fluctuation of primary biliary cirrhosis-related
autoantibodies during the course of the disease.

Gatselis NK(1), Zachou K, Norman GL, Gabeta S, Papamichalis P, Koukoulis GK,
Dalekos GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Research Laboratory of Internal Medicine, Medical
School, University of Thessaly , Larissa , Greece .

Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is a chronic cholestatic disease characterized by
the presence of antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA). PBC-specific antinuclear
antibodies (ANA) have been characterized and associated with disease progression 
and outcome. We evaluated the clinical significance of the presence and serial
changes in titers of AMA, PBC-specific ANA (anti-gp210, anti-sp100) and
anti-chromatin antibodies. Over a median (IQR) period of 35 (36) months, 512
specimens were collected from 110 patients. Autoantibodies were detected by
commercial ELISAs (INOVA Diagnostics). Biochemical, clinical, and histological
status were included at initial presentation and during follow-up visits. The
Mayo risk score was calculated as a prognostic index at each time point. Liver
biopsy findings were classified according to Ludwig's classification and
biochemical response to ursodeoxycholic acid was evaluated according to Pares. At
baseline, AMA IgG and IgA, anti-gp210 IgG, anti-sp100 IgG and anti-chromatin IgG 
were detected in 92/110 (83.6%), 57/110 (51.8%), 5/110 (4.5%), 14/110 (12.7%),
and 0/110 (0%) patients, respectively. Positivity for all autoantibodies apart
from anti-chromatin, at baseline visit (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>110 patients), in all tested sera
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>512) as well as increased autoantibodies titers during follow-up were
associated with biochemically and/or histologically advanced disease. A decrease 
of anti-sp100 titers but not of anti-gp210 titers during follow-up was associated
with improvement of Mayo risk score (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025) and response to ursodeoxycholic
acid (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.016). These results suggest that detection of AMA and PBC-specific
ANA was correlated with disease severity. Serial changes of anti-sp100 titers and
not of anti-gp210 titers might prove useful for monitoring the disease course and
treatment outcome.

PMID: 23777462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Int J Oncol. 2013 Aug;43(2):561-5. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.1966. Epub 2013 May 27.

Genetic differences between Asian and Caucasian chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Kawamata N(1), Moreilhon C, Saitoh T, Karasawa M, Bernstein BK, Sato-Otsubo A,
Ogawa S, Raynaud S, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. 
kawamatan@cshs.org

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a common hematological malignancy in
Western countries. However, this disease is very rare in Asian countries. It is
not clear whether the mechanisms of development of CLL in Caucasians and Asians
are the same. We compared genetic abnormalities in Asian and Caucasian CLL using 
250k GeneChip arrays. Both Asian and Caucasian CLL had four common genetic
abnormalities: deletion of 13q14.3, trisomy 12, abnormalities of ATM (11q) and
abnormalities of 17p. Interestingly, trisomy 12 and deletion of 13q14.3 were
mutually exclusive in both groups. We also found that deletions of miR 34b/34c
(11q), caspase 1/4/5 (11q), Rb1 (13q) and DLC1 (8p) are common in both ethnic
groups. Asian CLL more frequently had gain of 3q and 18q. These suggest that
classic genomic changes in the Asian and Caucasina CLL are same. Further, we
found amplification of IRF4 and deletion of the SP140/SP100 genes; these genes
have been reported as CLL-associated genes by previous genome-wide-association
study. We have found classic genomic abnormalities in Asian CLL as well as novel 
genomic alteration in CLL.

PMCID: PMC3775563
PMID: 23708256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Virology. 2013 Oct;445(1-2):175-86. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.04.017. Epub 2013
May 17.

L2, the minor capsid protein of papillomavirus.

Wang JW(1), Roden RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287,
USA.

The capsid protein L2 plays major roles in both papillomavirus assembly and the
infectious process. While L1 forms the majority of the capsid and can
self-assemble into empty virus-like particles (VLPs), L2 is a minor capsid
component and lacks the capacity to form VLPs. However, L2 co-assembles with L1
into VLPs, enhancing their assembly. L2 also facilitates encapsidation of the ~8 
kbp circular and nucleosome-bound viral genome during assembly of the
non-enveloped T=7d virions in the nucleus of terminally differentiated epithelial
cells, although, like L1, L2 is not detectably expressed in infected basal cells.
With respect to infection, L2 is not required for particles to bind to and enter 
cells. However L2 must be cleaved by furin for endosome escape. L2 then travels
with the viral genome to the nucleus, wherein it accumulates at ND-10 domains.
Here, we provide an overview of the biology of L2.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3770800
PMID: 23689062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Autoimmun. 2013 Aug;44:61-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2013.04.002. Epub 2013 May
15.

Genetic analysis of interferon induced thyroiditis (IIT): evidence for a key role
for MHC and apoptosis related genes and pathways.

Hasham A(1), Zhang W, Lotay V, Haggerty S, Stefan M, Concepcion E, Dieterich DT, 
Tomer Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITD) have become increasingly recognized as a
complication of interferon-alpha (IFNa) therapy in patients with chronic
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. Interferon-induced thyroiditis (IIT) can
manifest as clinical thyroiditis in approximately 15% of HCV patients receiving
IFNa and subclinical thyroiditis in up to 40% of patients, possibly resulting in 
either dose reduction or discontinuation of IFNa treatment. However, the exact
mechanisms that lead to the development of IIT are unknown and may include
IFNa-mediated immune-recruitment as well as direct toxic effects on thyroid
follicular cells. We hypothesized that IIT develops in genetically predisposed
individuals whose threshold for developing thyroiditis is lowered by IFNa.
Therefore, our aim was to identify the susceptibility genes for IIT. We used a
genomic convergence approach combining genetic association data with
transcriptome analysis of genes upregulated by IFNa. Integrating results of
genetic association, transcriptome data, pathway, and haplotype analyses enabled 
the identification of 3 putative loci, SP100/110/140 (2q37.1), HLA (6p21.3), and 
TAP1 (6p21.3) that may be involved in the pathogenesis of IIT. Immune-regulation 
and apoptosis emerged as the predominant mechanisms underlying the etiology of
IIT.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3740053
PMID: 23683877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Br J Biomed Sci. 2013;70(1):10-4.

Clinical significance of autoantibodies directed against nuclear and cytoplasmic 
antigens in autoimmune liver disease.

McLean F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Charing Cross Hospital, Fulham Palace Road, London
W6 8RE. fiona.x.mclean@questdiagnostics.com

Previous research carried out in the area of autoimmune liver disease and
autoantibody specificity has not been conclusive, and correlation between the two
in most situations remains unclear. This study aims to facilitate a consensus on 
these autoantibodies in an unselected patient population and their relationship
to autoimmune liver disease (AILD). The study detected two autoantibodies that
show reasonable specificity for primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), anti-sp100 and
anti-gp210, and it may be clinically useful to report any antimitochondrial
antibody (AMA) detected, as this may be a sign of very early PBC. The
inter-methodological differences in assays available for detection of the
autoantibodies were also noted. Care must be taken when selecting methods to
detect these autoantibodies.

PMID: 23617092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2013 Apr 18;45(2):233-7.

[Clinical manifestation and autoantibody profile in 123 patients with primary
biliary cirrhosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu HH(1), Fu JL, Xu J, Luo SQ, Liu ZW, Wang FS.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School of Chinese PLA, Bejing 100853, China; Chinese PLA 302 Hospital,
Bejing 100039, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the autoantibody profile and its clinical implication
in the patients with primary biliary cirrhosis.
METHODS: During the period of 2008 to 2010,123 patients with primary biliary
cirrhosis (PBC) in our hospital were enrolled in this study, of whom, 70 patients
were with cirrhosis and 53 without cirrhosis, The autoantibody profile was tested
for each patient by using immunoblotting and indirect immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: Of the 123 PBC patients with liver cirrhosis, 49% were positive with
serum ANA positive; 47%, 51%, 54%, 31% and 49% were positive with serum
anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-mitochondrial antibodies-M2 (AMA-M2),
anti-promyelocytic leukemia (anti-PML), anti-sp100 antibodies (anti-sp100),
anti-Ro-52 antibody (anti-52KD), respectively. By contrast, of the PBC patients
without liver cirrhosis, only 38%, 37%, 51%, 60%, 30% and 51% were positive with 
serum ANA, AMA, AMA-M2, anti-PML, anti-sp100 and anti-52KD, respectively.There
was the statistical difference between the two groups. In addition, it was also
found that the anti-gp210 antibody positive group had a higher Mayo risk
score,lower serum albumin and severe cholestasis and impaired liver function when
compared with anti-gp210 antibody negative patients.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that serum AMA is helpful for early diagnosis of
PBC, and in particular, serum ANA positivity can help make a diagnosis for the
AMA-negative patients. These indicate that anti-gp210 antibodies appear in the
late course of PBC.Anti-gp210 positive PBC patients have more severe cholestasis 
and liver dysfunction.

PMID: 23591343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 May;24(9):1454-68. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-09-0669. Epub 2013
Mar 13.

Sp100A promotes chromatin decondensation at a cytomegalovirus-promoter-regulated 
transcription site.

Newhart A(1), Negorev DG, Rafalska-Metcalf IU, Yang T, Maul GG, Janicki SM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Oncogenesis Program, Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA.

Promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML-NBs)/nuclear domain 10s (ND10s) are
nuclear structures that contain many transcriptional and chromatin regulatory
factors. One of these, Sp100, is expressed from a single-copy gene and spliced
into four isoforms (A, B, C, and HMG), which differentially regulate
transcription. Here we evaluate Sp100 function in single cells using an inducible
cytomegalovirus-promoter-regulated transgene, visualized as a chromatinized
transcription site. Sp100A is the isoform most strongly recruited to the
transgene array, and it significantly increases chromatin decondensation.
However, Sp100A cannot overcome Daxx- and a-thalassemia mental retardation,
X-linked (ATRX)-mediated transcriptional repression, which indicates that
PML-NB/ND10 factors function within a regulatory hierarchy. Sp100A increases and 
Sp100B, which contains a SAND domain, decreases acetyl-lysine regulatory factor
levels at activated sites, suggesting that Sp100 isoforms differentially regulate
transcription by modulating lysine acetylation. In contrast to Daxx, ATRX, and
PML, Sp100 is recruited to activated arrays in cells expressing the herpes
simplex virus type 1 E3 ubiquitin ligase, ICP0, which degrades all Sp100 isoforms
except unsumoylated Sp100A. The recruitment Sp100A(K297R), which cannot be
sumoylated, further suggests that sumoylation plays an important role in
regulating Sp100 isoform levels at transcription sites. This study provides
insight into the ways in which viruses may modulate Sp100 to promote their
replication cycles.

PMCID: PMC3639056
PMID: 23485562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Clin Ophthalmol. 2013;7:417-22. doi: 10.2147/OPTH.S35121. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Central corneal thickness and anterior chamber depth measurement by Sirius(®)
Scheimpflug tomography and ultrasound.

Jorge J(1), Rosado J, Díaz-Rey J, González-Méijome J.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Experimental Optometry Research Laboratory, Center of Physics
(Optometry), School of Sciences, University of Minho, Braga.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to compare the accuracy of the new
Sirius(®) Scheimpflug anterior segment examination device for measurement of
central corneal thickness (CCT) and anterior chamber depth (ACD) with that of CCT
measurements obtained by ultrasound pachymetry and ACD measurements obtained by
ultrasound biometry, respectively.
METHODS: CCT and ACD was measured in 50 right eyes from 50 healthy subjects using
a Sirius Scheimpflug camera, SP100 ultrasound pachymetry, and US800 ultrasound
biometry.
RESULTS: CCT measured with the Sirius was 546 ± 39 µm and 541 ± 35 µm with SP100 
ultrasound pachymetry (P = 0.003). The difference was statistically significant
(mean difference 4.68 ± 10.5 µm; limits of agreement -15.8 to 25.20 µm). ACD
measured with the Sirius was 2.96 ± 0.3 mm compared with 3.36 ± 0.29 mm using
US800 ultrasound biometry (P < 0.001). The difference was statistically
significant (mean difference -0.40 ± 0.16 mm; limits of agreement -0.72 to 0.07
mm). When the ACD values obtained using ultrasound biometry were corrected
according to the values for CCT measured by ultrasound, the agreement increased
significantly between both technologies for ACD measurements (mean difference
0.15 ± 0.16 mm; limits of agreement -0.16 to 0.45 mm).
CONCLUSION: CCT and ACD measured by Sirius and ultrasound methods showing good
agreement between repeated measurements obtained in the same subjects
(repeatability) with either instrument. However, CCT and ACD values, even after
correcting ultrasound ACD by subtracting the CCT value obtained with either
technology should not be used interchangeably.

PMCID: PMC3587393
PMID: 23467857  [PubMed]


51. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Nov 6;92(41):2918-20.

[Baseline analysis of refractory primary biliary cirrhosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang L(1), Kong F, Zhang X, Xu D, Hu ZJ, Li YZ, Zhang FC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To summarize the clinical characters of refractory primary biliary
cirrhosis (PBC) versus typical ones and explore the risk factors of prognosis.
METHODS: From 2009 to 2011, 60 PBC patients on the therapy of ursodeoxycholic
acid (UDCA) over 1 year at our clinic were recruited. According to the response
to UDCA by the Paris criteria, they were divided into refractory group (n = 23)
and typical group (n = 37) to analyze the basic clinical conditions, biochemical 
markers, antibodies and liver biopsies.
RESULTS: (1) Compared with the typical patients, the refractory ones had more
fatigue (73.9% vs 45.9%), pruritus (60.9% vs 40.5%) and jaundice (43.4% vs
18.9%); (2) the serum level of biomarkers (alanine aminotransferase (ALT),
aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), <U+03B3>-glutamyl
transpeptidase (GGT), total bilirubin (TBIL), direct bilirubin (DBIL) and
immunoglobulin M (IgM)) were higher in the refractory group (P < 0.05); (3) no
differences existed between two groups in age, gender, antibodies (antinuclear
antibody (ANA), antimitochondrial antibody (AMA), AMA-M2, anti-GP210, anti-SP100 
and anti-centromere antibody (ACA)) or liver biopsies.
CONCLUSION: Some clinical severe manifestation (fatigue, pruritus and jaundice)
and higher biochemical markers levels (ALT, AST, ALP, GGT, TBIL, DBIL and IgM)
seem to predict a worse response to UDCA and a rapid progression of disease in
PBC patients.

PMID: 23328240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Aging Cell. 2013 Apr;12(2):194-206. doi: 10.1111/acel.12040. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

Gene expression profile of mouse white adipose tissue during inflammatory stress:
age-dependent upregulation of major procoagulant factors.

Starr ME(1), Hu Y, Stromberg AJ, Carmical JR, Wood TG, Evers BM, Saito H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536-0298, USA.

Tolerance to physiological stress resulting from inflammatory disease decreases
significantly with age. High mortality rates, increased cytokine production, and 
pronounced thrombosis are characteristic complications of aged mice with acute
systemic inflammation induced by injection with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). As
adipose tissue is now recognized as an important source of cytokines, we
determined the effects of aging on visceral white adipose tissue gene expression 
during LPS-induced inflammation in male C57BL/6 mice. Microarray analysis
revealed that the expression of 6025 genes was significantly changed by LPS; of
those, the expression of 667 showed an age-associated difference. Age-associated 
differences were found in many genes belonging to the inflammatory response and
blood clotting pathways. Genes for several procoagulant factors were upregulated 
by LPS; among these, tissue factor, thrombospondin-1, and plasminogen activator
inhibitors-1 and -2, exhibited age-associated increases in expression which could
potentially contribute to augmented thrombosis. Further analysis by qRT-PCR,
histological examination, and cell fraction separation revealed that most
inflammatory and coagulant-related gene expression changes occur in resident
stromal cells rather than adipocytes or infiltrating cells. In addition, basal
expression levels of 303 genes were altered by aging, including increased
expression of component of Sp100-rs (Csprs). This study indicates that adipose
tissue is a major organ expressing genes for multiple inflammatory and coagulant 
factors and that the expression of many of these is significantly altered by
aging during acute inflammation. Data presented here provide a framework for
future studies aimed at elucidating the impact of adipose tissue on
age-associated complications during sepsis and systemic inflammation.

© 2012 The Authors Aging Cell © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society 
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMCID: PMC3633415
PMID: 23279636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Fukushima J Med Sci. 2012;58(2):107-16.

Autoantibodies by line immunoassay in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis.

Saito H(1), Takahashi A, Abe K, Okai K, Katsushima F, Monoe K, Kanno Y, Ohira H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Rheumatology, Fukushima Medical University.

OBJECTIVES: We attempted to measure multiple autoantibodies simultaneously using 
line immunoassay (LIA) in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) with or
without anti-mitochondrial antibody (AMA) and patients with PBC-autoimmune
hepatitis (AIH) overlap, and we examined the clinical significance of measuring
these autoantibodies.
METHODS: The study population consisted of 80 patients with PBC (including 12
AMA-negative patients), 16 patients with PBC-AIH overlap and 40 patients with AIH
as controls. Nine antibodies (AMA-M2, M2-3E, Sp100, PML, gp210, Ro-52, LKM-1,
LC-1 and SLA/LP) were detected by LIA, and AMA-M2 and anti-centromere antibody
(ACA) were detected by ELISA. We examined the relationship between these
autoantibodies and clinical findings.
RESULTS: The positive prevalence of each autoantibody and ACA in the PBC group,
as determined by LIA, was as follows: 13.8% for anti-Sp100, 8.7% for anti-PML,
40% for anti-gp210 and 27.5% for anti-Ro-52 antibodies and 32.5% for ACA. In the 
PBC-AIH overlap group, the prevalence of anti-gp210 antibody (68.7%) and that of 
anti-Ro-52 antibody (81.2%) were significantly higher than those in the PBC and
AIH groups. Only a few patients were positive for 2 or more autoantibodies. Nine 
patients were determined to be negative for all autoantibodies by LIA, of whom 7 
were positive for ACA. Patients positive for anti-gp210 antibody included more
patients classified as stage 4 on histology than did the negative group. Those
positive for ACA included more patents with varices than did the negative group.
CONCLUSION: LIA can measure multiple autoantibodies simultaneously and thus is
considered useful in diagnosing PBC and PBC-AIH overlap. In addition, ACA is a
useful marker for identifying AMA-negative PBC.

PMID: 23237866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Virol. 2013 Feb;87(4):2174-85. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02950-12. Epub 2012 Dec 5.

Components of promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (ND10) act cooperatively to
repress herpesvirus infection.

Glass M(1), Everett RD.

Author information: 
(1)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow, Scotland, United
Kingdom.

Upon the entry of the viral genome into the nucleus, herpes simplex virus type 1 
(HSV-1) gene expression is rapidly repressed by constitutively expressed cellular
proteins. This intrinsic antiviral defense is normally counteracted by ICP0,
which allows virus infection to proceed efficiently. Replication of ICP0-null
mutant HSV-1, however, is severely repressed by mechanisms that are conferred, at
least in part, by nuclear domain 10 (ND10) components, including hDaxx, the
promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein, and Sp100. To investigate if these ND10
components repress viral gene expression in a cooperative manner, we
simultaneously depleted host cells for hDaxx, PML, and Sp100 by multiple short
hairpin RNA (shRNA) knockdown from a single lentivirus vector. We found that
replication and gene expression of ICP0-null mutant HSV-1 were cooperatively
repressed by hDaxx, PML, and Sp100 immediately upon infection, and all stages of 
virus replication were inhibited. Plaque-forming efficiency was enhanced at least
50-fold in the triple-depleted cells, a much larger increase than achieved by
depletion of any single ND10 protein. Similar effects were also observed during
infection of triple-depleted cells with human cytomegalovirus (HCMV). Moreover,
using a cell culture model of quiescent infection, we found that triple depletion
resulted in a much larger number of viral genomes escaping repression. However,
triple depletion was unable to fully overcome the ICP0-null phenotype, implying
the presence of additional repressive host factors, possibly components of the
SUMO modification or DNA repair pathways. We conclude that several ND10
components cooperate in an additive manner to regulate HSV-1 and HCMV infection.

PMCID: PMC3571464
PMID: 23221561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Virol. 2013 Feb;87(4):2109-19. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02588-12. Epub 2012 Dec 5.

N-terminal phosphorylation sites of herpes simplex virus 1 ICP0 differentially
regulate its activities and enhance viral replication.

Mostafa HH(1), Thompson TW, Davido DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas,
USA.

The herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) infected cell protein 0 (ICP0) is an
immediate-early phosphoprotein that transactivates viral gene expression.
Evidence suggests that phosphorylation regulates the functions of ICP0, and three
regions (termed regions I, II, and III) in the protein are known to be
phosphorylated. Mutation of the putative phosphorylation sites within region I,
termed Phos 1, which lies in the N-terminal portion of ICP0, impairs the E3
ubiquitin (Ub) ligase and ND10-disrupting activities of ICP0 in cell culture and 
diminishes viral replication. To identify the specific phosphorylation site(s) or
residues responsible for the phenotypes observed with Phos 1, individual residues
within region I were mutated to alanine (S224A, T226A, T231A, and T232A) and one 
double mutant S224A/T226A was constructed. Tissue culture studies demonstrated
that the S224A, S224A/T226A, T231A, and T232A mutants were unable to dissociate
the cellular protein PML from ND10 and that the S224/T226A mutant was defective
in its ability to dissociate the cellular protein Sp100 from ND10. Additionally, 
the transactivation activity of ICP0 was impaired in the S224A and S224A/T226A
mutants. The S224A and S224A/T226A mutant forms were more stable than wild-type
ICP0, suggesting that their ability to autoubiquitinate was limited. Moreover,
one ICP0 ubiquitination target, USP-7, was also more stable after infection with 
these two mutants. Lastly, the replication of the S224A and S224A/T226A mutant
viruses was reduced in cell culture and in vivo. Overall, our data suggest that
specific phosphorylation sites within region I differentially regulate the
activities of ICP0, which are required for efficient viral replication.

PMCID: PMC3571471
PMID: 23221554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Virol. 2013 Jan;87(2):978-90. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01103-12. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

The replication defect of ICP0-null mutant herpes simplex virus 1 can be largely 
complemented by the combined activities of human cytomegalovirus proteins IE1 and
pp71.

Everett RD(1), Bell AJ, Lu Y, Orr A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research 8, Glasgow, Scotland.
roger.everett@glasgow.ac.uk

Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) immediate-early protein ICP0 is required for
efficient lytic infection and productive reactivation from latency and induces
derepression of quiescent viral genomes. Despite being unrelated at the sequence 
level, ICP0 and human cytomegalovirus proteins IE1 and pp71 share some functional
similarities in their abilities to counteract antiviral restriction mediated by
components of cellular nuclear structures known as ND10. To investigate the
extent to which IE1 and pp71 might substitute for ICP0, cell lines were developed
that express either IE1 or pp71, or both together, in an inducible manner. We
found that pp71 dissociated the hDaxx-ATRX complex and inhibited accumulation of 
these proteins at sites juxtaposed to HSV-1 genomes but had no effect on the
promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) or Sp100. IE1 caused loss of the small
ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)-conjugated forms of PML and Sp100 and inhibited
the recruitment of these proteins to HSV-1 genome foci but had little effect on
hDaxx or ATRX in these assays. Both IE1 and pp71 stimulated ICP0-null mutant
plaque formation, but neither to the extent achieved by ICP0. The combination of 
IE1 and pp71, however, inhibited recruitment of all ND10 proteins to viral genome
foci, stimulated ICP0-null mutant HSV-1 plaque formation to near wild-type
levels, and efficiently induced derepression of quiescent HSV-1 genomes. These
results suggest that ND10-related intrinsic resistance results from the additive 
effects of several ND10 components and that the effects of IE1 and pp71 on
subsets of these components combine to mirror the overall activities of ICP0.

PMCID: PMC3554063
PMID: 23135716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Virol J. 2012 Sep 28;9:222. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-9-222.

Nuclear domain 10-associated proteins recognize and segregate intranuclear
DNA/protein complexes to negate gene expression.

Rivera-Molina YA(1), Rojas BR, Tang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/RCMI Program, Ponce School of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Ponce, 00716, Puerto Rico.

BACKGROUND: DNA viruses, such as herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1), Simian
virus 40 (SV40), and Cytomegaloviruses (CMV), start their replicative processes
and transcription at specific nuclear domains known as ND10 (nuclear domain 10,
also called PML bodies). It has been previously determined that for HSV-1 and
SV40, a short DNA sequence and its binding protein are required and sufficient
for cell localization of viral DNA replication and gene transcription.
RESULTS: Our recent observations provide evidence that a foreign (not endogenous)
DNA/protein complex in the nucleus recruits ND10 proteins. First, the complexes
formed from the bacterial lac operator DNA and its binding protein (lac
repressor), or from HPV11 (human papillomavirus 11) origin DNA and its binding
protein (E2), co-localized with different ND10 proteins. Second, the HSV-1
amplicon without inserted lac operator DNA repeats distributed in the nucleus
randomly, whereas the amplicon with lac operator DNA repeats associated with
ND10, suggesting that DNA-binding proteins are required to localize at ND10. The 
cellular intrinsic DNA/protein complex (as detected for U2 DNA) showed no
association with ND10. Furthermore, our examination of PML-/-, Daxx-/-, and
Sp100-negative cells led to our discovering that DNA/protein complexes recruit
ND10 protein independently. Using the GFP-LacI/Operator system, we were able to
direct the transfected DNA to ND10 and found that gene expression was
significantly repressed when the transfected DNA was directed to ND10.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, the results suggest that cells recognize DNA/protein 
complexes through a mechanism that involves interaction with the ND10-associated 
proteins.

PMCID: PMC3502357
PMID: 23021128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. World J Gastroenterol. 2012 Sep 14;18(34):4721-8.

Primary biliary cirrhosis-specific autoantibodies in first degree relatives of
Greek primary biliary cirrhosis patients.

Zografos TA(1), Gatselis N, Zachou K, Liaskos C, Gabeta S, Koukoulis GK, Dalekos 
GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Research Laboratory of Internal Medicine, Medical
School, University of Thessaly, 41110 Larissa, Greece.

AIM: To determine the prevalence and significance of primary biliary cirrhosis
(PBC)-specific autoantibodies in first-degree relatives (FDRs) of Greek PBC
patients.
METHODS: The presence of antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA) and PBC-specific
antinuclear antibodies (ANA) were determined using indirect immunofluorescence
assays, dot-blot assays, and molecularly based enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays
in 101 asymptomatic for liver-related symptoms FDRs of 44 PBC patients. In order 
to specify our results, the same investigation was performed in 40 healthy
controls and in a disease control group consisting of 40 asymptomatic for
liver-related symptoms FDRs of patients with other autoimmune liver diseases
namely, autoimmune hepatitis-1 or primary sclerosing cholangitis (AIH-1/PSC).
RESULTS: AMA positivity was observed in 19 (only 4 with abnormal liver function
tests) FDRs of PBC patients and none of the healthy controls. The prevalence of
AMA was significantly higher in FDRs of PBC patients than in AIH-1/PSC FDRs and
healthy controls [18.8%, 95% confidence interval (CI): 12%-28.1% vs 2.5%, 95% CI:
0.1%-14.7%, P = 0.01; 18.8%, 95% CI: 12%-28.1% vs 0%, 95% CI: 0%-10.9%, P =
0.003, respectively]. PBC-specific ANA positivity was observed in only one FDR
from a PSC patient. Multivariate analysis showed that having a proband with PBC
independently associated with AMA positivity (odds ratio: 11.24, 95% CI:
1.27-25.34, P = 0.03) whereas among the investigated comorbidities and risk
factors, a positive past history for urinary tract infections (UTI) was also
independently associated with AMA detection in FDRs of PBC patients (odds ratio: 
3.92, 95% CI: 1.25-12.35, P = 0.02).
CONCLUSION: In FDRs of Greek PBC patients, AMA prevalence is significantly
increased and independently associated with past UTI. PBC-specific ANA were not
detected in anyone of PBC FDRs.

PMCID: PMC3442210
PMID: 23002341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2012 May;20(5):336-9. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1007-3418.2012.05.006.

[Correlation study of estrogen receptor with peripheral blood cytokines and serum
markers in primary biliary cirrhosis patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang L(1), Li QM, DU HH, Wang LQ, Liu YB, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)Longhua Hospital Shanghai University of TCM.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the correlation between ER-a in the liver and cytokines
of T lymphocytes subsets and serum signatures in PBC patients.
METHODS: The research is performed with cross-sectional study. 80 PBC women
patients without treatment were enrolled in PBC group, 10 healthy women as
baseline-matched in healthy-control group, and 20 patients with non-autoimmune
liver disease in non-PBC control group. The expression of IL-6, IL-8, IL-22,
TNFa, IFNgamma, AMA-M2, Sp100 and gp210 were analyzed in Peripheral Blood using
ELISA in all groups, and ER-a of patients were performed on tissues from liver
biopsies in PBC group and non-PBC control group with immunohistochemistry.
Spearman correlation test were performed on the indices to identified the
association of all Parameters. numerical data were compared with Wilcoxon
rank-sum test.
RESULTS: Compared with healthy-control group, expression of serum cytokines are
significantly higher in PBC and non-PBC groups (P less than 0.01), while no
significant difference were observed between PBC and non-PBC groups. The positive
rate of ER-a in PBC patients liver tissues in PBC group is higher than that in
non-PBC group (Z=4.82, P less than 0.01). Expression of ER-a is positively
correlated with positive rates of AMA-M2 antibody, Sp100 and gP210 of tissues of 
PBC patients ( r=0.898, 0.819, 0.814, P less than 0.01). ER-a is positive
correlated with the expression of cytokines, among which the coefficient of
correlation of IL-22, TNFa, IFNgamma is more than 0.7 (r=0.71, 0.89, 0.82, P less
than 0.01), AMA-M2, Sp100, gp210 is negative in serum of non-PBC control group.
No obviously correlations were indicated between the expression of ER-a and
cytokines.
CONCLUSION: A high level of expression of cytokines in the serum might be one of 
the factors of etiopathogenesis of PBC.

PMID: 22971276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 31;287(36):30729-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.374769. Epub
2012 Jul 7.

Contribution of the C-terminal regions of promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML)
isoforms II and V to PML nuclear body formation.

Geng Y(1), Monajembashi S, Shao A, Cui D, He W, Chen Z, Hemmerich P, Tang J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100193, China.

Promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) nuclear bodies are dynamic and heterogeneous
nuclear protein complexes implicated in various important functions, most notably
tumor suppression. PML is the structural component of PML nuclear bodies and has 
several nuclear splice isoforms that share a common N-terminal region but differ 
in their C termini. Previous studies have suggested that the coiled-coil motif
within the N-terminal region is sufficient for PML nuclear body formation by
mediating homo/multi-dimerization of PML molecules. However, it has not been
investigated whether any of the C-terminal variants of PML may contribute to PML 
body assembly. Here we report that the unique C-terminal domains of PML-II and
PML-V can target to PML-NBs independent of their N-terminal region. Strikingly,
both domains can form nuclear bodies in the absence of endogenous PML. The
C-terminal domain of PML-II interacts transiently with unknown binding sites at
PML nuclear bodies, whereas the C-terminal domain of PML-V exhibits hyperstable
binding to PML bodies via homo-dimerization. This strong interaction is mediated 
by a putative a-helix in the C terminus of PML-V. Moreover, nuclear bodies
assembled from the C-terminal domain of PML-V also recruit additional PML body
components, including Daxx and Sp100. These observations establish the C-terminal
domain of PML-V as an additional important contributor to the assembly
mechanism(s) of PML bodies.

PMCID: PMC3436317
PMID: 22773875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mediators Inflamm. 2012;2012:607276. doi: 10.1155/2012/607276. Epub 2012 May 31.

Interplay between human cytomegalovirus and intrinsic/innate host responses: a
complex bidirectional relationship.

Rossini G(1), Cerboni C, Santoni A, Landini MP, Landolfo S, Gatti D, Gribaudo G, 
Varani S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Microbiology, Department of Hematology and Oncology "L. & A.
Seragnoli", University of Bologna, 40138 Bologna, Italy.

The interaction between human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) and its host is a complex
process that begins with viral attachment and entry into host cells, culminating 
in the development of a specific adaptive response that clears the acute
infection but fails to eradicate HCMV. We review the viral and cellular partners 
that mediate early host responses to HCMV with regard to the interaction between 
structural components of virions (viral glycoproteins) and cellular receptors
(attachment/entry receptors, toll-like receptors, and other nucleic acid sensors)
or intrinsic factors (PML, hDaxx, Sp100, viperin, interferon inducible protein
16), the reactions of innate immune cells (antigen presenting cells and natural
killer cells), the numerous mechanisms of viral immunoevasion, and the potential 
exploitation of events that are associated with early phases of virus-host
interplay as a therapeutic strategy.

PMCID: PMC3371353
PMID: 22701276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Clin Lab. 2012;58(3-4):329-32.

Analysis of a multiple nuclear dots pattern in a large cohort of dermatological
patients.

Cozzani E(1), Drosera M, Riva S, Parodi A.

Author information: 
(1)DISSAL Section of Dermatology, University of Genoa Medical School, Viale
Benedetto XV 7, Genova, Italy. emanuele.cozzani@unige.it

BACKGROUND: Anti-multiple nuclear dots (MND) antibodies are the markers of
primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), but can also be found in patients with other
autoimmune diseases.
METHODS: We looked for MND in 9189 sera belonging to 6240 patients stored for
autoimmune diseases with prevalent cutaneous features.
RESULTS: Fifty sera proved anti-MND-positive and came from 15 different patients:
6 had lupus erythematosus, 2 dermatomyositis, 2 lichen planus, 1 stroke, 1
telogen effluvium, 1 autoimmune thrombocytopenia, and 2 undifferentiated
connective tissue disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-MND antibodies can be found not only in patients with PBC, but 
in connective tissue diseases as well. They can be associated with other
fluoroscopic patterns and their titers can vary over the years, never correlating
with the disease activity or with particular cutaneous features. Although
anti-MND antibodies found are directed to the Sp100 antigen of the nuclear dots, 
it remains unclear whether their molecular target is the same amino-acid domain
as in PBC.

PMID: 22582508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Clin Exp Immunol. 2012 Jun;168(3):261-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2012.04577.x.

Epitope-specific anti-nuclear antibodies are expressed in a mouse model of
primary biliary cirrhosis and are cytokine-dependent.

Yang CY(1), Leung PS, Yang GX, Kenny TP, Zhang W, Coppel R, Norman GL, Ansari AA,
Mackay IR, Worman HJ, Gershwin ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of
California, Davis, CA, USA.

Although the hallmark of primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is the presence of
anti-mitochondrial antibodies (AMA), a significant number of patients have
anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) directed primarily against two nuclear proteins,
gp210 and sp100. In PBC, there are considerable data on the specificity of these 
anti-nuclear antibodies as well as suggestive evidence that antibodies to gp210
predict a poor outcome. However, a further understanding of the significance of
these autoantibodies has been hampered by limitations in accessing human subjects
in a preclinical or early asymptomatic stage. To overcome this limitation, we
have taken advantage of transgenic mice with abrogated transforming growth
factor-ß signalling in T cells (dnTGF-ßRII) that develop histological features of
PBC as well as the same AMA specificity. We studied these mice for serum ANA,
including specific autoantibodies against gp210 and sp100. We further examined
sera from dnTGF-ßRII mice with concurrent deletions of the genes encoding
interleukin (IL)-12p35, IL-12p40, IL-23p19, IL-17, IL-6, interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> or
tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-a. Sera from all the dnTGF-ßRII mouse lines
contained antibodies against gp210 and sp100. Of significance, mice with germline
deletions of the genes encoding IL-12p40, IL-23p19, IL-17, IL-6 and TNF-a had
significantly lower titres of anti-gp210 antibodies. These results provide a
platform to dissect the mechanisms of gp210 and sp100 autoantibody production in 
dnTGF-ßRII mice as well as to study the possible role of ANA in the
pathophysiology of PBC.

© 2012 The Authors. Clinical and Experimental Immunology © 2012 British Society
for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC3390476
PMID: 22519587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2012 Apr 18;44(2):209-14.

[Diagnostic significance of autoantibodies in patients with primary biliary
cirrhosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiao H(1), Chen JW, Xie X, Liu YM, Li F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Xiangya Second Hospital, Central
South University, Changsha 410011, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the significance of autoantibodies in patients with
primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC).
METHODS: A anti-mitochondrial antibodies-M2(AMA-M2), anti-BCOADC-E2 PDC-E2
OGDC-E2 antibodies (anti-3E/BPO), anti-SP100 antibodies (anti-SP100),
anti-promyelocytic leukemia (anti-PML), anti-gp210 antibodies (anti-gp210),and
anti-Ro-52 were detected respectively in 330 suspected PBC cases by Western
blotting.
RESULTS: (1) The sensitivity/specificity rates of
AMA-M2,anti-3E/BPO,anti-SP100,anti-PML,anti-gp210,and anti-Ro-52 were
85.3%/84.8%, 79.4%/93.2 %, 35.3%/98.0%, 41.2%/96.3%, 44.1%/96.6%,61.8%/68.6%
respectively; AMA-M2 were combined with the other antibodies. The specificity
rates in the series tests were 94.9%, 99.3%, 99.3 %, 98.3%, and 92.2%, while the 
sensitivity rates in the parallel tests were 91.2%, 94.1%, 94.1%, 94.1%, and
1.2%,respectively .(2)There were 5 cases of AMA-M2 negative in patients with
PBC,including 60% (3/5) cases of anti-gp210, anti-SP100 and anti-PML positive
respectively.
CONCLUSION: (1) AMA-M2 were more sensitive than other antibodies, while the
specificity rates of anti-3E/BPO , anti-SP100, anti-PML, and anti-gp210 were
higher than that of AMA-M2; Parallel tests helps to exclude the suspected PBC
cases and series tests could be useful in clinics to confirm the PBC cases. (2)
anti-gp210, anti-SP100, anti-PML antibodies appear to be more common in AMA-M2
negative PBC patients than in those who are AMA-M2 positive,and their presence in
AMA-M2 negative PBC patients contributes to the PBC diagnosis.

PMID: 22516989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Clin Chim Acta. 2012 Aug 16;413(15-16):1211-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2012.03.020.
Epub 2012 Apr 3.

Diagnostic and clinical utility of antibodies against the nuclear body
promyelocytic leukaemia and Sp100 antigens in patients with primary biliary
cirrhosis.

Mytilinaiou MG(1), Meyer W, Scheper T, Rigopoulou EI, Probst C, Koutsoumpas AL,
Abeles D, Burroughs AK, Komorowski L, Vergani D, Bogdanos DP.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Immunopathology, Institute of Liver Studies, King's College London
School of Medicine at King's College Hospital, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: The lack of an immunoassay that detects antibodies to promyelocytic
leukaemia (PML) protein, the primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC)-specific multiple
nuclear dot (MND) antigen, has prompted us to develop a line immunoassay (LIA)
for the simultaneous detection of PML and Sp100 MND-specific autoantibodies.
METHODS: PML and Sp100 were expressed in Escherichia coli, and analysed by
SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting using a monoclonal antibody and MALDI-ToF
fingerprinting. A quantitative PML and Sp100 LIA were developed and testing was
performed in 150 anti-mitochondrial antibody (AMA) positive, 20 AMA-PBCs and 130 
controls.
RESULTS: Thirty-five (23%) of 150 AMA+ PBCs (18 anti-MND+) were anti-PML+ (12%)
or anti-Sp100+ (20%), 10 being anti-PML+/Sp100+, 5 single anti-PML+ and 20 single
anti-Sp100+. Six (30%, 5 anti-MND+) AMA-PBCs were anti-PML+ or Sp100+. Only 2
(1.7%) pathological controls were anti-PML+ and/or anti-Sp100+. Levels of
anti-PML correlated with those of anti-Sp100 (R=0.64, p<0.0001). The autoantibody
profile largely remained unchanged over a 10year-follow up (52 patients, 352
samples). Anti-PML, Sp100 or MND-reactive PBCs were younger and had longer
disease duration than the seronegative (p=0.06, for both). Anti-Sp100 levels
correlated with the Mayo risk score (r=0.63, p=0.01). Anti-PML+/Sp100+ patients
had more advanced disease compared to patients negative for anti-PML/Sp100
(p=0.04).
CONCLUSION: The new line immunoassay offers a robust and accurate method for the 
detection of clinically-relevant PBC-specific anti-MND antibodies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22503841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Feb;97(3):1141-7. doi: 10.1007/s00253-012-3992-5.
Epub 2012 Mar 16.

Role and fate of SP100 protein in response to Rep-dependent nonviral integration 
system.

Xue YY(1), Wang R, Yue YB, Xue JL, Chen JZ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, People's Republic of China.

Previously, we studied an AAVS1 site-specific non-viral integration system with a
Rep-donor plasmid and a plasmid containing adeno-associated virus integration
element. Our earlier study focused on the plasmid vector itself, but the cellular
response to the system was still unknown. SP100 is a member of the promyelocytic 
leukemia nuclear bodies. It is involved in many cellular processes such as
transcriptional regulation and the cellular intrinsic immune response against
viral infection. In this study, we revealed that SP100 inhibited the
Rep-dependent nonviral integration. Conversely, transient expression of Rep78
increased the degradation of SP100. This degradation was inhibited by treatment
with MG132, an inhibitor of the ubiquitin proteasome. SP100 and Rep78 are both
located in the nucleolus, which provides the spatial possibility for their
interaction. Rep78 was coimmunoprecipitated with the enhanced green fluorescent
protein (EGFP)-SP100 fusion protein but not EGFP, which verified the interaction 
between Rep78 and SP100. These results have enriched our knowledge about the
cellular protein SP100 and Rep-dependent nonviral integration. It may lead to an 
improvement in the application of Rep-related transgene integration method and in
the selection of target cells.

PMID: 22419217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;832:93-110. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-474-2_5.

Recombinant reconstitution of sumoylation reactions in vitro.

Flotho A(1), Werner A, Winter T, Frank AS, Ehret H, Melchior F.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie der Universität Heidelberg (ZMBH), DKFZ-ZMBH
Alliance, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.

Reconstituting posttranslational modification with SUMO in vitro is an essential 
tool in the analysis of sumoylation. In this article, we provide detailed
protocols that allow to set up and perform sumoylation reactions using a purified
recombinant sumoylation machinery. The protocols include purification of the SUMO
E1 enzyme His-Aos1/Uba2, untagged E2 enzyme Ubc9, untagged SUMO, and the RanBP2
E3 ligase fragment IR1 + M. Using these components, we provide step-by-step
instructions to set up sumoylation reactions. Two established SUMO model
substrates, His-RanGAPtail and HisYFP-Sp100, complement the described tool box;
these proteins serve as positive controls in E3 ligase-independent and -dependent
sumoylation reactions and are valuable instruments to adjust the reaction
conditions if necessary.

PMID: 22350878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mod Rheumatol. 2012 Nov;22(6):892-8. doi: 10.1007/s10165-012-0607-z. Epub 2012
Feb 12.

High prevalence of primary biliary cirrhosis and disease-associated
autoantibodies in Japanese patients with systemic sclerosis.

Imura-Kumada S(1), Hasegawa M, Matsushita T, Hamaguchi Y, Encabo S, Shums Z,
Norman GL, Takehara K, Fujimoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical
Science, Ishikawa, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the prevalence of primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) and
PBC-associated autoantibodies in Japanese systemic sclerosis (SSc) patients.
METHODS: Clinical data from 225 Japanese SSc patients were retrospectively
obtained. Serum samples from these patients were examined for PBC-associated
autoantibodies, anti-mitochondrial M2 antibodies (AMA), anti-sp100 antibodies
(anti-sp100), and anti-gp210 antibodies (anti-gp210) by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: Of 225 patients, 37 (16.4%) had AMA, 13 (5.8%) had anti-sp100, and 3
(1.3%) had anti-gp210. Three patients were positive for both AMA and anti-sp100, 
and 2 were positive for both AMA and anti-gp210. PBC was found in 22 (9.8%)
patients positive for AMA with or without anti-sp100 or anti-gp210, but not in
those with anti-sp100 or anti-gp210 without AMA. Furthermore, 13 patients lacking
these three antibodies were diagnosed with or suspected of PBC by liver biopsy
and/or their clinical manifestation. Multivariable analysis revealed that AMA and
anti-centromere antibodies were independently associated with PBC in SSc
patients, while anti-sp100 and anti-gp210 were not.
CONCLUSIONS: This study has demonstrated even higher prevalence of both
PBC-associated autoantibodies and PBC in the Japanese SSc population than in the 
Caucasian SSc population. AMA and anti-centromere antibodies are likely to
indicate increasing risk of PBC in SSc patients.

PMID: 22327744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Virol. 2012 Apr;86(7):3541-53. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06992-11. Epub 2012 Jan 25.

Herpesvirus saimiri antagonizes nuclear domain 10-instituted intrinsic immunity
via an ORF3-mediated selective degradation of cellular protein Sp100.

Full F(1), Reuter N, Zielke K, Stamminger T, Ensser A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische und Molekulare Virologie, Universitätsklinikum,
Friedrich Alexander Universität, Erlangen, Germany.

In recent studies, the nuclear domain 10 (ND10) components PML, Sp100, human Daxx
(hDaxx), and ATRX were identified to be cellular restriction factors that are
able to inhibit the replication of several herpesviruses. The antiviral function 
of ND10, however, is antagonized by viral effector proteins by a variety of
strategies, including degradation of PML or relocalization of ND10 proteins. In
this study, we analyzed the interplay between infection with herpesvirus saimiri 
(HVS), the prototypic rhadinovirus, and cellular defense by ND10. In contrast to 
other herpesviruses, we found that HVS specifically degraded the cellular ND10
component Sp100, whereas other factors like PML or hDaxx remained intact. We
could further identify the ORF3 tegument protein of HVS, which shares homology
with the cellular formylglycinamide ribotide amidotransferase (FGARAT) enzyme, to
be the viral factor that induces the proteasomal degradation of Sp100.
Interestingly, recent studies showed that the ORF3-homologous proteins ORF75c of 
murine gammaherpesvirus 68 and BNRF-1 of Epstein-Barr virus modulate the ND10
proteins PML and ATRX, respectively, suggesting that the ND10 targets of viral
FGARAT-homologous proteins diversified during evolution. Furthermore, a virus
with the ORF3 deletion was efficiently complemented in Sp100-depleted cells,
indicating that Sp100 is able to inhibit HVS in the absence of antagonistic
mechanisms. In contrast, we observed that PML, which was neither degraded nor
redistributed after HVS infection, strongly restricted both wild-type HVS and
virus with the ORF3 deletion. Thus, HVS may lack a factor that efficiently
counteracts the repressive function of PML, which may foster latency as the
outcome of infection.

PMCID: PMC3302493
PMID: 22278248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2012 Jan;12(1):65-74. doi: 10.1586/ERM.11.82.

Antinuclear antibodies as ancillary markers in primary biliary cirrhosis.

Granito A(1), Muratori P, Quarneti C, Pappas G, Cicola R, Muratori L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Alma Mater Studiorum-University of Bologna,
S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Italy. alessandro.granito@unibo.it

Antimitochondrial antibodies are the serological hallmark of primary biliary
cirrhosis (PBC). Besides antimitochondrial antibodies, the autoantibody profile
of PBC includes antinuclear antibodies (ANA) which are detectable by indirect
immunofluorescence in up to 50% of PBC patients. Two immunofluorescence patterns 
are considered 'PBC-specific': the multiple nuclear dots and rim-like/membranous 
patterns. The target antigens of the multiple nuclear dots pattern have been
identified as Sp100 and promyelocytic leukemia protein, whereas the
rim-like/membranous pattern is given by autoantibodies recognizing multiple
proteins such as gp210, nucleoporin p62 and the lamin B receptor. Other ANA,
especially those already known in the rheumatological setting, such as
anticentromere, anti-SSA/Ro and anti-dsDNA antibodies, can be frequently found in
PBC, often coexisting in the same patient. In this article, we will report on
recent progress in the antigenic characterization of ANA in PBC, their detection 
with both traditional assays and Western blot/ELISA with molecularly defined
nuclear antigens, and we will discuss their clinical significance.

PMID: 22133120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Dec 2;415(4):702-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.10.146. Epub 2011 Nov 6.

Cdc20 mediates D-box-dependent degradation of Sp100.

Wang R(1), Li KM, Zhou CH, Xue JL, Ji CN, Chen JZ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Cdc20 is a co-activator of the anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C
complex), which recruits substrates at particular phases of the cell cycle and
mediates their degradation. Sp100 is a PML-NB scaffold protein, which localizes
to nuclear particles during interphase and disperses from them during mitosis,
participates in viral resistance, transcriptional regulation, and apoptosis.
However, its metabolism during the cell cycle has not yet been fully
characterized. We found a putative D-box in Sp100 using the Eukaryotic Linear
Motif (ELM) predictor database. The putative D-box of Sp100 was verified by
mutational analysis. Overexpression of Cdc20 resulted in decreased levels of both
endogenous Sp100 protein and overexpressed Sp100 mRNA in HEK 293 cells. Only an
overexpressed D-box deletion mutant of Sp100 accumulated in HEK293 cells that
also overexpressed Cdc20. Cdc20 knockdown by cdc20 specific siRNA resulted in
increased Sp100 protein levels in cells. Furthermore, we discovered that the
Cdc20 mediated degradation of Sp100 is diminished by the proteasome inhibitor
MG132, which suggests that the ubiquitination pathway is involved in this
process. However, unlike the other Cdc20 substrates, which display oscillating
protein levels, the level of Sp100 protein remains constant throughout the cell
cycle. Additionally, both overexpression and knockdown of endogenous Sp100 had no
effect on the cell cycle. Our results suggested that sp100 is a novel substrate
of Cdc20 and it is degraded by the ubiquitination pathway. The intact D-box of
Sp100 was necessary for this process. These findings expand our knowledge of both
Sp100 and Cdc20 as well as their role in ubiquitination.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22086178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Cell Sci. 2011 Nov 1;124(Pt 21):3603-18. doi: 10.1242/jcs.084681. Epub 2011 Nov
1.

De novo assembly of a PML nuclear subcompartment occurs through multiple pathways
and induces telomere elongation.

Chung I(1), Leonhardt H, Rippe K.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center & BioQuant, Research Group Genome Organization &
Function, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Telomerase-negative tumor cells use an alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT)
pathway that involves DNA recombination and repair to maintain their
proliferative potential. The cytological hallmark of this process is the
accumulation of promyelocytic leukemia (PML) nuclear protein at telomeric DNA to 
form ALT-associated PML bodies (APBs). Here, the de novo formation of a telomeric
PML nuclear subcompartment was investigated by recruiting APB protein components.
We show that functionally distinct proteins were able to initiate the formation
of bona fide APBs with high efficiency in a self-organizing and self-propagating 
manner. These included: (1) PML and Sp100 as the constituting components of PML
nuclear bodies, (2) telomere repeat binding factors 1 and 2 (TRF1 and TRF2,
respectively), (3) the DNA repair protein NBS1 and (4) the SUMO E3 ligase MMS21, 
as well as the isolated SUMO1 domain, through an interacting domain of another
protein factor. By contrast, the repair factors Rad9, Rad17 and Rad51 were less
efficient in APB nucleation but were recruited to preassembled APBs. The
artificially created APBs induced telomeric extension through a DNA repair
mechanism, as inferred from their colocalization with sites of non-replicative
DNA synthesis and histone H2A.X phosphorylation, and an increase of the telomere 
repeat length. These activities were absent after recruitment of the APB factors 
to a pericentric locus and establish APBs as functional intermediates of the ALT 
pathway.

PMID: 22045732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Rheumatol. 2011 Oct;38(10):2180-5. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.110167. Epub 2011 Sep
15.

Primary biliary cirrhosis-related autoantibodies in a large cohort of italian
patients with systemic sclerosis.

Cavazzana I(1), Ceribelli A, Taraborelli M, Fredi M, Norman G, Tincani A, Satoh
M, Franceschini F.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Spedali Civili, Piazzale Spedali Civili 1, 25100 Brescia,
Italy. ilariacava@virgilio.it

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the prevalence, associations, and fine specificity of
autoantibodies to primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC)-associated antigens (MIT3,
Sp100, and gp210) in a cohort of Italian patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc).
METHODS: Sera samples from 201 patients with SSc were tested for antibodies to
MIT3, gp210, and Sp100 by ELISA (the PBC screen). Anti-MIT3-positive sera were
studied for IgG or IgA isotypes. All sera were analyzed by indirect
immunofluorescence on HEp-2 cells and on rodent kidney/stomach/liver tissue
sections in order to detect antinuclear and antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA).
SSc was selected by American College of Rheumatology criteria and classified
based on LeRoy's criteria.
RESULTS: Forty-three (21.4%) sera samples were positive for PBC screen
antibodies. Anti-MIT3 antibodies were detected in 36 samples, anti-Sp100 in 5,
and anti-gp210 in 1 sample. The other 3 PBC screen-positive samples showed no
specificity for the single antigens. PBC screen-positive patients more frequently
showed a limited cutaneous SSc subtype (p = 0.04), anticentromere antibodies
(ACA; p = 0.0013), elevated alkaline phosphatase (ALP) (p < 0.0001), PBC (p =
0.002), and AMA (p = 0.008). Teleangiectasia and calcinosis were less frequent in
this group of patients. IgG+IgA anti-MIT3-positive patients had higher prevalence
of AMA (p = 0.0035), diagnosis of PBC (p = 0.014), and increased ALP (p = 0.039),
all considered biochemical markers of severe liver disease.
CONCLUSION: PBC screen antibodies were detected in 20% of patients with SSc,
strongly associated with ACA. ACA+/PBC screen+ patients had higher risk of
developing PBC or elevation of ALP.

PMID: 21921093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Virol. 2011 Nov;85(22):11928-37. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00758-11. Epub 2011 Aug 31.

Human cytomegalovirus infection causes degradation of Sp100 proteins that
suppress viral gene expression.

Kim YE(1), Lee JH, Kim ET, Shin HJ, Gu SY, Seol HS, Ling PD, Lee CH, Ahn JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 300 Cheoncheondong Jangangu, Suwon,
Gyeonggido 440-746, Republic of Korea.

The interferon-inducible Sp100 proteins are thought to play roles in the
chromatin pathway and in transcriptional regulation. Sp100A, the smallest
isoform, is one of the major components of PML nuclear bodies (NBs) that exhibit 
intrinsic antiviral activity against several viruses. Since PML NBs are disrupted
by the immediate-early 1 (IE1) protein during human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)
infection, the modulation of Sp100 protein expression or activity during
infection has been suggested. Here, we show that Sp100 proteins are lost largely 
in the late stages of HCMV infection. This event required viral gene expression
and involved posttranscriptional control. The mutant virus with deletion of the
sequence for IE1 (CR208) did not have Sp100 loss. In CR208 infection, PML
depletion by RNA interference abrogated the accumulation of SUMO-modified Sp100A 
and of certain high-molecular-weight Sp100 isoforms but did not significantly
affect unmodified Sp100A, suggesting that the IE1-induced disruption of PML NBs
is not sufficient for the complete loss of Sp100 proteins. Sp100A loss was found 
to require proteasome activity. Depletion of all Sp100 proteins by RNA silencing 
enhanced HCMV replication and major IE (MIE) gene expression. Sp100 knockdown
enhanced the acetylation level of histones associated with the MIE promoter,
demonstrating that the repressive effect of Sp100 proteins may involve, at least 
in part, the epigenetic control of the MIE promoter. Sp100A was found to interact
directly with IE1 through the N-terminal dimerization domain. These findings
indicate that the IE1-dependent loss of Sp100 proteins during HCMV infection may 
represent an important requirement for efficient viral growth.

PMCID: PMC3209270
PMID: 21880768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Nov 1;20(21):4175-86. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr344. Epub 2011 Aug 
10.

Repetitive disruptions of the nuclear envelope invoke temporary loss of cellular 
compartmentalization in laminopathies.

De Vos WH(1), Houben F, Kamps M, Malhas A, Verheyen F, Cox J, Manders EM,
Verstraeten VL, van Steensel MA, Marcelis CL, van den Wijngaard A, Vaux DJ,
Ramaekers FC, Broers JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, CARIM-School for Cardiovascular
Diseases, Maastricht University Medical Center, PO Box 616, NL-6200 MD
Maastricht, The Netherlands.

The nuclear lamina provides structural support to the nucleus and has a central
role in nuclear organization and gene regulation. Defects in its constituents,
the lamins, lead to a class of genetic diseases collectively referred to as
laminopathies. Using live cell imaging, we observed the occurrence of
intermittent, non-lethal ruptures of the nuclear envelope in dermal fibroblast
cultures of patients with different mutations of lamin A/C. These ruptures, which
were absent in normal fibroblasts, could be mimicked by selective knockdown as
well as knockout of LMNA and were accompanied by the loss of cellular
compartmentalization. This was demonstrated by the influx of cytoplasmic
transcription factor RelA and regulatory protein Cyclin B1 into the nucleus, and 
efflux of nuclear transcription factor OCT1 and nuclear structures containing the
promyelocytic leukemia (PML) tumour suppressor protein to the cytoplasm. While
recovery of enhanced yellow fluorescent protein-tagged nuclear localization
signal in the nucleus demonstrated restoration of nuclear membrane integrity,
part of the mobile PML structures became permanently translocated to the
cytoplasm. These satellite PML structures were devoid of the typical PML body
components, such as DAXX, SP100 or SUMO1. Our data suggest that nuclear rupture
and loss of compartmentalization may add to cellular dysfunction and disease
development in various laminopathies.

PMID: 21831885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Jul;7(7):e1002123. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002123. Epub 2011
Jul 14.

SUMO pathway dependent recruitment of cellular repressors to herpes simplex virus
type 1 genomes.

Cuchet-Lourenço D(1), Boutell C, Lukashchuk V, Grant K, Sykes A, Murray J, Orr A,
Everett RD.

Author information: 
(1)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow, Scotland, United
Kingdom.

Components of promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) nuclear bodies (ND10) are recruited
to sites associated with herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) genomes soon after
they enter the nucleus. This cellular response is linked to intrinsic antiviral
resistance and is counteracted by viral regulatory protein ICP0. We report that
the SUMO interaction motifs of PML, Sp100 and hDaxx are required for recruitment 
of these repressive proteins to HSV-1 induced foci, which also contain SUMO
conjugates and PIAS2ß, a SUMO E3 ligase. SUMO modification of PML and elements of
its tripartite motif (TRIM) are also required for recruitment in cells lacking
endogenous PML. Mutants of PML isoform I and hDaxx that are not recruited to
virus induced foci are unable to reproduce the repression of ICP0 null mutant
HSV-1 infection mediated by their wild type counterparts. We conclude that
recruitment of ND10 components to sites associated with HSV-1 genomes reflects a 
cellular defence against invading pathogen DNA that is regulated through the SUMO
modification pathway.

PMCID: PMC3136452
PMID: 21779164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Virol. 2011 Sep;85(18):9447-58. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00870-11. Epub 2011 Jul 6.

Evidence for a dual antiviral role of the major nuclear domain 10 component Sp100
during the immediate-early and late phases of the human cytomegalovirus
replication cycle.

Tavalai N(1), Adler M, Scherer M, Riedl Y, Stamminger T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical and Molecular Virology, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, 
Schlossgarten 4, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

In recent studies, the nuclear domain 10 (ND10) components PML and hDaxx were
identified as cellular restriction factors that inhibit the initiation of human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) replication. The antiviral function of ND10, however, is
antagonized by the IE1 protein, which induces ND10 disruption. Here we show that 
IE1 not only de-SUMOylates PML immediately upon infection but also directly
targets Sp100. IE1 expression alone was sufficient to downregulate endogenous
Sp100 independently of the presence of PML. Moreover, cotransfection experiments 
revealed that IE1 negatively interferes with the SUMOylation of all Sp100
isoforms. The modulation of Sp100 at immediate-early (IE) times of infection,
indeed, seemed to have an in vivo relevance for HCMV replication, since knockdown
of Sp100 resulted in more cells initiating the viral gene expression program. In 
addition, we observed that Sp100 was degraded in a proteasome-dependent manner at
late times postinfection, suggesting that Sp100 may play an additional antiviral 
role during the late phase. Infection experiments conducted with Sp100 knockdown 
human foreskin fibroblasts (HFFs) confirmed this hypothesis: depletion of Sp100
resulted in augmented release of progeny virus particles compared to that from
control cells. Consistent with this observation, we noted increased amounts of
viral late gene products in the absence of Sp100. Importantly, this elevated late
gene expression was not dependent on enhanced viral IE gene expression. Taken
together, our data provide evidence that Sp100 is the first ND10-related factor
identified that not only possesses the potential to restrict the initial stage of
infection but also inhibits HCMV replication during the late phase.

PMCID: PMC3165758
PMID: 21734036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Jun;7(6):e1002084. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002084. Epub 2011
Jun 16.

The intrinsic antiviral defense to incoming HSV-1 genomes includes specific DNA
repair proteins and is counteracted by the viral protein ICP0.

Lilley CE(1), Chaurushiya MS, Boutell C, Everett RD, Weitzman MD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California, United States of America.

Cellular restriction factors responding to herpesvirus infection include the ND10
components PML, Sp100 and hDaxx. During the initial stages of HSV-1 infection,
novel sub-nuclear structures containing these ND10 proteins form in association
with incoming viral genomes. We report that several cellular DNA damage response 
proteins also relocate to sites associated with incoming viral genomes where they
contribute to the cellular front line defense. We show that recruitment of DNA
repair proteins to these sites is independent of ND10 components, and instead is 
coordinated by the cellular ubiquitin ligases RNF8 and RNF168. The viral protein 
ICP0 targets RNF8 and RNF168 for degradation, thereby preventing the deposition
of repressive ubiquitin marks and counteracting this repair protein recruitment. 
This study highlights important parallels between recognition of cellular DNA
damage and recognition of viral genomes, and adds RNF8 and RNF168 to the list of 
factors contributing to the intrinsic antiviral defense against herpesvirus
infection.

PMCID: PMC3116817
PMID: 21698222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Dig Dis Sci. 2011 Nov;56(11):3357-63. doi: 10.1007/s10620-011-1756-1. Epub 2011
Jun 10.

Prevalence of autoimmune liver disease related autoantibodies in Chinese patients
with primary biliary cirrhosis.

Hu C(1), Deng C, Song G, Zhang W, Zhang S, Li X, Li P, Zhang F, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking Union Medical
College Hospital, Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, No.41 Da Mu Cang, Western District, Beijing 100032, People's Republic
of China. huchaojun818@sina.com

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of autoimmune liver disease (AiLD)-related
autoantibodies has not been defined in Chinese patients with primary biliary
cirrhosis (PBC) and therefore needs to be characterized.
AIMS: The purpose of this study was to explore the prevalence of AiLD-related
autoantibodies in Chinese patients with PBC.
METHODS: Indirect immunofluorescence was used to detect anti-mitochondrial
antibodies (AMA) in the sera from 198 PBC, 44 autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) and 41
non-autoimmune liver disease controls (LDC). ELISA assays were used to test the
presence of anti-M2, anti-gp210, anti-sp100, anti-SLA, anti-LC1 and anti-LKM-1
antibodies.
RESULTS: AMA was present in 92.4, 15.9 and 7.3%, respectively, of patients with
PBC, AIH and LDC. Anti-M2 was present in 87.4% of the PBC patients, but only in
4.5 and 4.9%, respectively, of AIH and LDC patients. Anti-gp210 and anti-sp100
were detected in 34.3 and 25.8% of PBC, 6.8 and 15.9% of AIH and in 4.9 and 17.1%
of LDC patients. Anti-LC1, anti-SLA and anti-LKM-1 were, respectively, present in
1.5, 0.0 and 0.5% of PBC, and 9.1, 11.4 and 2.3% of AIH, and none of LDC. PBC
patients that were AMA-positive presented with higher IgM levels but lower CRP
levels than negative ones. ALT, TBIL, DBIL, GGT, ALP, and AST were detected at
higher levels and ALB at lower levels in PBC positive for anti-gp210 (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of AiLD-related autoantibodies we provided might help
define PBC in China. Anti-sp100 is not a better prognostic marker for Chinese PBC
patients compared to anti-gp210. The identification of effective diagnostic
biomarkers for AMA-negative PBC patients is still needed.

PMID: 21660486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Virol. 2011 Aug;85(15):7644-57. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02207-10. Epub 2011 Jun 1.

Herpes simplex virus immediate-early protein ICP0 is targeted by SIAH-1 for
proteasomal degradation.

Nagel CH(1), Albrecht N, Milovic-Holm K, Mariyanna L, Keyser B, Abel B, Weseloh
B, Hofmann TG, Eibl MM, Hauber J.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich Pette Institute-Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology,
Martinistrasse 52, 20251 Hamburg, Germany.

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) immediate-early protein ICP0 is a transcriptional
activator with E3 ubiquitin ligase activity that induces the degradation of ND10 
proteins, including the promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) and Sp100. Moreover,
ICP0 has a role in the derepression of viral genomes and in the modulation of the
host interferon response to virus infection. Here, we report that ICP0 interacts 
with SIAH-1, a cellular E3 ubiquitin ligase that is involved in multiple cellular
pathways and is itself capable of mediating PML degradation. This novel
virus-host interaction profoundly stabilized SIAH-1 and recruited this cellular
E3 ligase into ICP0-containing nuclear bodies. Moreover, SIAH-1 mediated the
polyubiquitination of HSV ICP0 in vitro and in vivo. After infection of SIAH-1
knockdown cells with HSV, higher levels of ICP0 were produced, ICP0 was less
ubiquitinated, and the half-life of this multifunctional viral regulatory protein
was increased. These results indicate an inhibitory role of SIAH-1 during lytic
infection by targeting ICP0 for proteasomal degradation.

PMCID: PMC3147933
PMID: 21632771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Gen Virol. 2011 Sep;92(Pt 9):2006-19. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.033225-0. Epub 2011
Jun 1.

H2B homology region of major immediate-early protein 1 is essential for murine
cytomegalovirus to disrupt nuclear domain 10, but is not important for viral
replication in cell culture.

Cosme-Cruz R(1), Martínez FP, Perez KJ, Tang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Ponce School of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Ponce 00716, Puerto Rico.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) major immediate-early protein 1 (IE1) has multiple
functions and is important for efficient viral infection. As does its counterpart
in human CMV, murine CMV (MCMV) IE1 also functions as a disruptor of mouse-cell
nuclear domain 10 (ND10), where many different gene-regulation proteins
congregate. It still remains unclear how MCMV IE1 disperses ND10 and whether this
dispersion could have any effect on viral replication. MCMV IE1 is 595 aa long
and has multiple functional domains that have not yet been fully analysed. In
this study, we dissected the IE1 molecule by truncation and/or deletion and found
that the H2B homology domain (amino acid sequence NDIFERI) is required for the
dispersion of ND10 by IE1. Furthermore, we made additional deletions and point
mutations and found that the minimal truncation in the H2B homology domain
required for IE1 to lose the ability to disperse ND10 is just 3 aa (IFE).
Surprisingly, the mutated IE1 still interacted with PML and co-localized with
ND10 but failed to disperse ND10. This suggests that binding to ND10 key protein 
is essential to, but not sufficient for, the dispersal of ND10, and that some
other unknown mechanism must be involved in this biological procedure. Finally,
we generated MCMV with IFE-deleted IE1 (MCMVdlIFE) and its revertant (MCMVIFERQ).
Although MCMVdlIFE lost the ability to disperse ND10, plaque assays and viral
gene production assays showed that the deletion of IFE did not increase viral
replication in cell culture. We conclude that the dispersion of ND10 appears not 
to be important for MCMV replication in a mouse-cell culture.

PMCID: PMC3353387
PMID: 21632568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 28;6(4):e19187. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019187.

Functional interaction of nuclear domain 10 and its components with
cytomegalovirus after infections: cross-species host cells versus native cells.

Cosme RC(1), Martínez FP, Tang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/AIDS Research Program, Ponce School of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Ponce, Puerto Rico, United States of America.

Species-specificity is one of the major characteristics of cytomegaloviruses
(CMVs) and is the primary reason for the lack of a mouse model for the direct
infection of human CMV (HCMV). It has been determined that CMV cross-species
infections are blocked at the post-entry level by intrinsic cellular defense
mechanisms, but few details are known. It is important to explore how CMVs
interact with the subnuclear structure of the cross-species host cell. In our
present study, we discovered that nuclear domain 10 (ND10) of human cells was not
disrupted by murine CMV (MCMV) and that the ND10 of mouse cells was not disrupted
by HCMV, although the ND10-disrupting protein, immediate-early protein 1 (IE1),
also colocalized with ND10 in cross-species infections. In addition, we found
that the UL131-repaired HCMV strain AD169 (vDW215-BADrUL131) can infect mouse
cells to produce immediate-early (IE) and early (E) proteins but that neither DNA
replication nor viral particles were detectable in mouse cells. Unrepaired AD169 
can express IE1 only in mouse cells. In both HCMV-infected mouse cells and
MCMV-infected human cells, the knocking-down of ND10 components (PML, Daxx, and
SP100) resulted in significantly increased viral-protein production. Our
observations provide evidence to support our hypothesis that ND10 and ND10
components might be important defensive factors against the CMV cross-species
infection.

PMCID: PMC3084273
PMID: 21552525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Virology. 2011 Jun 5;414(2):119-29. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2011.03.013. Epub 2011
Apr 13.

Nuclear body formation and PML body remodeling by the human cytomegalovirus
protein UL35.

Salsman J(1), Wang X, Frappier L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, 1 Kings College Circle, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 1A8.

The human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) UL35 gene encodes two proteins, UL35 and UL35a. 
Expression of UL35 in transfected cells results in the formation of UL35 nuclear 
bodies that associate with promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein. PML forms the
basis for PML nuclear bodies that are important for suppressing viral lytic gene 
expression. Given the important relationship between PML and viral infection, we 
have further investigated the association of UL35 with PML bodies. We demonstrate
that UL35 bodies form independently of PML and subsequently recruit PML, Sp100
and Daxx. In contrast, UL35a did not form bodies; however, it could bind UL35 and
inhibit the formation of UL35 bodies. The HCMV tegument protein pp71 promoted the
formation of UL35 bodies and the cytoplasmic localization of UL35a. Similarly,
UL35a shifted pp71 to the cytoplasm. These results indicate that the interplay
between UL35, UL35a and pp71 affects their subcellular localization and likely
their functions throughout infection.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21489587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Gen Virol. 2011 Jul;92(Pt 7):1532-8. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.030981-0. Epub 2011 Apr
6.

Human cytomegalovirus immediate-early gene expression is restricted by the
nuclear domain 10 component Sp100.

Adler M(1), Tavalai N, Müller R, Stamminger T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische und Molekulare Virologie der Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

Nuclear domains 10 (ND10s) are discrete subnuclear structures that contain the
three major protein components promyelocytic leukaemia protein (PML), hDaxx and
Sp100. Previous studies identified the ND10-components PML and hDaxx as cellular 
restriction factors that independently counteract human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)
infection via the repression of viral immediate-early (IE) gene expression.
Consequently, we asked whether Sp100 is likewise involved in this repressive
activity. Infection of Sp100 knockdown (kd) cells with HCMV resulted in a
significantly increased plaque-forming ability. In addition, ablation of Sp100
led to a considerable increase in the number of IE1-expressing cells, indicating 
that Sp100 suppresses the initiation of viral gene expression. Next, double-kd
cells, lacking either Sp100/hDaxx or Sp100/PML, were generated. Here, infection
resulted in an additional enhancement in HCMV replication efficacy compared with 
the single-kd cells. Thus, our results further strengthen the concept that the
three major ND10-components independently contribute to the cellular restriction 
of HCMV replication.

PMID: 21471311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011 Jun 15;253(3):235-43. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2011.03.024. Epub 2011 Apr 3.

Nickel-induced down-regulation of <U+0394>Np63 and its role in the proliferation of
keratinocytes.

Zhang Z(1), Li W, Cheng S, Yao H, Zhang F, Chang Q, Ke Z, Wang X, Son YO, Luo J, 
Shi X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine and Environmental Health, University of
Kentucky, 121 Washington Avenue, Lexington, KY 40536, USA. zhuo.zhang@uky.edu

Epidemiological, animal, and cell studies have demonstrated that nickel compounds
are human carcinogens. The mechanisms of their carcinogenic actions remain to be 
investigated. p63, a close homologue of the p53 tumor suppressor protein, has
been linked to cell fate determination and/or maintenance of self-renewing
populations in several epithelial tissues, including skin, mammary gland, and
prostate. <U+0394>Np63, a dominant negative isoform of p63, is amplified in a variety of
epithelial tumors including squamous cell carcinomas and carcinomas of the
prostate and mammary glands. The present study shows that nickel suppressed <U+0394>Np63
expression in a short-time treatment (up to 48 h). Nickel treatment caused
activation of NF-<U+03BA>B. Blockage of NF-<U+03BA>B partially reversed nickel-induced <U+0394>Np63
suppression. Nickel decreased interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and IRF7,
IKKe, and Sp100. Over-expression of IRF3 increased <U+0394>Np63 expression suppressed by
nickel. Nickel was able to activate p21, and its activation was offset by the
over-expression of <U+0394>Np63. In turn, elevated p63 expression counteracted the
ability of nickel to restrict cell growth. The present study demonstrated that
nickel decreased interferon regulatory proteins IRF3 and IRF7, and activated
NF-<U+03BA>B, resulting in <U+0394>Np63 suppression and then p21 up-regulation. <U+0394>Np63 plays an 
important role in nickel-induced cell proliferation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3113543
PMID: 21466819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Acta Biochim Pol. 2011;58(1):67-73. Epub 2011 Mar 7.

Sp100 interacts with phage FC31 integrase to inhibit its recombination activity.

Lin Y(1), Li ZH, Wang JJ, Xu GL, Shen Q, Tian L, Xue JL, Chen JZ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China.

Phage FC31 integrase is a potential vector for the insertion of therapeutic genes
into specific sites in the human genome. To understand the mechanism involved in 
FC31 integrase-mediated recombination, it is important to understand the
interaction between the integrase and cellular proteins. Using a yeast two-hybrid
system with pLexA-FC31 integrase as bait, we screened a pB42AD human fetal brain 
cDNA library for potential interacting cellular proteins. From the 106
independent clones that were screened, 11 potential interacting clones were
isolated, of which one encoded C-terminal fragment of Sp100. The interaction
between Sp100 and FC31 integrase was further confirmed by yeast mating and
co-immunoprecipitation assays. The hybridization between a FC31 integrase peptide
array and an HEK293 cell extract revealed that residues 81RILN84 in the
N-terminus of FC31 integrase are responsible for the interaction with Sp100.
Knocking down endogenous Sp100 with Sp100-specific siRNA increased FC31
integrase-mediated recombination but did not impact reporter gene expression.
Therefore, endogenous Sp100 may interact with FC31 integrase and inhibit the
efficiency of FC31 integrase-mediated recombination.

PMID: 21383994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. MBio. 2011 Feb 8;2(1):e00281-10. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00281-11. Print 2011.

Functional reorganization of promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies during BK
virus infection.

Jiang M(1), Entezami P, Gamez M, Stamminger T, Imperiale MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

BK virus (BKV) is the causative agent for polyomavirus-associated nephropathy, a 
severe disease found in renal transplant patients due to reactivation of a
persistent BKV infection. BKV replication relies on the interactions of BKV with 
many nuclear components, and subnuclear structures such as promyelocytic leukemia
nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) are known to play regulatory roles during a number of
DNA virus infections. In this study, we investigated the relationship between
PML-NBs and BKV during infection of primary human renal proximal tubule
epithelial (RPTE) cells. While the levels of the major PML-NB protein components 
remained unchanged, BKV infection of RPTE cells resulted in dramatic alterations 
in both the number and the size of PML-NBs. Furthermore, two normally
constitutive components of PML-NBs, Sp100 and hDaxx, became dispersed from
PML-NBs. To define the viral factors responsible for this reorganization, we
examined the cellular localization of the BKV large tumor antigen (TAg) and viral
DNA. TAg colocalized with PML-NBs during early infection, while a number of BKV
chromosomes were adjacent to PML-NBs during late infection. We demonstrated that 
TAg alone was not sufficient to reorganize PML-NBs and that active viral DNA
replication is required. Knockdown of PML protein did not dramatically affect BKV
growth in culture. BKV infection, however, was able to rescue the growth of an
ICP0-null herpes simplex virus 1 mutant whose growth defect was partially due to 
its inability to disrupt PML-NBs. We hypothesize that the antiviral functions of 
PML-NBs are inactivated through reorganization during normal BKV infection.

Copyright © 2011 Jiang et al.

PMCID: PMC3039439
PMID: 21304169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Int J Oncol. 2011 Apr;38(4):1023-30. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.927. Epub 2011 Jan 27.

SP100 reduces malignancy of human glioma cells.

Held-Feindt J(1), Hattermann K, Knerlich-Lukoschus F, Mehdorn HM, Mentlein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein UKSH,
Campus Kiel, Arnold-Heller-Str 3, Building 41, 24105 Kiel, Germany.
held-feindtj@nch.uni-kiel.de

The nuclear autoantigen SP100 (speckled protein 100) is reported to control
cellular gene expression, cell growth and differentiation. To investigate its
relevance in brain tumors, we investigated SP100 expression and function in human
glioblastomas and meningiomas. SP100 was expressed in both tumors at the mRNA and
protein levels in situ and in vitro, however, expression in meningioma samples
and meningioma cells exceeded that in glioblastoma samples and cultivated cells
significantly. Moreover, whereas nearly all meningioma cells were
SP100-immunopositive, only part of the glioblastoma cells were SP100 stainable.
In vitro, SP100 was upregulated by interferon-a and -<U+03B3> in both malignant cell
types. To study its functional role, SP100 was overexpressed in glioblastoma
cells. This SP100 overexpression reduced considerably the glioblastoma cell
proliferation and migration to fetal calf serum. We conclude that SP100
expression reduces malignancy of brain tumors. Since meningiomas show a generally
higher SP100 expression, this may be one of the factors explaining their lower
malignancy compared to glioblastomas.

PMID: 21274506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2011 Jan;31(1):145-58. doi: 10.1089/jir.2010.0111.
Epub 2011 Jan 3.

Role of promyelocytic leukemia protein in host antiviral defense.

Geoffroy MC(1), Chelbi-Alix MK.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, FRE 3235, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.

Several pathways have been implicated in the establishment of antiviral state in 
response to interferon (IFN), one of which implicates the promyelocytic leukemia 
(PML) protein. The PML gene has been discovered 20 years ago and has led to new
insights into oncogenesis, apoptosis, cell senescence, and antiviral defense. PML
is induced by IFN, leading to a marked increase of expression of PML isoforms and
the number of PML nuclear bodies (NBs). PML is the organizer of the NBs that
contains at least 2 permanent NB-associated proteins, the IFN-stimulated gene
product Speckled protein of 100 kDa (Sp100) and death-associated dead protein
(Daxx), as well as numerous other transient proteins recruited in these
structures in response to different stimuli. Accumulating reports have implicated
PML in host antiviral defense and revealed various strategies developed by
viruses to disrupt PML NBs. This review will focus on the regulation of PML and
the implication of PML NBs in conferring resistance to DNA and RNA viruses. The
role of PML in mediating an IFN-induced antiviral state will also be discussed.

PMID: 21198351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2012 Jun;42(3):288-97. doi: 10.1007/s12016-010-8234-y.

Overcoming a "probable" diagnosis in antimitochondrial antibody negative primary 
biliary cirrhosis: study of 100 sera and review of the literature.

Bizzaro N(1), Covini G, Rosina F, Muratori P, Tonutti E, Villalta D, Pesente F,
Alessio MG, Tampoia M, Antico A, Platzgummer S, Porcelli B, Terzuoli L, Liguori
M, Bassetti D, Brusca I, Almasio PL, Tarantino G, Bonaguri C, Agostinis P, Bredi 
E, Tozzoli R, Invernizzi P, Selmi C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Patologia Clinica, Ospedale Civile, Tolmezzo, Italy.
nicola.bizzaro@ass3.sanita.fvg.it

Serum anti-mitochondrial antibodies (AMA) are the serological hallmark of primary
biliary cirrhosis (PBC), yet up to 15% of PBC sera are AMA negative at routine
indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) while being referred to as "probable" cases.
The diagnostic role of PBC-specific antinuclear antibodies (ANA) remains to be
determined. We will report herein data on the accuracy of new laboratory tools
for AMA and PBC-specific ANA in a large series of PBC sera that were AMA-negative
at IIF. We will also provide a discussion of the history and current status of
AMA detection methods. We included IIF AMA-negative PBC sera (n=100) and sera
from patients with other chronic liver diseases (n=104) that had been
independently tested for IIF AMA and ANA; sera were blindly tested with an ELISA 
PBC screening test including two ANA (gp210, sp100) and a triple (pMIT3) AMA
recombinant antigens. Among IIF AMA-negative sera, 43/100 (43%) manifested
reactivity using the PBC screening test. The same test was positive for 6/104
(5.8%) control sera. IIF AMA-negative/PBC screen-positive sera reacted against
pMIT3 (11/43), gp210 (8/43), Sp100 (17/43), both pMIT3 and gp210 (1/43), or both 
pMIT3 and Sp100 (6/43). Concordance rates between the ANA pattern on HEp-2 cells 
and specific Sp100 and gp210 ELISA results in AMA-negative subjects were 92% for 
nuclear dots and Sp100 and 99% for nuclear rim and gp210. Our data confirm the
hypothesis that a substantial part of IIF AMA-negative (formerly coined
"probable") PBC cases manifest disease-specific autoantibodies when tested using 
newly available tools and thus overcome the previously suggested diagnostic
classification. As suggested by the recent literature, we are convinced that the 
proportion of AMA-negative PBC cases will be significantly minimized by the use
of new laboratory methods and recombinant antigens.

PMID: 21188646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Cell Sci. 2011 Jan 15;124(Pt 2):280-91. doi: 10.1242/jcs.075390. Epub 2010 Dec 
20.

PML isoforms I and II participate in PML-dependent restriction of HSV-1
replication.

Cuchet D(1), Sykes A, Nicolas A, Orr A, Murray J, Sirma H, Heeren J, Bartelt A,
Everett RD.

Author information: 
(1)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Church Street, Glasgow
G11 5JR, Scotland, UK.

Intrinsic antiviral resistance mediated by constitutively expressed cellular
proteins is one arm of defence against virus infection. Promyelocytic leukaemia
nuclear bodies (PML-NBs, also known as ND10) contribute to host restriction of
herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) replication via mechanisms that are
counteracted by viral regulatory protein ICP0. ND10 assembly is dependent on PML,
which comprises several different isoforms, and depletion of all PML isoforms
decreases cellular resistance to ICP0-null mutant HSV-1. We report that
individual expression of PML isoforms I and II partially reverses the increase in
ICP0-null mutant HSV-1 plaque formation that occurs in PML-depleted cells. This
activity of PML isoform I is dependent on SUMO modification, its SUMO interaction
motif (SIM), and each element of its TRIM domain. Detailed analysis revealed that
the punctate foci formed by individual PML isoforms differ subtly from normal
ND10 in terms of composition and/or Sp100 modification. Surprisingly, deletion of
the SIM motif from PML isoform I resulted in increased colocalisation with other 
major ND10 components in cells lacking endogenous PML. Our observations suggest
that complete functionality of PML is dependent on isoform-specific C-terminal
sequences acting in concert.

PMCID: PMC3010193
PMID: 21172801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Cancer Res. 2010 Dec 1;70(23):9991-10001. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1483.
Epub 2010 Nov 30.

Sp100 as a potent tumor suppressor: accelerated senescence and rapid malignant
transformation of human fibroblasts through modulation of an embryonic stem cell 
program.

Negorev DG(1), Vladimirova OV, Kossenkov AV, Nikonova EV, Demarest RM, Capobianco
AJ, Showe MK, Rauscher FJ 3rd, Showe LC, Maul GG.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Retraction in
    Negorev DG, Vladimirova OV, Kossenkov AV, Demarest RM, Showe MK, Rauscher FJ 3rd,
Showe LC, Nikonova EV, Capobianco AJ. Cancer Res. 2013 Aug 1;73(15):4960-1.

Identifying the functions of proteins, which associate with specific subnuclear
structures, is critical to understanding eukaryotic nuclear dynamics. Sp100 is a 
prototypical protein of ND10/PML nuclear bodies, which colocalizes with Daxx and 
the proto-oncogenic PML. Sp100 isoforms contain SAND, PHD, Bromo, and HMG domains
and are highly sumoylated, all characteristics suggestive of a role in
chromatin-mediated gene regulation. A role for Sp100 in oncogenesis has not been 
defined previously. Using selective Sp100 isoform-knockdown approaches, we show
that normal human diploid fibroblasts with reduced Sp100 levels rapidly senesce. 
Subsequently, small rapidly dividing Sp100 minus cells emerge from the senescing 
fibroblasts and are found to be highly tumorigenic in nude mice. The derivation
of these tumorigenic cells from the parental fibroblasts is confirmed by
microsatellite analysis. The small rapidly dividing Sp100 minus cells now also
lack ND10/PML bodies, and exhibit genomic instability and p53 cytoplasmic
sequestration. They have also activated MYC, RAS, and TERT pathways and express
mesenchymal to epithelial transdifferentiation (MET) markers. Reintroduction of
expression of only the Sp100A isoform is sufficient to maintain senescence and to
inhibit emergence of the highly tumorigenic cells. Global transcriptome studies, 
quantitative PCR, and protein studies, as well as immunolocalization studies
during the course of the transformation, reveal that a transient expression of
stem cell markers precedes the malignant transformation. These results identify a
role for Sp100 as a tumor suppressor in addition to its role in maintaining
ND10/PML bodies and in the epigenetic regulation of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3059726
PMID: 21118961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Clin Exp Immunol. 2011 Feb;163(2):147-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2010.04288.x. 
Epub 2010 Nov 22.

Autoantibodies to GW bodies and other autoantigens in primary biliary cirrhosis.

Stinton LM(1), Swain M, Myers RP, Shaheen AA, Fritzler MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Calgary, AB, Canada.

Autoantibodies to intracellular targets in mitochondria and nuclei are
serological hallmarks of primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC). One of the most
recently identified cellular targets of PBC autoantibodies is a novel cytoplasmic
structure referred to as GW bodies [GWB, G (glycine) W (tryptophan)-containing
bodies (GWB)]. GWB are indentified as discrete cytoplasmic domains that are
involved in mRNA processing via the RNA interference (RNAi) pathway. Key
components of GWB include the proteins GW182, Ago2, RNA-associated protein 55
(RAP55) and Ge-1/Hedls. The primary objective was to study the frequency and
clinical association of antibodies directed to GWB components, in 109 PBC
patients. Autoantibodies to mitochondrial antigen-pyruvate dehydrogenase complex 
(M2), branched-chain 2-oxo-acid dehydrogenase complex and 2-oxo glutarate
dehydrogenase complex (3E-BPO), gp210, sp100, promyelocytic leukaemia cell
antigen (PML) and liver kidney microsomal-1 antigen (LKM-1) were detected by a
line immunoassay and antibodies to GWB (GW182, RAP55, Ge-1, GW2, GW3) and
glutamate receptor interacting protein (GRIP)-associated protein-1 (GRASP-1), by 
an addressable laser bead immunoassay (ALBIA). The most common GWB autoantigen
targets were: RAP55-28%, GW182-12%, GW2-2% and antibodies to GRASP-1-17%. By
comparison, the frequency of reactivity to established PBC autoantigens was:
gp210, 27%; sp100, 27% and PML, 17%. None of the autoantibodies were associated
with differences in Mayo risk score or liver decompensation. This study is the
first study to show that antibodies to RAP55, GW182 and GRASP-1 are the most
common GWB targets in PBC.

© 2010 The Authors. Clinical and Experimental Immunology © 2010 British Society
for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC3043305
PMID: 21091667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Theriogenology. 2011 Feb;75(3):577-83. doi: 10.1016/j.theriogenology.2010.09.025.
Epub 2010 Nov 12.

Is photometry an accurate and reliable method to assess boar semen concentration?

Camus A(1), Camugli S, Lévêque C, Schmitt E, Staub C.

Author information: 
(1)IMV Technologies ZI n°1 Est 61300 Aigle, France.
agnes.camus@imv-technologies.com

Sperm concentration assessment is a key point to insure appropriate sperm number 
per dose in species subjected to artificial insemination (AI). The aim of the
present study was to evaluate the accuracy and reliability of two commercially
available photometers, AccuCell and AccuRead pre-calibrated for boar semen in
comparison to UltiMate boar version 12.3D, NucleoCounter SP100 and Thoma
hemacytometer. For each type of instrument, concentration was measured on 34 boar
semen samples in quadruplicate and agreement between measurements and instruments
were evaluated. Accuracy for both photometers was illustrated by mean of
percentage differences to the general mean. It was -0.6% and 0.5% for Accucell
and Accuread respectively, no significant differences were found between
instrument and mean of measurement among all equipment. Repeatability for both
photometers was 1.8% and 3.2% for AccuCell and AccuRead respectively. Low
differences were observed between instruments (confidence interval 3%) except
when hemacytometer was used as a reference. Even though hemacytometer is
considered worldwide as the gold standard, it is the more variable instrument
(confidence interval 7.1%). The conclusion is that routine photometry measures of
raw semen concentration are reliable, accurate and precise using AccuRead or
AccuCell. There are multiple steps in semen processing that can induce sperm
loss and therefore increase differences between theoretical and real sperm
numbers in doses. Potential biases that depend on the workflow but not on the
initial photometric measure of semen concentration are discussed.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21074835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Nihon Rinsho. 2010 Jun;68 Suppl 6:711-3.

[Anti-Sp100 antibody].

[Article in Japanese]

Mori S(1), Wake H, Liu K, Takahashi HK, Nishibori M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Shujitsu University

PMID: 20942171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Virus Res. 2011 May;157(2):128-33. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2010.10.002. Epub 2010
Oct 8.

Intrinsic cellular defense mechanisms targeting human cytomegalovirus.

Tavalai N(1), Stamminger T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical and Molecular Virology, University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Schlossgarten 4, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

In recent studies we and others have identified the cellular proteins PML, hDaxx,
Sp100 and ATRX, which form a subnuclear structure known as nuclear domain 10
(ND10) or PML nuclear bodies (PML-NBs), as host restriction factors that
counteract cytomegalovirus infections by inhibiting the initiation of viral
immediate-early (IE) gene expression. The antiviral function of ND10, however, is
antagonized by viral regulatory proteins which either induce a proteasomal
degradation of ND10 proteins or a disruption of the subnuclear structure. This
review will summarize our current knowledge on the inhibition of cytomegalovirus 
replication by ND10 proteins. Furthermore, viral strategies to defeat this host
defense mechanism are discussed.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20934469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Autoimmun. 2010 Dec;35(4):436-42. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2010.09.005. Epub 2010
Oct 6.

PBC screen: an IgG/IgA dual isotype ELISA detecting multiple mitochondrial and
nuclear autoantibodies specific for primary biliary cirrhosis.

Liu H(1), Norman GL, Shums Z, Worman HJ, Krawitt EL, Bizzaro N, Vergani D,
Bogdanos DP, Dalekos GN, Milkiewicz P, Czaja AJ, Heathcote EJ, Hirschfield GM,
Tan EM, Miyachi K, Bignotto M, Battezzati PM, Lleo A, Leung PS, Podda M, Gershwin
ME, Invernizzi P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Internal Medicine and Center for Autoimmune Liver Diseases, IRCCS 
Istituto Clinico Humanitas, Rozzano, Italy.

A dual isotype (IgG, IgA) enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) designed to
provide enhanced detection of primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC)-specific
autoantibodies against both major mitochondrial and nuclear antigens has been
developed and recently become commercially available. The assay (PBC Screen)
simultaneously detects IgG and IgA autoantibodies to the immunodominant portions 
of the 3 major mitochondrial (MIT3) and nuclear (gp210, and sp100) antigens. The 
aim of this study was to compare the performance of the PBC Screen to the
combined performance obtained with individual IgG ELISAs to MIT3, gp210, and
sp100 on a large group of selected patients from multiple centers. A total of
1175 patients with PBC and 1232 subjects without PBC were evaluated. Non-PBC
groups included healthy controls (624) as well as individuals with autoimmune
hepatitis (281), primary sclerosing cholangitis (77), viral hepatitis (91
hepatitis B and 98 hepatitis C), other liver diseases (31), and other infectious 
or autoimmune diseases (30). The PBC Screen at the receiver operator
characteristic optimized cutoff of 27.8 units, had an overall sensitivity of
83.8%, specificity of 94.7% and area under curve of 0.9212. This was similar to
the specificity of 96.1% obtained by the combined results of individual MIT3,
sp100, and gp210 IgG ELISAs (kappa index at 0.898). Of the 253 PBC patients
without AMA detectable by immunofluorescence, 113 (44.7%) were interpreted as
positive for PBC-specific autoantibodies. In conclusion, the PBC Screen is an
appropriate first-line test for the diagnosis of PBC, including for patients
negative for markers assessed using conventional methods.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20932720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. BMC Gastroenterol. 2010 Sep 3;10:100. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-10-100.

Prevalence of primary biliary cirrhosis in adults referring hospital for annual
health check-up in Southern China.

Liu H(1), Liu Y, Wang L, Xu D, Lin B, Zhong R, Gong S, Podda M, Invernizzi P.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory, Guangzhou Women and Childrens Medical Center, 9 Jinsui
Road, Guangzhou 510623, China.

BACKGROUND: Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is an autoimmune liver disease
characterized by the presence of anti-mitocondrial autoantibodies (AMA) which has
an essential role also for diagnosis. In addition, also some anti-nuclear
antibodies (ANA) have been shown to be highly specific PBC. The purpose of this
study was to assess the prevalence of PBC among the adults referring hospital for
annual health check-up in Southern China by screening sera for PBC-specific
autoantibodies.
METHODS: AMA and ANA were screened in 8,126 adults (mean age 44 ± 15 years, 48%
females) by indirect immunofluorenscence (IIF). Positive sera were tested by
ELISA/immunoblotting for AMA-M2, anti-sp100 and anti-gp210. A diagnosis of PBC
was re-assessed six months after the initial testing.
RESULTS: Out of 8,126 individuals 35 were positive for AMA and 79 positive for
ANA. Nineteen, 4, and 3 of the subjects positive for AMA and/or ANA showed
reactivity for AMA-M2, anti-sp100 or gp210, respectively, further tested with
ELISA/immunoblotting. Fourteen in the 39 individuals positive for AMA at IIF,
AMA-M2, anti-gp210, or anti-sp100 had abnormal cholestatic liver functional
indices. One definite and 3 probable PBC diagnosis could be made in 4 cases
including 3 females and 1 male after half a year.
CONCLUSIONS: We found a point prevalence rate of PBC among Southern Chinese
adults attending for yearly health check-up of 492 cases per million (95% CI, 128
to 1,093) and 1,558 cases per million (95% CI, 294 to 3,815) for women over 40, a
finding similar to prevalence reported in other geographical areas.

PMCID: PMC2944334
PMID: 20815889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. PLoS Comput Biol. 2010 Jun 24;6(6):e1000830. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000830.

The 20S proteasome splicing activity discovered by SpliceMet.

Liepe J(1), Mishto M, Textoris-Taube K, Janek K, Keller C, Henklein P, Kloetzel
PM, Zaikin A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Charité, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

The identification of proteasome-generated spliced peptides (PSP) revealed a new 
unpredicted activity of the major cellular protease. However, so far
characterization of PSP was entirely dependent on the availability of
patient-derived cytotoxic CD8+ T lymphocytes (CTL) thus preventing a systematic
investigation of proteasome-catalyzed peptide splicing (PCPS). For an
unrestricted PSP identification we here developed SpliceMet, combining the
computer-based algorithm ProteaJ with in vitro proteasomal degradation assays and
mass spectrometry. By applying SpliceMet for the analysis of proteasomal
processing products of four different substrate polypeptides, derived from human 
tumor as well as viral antigens, we identified fifteen new spliced peptides
generated by PCPS either by cis or from two separate substrate molecules, i.e.,
by trans splicing. Our data suggest that 20S proteasomes represent a molecular
machine that, due to its catalytic and structural properties, facilitates the
generation of spliced peptides, thereby providing a pool of qualitatively new
peptides from which functionally relevant products may be selected.

PMCID: PMC2891702
PMID: 20613855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Eur J Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;89(10):757-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2010.05.006.

Differential relocation and stability of PML-body components during productive
human cytomegalovirus infection: detailed characterization by live-cell imaging.

Dimitropoulou P(1), Caswell R, McSharry BP, Greaves RF, Spandidos DA, Wilkinson
GW, Sourvinos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Crete, Heraklion
71003, Crete, Greece.

In controlling the switch from latency to lytic infection, the immediate early
(IE) genes lie at the core of herpesvirus pathogenesis. To image the 72kDa human 
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) major IE protein (IE1-72K), a recombinant virus encoding
IE1 fused with EGFP was constructed. Using this construct, the IE1-EGFP fusion
was detected at ND10 (PML-bodies) within 2h post infection (p.i.) and the
complete disruption of ND10 imaged through to 6h p.i. HCMV genomes and IE2-86K
protein could be detected adjacent to the slowly degrading IE1-72K/ND10 foci.
IE1-72K associates with metaphase chromatin, recruiting both PML and STAT2.
hDaxx, STAT1 and IE2-86K did not re-locate to metaphase chromatin; the fate of
hDaxx is particularly important as this protein contributes to an intrinsic
barrier to HCMV infection. While IE1-72K participates in a complex with
chromatin, PML, STAT2 and Sp100, IE1-72K releases hDaxx from ND10 yet does not
appear to remain associated with it.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20599291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Med Sci Monit. 2010 Jun;16(6):BR174-8.

Low expression of Sp100 in laryngeal cancer: correlation with cell
differentiation.

Li W(1), Shang C, Guan C, Zhang Y, Sun K, Fu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang City,
China.

BACKGROUND: Sp100 is a permanent ProMyelocytic Leukaemian nuclear bodies (PML
NB)-associated protein, and has been reported to participate in the regulation of
transcriptional activity, apoptosis and other cellular biological processes. The 
aim of the present study was to explore the expression of Sp100 and its potential
clinical implications in laryngeal cancer.
MATERIAL/METHODS: The mRNA and protein levels of Sp100 in 96 laryngeal cancer
samples and paired normal epithelium were examined by RT-PCR, Western blot and
immuno-histochemical staining. The correlation of Sp100 expression with
clinicopathological features of these patients was assessed by Chi-squared test.
RESULTS: The coherent low Sp100 expression of both transcriptional and
translational levels were confirmed in the malignant tissues compared to the
normal mucosa, and the expression was down-regulated among the well-, moderately-
and poorly-differentiated cancer cells accordingly. Moreover,
immuno-histochemical staining demonstrated that Sp100 showed a predominantly
nuclear pattern in well-differentiated cancer cells, and diffuse cellular
distribution in cytoplasm in poorly-differentiated cancer cells. Besides
histological type of cancer cells, other clinicopathological characteristics,
including age, sex, T classification, lymph node metastasis, distant metastasis
and clinical stage, showed no significant correlation with Sp100 low expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our finding provides an important clue to further understanding the 
role of Sp100 in the initiation and progression of tumorgenesis.

PMID: 20512085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Dig Dis Sci. 2010 Aug;55(8):2144-61. doi: 10.1007/s10620-010-1268-4. Epub 2010
May 13.

Autoantibodies as prognostic markers in autoimmune liver disease.

Czaja AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA. czaja.albert@mayo.edu

Certain autoantibodies in autoimmune liver disease have prognostic implications
that are under-utilized and under-developed. The goals of this review are to
indicate progress in characterizing the autoantibodies with prognostic
connotations and to indicate the feasibility and importance of discovering other 
markers. Prime source and review articles in English were selected by a Medline
search through 2010. Antibodies to soluble liver antigen, actin, liver cytosol
type 1, asialoglycoprotein receptor, chromatin, cyclic citrullinated peptide, and
uridine glucuronosyltransferases have been associated with the occurrence,
severity, and progression of autoimmune hepatitis, and antibodies to Sp100,
gp210, and centromere have had similar implications in primary biliary cirrhosis.
Antibodies to soluble liver antigen have shown the most promise in autoimmune
hepatitis as they have been associated with severe histological changes, long
durations of treatment, relapse after drug withdrawal, and high frequency of
liver failure. Antibodies to the nuclear rim pore protein, gp210, have shown the 
most promise in primary biliary cirrhosis as they have been associated with
severe interface hepatitis, lobular inflammation, and progression to liver
failure. The major limitations of the autoantibodies have been their lack of
standardized assays, low negative predictabilities, and fluctuating levels.
Performance parameters will improve as critical pathogenic pathways,
comprehensive testing batteries, and standardized assays through international
exchange workshops are developed. Progress has been made in identifying the
serological markers of prognosis in autoimmune liver disease, and they promise to
reflect critical disease mechanisms and enhance patient management.

PMID: 20464491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Vet Med Int. 2010;2010:659862. doi: 10.4061/2010/659862. Epub 2009 Nov 12.

Stallion Sperm Viability, as Measured by the Nucleocounter SP-100, Is Affected by
Extender and Enhanced by Single Layer Centrifugation.

Morrell JM(1), Johannisson A, Juntilla L, Rytty K, Bäckgren L, Dalin AM,
Rodriguez-Martinez H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproduction, Department of Clinical Sciences, Swedish University 
of Agricultural Sciences (SLU), P.O. Box 7054, 75007 Uppsala, Sweden.

On-stud assessment of stallion sperm quality can be problematic. A new
instrument, the Nucleocounter SP-100, was validated for measuring stallion sperm 
concentration and viability. It was subsequently used to evaluate sperm viability
in Kenney's extender and INRA96. There was a strong correlation between sperm
concentrations measured by the Nucleocounter SP-100 and by the Bürker counting
chamber (r = 0.84; P < .001). Similarly, there was a good correlation between
sperm viability results from the Nucleocounter SP-100 and flow cytometric results
(r = 0.73; P < .001). Sperm viability at 24 hours was significantly better for
samples extended in INRA96 than in Kenney's extender (P < .001). Furthermore,
sperm kinematics were better for stored samples in INRA96 than in Kenney's
extender. Single Layer Centrifugation selected spermatozoa that maintained their 
viability better during storage for 24 hours than the uncentrifuged samples. In
conclusion, the type of semen extender used and Single Layer Centrifugation were 
found to influence both the kinematics and viability of stallion spermatozoa. The
Nucelocounter-SP100 was considered to be a useful instrument for rapidly
measuring stallion sperm concentration and viability.

PMCID: PMC2860196
PMID: 20445788  [PubMed]


104. J Virol. 2010 Jul;84(13):6861-5. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00335-10. Epub 2010 Apr 14.

The RING finger domain of Varicella-Zoster virus ORF61p has E3 ubiquitin ligase
activity that is essential for efficient autoubiquitination and dispersion of
Sp100-containing nuclear bodies.

Walters MS(1), Kyratsous CA, Silverstein SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, 701 W. 168th St., New York, NY 10032, USA.

Varicella zoster virus encodes an immediate-early (IE) protein termed ORF61p that
is orthologous to the herpes simplex virus IE protein ICP0. Although these
proteins share several functional properties, ORF61p does not fully substitute
for ICP0. The greatest region of similarity between these proteins is a RING
finger domain. We demonstrate that disruption of the ORF61p RING finger domain by
amino acid substitution (Cys19Gly) alters ORF61p intranuclear distribution and
abolishes ORF61p-mediated dispersion of Sp100-containing nuclear bodies. In
addition, we demonstrate that an intact ORF61p RING finger domain is necessary
for E3 ubiquitin ligase activity and is required for autoubiquitination and
regulation of protein stability.

PMCID: PMC2903287
PMID: 20392849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Cell Biochem. 2010 May;110(1):118-28. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22518.

Validation and application of normalization factors for gene expression studies
in rubella virus-infected cell lines with quantitative real-time PCR.

Chey S(1), Claus C, Liebert UG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

Reference genes are generally employed in real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR)
experiments to normalize variability between different samples. The aim of this
study was to identify and validate appropriate reference genes as internal
controls for RT-qPCR experiments in rubella virus (RV)-infected Vero and MCF-7
cell lines using SYBR green fluorescence. The software programs geNorm and
NormFinder and the DeltaDeltaC(t) calculation were used to determine the
expression stability and thus reliability of nine suitable reference genes. HPRT1
and HUEL, and HUEL and TBP were identified to be most suitable for RT-qPCR
analysis of RV-infected Vero and MCF-7 cells, respectively. These genes were used
as normalizers for transcriptional activity of selected cellular genes. The
results confirm previously published microarray and Northern blot data,
particularly on the transcriptional activity of the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p21 and the nuclear body protein SP100. Furthermore, the mRNA level of 
the mitochondrial protein p32 is increased in RV-infected cells. The effect on
cellular gene transcription by RV-infection seems to be cell line-specific, but
genes of central importance for viral life cycle appear to be altered to a
similar degree. This study does not only provide an accurate and flexible tool
for the quantitative analysis of gene expression patterns in RV-infected cell
lines. It also indicates, that the suitability of a reference gene as normalizer 
of RT-qPCR data and the host-cell response to RV-infection are strictly cell-line
specific.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20217898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Virol. 2010 Apr;84(8):4026-40. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02597-09. Epub 2010 Feb 10.

Regulation of ICP0-null mutant herpes simplex virus type 1 infection by ND10
components ATRX and hDaxx.

Lukashchuk V(1), Everett RD.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Virology Unit, Institute of Virology, Church Street, Glasgow G11 5JR,
Scotland, United Kingdom.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) immediate-early gene product ICP0 activates
lytic infection and relieves cell-mediated repression of viral gene expression.
This repression is conferred by preexisting cellular proteins and is commonly
referred to as intrinsic antiviral resistance or intrinsic defense. PML and
Sp100, two core components of nuclear substructures known as ND10 or PML nuclear 
bodies, contribute to intrinsic resistance, but it is clear that other proteins
must also be involved. We have tested the hypothesis that additional ND10
factors, particularly those that are involved in chromatin remodeling, may have
roles in intrinsic resistance against HSV-1 infection. The two ND10 component
proteins investigated in this report are ATRX and hDaxx, which are known to
interact with each other and comprise components of a repressive
chromatin-remodeling complex. We generated stable cell lines in which endogenous 
ATRX or hDaxx expression is severely suppressed by RNA interference. We found
increases in both gene expression and plaque formation induced by ICP0-null
mutant HSV-1 in both ATRX- and hDaxx-depleted cells. Reconstitution of wild-type 
hDaxx expression reversed the effects of hDaxx depletion, but reconstitution with
a mutant form of hDaxx unable to interact with ATRX did not. Our results suggest 
that ATRX and hDaxx act as a complex that contributes to intrinsic antiviral
resistance to HSV-1 infection, which is counteracted by ICP0.

PMCID: PMC2849514
PMID: 20147399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Cell Sci. 2010 Feb 1;123(Pt 3):392-400. doi: 10.1242/jcs.053496.

Three-dimensional organization of promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies.

Lang M(1), Jegou T, Chung I, Richter K, Münch S, Udvarhelyi A, Cremer C,
Hemmerich P, Engelhardt J, Hell SW, Rippe K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of High Resolution Optical Microscopy, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) are mobile subnuclear organelles 
formed by PML and Sp100 protein. They have been reported to have a role in
transcription, DNA replication and repair, telomere lengthening, cell cycle
control and tumor suppression. We have conducted high-resolution 4Pi fluorescence
laser-scanning microscopy studies complemented with correlative electron
microscopy and investigations of the accessibility of the PML-NB subcompartment. 
During interphase PML-NBs adopt a spherical organization characterized by the
assembly of PML and Sp100 proteins into patches within a 50- to 100-nm-thick
shell. This spherical shell of PML and Sp100 imposes little constraint to the
exchange of components between the PML-NB interior and the nucleoplasm.
Post-translational SUMO modifications, telomere repeats and heterochromatin
protein 1 were found to localize in characteristic patterns with respect to PML
and Sp100. From our findings, we derived a model that explains how the
three-dimensional organization of PML-NBs serves to concentrate different
biological activities while allowing for an efficient exchange of components.

PMID: 20130140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Virol. 2010 Apr;84(7):3476-87. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02544-09. Epub 2010 Jan 27.

Comparison of the biological and biochemical activities of several members of the
alphaherpesvirus ICP0 family of proteins.

Everett RD(1), Boutell C, McNair C, Grant L, Orr A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Virology Unit, Institute of Virology, Church Street, Glasgow G11 5JR,
Scotland, United Kingdom. r.everett@mrcvu.gla.ac.uk

Immediate-early protein ICP0 of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is an E3
ubiquitin ligase of the RING finger class that is required for efficient lytic
infection and reactivation from latency. Other alphaherpesviruses also express
ICP0-related RING finger proteins, but these have limited homology outside the
core RING domain. Existing evidence indicates that ICP0 family members have
similar properties, but there has been no systematic comparison of the
biochemical activities and biological functions of these proteins. Here, we
describe an inducible cell line system that allows expression of the ICP0-related
proteins of bovine herpes virus type 1 (BHV-1), equine herpesvirus type 1
(EHV-1), pseudorabies virus (PRV), and varicella-zoster virus (VZV) and their
subsequent functional analysis. We report that the RING domains of all the
proteins have E3 ubiquitin ligase activity in vitro. The BHV-1, EHV-1, and PRV
proteins complement ICP0-null mutant HSV-1 plaque formation and induce
derepression of quiescent HSV-1 genomes to levels similar to those achieved by
ICP0 itself. VICP0, the ICP0 expressed by VZV, was found to be extremely
unstable, which limited its analysis in this system. We compared the abilities of
the ICP0-related proteins to disrupt ND10, to induce degradation of PML and
Sp100, to affect key components of the interferon signaling pathway, and to
interfere with induction of interferon-stimulated genes. We found that the
property that correlated most closely with their biological activities was the
ability to preclude the recruitment of cellular ND10 proteins to sites closely
associated with incoming HSV-1 genomes and early replication compartments.

PMCID: PMC2838103
PMID: 20106921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Genes Dev. 2009 Dec 1;23(23):2723-8. doi: 10.1101/gad.1812609.

The SAND domain protein ULTRAPETALA1 acts as a trithorax group factor to regulate
cell fate in plants.

Carles CC(1), Fletcher JC.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Gene Expression Center, United States Department of
Agriculture/University of California at Berkeley, Albany, California 94710, USA.

During development, trithorax group (trxG) chromatin remodeling complexes
counteract repression by Polycomb group (PcG) complexes to sustain active
expression of key regulatory genes. Although PcG complexes are well characterized
in plants, little is known about trxG activities. Here we demonstrate that the
Arabidopsis SAND (Sp100, AIRE-1, NucP41/75, DEAF-1) domain protein ULTRAPETALA1
(ULT1) functions as a trxG factor that counteracts the PcG-repressive activity of
CURLY LEAF. In floral stem cells, ULT1 protein associates directly with the
master homeotic locus AGAMOUS, inducing its expression by regulating its histone 
methylation status. Our analysis introduces a novel mechanism that mediates
epigenetic switches controlling post-embryonic stem cell fates in plants.

PMCID: PMC2788324
PMID: 19952107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Viruses. 2009 Dec;1(3):1240-64. doi: 10.3390/v1031240. Epub 2009 Dec 15.

Interplay between Herpesvirus Infection and Host Defense by PML Nuclear Bodies.

Tavalai N(1), Stamminger T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical and Molecular Virology, University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Schlossgarten 4, 91054 Erlangen, Germany; E-Mail:
nina.tavalai@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de.

In recent studies we and others have identified the cellular proteins PML, hDaxx,
and Sp100, which form a subnuclear structure known as nuclear domain 10 (ND10) or
PML nuclear bodies (PML-NBs), as host restriction factors that counteract
herpesviral infections by inhibiting viral replication at different stages. The
antiviral function of ND10, however, is antagonized by viral regulatory proteins 
(e.g., ICP0 of herpes simplex virus; IE1 of human cytomegalovirus) which induce
either a modification or disruption of ND10. This review will summarize the
current knowledge on how viral replication is inhibited by ND10 proteins.
Furthermore, herpesviral strategies to defeat this host defense mechanism are
discussed.

PMCID: PMC3185544
PMID: 21994592  [PubMed]


111. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 Jan;105(1):125-31. doi: 10.1038/ajg.2009.596. Epub 2009 
Oct 27.

PML nuclear body component Sp140 is a novel autoantigen in primary biliary
cirrhosis.

Granito A(1), Yang WH, Muratori L, Lim MJ, Nakajima A, Ferri S, Pappas G,
Quarneti C, Bianchi FB, Bloch DB, Muratori P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica, Alma Mater Studiorum University of Bologna, 
Italy. alessandro.granito@unibo.it

OBJECTIVES: Some patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) have antinuclear
antibodies (ANAs). These ANAs include the "multiple nuclear dots" (MND) staining 
pattern, targeting promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) nuclear body (NB)
components, such as "speckled 100-kD" protein (Sp100) and PML. A new PML NB
protein, designated as Sp140, was identified using serum from a PBC patient. The 
aim of this study was to analyze the immune response against Sp140 protein in PBC
patients.
METHODS: We studied 135 PBC patients and 157 pathological controls with type 1
autoimmune hepatitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, and systemic lupus
erythematosus. We used indirect immunofluorescence and a neuroblastoma cell line 
expressing Sp140 for detecting anti-Sp140 antibodies, and a commercially
available immunoblot for detecting anti-Sp100 and anti-PML antibodies.
RESULTS: Anti-Sp140 antibodies were present in 20 (15%) PBC patients but not in
control samples, with a higher frequency in antimitochondrial antibody
(AMA)-negative cases (53 vs. 9%, P<0.0001). Anti-Sp140 antibodies were found
together with anti-Sp100 antibodies in all but one case (19 of 20, 90%) and with 
anti-PML antibodies in 12 (60%) cases. Anti-Sp140 positivity was not associated
with a specific clinical feature of PBC.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identifies Sp140 as a new, highly specific autoantigen in 
PBC for the first time. The very frequent coexistence of anti-Sp140, anti-Sp100
and anti-PML antibodies suggests that the NB is a multiantigenic complex in PBC
and enhances the diagnostic significance of these reactivities, which are
particularly useful in AMA-negative cases.

PMID: 19861957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Nov 10;106(45):19132-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0910920106. Epub 2009 Oct 22.

During its nuclear phase the multifunctional regulatory protein ICP0 undergoes
proteolytic cleavage characteristic of polyproteins.

Gu H(1), Poon AP, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago IL 60637, USA.

ICP0 is a multifunctional herpes simplex virus protein known primarily as a
promiscuous transactivator. In the course of productive infection, it is
localized during the first 5-7 h in the nucleus and later in the cytoplasm. In
the nucleus, its primary activities are to suppress the silencing of viral DNA by
host proteins, activate cdk4 through recruitment of cyclin D3 to the sites of
formation of replication compartments, and degrade several cellular proteins
including PML and Sp100, key components of the ND10 nuclear bodies. ICP0 is not
translocated to the cytoplasm in cells infected with mutants incapable of
performing these tasks. We report the unexpected finding that ICP0 is cleaved
into several discrete polypeptides by a proteasome-independent process. The
products of this cleavage accumulate in cells infected with ICP0 mutants
incapable of degrading PML and therefore are retained in the nucleus. In the
second step, the products of the initial cleavage of wild-type virus-infected
cells are themselves subject to proteasome-dependent degradation. The average
half life of intact ICP0 during the nuclear phase is approximately 1 h. The
proteasome-independent cleavage products are no longer detected at late times
corresponding to the cytoplasmic phase of ICP0. The results are consistent with
the hypothesis that the cleavage products of ICP0 function in topologically
distinct domains during its nuclear phase.

PMCID: PMC2776466
PMID: 19850872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cases J. 2009 May 27;2:7491. doi: 10.1186/1757-1626-2-7491.

Incipient primary biliary cirrhosis/autoimmune hepatitis overlap or hepatitic
form of primary biliary cirrhosis: a case report.

Minz RW(1), Chhabra S, Aggarwal R, Das A, Saikia B, Chawla YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunopathology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education &
Research, Sector-12,Chandigarh - 160 012, India. rwminz@hotmail.com

A 42 year old asymptomatic female detected as incipient Primary Biliary
Cirrhosis/Autoimmune Hepatitis overlap during routine checkup. The biochemical
profile showed evolution from a mildly deranged liver function test in 2004 along
with increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate to a 4 times elevation of alkaline 
phosphatase in 2006 with mildly deranged alanine transaminase. Autoimmune markers
demonstrable were Anti mitochondrial antibody M(2) and sp100. Histopathology
showed dual features, dominant findings were of autoimmune heptatitis. Features
consistent with Primary Biliary Cirrhosis were minimal with an occasional portal 
tract showing paucity of bile ducts and occasional bile duct proliferation. Human
leucocyte antigen DR/DQ genotype was as follows: DRB1*03, DRB1*07, DQB1*02,
DQB1*04.

PMCID: PMC2740050
PMID: 19829977  [PubMed]


114. J Rheumatol. 2009 Oct;36(10):2250-6. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.090340. Epub 2009 Sep 1.

Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), PBC autoantibodies, and hepatic parameter
abnormalities in a large population of systemic sclerosis patients.

Assassi S(1), Fritzler MJ, Arnett FC, Norman GL, Shah KR, Gourh P, Manek N, Perry
M, Ganesh D, Rahbar MH, Mayes MD.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas-Health Science Center at Houston, 6431 Fannin, MSB
5.232, Houston, TX 77030, USA. shervin.assassi@uth.tmc.edu

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the diagnostic accuracy of antimitochondrial antibodies
(AMA), sp100, and gp210 antibodies for primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) in a large
population of patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc); to examine concordance of
these antibodies with subsets of SSc. Further, to assess the association of
SSc-related antibodies with hepatic parameter abnormalities.
METHODS: We obtained medical records to verify the diagnoses of SSc and PBC. Sera
from all participants were examined for the presence of SSc- and PBC-related
antibodies, as well as for abnormalities in hepatic parameters.
RESULTS: We examined 817 patients with SSc, of whom 16 (2%) had confirmed PBC.
The sensitivity and specificity of AMA by a MIT3 ELISA for PBC were 81.3% and
94.6%, respectively. Sp100 had a sensitivity and specificity of 31.3% and 97.4%, 
respectively, while gp210 had an even lower sensitivity. We were able to detect
all PBC cases using AMA(MIT3) and sp100 as a combined marker, resulting in a
significantly improved sensitivity of 100% (p = 0.042) with an incremental
decrease in specificity to 92.6%. Independent of AMA or sp100 status, there was
an association of anticentromere B (CENP-B) and anti-topoisomerase antibodies
(ATA) with higher alkaline phosphatase levels (p = 0.051 and p = 0.003,
respectively) while anti-RNA polymerase III (anti-RNAP) was associated with lower
alkaline phosphatase levels (p = 0.019) among the patients with SSc.
CONCLUSION: Utilization of AMA(MIT3) and sp100 antibodies as a combined
diagnostic marker leads to an improved detection of PBC in patients with SSc.
CENP-B and ATA are associated with alkaline phosphatase elevation.

PMCID: PMC2885441
PMID: 19723904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 25;106(34):14576-80. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0906905106. Epub 2009 Aug 12.

ICP0 enables and monitors the function of D cyclins in herpes simplex virus 1
infected cells.

Kalamvoki M(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The herpes simplex virus 1 ICP0 is a regulatory protein. Early in infection ICP0 
localizes in ND10 bodies and performs two functions: As an E3 ligase in
conjunction with E2 UbcH5a conjugating enzyme, it degrades the ND10 components
PML and SP100. Concurrently, it suppresses the silencing of viral DNA by
dispersing the HDAC1/CoREST/REST/LSD1 repressor complex. Subsequently, ICP0 is
exported to the cytoplasm. In cells treated with HDAC inhibitors or transfected
with irrelevant DNA, the export is delayed in a DNA dose-dependent fashion. Here,
we follow up an observation that ICP0 binds cyclin D3 and that ICP0 mutants
unable to bind cyclin D3 are not exported. Moreover, in infected cells cdk4 is
activated, but cdk2 is not. We report that (i) cyclin D1, D2, or D3 colocalize
with ND10 bodies and ICP0 early in infection and ultimately become incorporated
into viral replication compartments, (ii) each of the D cyclins partially rescues
DeltaICP0 mutants, and (iii) inhibition of cdk4 by inhibitor I sequesters ICP0 in
the nucleus. A key finding is that overexpression of cyclin D3 enables the
transport of ICP0 to the cytoplasm. We conclude that (i) ICP0 facilitates the
recruitment of cyclin D3 to the sites of viral DNA synthesis, (ii) until its
functions are completed, ICP0 is retained in the nucleus, and (iii) a common
signal that results in the export of ICP0 to the cytoplasm is the accumulation of
a viral DNA-synthesis-dependent late protein.

PMCID: PMC2732861
PMID: 19706544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Cancer Lett. 2010 Feb 1;288(1):94-8. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.06.028. Epub 2009
Aug 11.

Ultrasound-enhanced drug dispersion through solid tumours and its possible role
in aiding ultrasound-targeted cancer chemotherapy.

Nomikou N(1), Li YS, McHale AP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulster, Cromore Rd., Coleraine,
Co. Derry BT52 1SA, Northern Ireland, UK.

It has been demonstrated that inadequate dispersion of cancer chemotherapeutic
drugs throughout the tissues of larger, relatively poorly vascularised tumours
compromises the therapeutic effectiveness of such drugs. Recently we demonstrated
that electric fields could be exploited to achieve dispersion of a cancer
chemotherapeutic drug through relatively impermeable tissues of a poorly
vascularised solid tumour model. Using a modified Sonidel SP100 sonoporator we
demonstrate that ultrasound may enhance the toxicity of a cancer chemotherapeutic
drug by dispersing the drug through relatively impermeable tissues of a
non-vascularised tumour model in vivo. We suggest that such a phenomenon may play
a significant role in ultrasound targeting of cancer chemotherapeutic drugs,
particularly in the treatment of solid tumours.

Crown Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19674834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Virol. 2009 Oct;83(20):10637-43. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01144-09. Epub 2009 Aug 5.

Complementation of a herpes simplex virus ICP0 null mutant by varicella-zoster
virus ORF61p.

Kyratsous CA(1), Walters MS, Panagiotidis CA, Silverstein SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, 701 W. 168th St., New York, NY 10032, USA.

The herpes simplex virus (HSV) ICP0 protein acts to overcome intrinsic cellular
defenses that repress viral alpha gene expression. In that vein, viruses that
have mutations in ICP0's RING finger or are deleted for the gene are sensitive to
interferon, as they fail to direct degradation of promyelocytic leukemia protein 
(PML), a component of host nuclear domain 10s. While varicella-zoster virus is
also insensitive to interferon, ORF61p, its ICP0 ortholog, failed to degrade PML.
A recombinant virus with each coding region of the gene for ICP0 replaced with
sequences encoding ORF61p was constructed. This virus was compared to an ICP0
deletion mutant and wild-type HSV. The recombinant degraded only Sp100 and not
PML and grew to higher titers than its ICP0 null parental virus, but it was
sensitive to interferon, like the virus from which it was derived. This analysis 
permitted us to compare the activities of ICP0 and ORF61p in identical
backgrounds and revealed distinct biologic roles for these proteins.

PMCID: PMC2753114
PMID: 19656893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Oct 9;388(1):41-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.07.103. Epub 2009 Jul 25.

Enhanced SUMOylation of proteins containing a SUMO-interacting motif by SUMO-Ubc9
fusion.

Kim ET(1), Kim KK, Matunis MJ, Ahn JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Cheoncheondong Jangangu, Suwon,
Gyeonggido, Republic of Korea.

Identifying new targets for SUMO and understanding the function of protein
SUMOylation are largely limited by low level of SUMOylation. It was found
recently that Ubc9, the SUMO E2 conjugating enzyme, is covalently modified by
SUMO at a lysine 14 in the N-terminal alpha helix, and that SUMO-modified Ubc9
has enhanced conjugation activity for certain target proteins containing a
SUMO-interacting motif (SIM). Here, we show that, compared to intact Ubc9, the
SUMO-Ubc9 fusion protein has higher conjugating activity for SIM-containing
targets such as Sp100 and human cytomegalovirus IE2. Assays using an IE2 SIM
mutant revealed the requirement of SIM for the enhanced IE2 SUMOylation by
SUMO-Ubc9. In pull-down assays with cell extracts, the SUMO-Ubc9 fusion protein
bound to more diverse cellular proteins and interacted with some SIM-containing
proteins with higher affinities than Ubc9. Therefore, the devised SUMO-Ubc9
fusion will be useful for identifying SIM-containing SUMO targets and producing
SUMO-modified proteins.

PMID: 19635459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009 Dec;7(12):1355-60. doi:
10.1016/j.cgh.2009.07.012. Epub 2009 Jul 22.

Value of autoantibody analysis in the differential diagnosis of chronic
cholestatic liver disease.

Milkiewicz P(1), Buwaneswaran H, Coltescu C, Shums Z, Norman GL, Heathcote EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Toronto Western Hospital, University Health Network,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: It is challenging to diagnose patients with chronic
cholestatic liver diseases when all the classic criteria are not fulfilled. We
evaluated the performance of the recently developed MIT3-based enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), which detects antimitochondrial autoantibodies
(AMAs), together with ELISAs for other autoimmune liver disease-related
antibodies in patients with chronic cholestatic liver disease.
METHODS: Sera from 281 patients with chronic cholestatic conditions, including
primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), primary sclerosing cholangitis, AMA-positive
autoimmune hepatitis, and "undetermined cholangiopathy" were tested for the
following PBC-associated autoantibodies: anti-gp210, anti-sp100, conventional
anti-M2, anti-M2 (MIT3) IgG, anti-M2 (MIT3) IgA, as well as anti-centromere,
anti-soluble liver antigen, and anti-chromatin.
RESULTS: Of 57 patients with PBC who were AMA-negative by conventional M2 ELISA, 
14 were found to be AMA-positive by the MIT3-IgG assay. Furthermore, on the basis
of the data from 3 tests (MIT3-IgG, gp210, and sp100), PBC was confirmed in 20 of
57 (35%) patients diagnosed with AMA-negative PBC. We confirmed that sp100 and
gp210 antibodies were detected only in patients with PBC and AMA-positive
autoimmune hepatitis, whereas gp210 was detected more frequently in patients
known to have had a poor outcome. Of the 11 patients with an undetermined
cholangiopathy, 3 (27%) tested positive for PBC with the MIT3-IgG assay. In
contrast to previous findings, anti-centromere antibodies were not found to be
associated with poor outcome in PBC.
CONCLUSIONS: ELISAs for AMAs and antinuclear antibodies are useful in diagnosis
and prognosis of patients with features of PBC who lack conventional AMA and in
patients with a cholangiopathy of undetermined etiology.

PMID: 19631286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Dig Liver Dis. 2009 Dec;41(12):916; author reply 916-7. doi:
10.1016/j.dld.2009.05.005. Epub 2009 Jul 14.

Primary biliary cirrhosis-specific autoantibodies in patients with systemic
sclerosis.

Mytilinaiou MG, Bogdanos DP.

Comment on
    Dig Liver Dis. 2009 Oct;41(10):762-4.

PMID: 19604733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Aging Cell. 2009 Aug;8(4):484-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2009.00496.x. Epub
2009 Jun 25.

Gene expression profiling of aging in multiple mouse strains: identification of
aging biomarkers and impact of dietary antioxidants.

Park SK(1), Kim K, Page GP, Allison DB, Weindruch R, Prolla TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Medical Genetics, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
53706, USA.

We used DNA microarrays to identify panels of transcriptional markers of aging
that are differentially expressed in young (5 month) and old (25 month) mice of
multiple inbred strains (129sv, BALB/c, CBA, DBA, B6, C3H and B6C3F(1)). In the
heart, age-related changes of five genes were studied throughout the mouse
lifespan: complement component 4, chemokine ligand 14, component of Sp100-rs,
phenylalanine hydroxylase and src family associated phosphoprotein 2. A similar
analysis in the brain (cerebellum) involved complement component 1q (alpha
polypeptide), complement component 4, P lysozyme structural, glial fibrillary
acidic protein and cathepsin S. Caloric restriction (CR) inhibited age-related
expression of these genes in both tissues. Parametric analysis of gene set
enrichment identified several biological processes that are induced with aging in
multiple mouse strains. We also tested the ability of dietary antioxidants to
oppose these transcriptional markers of aging. Lycopene, resveratrol,
acetyl-l-carnitine and tempol were as effective as CR in the heart, and
alpha-lipoic acid and coenzyme Q(10) were as effective as CR in the cerebellum.
These findings suggest that transcriptional biomarkers of aging in mice can be
used to estimate the efficacy of aging interventions on a tissue-specific basis.

PMCID: PMC2733852
PMID: 19555370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Jul 1;107(4):609-21. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22183.

Changing nuclear landscape and unique PML structures during early epigenetic
transitions of human embryonic stem cells.

Butler JT(1), Hall LL, Smith KP, Lawrence JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, 01655, USA.

The complex nuclear structure of somatic cells is important to epigenomic
regulation, yet little is known about nuclear organization of human embryonic
stem cells (hESC). Here we surveyed several nuclear structures in pluripotent and
transitioning hESC. Observations of centromeres, telomeres, SC35 speckles, Cajal 
Bodies, lamin A/C and emerin, nuclear shape and size demonstrate a very different
"nuclear landscape" in hESC. This landscape is remodeled during a brief
transitional window, concomitant with or just prior to differentiation onset.
Notably, hESC initially contain abundant signal for spliceosome assembly factor, 
SC35, but lack discrete SC35 domains; these form as cells begin to specialize,
likely reflecting cell-type specific genomic organization. Concomitantly, nuclear
size increases and shape changes as lamin A/C and emerin incorporate into the
lamina. During this brief window, hESC exhibit dramatically different PML-defined
structures, which in somatic cells are linked to gene regulation and cancer.
Unlike the numerous, spherical somatic PML bodies, hES cells often display
approximately 1-3 large PML structures of two morphological types: long linear
"rods" or elaborate "rosettes", which lack substantial SUMO-1, Daxx, and Sp100.
These occur primarily between Day 0-2 of differentiation and become rare
thereafter. PML rods may be "taut" between other structures, such as centromeres,
but clearly show some relationship with the lamina, where PML often abuts or
fills a "gap" in early lamin A/C staining. Findings demonstrate that pluripotent 
hES cells have a markedly different overall nuclear architecture, remodeling of
which is linked to early epigenomic programming and involves formation of unique 
PML-defined structures.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2937361
PMID: 19449340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Dig Liver Dis. 2009 Oct;41(10):762-4. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2009.01.014. Epub 2009
Apr 7.

Is prevalence of PBC underestimated in patients with systemic sclerosis?

Norman GL(1), Bialek A, Encabo S, Butkiewicz B, Wiechowska-Kozlowska A, Brzosko
M, Shums Z, Milkiewicz P.

Author information: 
(1)INOVA Diagnostics, San Diego, United States.

Comment in
    Dig Liver Dis. 2009 Dec;41(12):916; author reply 916-7.

BACKGROUND: Clinically significant primary biliary cirrhosis occurs in 2.5% of
patients with systemic sclerosis. Primary biliary cirrhosis-specific
autoantibodies include anti-mitochondrial, anti-glycoprotein 210, and anti-sp100 
antibodies. The majority of asymptomatic anti-mitochondrial-positive subjects
express histological features of primary biliary cirrhosis. Early detection of
primary biliary cirrhosis is important, as timely introduction of ursodeoxycholic
acid may improve prognosis. The aim was to assess the prevalence of MIT3
IgG-anti-mitochondrial, gp210, sp100 and other autoantibodies in patients with
systemic sclerosis and compare the clinical and biochemical parameters in those
who are primary biliary cirrhosis-specific autoantibodies positive and negative.
MATERIALS/METHODS: Fifty-two consecutive patients with systemic sclerosis were
included. Thirty-three suffered from limited skin SS and 19 from diffuse SS.
RESULTS: Eight (15%) patients with systemic sclerosis tested positive for primary
biliary cirrhosis-specific autoantibodies. No significant differences were
observed between primary biliary cirrhosis-specific autoantibodies positive and
negative subjects in terms of various demographic, clinical or biochemical
features. A trend towards increased prevalence of chronic fatigue in primary
biliary cirrhosis-specific autoantibodies positive patients was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Primary biliary cirrhosis-specific autoantibodies were detected in
15% of the systemic sclerosis patients. Since patients with primary biliary
cirrhosis-specific antibodies are at high-risk or do suffer from primary biliary 
cirrhosis, screening for primary biliary cirrhosis-specific autoantibodies may be
considered during routine assessment of systemic sclerosis.

PMID: 19357001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Virol. 2009 May;83(10):5168-80. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02083-08. Epub 2009 Mar 11.

Differential functions of interferon-upregulated Sp100 isoforms: herpes simplex
virus type 1 promoter-based immediate-early gene suppression and PML protection
from ICP0-mediated degradation.

Negorev DG(1), Vladimirova OV, Maul GG.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Cells have intrinsic defenses against virus infection, acting before the innate
or the adaptive immune response. Preexisting antiviral proteins such as PML,
Daxx, and Sp100 are stored in specific nuclear domains (ND10). In herpes simplex 
virus type 1 (HSV-1), the immediate-early protein ICP0 serves as a counterdefense
through degradation of the detrimental protein PML. We asked whether interferon
(IFN)-upregulated Sp100 is similarly antagonized by ICP0 in normal human
fibroblasts by using a selective-knockdown approach. We find that of the four
Sp100 isoforms, the three containing a SAND domain block the transcription of
HSV-1 proteins ICP0 and ICP4 at the promoter level and that IFN changes the
differential splicing of the Sp100 transcript in favor of the inhibitor Sp100C.
At the protein level, ICP0 activity does not lead to the hydrolysis of any of the
Sp100 isoforms. The SAND domain-containing isoforms are not general inhibitors of
viral promoters, as the activity of the major immediate-early cytomegalovirus
promoter is not diminished, whereas the long terminal repeat of a retrovirus,
like the ICP0 promoter, is strongly inhibited. Since we could not find a specific
promoter region in the ICP0 gene that responds to the SAND domain-containing
isoforms, we questioned whether Sp100 could act through other antiviral proteins 
such as PML. We find that all four Sp100 isoforms stabilize ND10 and protect PML 
from ICP0-based hydrolysis. Loss of either all PML isoforms or all Sp100 isoforms
reduces the opposite constituent ND10 protein, suggesting that various
interdependent mechanisms of ND10-based proteins inhibit virus infection at the
immediate-early level.

PMCID: PMC2682089
PMID: 19279115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2009 Jan 1;14:1182-96.

PML nuclear bodies and their spatial relationships in the mammalian cell nucleus.

Batty E(1), Jensen K, Freemont P.

Author information: 
(1)Macromolecular Structure and Function Lab, Division of Molecular Biosciences, 
Imperial College London, Biochemistry Building, South Kensington Campus, London, 
SW7 2AZ, U.K.

Promyelocytic leukaemia nuclear bodies (PML NBs) are found within the nucleus of 
mammalian cells, and are formed from the constituent proteins PML and Sp100.
Numbering between 10 and 30 per cell, they are an obvious feature of the nuclear 
landscape, yet their functions have still to be unambiguously defined. In the
mammalian nucleus, compartmentalization of functions is apparent, as reflected in
the wide-range of other nuclear compartments that can be identified. These
include nucleoli, transcription foci, splicing speckles, chromosomal topological 
markers such as centromeres and telomeres, the nuclear boundary, and the
nucleoplasm itself. Quantification of the otherwise qualitative observations of
relationships between mammalian nuclear compartments is essential for a complete 
understanding of nuclear processes. Here we describe some of the interesting
known associations between PML NBs and other nuclear compartments, and comment
upon their implications for PML NB function.

PMID: 19273124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Virol. 2009 May;83(9):4262-74. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00021-09. Epub 2009 Feb 11.

Components of nuclear domain 10 bodies regulate varicella-zoster virus
replication.

Kyratsous CA(1), Silverstein SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

PML, Sp100, and Daxx are proteins that normally reside within nuclear domains 10 
(ND10s). They associate with DNA virus genomes and repress the very early stages 
of the DNA virus replication cycle. Virus-encoded proteins counteract this innate
antiviral response. ICP0, a herpes simplex virus (HSV) immediate-early protein,
is necessary and sufficient to dissociate ND10s and target their two major
components, PML and Sp100, for proteasomal degradation. In this report, we show
that ORF61p, the varicella-zoster virus (VZV) ortholog of ICP0, does not degrade 
PML and alters Sp100 levels only slightly. Furthermore, we demonstrate that other
virus proteins cannot substitute for this lack of function during infection. By
using short interfering RNAs, we depleted PML, Sp100, and Daxx and studied their 
roles in plaquing efficiency, virus protein accumulation, infectious-center
titer, and virus spread. The results of these studies show that components of
ND10s can accelerate VZV replication but do not ultimately control
cell-associated virus titers. We conclude that while both ICP0 and ORF61p
activate virus gene expression, they modulate host innate repression mechanisms
in two different ways. As a result, HSV and VZV commandeer their host cells by
distinct mechanisms to ensure their replication and spread.

PMCID: PMC2668482
PMID: 19211749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Virol. 2009 May;83(9):4376-85. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02515-08. Epub 2009 Feb 4.

Engagement of the lysine-specific demethylase/HDAC1/CoREST/REST complex by herpes
simplex virus 1.

Gu H(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)Marjorie B Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Among the early events in herpes simplex virus 1 replication are localization of 
ICP0 in ND10 bodies and accumulation of viral DNA-protein complexes in structures
abutting ND10. ICP0 degrades components of ND10 and blocks silencing of viral
DNA, achieving the latter by dislodging HDAC1 or -2 from the lysine-specific
demethylase 1 (LSD1)/CoREST/REST repressor complex. The role of this process is
apparent from the observation that a dominant-negative CoREST protein compensates
for the absence of ICP0 in a cell-dependent fashion. HDAC1 or -2 and the
CoREST/REST complex are independently translocated to the nucleus once viral DNA 
synthesis begins. The focus of this report is twofold. First, we report that in
infected cells, LSD1, a key component of the repressor complex, is partially
degraded or remains stably associated with CoREST and is ultimately also
translocated, in part, to the cytoplasm. Second, we examined the distribution of 
the components of the repressor complex and ICP8 early in infection in
wild-type-virus- and ICP0 mutant virus-infected cells. The repressor component
and ultimately ICP8 localize in structures that abut the ND10 nuclear bodies.
There is no evidence that the two compartments fuse. We propose that ICP0 must
dynamically interact with both compartments in order to accomplish its functions 
of degrading PML and SP100 and suppressing silencing of viral DNA through its
interactions with CoREST. In turn, the remodeling of the viral DNA-protein
complex enables recruitment of ICP8 and initiation of formation of replication
compartments.

PMCID: PMC2668468
PMID: 19193804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Methods Mol Biol. 2009;497:187-99. doi: 10.1007/978-1-59745-566-4_12.

Performing in vitro sumoylation reactions using recombinant enzymes.

Werner A(1), Moutty MC, Möller U, Melchior F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry I, Faculty of Medicine, Georg-August, University of
Göttingen, Germany.

Sumoylation of proteins in vitro has evolved as an indispensable tool for the
functional analysis of this post-translational modification. In this article we
present detailed protocols for bacterial production of mammalian proteins
necessary to perform in vitro sumoylation reactions, namely the E1 activating
enzyme Aos1/Uba2 (SAE1/SAE2), the E2 conjugating enzyme Ubc9, SUMO-1 (identical
protocols can be used for SUMO-2/3), and the catalytic domain of the E3 ligase
RanBP2/Nup358. Two alternative procedures are described for the E1 enzyme, one
depending on co-expression of His-Aos1 and untagged Uba2, and a second protocol
for separate expression of His-Aos1 and Uba2-His and subsequent reconstitution of
the active dimer. Two example conditions for in vitro sumoylation of RanGAP1 and 
Sp100 in the absence or presence of the SUMO E3 ligase RanBP2, respectively, are 
provided. Both protocols can be adapted easily to test in vitro conjugation of
other target proteins and/or E3 ligases.

PMID: 19107418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2008 Dec;16(12):922-5.

[Frequencies of autoantibodies specific for primary biliary cirrhosis in a
general adult population group].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu HY(1), Wang LX, Liu YF.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou 
510120, China. xiangliuhaiying@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the frequencies of primary biliary cirrhosis
(PBC)-specific autoantibodies, including antimitochondrial autoantibodies (AMA)
M2, anti-gp210 and anti-Sp100, and to assess their point prevalence rates in a
general adult population group in Guangzhou.
METHODS: Eight thousand one hundred twenty-six adults (mean age 43.5+/-14.6
years, range 18 to 83 years; 4248 males and 3878 females) were enrolled for this 
study. AMA and anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) were screened by indirect
immunofluorescence test and AMA-M2, anti-gp210 and anti-sp100 were further
detected using ELISA or immunoblotting assay. PBC diagnosis was made according to
criteria recommended by AASLD in 2000.
RESULTS: Of the 8126 adults tested, 35 (0.43%) and 79 (0.97%) were found to be
positive for AMA and ANA. The positivity for both of AMA and ANA increased with
aging. Twenty-two cases were positive for PBC-specific autoantibodies.
Frequencies for AMA-M2, anti-sp100 and anti-gp210 in the general adult population
were 0.23%, 0.05% and 0.04% respectively and their frequency reached 0.62% in
women over 40 years. A woman among the 22 cases who was PBC-specific autoantibody
positive was finally diagnosed as a PBC patient.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicates that PBC specific autoantibodies exist in the
general adult population at very low frequencies and the point prevalence rate of
PBC in adults in Guangzhou is not less than that of other areas.

PMID: 19105938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Blood. 2009 Mar 26;113(13):3059-69. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-07-170183. Epub 2008 
Nov 4.

Uniparental disomies, homozygous deletions, amplifications, and target genes in
mantle cell lymphoma revealed by integrative high-resolution whole-genome
profiling.

Beà S(1), Salaverria I, Armengol L, Pinyol M, Fernández V, Hartmann EM, Jares P, 
Amador V, Hernández L, Navarro A, Ott G, Rosenwald A, Estivill X, Campo E.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopathology Unit, Department of Pathology, Hospital Clinic, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is genetically characterized by the t(11;14)(q13;q32) 
translocation and a high number of secondary chromosomal alterations. However,
only a limited number of target genes have been identified. We have studied 10
MCL cell lines and 28 primary tumors with a combination of a high-density
single-nucleotide polymorphism array and gene expression profiling. We detected
highly altered genomes in the majority of the samples with a high number of
partial uniparental disomies (UPDs). The UPD at 17p was one of the most common,
and it was associated with TP53 gene inactivation. Homozygous deletions targeted 
4 known tumor suppressor genes (CDKN2C, BCL2L11, CDKN2A, and RB1) and 6 new genes
(FAF1, MAP2, SP100, MOBKL2B, ZNF280A, and PRAME). Gene amplification coupled with
overexpression was identified in 35 different regions. The most recurrent
amplified regions were 11q13.3-q13.5, 13q31.3, and 18q21.33, which targeted
CCND1, C13orf25, and BCL2, respectively. Interestingly, the breakpoints flanking 
all the genomic alterations, including UPDs, were significantly associated with
genomic regions enriched in copy number variants and segmental duplications,
suggesting that the recombination at these regions may play a role in the genomic
instability of MCL. This integrative genomic analysis has revealed target genes
that may be potentially relevant in MCL pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2662646
PMID: 18984860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Virol. 2009 Jan;83(1):181-7. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01940-08. Epub 2008 Oct 22.

The two functions of herpes simplex virus 1 ICP0, inhibition of silencing by the 
CoREST/REST/HDAC complex and degradation of PML, are executed in tandem.

Gu H(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, University of Chicago, 910
East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

ICP0, an alpha (immediate-early) protein of herpes simplex virus 1, performs at
least two key functions. It blocks inhibition of viral-gene expression by
interferon, a function dependent on the degradation of the ND10 components PML
and SP100 by the ubiquitin ligase expressed by the RING finger (RF), and it
blocks silencing of viral DNA mediated by the HDAC1/2-CoREST-REST complex. In the
latter case, a mutant CoREST lacking the HDAC1 binding site compensates totally
or in part for the absence of ICP0 in a cell-type-dependent manner. Here, we
compare the phenotypes of an ICP0 mutant containing disabling amino acid
substitutions in the RF with those of a mutant with substitutions in the CoREST
binding site (R8507). We report the following: (i) the onset of replication of
both mutants was delayed, but the RF mutant yields did not reach wild-type virus 
levels even as late as 48 h after infection, and (ii) in infected cells, PML is
rapidly degraded by wild-type virus, with some delay by the R8507 mutant, and is 
spared by the RF mutant. The translocation of ICP0 to the cytoplasm is impaired
in cells infected with the RF mutant or delayed in cells infected with the R8507 
mutant. Finally, in contrast to wild-type viruses, both mutants are inhibited by 
alpha or gamma interferon. The results indicate that both sets of events, the
degradation of PML and the blocking of silencing, are interdependent and in large
measure dependent on events in the ND10 nuclear bodies.

PMCID: PMC2612314
PMID: 18945770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2008 Nov;28(11):667-78. doi: 10.1089/jir.2008.0023.

Regulation of Sp100A subnuclear localization and transcriptional function by
EBNA-LP and interferon.

Echendu CW(1), Ling PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) efficiently immortalizes human B cells and is associated
with several human malignancies. The EBV transcriptional activating protein EBNA2
and the EBNA2 coactivator EBNA-leader protein (EBNA-LP) are important for B cell 
immortalization. Recent observations from our laboratory indicate that EBNA-LP
coactivation function is mediated through interactions with the
interferon-inducible gene (ISG) Sp100, resulting in displacement from its normal 
location in promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML NBs) into the nucleoplasm.
The EBNA-LP- and interferon-mediated mechanisms that regulate Sp100 subnuclear
localization and transcriptional function remain undefined. To clarify these
issues, we generated a panel of Sp100 mutant proteins to ascertain whether
EBNA-LP induces Sp100 displacement from PML NBs by interfering with Sp100
dimerization or through other domains. In addition, we tested EBNA-LP function in
interferon-treated cells. Our results indicate that Sp100 dimerization, PML NB
localization, and EBNA-LP interaction domains overlap significantly. We also show
that IFN-beta does not inhibit EBNA-LP coactivation function. The results suggest
that EBNA-LP might play a role in EBV-evasion of IFN-mediated antiviral
responses.

PMCID: PMC2988464
PMID: 18844582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Hepatology. 2008 Sep;48(3):871-7. doi: 10.1002/hep.22428.

Biochemical response to ursodeoxycholic acid and long-term prognosis in primary
biliary cirrhosis.

Corpechot C(1), Abenavoli L, Rabahi N, Chrétien Y, Andréani T, Johanet C,
Chazouillères O, Poupon R.

Author information: 
(1)Hepatology Department, Reference Center for Inflammatory Biliary Diseases,
Saint-Antoine Hospital, National Institute of Health and Medical Research
(INSERM), Pierre et Marie Curie University (Paris 6), France.
christophe.corpechot@sat.aphp.fr

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2009 Jan;49(1):337-8; author reply 338.

Biochemical response to ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) in patients with primary
biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is variable. It has been recently proposed that an
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) decline of more than 40% in baseline value or a normal
level after 1 year of UDCA treatment (Barcelona criteria) could serve as a good
marker of long-term prognosis. Our aim was to define the best efficient set of
biochemistries able to identify UDCA-treated patients at risk of death or liver
transplantation (LT). The efficiency of several combinations of serum bilirubin, 
ALP, and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) threshold values to predict outcome was
assessed after 1 year of treatment in 292 patients with PBC. Patients showing ALP
<3 upper limit of normal (ULN), AST <2 ULN, and bilirubin </=1 mg/dL after 1 year
of UDCA had a 10-year transplant-free survival rate of 90% (95% confidence
interval, 81%-95%), compared to 51% (95% confidence interval, 38%-64%) for those 
who did not (P < 0.001). Patients were less well discriminated by the Barcelona
criteria (79% versus 63%). Independent predictive factors of death or LT were
baseline serum bilirubin level >1 mg/dL (relative risk [RR], 1.7), histologic
stage >/=3 (RR, 1.5), interface hepatitis (RR, 1.9), and the absence of
biochemical response (ALP >3 ULN or AST >2 ULN, or bilirubin >1 mg/dL) (RR, 2.3).
Antinuclear antibodies against gp210 or Sp100 proteins were associated with death
or LT in univariate but not in multivariate analysis.CONCLUSION: This study
defines the best efficient biochemical response to UDCA, which, independent of
baseline predictive factors, identifies patients with PBC with a good long-term
prognosis. Patients who fail to achieve this response and those with interface
hepatitis or advanced histological stage should be targeted for further
therapeutic research.

PMID: 18752324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Oct 24;375(3):395-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.08.023. Epub 2008 Aug 14.

TTRAP is a novel PML nuclear bodies-associated protein.

Xu GL(1), Pan YK, Wang BY, Huang L, Tian L, Xue JL, Chen JZ, Jia W.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

PML nuclear body (PML NB) is an important macromolecular nuclear structure that
is involved in many essential aspects of cellular function. Tens of proteins have
been found in PML NBs, and promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) has been proven
to be essential for the formation of this structure. Here, we showed that TRAF
and TNF receptor-associated protein (TTRAP) was a novel PML NBs-associated
protein. TTRAP colocalized with three important PML NBs-associated proteins, PML,
DAXX and Sp100 in the typical fashion of PML NBs. By yeast mating assay, TTRAP
was identified to interact with these PML NBs-associated proteins. The
transcription and expression of TTRAP could be induced by IFN-gamma, representing
another common feature of PML NBs-associated proteins. These results would not
only be important for understanding PML NBs but also be helpful in studying the
TTRAP function in the future.

PMID: 18706885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Cell. 2008 Aug 8;31(3):371-82. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.05.022.

Ubc9 sumoylation regulates SUMO target discrimination.

Knipscheer P(1), Flotho A, Klug H, Olsen JV, van Dijk WJ, Fish A, Johnson ES,
Mann M, Sixma TK, Pichler A.

Author information: 
(1)The Netherlands Cancer Institute and Center for Biomedical Genetics,
Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Posttranslational modification with small ubiquitin-related modifier, SUMO, is a 
widespread mechanism for rapid and reversible changes in protein function.
Considering the large number of known targets, the number of enzymes involved in 
modification seems surprisingly low: a single E1, a single E2, and a few distinct
E3 ligases. Here we show that autosumoylation of the mammalian E2-conjugating
enzyme Ubc9 at Lys14 regulates target discrimination. While not altering its
activity toward HDAC4, E2-25K, PML, or TDG, sumoylation of Ubc9 impairs its
activity on RanGAP1 and strongly activates sumoylation of the transcriptional
regulator Sp100. Enhancement depends on a SUMO-interacting motif (SIM) in Sp100
that creates an additional interface with the SUMO conjugated to the E2, a
mechanism distinct from Ubc9 approximately SUMO thioester recruitment. The
crystal structure of sumoylated Ubc9 demonstrates how the newly created binding
interface can provide a gain in affinity otherwise provided by E3 ligases.

PMID: 18691969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Cell Sci. 2008 Aug 15;121(Pt 16):2731-43. doi: 10.1242/jcs.031922. Epub 2008
Jul 29.

Dynamics of component exchange at PML nuclear bodies.

Weidtkamp-Peters S(1), Lenser T, Negorev D, Gerstner N, Hofmann TG, Schwanitz G, 
Hoischen C, Maul G, Dittrich P, Hemmerich P.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz-Institute of Age Research, Fritz-Lipman-Institute, Beutenbergstr. 11, 
07745 Jena, Germany.

PML nuclear bodies (NBs) are involved in the regulation of key nuclear pathways
but their biochemical function in nuclear metabolism is unknown. In this study
PML NB assembly dynamics were assessed by live cell imaging and mathematic
modeling of its major component parts. We show that all six nuclear PML isoforms 
exhibit individual exchange rates at NBs and identify PML V as a scaffold
subunit. SP100 exchanges at least five times faster at NBs than PML proteins.
Turnover dynamics of PML and SP100 at NBs is modulated by SUMOylation. Exchange
is not temperature-dependent but depletion of cellular ATP levels induces protein
immobilization at NBs. The PML-RARalpha oncogene exhibits a strong NB retention
effect on wild-type PML proteins. HIPK2 requires an active kinase for PML NB
targeting and elevated levels of PML IV increase its residence time. DAXX and BLM
turn over rapidly and completely at PML NBs within seconds. These findings
provide a kinetics model for factor exchange at PML NBs and highlight potential
mechanisms to regulate intranuclear trafficking of specific factors at these
domains.

PMID: 18664490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. World J Gastroenterol. 2008 Jun 7;14(21):3374-87.

Autoimmune liver serology: current diagnostic and clinical challenges.

Bogdanos DP(1), Invernizzi P, Mackay IR, Vergani D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Liver Studies, King's College London School of Medicine, London
SE5 9RS, UK.

Liver-related autoantibodies are crucial for the correct diagnosis and
classification of autoimmune liver diseases (AiLD), namely autoimmune hepatitis
types 1 and 2 (AIH-1 and 2), primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), and the sclerosing 
cholangitis variants in adults and children. AIH-1 is specified by anti-nuclear
antibody (ANA) and smooth muscle antibody (SMA). AIH-2 is specified by antibody
to liver kidney microsomal antigen type-1 (anti-LKM1) and anti-liver cytosol type
1 (anti-LC1). SMA, ANA and anti-LKM antibodies can be present in de-novo AIH
following liver transplantation. PBC is specified by antimitochondrial antibodies
(AMA) reacting with enzymes of the 2-oxo-acid dehydrogenase complexes (chiefly
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex E2 subunit) and disease-specific ANA mainly
reacting with nuclear pore gp210 and nuclear body sp100. Sclerosing cholangitis
presents as at least two variants, first the classical primary sclerosing
cholangitis (PSC) mostly affecting adult men wherein the only (and non-specific) 
reactivity is an atypical perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody
(p-ANCA), also termed perinuclear anti-neutrophil nuclear antibodies (p-ANNA) and
second the childhood disease called autoimmune sclerosing cholangitis (ASC) with 
serological features resembling those of type 1 AIH. Liver diagnostic serology is
a fast-expanding area of investigation as new purified and recombinant
autoantigens, and automated technologies such as ELISAs and bead assays, become
available to complement (or even compete with) traditional immunofluorescence
procedures. We survey for the first time global trends in quality assurance
impacting as it does on (1) manufacturers/purveyors of kits and reagents, (2)
diagnostic service laboratories that fulfill clinicians' requirements, and (3)
the end-user, the physician providing patient care, who must properly interpret
test results in the overall clinical context.

PMCID: PMC2716592
PMID: 18528935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Expert Opin Med Diagn. 2008 Jun;2(6):621-34. doi: 10.1517/17530059.2.6.621.

Molecular diagnostics of primary biliary cirrhosis.

Rigopoulou EI(1), Dalekos GN.

Author information: 
(1)University of Thessaly, Department of Medicine, Academic Liver Unit and
Research Lab of Internal Medicine, Medical School, Papakiriazi 22 Street, 41222
Larissa, Greece +30 2410 565251 ; +30 2410 565250 ; dalekos@med.uth.gr.

BACKGROUND: Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is an autoimmune liver disease of
unknown etiology characterized by the presence of antimitochondrial antibodies
(AMA) in 90 - 95% of patients. AMA are directed against members of 2-oxo-acid
dehydrogenase complex, including mainly the E2 subunit of pyruvate dehydrogenase,
the E2 subunit of branched chain 2-oxo-acid dehydrogenase complex and the E2
subunit of the oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex. Apart from AMA, PBC is
characterized by the presence of PBC-specific antinuclear antibodies (ANA). The
molecular targets of these PBC-specific ANA have been characterized as gp210,
lamin B receptor, nucleoporin 62, sp100 and promyelocytic leukemia proteins.
OBJECTIVE: To discuss the molecular diagnostics of PBC in the context of AMA and 
PBC-specific ANA detection by the use of conventional and 'new' novel
technologies.
METHODS: Critical analysis of all published data regarding PBC serology between
1985 and 2007 was performed in order to suggest a diagnostic algorithm for the
serological diagnosis of PBC.
RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS: AMA are first detected by indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) 
on frozen sections of rat liver, kidney and stomach substrates. However, because 
IIF is time-consuming, labor-intensive and observer-dependent, molecular-based
assays such as immunoblot and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays have been
developed with high sensitivity and specificity. Similarly, molecular-based
assays have also been developed for the detection of PBC-specific ANA. The latter
investigation seems to be of outmost importance because these autoantibodies can 
be used as a positive tool in the diagnosis of AMA-negative PBC while at the same
time identifying a subgroup of PBC patients with more advanced disease. New test 
systems for the detection of PBC-specific antibodies based on the xMultiple
Analyte Profiling Luminex methodology seems to be the future in molecular
diagnostics of PBC as it was expected first to decrease the cost and second to
speed up an accurate serological profile, although they may decrease further the 
proportion of AMA-negative PBC cases.

PMID: 23495774  [PubMed]


139. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Jul;19(7):3147-62. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-01-0035. Epub 2008
May 14.

Live cell dynamics of promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies upon entry into and
exit from mitosis.

Chen YC(1), Kappel C, Beaudouin J, Eils R, Spector DL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook,
NY 11794, USA.

Promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML NBs) have been proposed to be involved
in tumor suppression, viral defense, DNA repair, and/or transcriptional
regulation. To study the dynamics of PML NBs during mitosis, we developed several
U2OS cell lines stably coexpressing PML-enhanced cyan fluorescent protein with
other individual marker proteins. Using three-dimensional time-lapse live cell
imaging and four-dimensional particle tracking, we quantitatively demonstrated
that PML NBs exhibit a high percentage of directed movement when cells progressed
from prophase to prometaphase. The timing of this increased dynamic movement
occurred just before or upon nuclear entry of cyclin B1, but before nuclear
envelope breakdown. Our data suggest that entry into prophase leads to a loss of 
tethering between regions of chromatin and PML NBs, resulting in their increased 
dynamics. On exit from mitosis, Sp100 and Fas death domain-associated protein
(Daxx) entered the daughter nuclei after a functional nuclear membrane was
reformed. However, the recruitment of these proteins to PML NBs was delayed and
correlated with the timing of de novo PML NB formation. Together, these results
provide insight into the dynamic changes associated with PML NBs during mitosis.

PMCID: PMC2441680
PMID: 18480407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Future Virol. 2008 May 1;3(3):265-277.

Promyelocytic leukemia-nuclear body proteins: herpesvirus enemies, accomplices,
or both?

Saffert RT(1), Kalejta RF.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin-Madison, Institute for Molecular Virology & McArdle
Laboratory for Cancer Research, Madison, WI, USA Tel.: +1 608 265 5546; ;
rtsaffert@wisc.edu.

The promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein gathers other cellular proteins, such as
Daxx and Sp100, to form subnuclear structures termed PML-nuclear bodies (PML-NBs)
or ND10 domains. Many infecting viral genomes localize to PML-NBs, leading to
speculation that these structures may represent the most efficient subnuclear
location for viral replication. Conversely, many viral proteins modify or disrupt
PML-NBs, suggesting that viral replication may be more efficient in the absence
of these structures. Thus, a debate remains as to whether PML-NBs inhibit or
enhance viral replication. Here we review and discuss recent data indicating that
for herpesviruses, PML-NB proteins inhibit viral replication in cell types where 
productive, lytic replication occurs, while at the same time may enhance the
establishment of lifelong latent infections in other cell types.

PMCID: PMC2744987
PMID: 19763230  [PubMed]


141. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2008 Apr;67(4):299-308. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e31816a1dd3.

Promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies provide a scaffold for human polyomavirus
JC replication and are disrupted after development of viral inclusions in
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.

Shishido-Hara Y(1), Higuchi K, Ohara S, Duyckaerts C, Hauw JJ, Uchihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute for Neuroscience, Tokyo.
shishido-hara@y6.dion.ne.jp

Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy is a fatal demyelinating disorder due 
to human polyomavirus JC infection in which there are viral inclusions in
enlarged nuclei of infected oligodendrocytes. We report that the pathogenesis of 
this disease is associated with distinct subnuclear structures known as
promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML-NBs). Postmortem brain tissues from 5 
patients with the disease were examined. Affected cells with enlarged nuclei
contained distinct dot-like subnuclear PML-NBs that were immunopositive for PML
protein and nuclear body protein Sp100. Major and minor viral capsid proteins and
proliferating cell nuclear antigen, an essential component for DNA replication,
colocalized with PML-NBs. By in situ hybridization, viral genomic DNA showed
dot-like nuclear accumulation, and by electron microscopy, virus-like structures 
clustered in subnuclear domains, indicating that PML-NBs are the site of viral
DNA replication and capsid assembly. Molecules involved in the ubiquitin
proteosome pathway (i.e. ubiquitin and small ubiquitin-like modifier 1) did not
accumulate in the nuclei with viral inclusions, indicating that cell degeneration
may not be dependent on this pathway. When viral progeny production was advanced,
PML-NBs were disrupted. These data suggest that: 1) PML-NBs allow for efficient
viral propagation by providing scaffolds, 2) disruption of PML-NBs is independent
of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, and 3) this disruption probably heralds
oligodendrocyte degeneration and the resulting demyelination.

PMID: 18379438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2008 Feb;31(1):47-55.

Primary biliary cirrhosis and autoantibodies.

Miyachi K(1), Miyakawa H, Oda M, Horigome T, Fritzler MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Keigu Clinic, Department of Internal Medicine.

Fifty years have passed since anti-mitochondrial antibodies were found in
patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC). PBC is an autoimmune hepatic
disease in which 85-90% of patient antibodies bind to mitochondrial antigens that
include pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC)-E2 and other members of the
oxaloacid dehydrogenase family. In addition, indirect immunofluorescence (IIF)
assays utilizing HEp-2 cell substrates have been used to identify anti-centromere
antibodies in 20-30% of PBC sera. These antibodies are generally easily
recognized, however, anti-nuclear envelope and anti-multiple nuclear dot
antibodies are occasionally more difficult to recognize with certainty by IIF.
The use of enzyme linked immunosorbent assays that utilize recombinant gp210 (an 
autoantigen of the nuclear envelope) and/or sp100 (a protein target represented
by multiple nuclear dots) should be particularly considered in anti-mitochondrial
antibody negative PBC sera. Although the clinical significance of these
antibodies still remains to be determined, there is evidence that the existence
of anti-gp210 antibodies are related to poorer prognosis and more aggressive
disease progression.

PMID: 18311042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Liver Int. 2008 Feb;28(2):233-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2007.01651.x.

Antimitochondrial antibody-negative primary biliary cirrhosis: a subset of
primary biliary cirrhosis.

Liu B(1), Shi XH, Zhang FC, Zhang W, Gao LX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Science, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: Antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA) are the hallmark in primary biliary
cirrhosis (PBC); nevertheless, it has long been recognized that 5-10% patients
with typical features compatible with PBC do not have detectable AMA, and they
were referred to as 'AMA-negative PBC'. This study aimed to evaluate whether
AMA-negative/positive PBC represents different clinical entities.
METHODS: We compared the clinical, laboratory, percentage of regulatory T cells
(Tregs) in peripheral blood, liver biopsy features and response to treatment of
the two groups of patients. The first group was comprised of 12 patients with
'AMA-negative PBC'. The second was made up of another 12 PBC patients with
positive AMA.
RESULTS: Antimitochondrial antibodies-negative/positive patients were remarkably 
similar in terms of clinical manifestations, liver biochemistries and
histological findings. The frequency of anti-nuclear antibodies,
anti-smooth-muscle antibody, anti-gp210 and anti-sp100 antibody showed no
significant difference between the two groups. A significantly lower mean
percentage of CD4+CD25(high) T cells was observed in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells of AMA-negative/positive PBC patients compared with that of the 12 control 
subjects (5.8+/-1.8 and 5.4+/-1.4% vs. 7.6+/-1.7% respectively; P=0.014 and
0.004). However, no difference could be found between AMA-negative and
AMA-positive PBC patients (P=0.599). After 1 year treatment with ursodeoxycholic 
acid, the two groups showed similar response.
CONCLUSION: Antimitochondrial antibody-negative/positive PBC patients are similar
in clinical, laboratory, percentage of Treg in peripheral blood, liver biopsy
features and response to treatment. This suggests that AMA-negative PBC may be a 
variant of AMA-positive PBC rather than a separate clinical entity.

PMID: 18251980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Virol. 2008 Mar;82(6):2661-72. Epub 2007 Dec 26.

Replication of ICP0-null mutant herpes simplex virus type 1 is restricted by both
PML and Sp100.

Everett RD(1), Parada C, Gripon P, Sirma H, Orr A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Virology Unit, Church Street, Glasgow G11 5JR, Scotland, United Kingdom.
r.everett@mrcvu.gla.ac.uk

Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) mutants that fail to express the viral
immediate-early protein ICP0 have a pronounced defect in viral gene expression
and plaque formation in limited-passage human fibroblasts. ICP0 is a RING finger 
E3 ubiquitin ligase that induces the degradation of several cellular proteins.
PML, the organizer of cellular nuclear substructures known as PML nuclear bodies 
or ND10, is one of the most notable proteins that is targeted by ICP0. Depletion 
of PML from human fibroblasts increases ICP0-null mutant HSV-1 gene expression,
but not to wild-type levels. In this study, we report that depletion of Sp100,
another major ND10 protein, results in a similar increase in ICP0-null mutant
gene expression and that simultaneous depletion of both proteins complements the 
mutant virus to a greater degree. Although chromatin assembly and modification
undoubtedly play major roles in the regulation of HSV-1 infection, we found that 
inhibition of histone deacetylase activity with trichostatin A was unable to
complement the defect of ICP0-null mutant HSV-1 in either normal or PML-depleted 
human fibroblasts. These data lend further weight to the hypothesis that ND10
play an important role in the regulation of HSV-1 gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2258993
PMID: 18160441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Feb 29;367(1):47-53. Epub 2007 Dec 26.

Split mCherry as a new red bimolecular fluorescence complementation system for
visualizing protein-protein interactions in living cells.

Fan JY(1), Cui ZQ, Wei HP, Zhang ZP, Zhou YF, Wang YP, Zhang XE.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, 44#, Xiao Hong Shan, Wuhan 430071, China.

Bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) is a recently developed technique
for detection of protein-protein interactions in living cells. In this study, a
new red BiFC system was developed by splitting mCherry, a mutant monomeric red
fluorescent protein, into two fragments between amino acids 159-160 and was
verified using a pair of interacting proteins, SV40 large T antigen (LTag), and
human p53 protein. By combined use of the mCherry-based red BiFC system with a
Venus-based yellow BiFC system, the interaction between LTag and p53 as well as
the interaction between sp100 and promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML), were
detected simultaneously in Vero cells. The brilliant redness, short maturation
time, and the long excitation and emission wavelengths (587/610 nm) of mCherry
make the new BiFC system an excellent candidate for analyzing protein-protein
interactions in living cells and for studying multiple protein-protein
interactions when coupled with other BiFC systems.

PMID: 18158915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Hepatol Res. 2007 Oct;37 Suppl 3:S412-9.

Predictive role of anti-gp210 and anticentromere antibodies in long-term outcome 
of primary biliary cirrhosis.

Nakamura M(1), Komori A, Ito M, Kondo H, Aiba Y, Migita K, Nagaoka S, Ohata K,
Yano K, Abiru S, Daikoku M, Yatsuhashi H, Shimoda S, Ishibashi H.

Author information: 
(1)National Hospital Organization (NHO) Nagasaki Medical Center, Omura; Nagasaki 
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki; and National
Hospital Organization Study Group for Liver Disease in Japan (NHOSLJ), Fukuoka,
Japan.

Because some of the autoreactive T-cell clones specific for human PDC-E2
cross-react to mimicry peptides having an EIExDK motif derived from nuclear
antigens such as human gp210 and sp100, we studied the clinical significance of
antinuclear antibodies (ANA) in primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) patients
registered to the National Hospital Organization Study Group for Liver Disease in
Japan (NHOSLJ). We found that there are two different types of progression in
PBC; one is a hepatic failure-type progression which is represented by positive
anti-gp210 antibodies and the other is a portalhypertension-type progression
which is represented by positive anticentromere antibodies. We discuss the
predictive role of these ANA in the long-term outcome of PBC and the mechanisms
by which two different PBC progression types occur based on molecular mimicry and
aberrant expression of nuclear antigens.

PMID: 17931196  [PubMed]


147. Hepatol Res. 2007 Oct;37 Suppl 3:S406-11.

Nuclear envelope protein autoantigens in primary biliary cirrhosis.

Worman HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Physicians
and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, USA.

Antinuclear antibodies are detectable in approximately 50% of subjects with
primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC). Most clinical laboratories use indirect
immunofluorescence microscopy to detect antinuclear antibodies and two labeling
patterns that predominate in PBC are nuclear rim and multiple nuclear dots.
Antibodies giving these patterns most often recognize nuclear envelope protein
gp210 and nuclear body protein sp100, respectively. Fewer subjects with PBC have 
autoantibodies giving nuclear rim labeling that recognize nucleoporin p62 and
LBR. Gp210 is an integral protein localized to the nuclear pore membranes.
Approximately 25% of subjects with PBC have detectable serum anti-gp210
antibodies. The vast majority of anti-gp210 antibodies from patients with PBC
recognize a stretch of only 15 amino acids in the carboxyl-terminal tail that
faces the nuclear pore complex. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays using either
recombinant protein expressed in bacteria or chemically synthesized polypeptides 
have been established to reliably detect these autoantibodies. Although initial
studies did not find a correlation between the presence of anti-gp210 antibodies 
and prognosis in PBC, recent data suggest that the presence of antinuclear
envelope protein antibodies correlate with an unfavorable disease course and more
rapid progression.

PMID: 17931195  [PubMed]


148. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Aug;1109:203-11.

Comparison of two ELISA assays for anti-Sp100 determination.

Manuel Lucena J(1), Montes Cano M, Luis Caro J, Respaldiza N, Alvarez A,
Sánchez-Román J, Núñez-Roldán A, Wichmann I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Hospitales Universitarios Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla,
Spain. jmlucenas@hotmail.com

Antibodies to Sp100 have been described not only in primary biliary cirrhosis
(PBC), but also in other diseases. Two assays for detection of Sp100 levels by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) have been compared in a cohort of
patients from our area: (a) Sp100 kit produced by IMTEC, Immunodiagnostica GmbH, 
and (b) Quanta Lite Sp100 kit produced by INOVA Diagnostics. We analyze here the 
correlation between the two assays and compare their efficiency in diagnosing
PBC. We also comment on the exceptions derived from reactivity with other
diseases. We studied 78 sera by IIF with the typical multiple nuclear dots (MND) 
pattern from patients who suffered from PBC, hepatopathies different from PBC,
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), other connective tissue diseases (CTD),
skeletal diseases, lung diseases, hematological disorders, a miscellaneous group,
and a healthy IIF negative control group. The tests work equally well despite
their different quantification system: (a) it is based on a standard curve; and
(b) it is based on a single-point antigen-specific calibration. Some
discrepancies could be explained by differences in the immunodominant epitope
used in the ELISA. The main finding of this study is that the presence of
MND/Sp100-positive antibodies were detected not only in hepatic diseases, mainly 
PBC, but also in other clinical conditions, confirmed by both tests. Diagnosis of
PBC must be established in the right clinical context, because other diseases
recognizing the same epitope, mainly SLE, may also show high Sp100 levels. Sera
from PBC patients with antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA) showed higher
anti-Sp100 than the AMA-negative group.

PMID: 17785307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2007 Dec;34(12):1933-42. Epub 2007 Sep 1.

FET PET for the evaluation of untreated gliomas: correlation of FET uptake and
uptake kinetics with tumour grading.

Pöpperl G(1), Kreth FW, Mehrkens JH, Herms J, Seelos K, Koch W, Gildehaus FJ,
Kretzschmar HA, Tonn JC, Tatsch K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Klinikum Grosshadern, University of Munich,
Marchioninistrasse 15, Munich, Germany. Gabriele.Poepperl@med.uni-muenchen.de

PURPOSE: Treatment and prognosis of gliomas depend on their histological tumour
grade. The aim of the study was to evaluate the potential of
[(18)F]fluoroethyltyrosine (FET) PET for non-invasive tumour grading in untreated
patients.
METHODS: Dynamic FET PET studies were performed in 54 patients who, based on MRI,
were estimated to have low grade (LG; n = 20), intermediate (WHO II-III; n = 4)
or high grade (HG; n = 30) tumours. For standard evaluation, tumour SUV(max) and 
the ratio to background (SUV(max)/BG) were calculated (sum image: 20-40 min). For
dynamic evaluation, mean SUV values within a 90% isocontour ROI (SUV90) and the
SUV90/BG ratios were determined for each time frame to evaluate the course of FET
uptake. Results were correlated with histopathological findings from PET-guided
stereotactic biopsies.
RESULTS: Histology revealed gliomas in all patients. Using the standard method a 
statistically significant difference (p = 0.001) was found between LG (n = 20;
SUV(max)/BG: 2.16 +/- 0.98) and HG (n = 34; SUV(max)/BG: 3.29 +/- 1.06) gliomas
(opt. threshold 2.58: SN71%/SP85%/area under ROC curve [AUC]:0.798), however,
with a marked overlap between WHO II to IV tumours. Time activity curves showed
slight increase in LG, whereas HG tumours presented with an early peak (10-20
min) followed by a decrease. Dynamic evaluation successfully separated LG from HG
gliomas with higher diagnostic accuracy (SN94%/SP100%/AUC:0.967).
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the ratio-based method, a statistically significant
difference was found between LG and HG gliomas. Due to the interindividual
variability, however, no reliable individual grading was possible. In contrast,
dynamic evaluation allowed LG and HG gliomas to be differentiated with high
diagnostic power and, thus, should supplement the conventional method.

PMID: 17763848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 5;282(40):29314-22. Epub 2007 Aug 9.

Disruption of telomere maintenance by depletion of the MRE11/RAD50/NBS1 complex
in cells that use alternative lengthening of telomeres.

Zhong ZH(1), Jiang WQ, Cesare AJ, Neumann AA, Wadhwa R, Reddel RR.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead 2145,
Sydney 2006, New South Wales, Australia.

Immortalized human cells are able to maintain their telomeres by telomerase or by
a recombination-mediated DNA replication mechanism known as alternative
lengthening of telomeres (ALT). We showed previously that overexpression of Sp100
protein can suppress ALT and that this was associated with sequestration of the
MRE11/RAD50/NBS1 (MRN) recombination protein complex by Sp100. In the present
study, we determined whether MRN proteins are required for ALT activity. ALT
cells were depleted of MRN proteins by small hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown,
which was maintained for up to 100 population doublings. Knockdown of NBS1 had no
effect on the level of RAD50 or MRE11, but knockdown of RAD50 also depleted cells
of NBS1, and knockdown of MRE11 depleted cells of all three MRN proteins.
Depletion of NBS1, with or without depletion of other members of the complex,
resulted in inhibition of ALT-mediated telomere maintenance, as evidenced by
decreased numbers of ALT-associated promyelocytic leukemia bodies and decreased
telomere length. In some clones there was an initial period of rapid shortening
followed by stabilization of telomere length, whereas in others there was
continuous shortening at a rate within the reported range for normal human
somatic cells lacking a telomere maintenance mechanism. In contrast, depletion of
NBS1 in telomerase-positive cells did not result in telomere shortening. A recent
study showed that NBS1 was required for the formation of extrachromosomal
telomeric circles (Compton, S. A., Choi, J. H., Cesare, A. J., Ozgur, S., and
Griffith, J. D. (2007) Cancer Res. 67, 1513-1519), also a marker for ALT. We
conclude that the MRN complex, and especially NBS1, is required for the ALT
mechanism.

PMID: 17693401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Trends Biochem Sci. 2007 Sep;32(9):400-6. Epub 2007 Aug 10.

Are promyelocytic leukaemia protein nuclear bodies a scaffold for caspase-2
programmed cell death?

Sanchez-Pulido L(1), Valencia A, Rojas AM.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biotechnology, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientificas. C/Darwin n3, 28049, Madrid, Spain.

Promyelocytic leukaemia protein nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) are nuclear structures
whose function is still poorly understood. They are implicated in various
biological functions, such as viral infection, cellular transformation, innate
immunity and growth control, and they might be dynamic hubs sensing stress and
DNA damage. Data from PML(-/-) mice suggest that PML-NBs are involved in
apoptosis via caspase-independent mechanisms, probably involving p53-dependent
and independent pathways. However, the recently demonstrated co-localization of
caspase-2 within the PML-NB nuclear structures presents a new paradigm for
nuclear cell death. Here, we show that these nuclear structures have a protein
known as SP100 that could contain a caspase recruitment domain (CARD). If
verified experimentally, this discovery will suggest a mechanism by which
caspase-2 could be recruited into the complex and ultimately lead to apoptosis.

PMID: 17693089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Virol. 2007 Oct;81(20):10991-1004. Epub 2007 Aug 1.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 genomes are associated with ND10 nuclear
substructures in quiescently infected human fibroblasts.

Everett RD(1), Murray J, Orr A, Preston CM.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Virology Unit, Church Street, Glasgow G11 5JR, Scotland, United Kingdom.
r.everett@mrcvu.gla.ac.uk

Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) genomes become associated with structures
related to cellular nuclear substructures known as ND10 or promyelocytic leukemia
nuclear bodies during the early stages of lytic infection. This paper describes
the relationship between HSV-1 genomes and ND10 in human fibroblasts that
maintain the viral genomes in a quiescent state. We report that quiescent HSV-1
genomes detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) are associated with
enlarged ND10-like structures, frequently such that the FISH-defined viral foci
are apparently enveloped within a sphere of PML and other ND10 proteins. The
number of FISH viral foci in each quiescently infected cell is concordant with
the input multiplicity of infection, with each structure containing no more than 
a small number of viral genomes. A proportion of the enlarged ND10-like foci in
quiescently infected cells contain accumulations of the heterochromatin protein
HP1 but not other common markers of heterochromatin such as histone H3 di- or
trimethylated on lysine residue 9. Many of the virally induced enlarged ND10-like
structures also contain concentrations of conjugated ubiquitin. Quiescent
infections can be established in cells that are highly depleted for PML. However,
during the initial stages of establishment of a quiescent infection in such
cells, other ND10 proteins (Sp100, hDaxx, and ATRX) are recruited into virally
induced foci that are likely to be associated with HSV-1 genomes. These
observations illustrate that the intimate connections between HSV-1 genomes and
ND10 that occur during lytic infection also extend to quiescent infections.

PMCID: PMC2045565
PMID: 17670833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Hepatology. 2007 Nov;46(5):1436-42.

Antimitochondrial antibodies in acute liver failure: implications for primary
biliary cirrhosis.

Leung PS(1), Rossaro L, Davis PA, Park O, Tanaka A, Kikuchi K, Miyakawa H, Norman
GL, Lee W, Gershwin ME; Acute Liver Failure Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology/Allergy, University of California, Davis Medical
Center, Sacramento, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2008 Mar;47(3):1096-7; author reply 1097.

In our previous work, including analysis of more than 10,000 sera from control
patients and patients with a variety of liver diseases, we have demonstrated that
with the use of recombinant autoantigens, antimitochondrial autoantibodies (AMAs)
are only found in primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) and that a positive AMA is
virtually pathognomonic of either PBC or future development of PBC. Although the 
mechanisms leading to the generation of AMA are enigmatic, we have postulated
that xenobiotic-induced and/or oxidative modification of mitochondrial
autoantigens is a critical step leading to loss of tolerance. This thesis
suggests that a severe liver oxidant injury would lead to AMA production. We
analyzed 217 serum samples from 69 patients with acute liver failure (ALF)
collected up to 24 months post-ALF, compared with controls, for titer and
reactivity with the E2 subunits of pyruvate dehydrogenase, branched chain
2-oxo-acid dehydrogenase, and 2-oxo-glutarate dehydrogenase. AMAs were detected
in 28/69 (40.6%) ALF patients with reactivity found against all of the major
mitochondrial autoantigens. In addition, and as further controls, sera were
analyzed for autoantibodies to gp210, Sp100, centromere, chromatin, soluble liver
antigen, tissue transglutaminase, and deaminated gliadin peptides; the most
frequently detected nonmitochondrial autoantibody was against tissue
transglutaminase (57.1% of ALF patients).CONCLUSION: The strikingly high
frequency of AMAs in ALF supports the thesis that oxidative stress-induced liver 
damage may lead to AMA induction. The rapid disappearance of AMAs in these
patients provides further support for the contention that PBC pathogenesis
requires additional factors, including genetic susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC3731127
PMID: 17657817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Virol. 2007 Sep;81(18):10123-36. Epub 2007 Jul 11.

Recruitment of human cytomegalovirus immediate-early 2 protein onto parental
viral genomes in association with ND10 in live-infected cells.

Sourvinos G(1), Tavalai N, Berndt A, Spandidos DA, Stamminger T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische und Molekulare Virologie, University Hospital Erlangen,
Schlossgarten 4, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

The human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) immediate-early 2 (IE2) transactivator has
previously been shown to form intranuclear, dot-like accumulations in association
with subnuclear structures known as promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) nuclear 
bodies or ND10. We recently observed that IE2 can form dot-like structures even
after infection of PML knockdown cells, which lack genuine ND10. To further
analyze the determinants of IE2 subnuclear localization, a recombinant HCMV
expressing IE2 fused to the enhanced green fluorescent protein was constructed.
We infected primary human fibroblasts expressing Sp100 fused to the
autofluorescent protein mCherry while performing live-cell imaging experiments.
These experiments revealed a very dynamic association of IE2 dots with ND10
structures during the first hours postinfection: juxtaposed structures rapidly
fused to precise co-localizations, followed by segregation, and finally, the
dispersal of ND10 accumulations. Furthermore, by infecting PML knockdown cells we
determined that the number of IE2 accumulations was dependent on the multiplicity
of infection. Since time-lapse microscopy in live-infected cells revealed that
IE2 foci developed into viral replication compartments, we hypothesized that
viral DNA could act as a determinant of IE2 accumulations. Direct evidence that
IE2 molecules are associated with viral DNA early after HCMV infection was
obtained using fluorescence in situ hybridization. Finally, a
DNA-binding-deficient IE2 mutant could no longer be recruited into viral
replication centers, suggesting that the association of IE2 with viral DNA is
mediated by a direct DNA contact. Thus, we identified viral DNA as an important
determinant of IE2 subnuclear localization, which suggests that the formation of 
a virus-induced nucleoprotein complex and its spatial organization is likely to
be critical at the early stages of a lytic infection.

PMCID: PMC2045433
PMID: 17626080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. EMBO J. 2007 Jun 6;26(11):2797-807. Epub 2007 May 10.

Noncovalent interaction between Ubc9 and SUMO promotes SUMO chain formation.

Knipscheer P(1), van Dijk WJ, Olsen JV, Mann M, Sixma TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Carcinogenesis, The Netherlands Cancer Institute and
Center for Biomedical Genetics, Plesmanlaan, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The ubiquitin-related modifier SUMO regulates a wide range of cellular processes 
by post-translational modification with one, or a chain of SUMO molecules.
Sumoylation is achieved by the sequential action of several enzymes in which the 
E2, Ubc9, transfers SUMO from the E1 to the target mostly with the help of an E3 
enzyme. In this process, Ubc9 not only forms a thioester bond with SUMO, but also
interacts with SUMO noncovalently. Here, we show that this noncovalent
interaction promotes the formation of short SUMO chains on targets such as Sp100 
and HDAC4. We present a crystal structure of the noncovalent Ubc9-SUMO1 complex, 
showing that SUMO is located far from the E2 active site and resembles the
noncovalent interaction site for ubiquitin on UbcH5c and Mms2. Structural
comparison suggests a model for poly-sumoylation involving a mechanism analogous 
to Mms2-Ubc13-mediated ubiquitin chain formation.

PMCID: PMC1888673
PMID: 17491593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cell Cycle. 2007 Apr 1;6(7):771-5. Epub 2007 Apr 21.

FLASH meets nuclear bodies: CD95 receptor signals via a nuclear pathway.

Krieghoff E(1), Milovic-Holm K, Hofmann TG.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Cellular Senescence, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum,
Heidelberg, Germany.

The CD95 receptor signals via assembly of a multi-protein complex termed
death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) which triggers activation of
receptor-bound caspase-8/FLICE molecules. Most cells (type II cells) depend on a 
mitochondrial amplification pathway to commit apoptosis upon CD95 activation. The
caspase-8-binding protein FLICE-associated huge protein (FLASH) has been
previously implicated in the regulation of caspase-8 activation at the DISC.
However, recent findings demonstrated that FLASH is a Cajal body component and
regulates progression through S-phase of the cell cycle in the nucleus. Our
recent work identified FLASH as binding partner of the PML nuclear body (PML NB) 
constituent Sp100 and demonstrated that FLASH partially localizes to PML NBs.
Upon CD95 activation FLASH exits the nucleus and translocates to mitochondria
where it meets caspase-8 to promote its activation. Our findings reconcile
conflicting views on FLASH localization and its role in apoptosis regulation, and
suggest that CD95 signals via a nuclear pathway. Potential implications of our
findings for understanding FLASH function are discussed.

PMID: 17377497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Biochimie. 2007 Jun-Jul;89(6-7):819-30. Epub 2007 Jan 27.

PML and PML nuclear bodies: implications in antiviral defence.

Everett RD(1), Chelbi-Alix MK.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Virology Unit, Institute of Virology, Church Street, Glasgow, UK.

The establishment of an intracellular antiviral state is the defining activity of
interferons (IFNs) as well as the property that permitted their discovery.
Several pathways have been implicated in resistance to viral infection in
IFN-treated cells, one of which implicates the ProMyelocytic Leukaemia (PML)
protein and PML nuclear bodies (NBs, also known as ND10). PML NBs are dynamic
intranuclear structures that require PML for their formation and which harbour
numerous other transiently or permanently localised proteins. PML is expressed as
a family of isoforms (PML I-VII) as a result of alternative splicing, most of
which are found in the nucleus. IFN treatment directly induces transcription of
the genes encoding both PML and Sp100, (another major component of PML NBs),
resulting in higher levels of expression of these proteins and increases in both 
the size and number of PML NBs. These and other observations have encouraged the 
hypothesis that PML, PML NBs and a number of other constituents of these
structures are involved in host antiviral defences. For example, exogenous
expression of PML III or PML VI can impede infection by a number of RNA and DNA
viruses, and certain viral proteins accumulate in PML NBs then cause their
disruption by a variety of mechanisms. Although there are many other functions of
PML NBs in a wide range of cellular pathways, there is accumulating evidence that
they represent preferential targets for viral infections and that PML plays a
role in the mechanism of the antiviral action of IFN. This article reviews the
potential antiviral activities of PML NB constituent proteins, how RNA and DNA
viruses overcome these defences, and the connections between these events and IFN
pathways.

PMID: 17343971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 May;18(5):1701-9. Epub 2007 Mar 1.

Dynamic regulation of p53 subnuclear localization and senescence by MORC3.

Takahashi K(1), Yoshida N, Murakami N, Kawata K, Ishizaki H, Tanaka-Okamoto M,
Miyoshi J, Zinn AR, Shime H, Inoue N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Molecular Biology, Osaka Medical Center
for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka, Osaka 537-8511, Japan.

The tumor suppressor p53 is a key transcriptional factor regulating the induction
of cellular senescence by oncogenic signals. The activity of p53 is regulated by 
recruitment into promyelocytic leukemia (PML)-nuclear bodies (NBs) as well as by 
stabilization through posttranslational modifications such as phosphorylation and
acetylation. Here we found that MORC3 (microrchidia3)-ATPase activated p53 and
induced cellular senescence in normal human and mouse fibroblasts but not p53-/- 
fibroblasts. Conversely, genotoxic stress-induced phosphorylation and
stabilization of p53 but barely increased its transcriptional activity in
Morc3-/- fibroblasts. MORC3 localized on PML-NBs in presence of PML and mediated 
recruitment of p53 and CREB-binding protein (CBP) into PML-NBs. In contrast,
expression of ATPase activity-deficient mutant MORC3-E35A or siRNA repression of 
MORC3 impaired the localization of p53 and Sp100 but not CBP on PML-NBs. These
results suggest that MORC3 regulates p53 activity and localization into PML-NBs. 
We identified a new molecular mechanism that regulates the activity of nuclear
proteins by localization to a nuclear subdomain.

PMCID: PMC1855011
PMID: 17332504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Oncogene. 2007 Jul 12;26(32):4635-47. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

Identification of candidate alternative lengthening of telomeres genes by
methionine restriction and RNA interference.

Jiang WQ(1), Zhong ZH, Henson JD, Reddel RR.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, NSW,
Australia.

Telomerase-negative cancer cells can maintain their telomeres by a
recombination-mediated alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) process. We
reported previously that sequestration of MRE11/RAD50/NBS1 complexes represses
ALT-mediated telomere length maintenance, and suppresses formation of
ALT-associated promyelocytic leukemia (PML) bodies (APBs). APBs are PML bodies
containing telomeric DNA and telomere-binding proteins, and are observed only in 
a small fraction of cells within asynchronously dividing ALT-positive cell
populations. Here, we report that methionine restriction caused a reversible
arrest in G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle and reversible induction of APB formation
in most cells within an ALT-positive population. We combined methionine
restriction with RNA interference to test whether the following proteins are
required for APB formation: PML body-associated proteins, PML and Sp100;
telomere-associated proteins, TRF1, TRF2, TIN2 and RAP1; and DNA repair proteins,
MRE11, RAD50, NBS1 and 53BP1. APB formation was not decreased by depletion of
Sp100 (as reported previously) or of 53BP1, although 53BP1 partially colocalizes 
with APBs. Depletion of the other proteins suppressed APB formation. Because of
the close linkage between ALT-mediated telomere maintenance and ability to form
APBs, the eight proteins identified by this screen as being required for APB
formation are also likely to be required for the ALT mechanism.

PMID: 17297460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. EMBO J. 2007 Jan 24;26(2):391-401.

FLASH links the CD95 signaling pathway to the cell nucleus and nuclear bodies.

Milovic-Holm K(1), Krieghoff E, Jensen K, Will H, Hofmann TG.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für Experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie, Hamburg,
Germany.

Caspase-8-binding protein FLICE-associated huge protein (FLASH) has been proposed
to regulate death receptor CD95-induced apoptosis through facilitating caspase-8 
activation at the death-inducing signaling complex. Here, we found that FLASH
interacts with the PML nuclear body component Sp100 and predominantly resides in 
the nucleus and nuclear bodies (NBs). In response to CD95 activation, FLASH
leaves the NBs and translocates into the cytoplasm where it accumulates at
mitochondria. The nucleo-cytoplasmic translocation of FLASH requires CD95-induced
caspase activation and is facilitated by the Crm1-dependent nuclear export
pathway. Downregulation of FLASH by RNA interference or inhibition of its
nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling reduced CD95-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, we show
that the adenoviral anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member E1B19K traps FLASH and
procaspase-8 in a ternary complex at mitochondria, thereby blocking CD95-induced 
caspase-8 activation. Knock-down of Sp100 potentiated CD95-activated apoptosis
through enhancing nucleo-cytoplasmic FLASH translocation. In summary, our
findings suggest that CD95 signals via a previously unrecognized nuclear pathway 
mediated by nucleo-cytoplasmic translocation of FLASH.

PMCID: PMC1783462
PMID: 17245429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Hepatology. 2007 Jan;45(1):118-27.

Anti-gp210 and anti-centromere antibodies are different risk factors for the
progression of primary biliary cirrhosis.

Nakamura M(1), Kondo H, Mori T, Komori A, Matsuyama M, Ito M, Takii Y, Koyabu M, 
Yokoyama T, Migita K, Daikoku M, Abiru S, Yatsuhashi H, Takezaki E, Masaki N,
Sugi K, Honda K, Adachi H, Nishi H, Watanabe Y, Nakamura Y, Shimada M, Komatsu T,
Saito A, Saoshiro T, Harada H, Sodeyama T, Hayashi S, Masumoto A, Sando T,
Yamamoto T, Sakai H, Kobayashi M, Muro T, Koga M, Shums Z, Norman GL, Ishibashi
H.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Center, National Hospital Organization (NHO) Nagasaki
Medical Center and Department of Hepatology, Nagasaki University Graduate School 
of Biomedical Sciences, Omura, Nagasaki, Japan. nakamuram@nmc.hosp.go.jp

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2007 Jun;45(6):1583; author reply 1583-4.

The predictive role of antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) remains elusive in the
long-term outcome of primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC). The progression of PBC was 
evaluated in association with ANAs using stepwise Cox proportional hazard
regression and an unconditional stepwise logistic regression model based on the
data of 276 biopsy-proven, definite PBC patients who have been registered to the 
National Hospital Organization Study Group for Liver Disease in Japan (NHOSLJ).
When death of hepatic failure/liver transplantation (LT) was defined as an
end-point, positive anti-gp210 antibodies (Hazard ratio (HR) = 6.742, 95%
confidence interval (CI): 2.408, 18.877), the late stage (Scheuer's stage 3, 4)
(HR = 4.285, 95% CI:1.682,10.913) and male sex (HR = 3.266, 95% CI: 1.321,8.075) 
were significant risk factors at the time of initial liver biopsy. When clinical 
progression to death of hepatic failure/LT (i.e., hepatic failure type
progression) or to the development of esophageal varices or hepatocellular
carcinoma without developing jaundice (Total bilirubin < 1.5 mg/dL) (i.e., portal
hypertension type progression) was defined as an end-point in the early stage
(Scheuer's stage 1, 2) PBC patients, positive anti-gp210 antibodies was a
significant risk factor for hepatic failure type progression [odds ratio (OR) =
33.777, 95% CI: 5.930, 636.745], whereas positive anti-centromere antibodies was 
a significant risk factor for portal hypertension type progression (OR = 4.202,
95% CI: 1.307, 14.763). Histologically, positive anti-gp210 antibodies was most
significantly associated with more severe interface hepatitis and lobular
inflammation, whereas positive anticentromere antibodies was most significantly
associated with more severe ductular reaction.CONCLUSION: These results indicate 
2 different progression types in PBC, hepatic failure type and portal
hypertension type progression, which may be represented by positive-anti-gp210
and positive-anticentromere antibodies, respectively.

PMID: 17187436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Blood. 2007 Feb 15;109(4):1373-80. Epub 2006 Oct 24.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors suppress IFNalpha-induced up-regulation of
promyelocytic leukemia protein.

Vlasáková J(1), Nováková Z, Rossmeislová L, Kahle M, Hozák P, Hodny Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Ultrastructure and Molecular Biology, Institute of
Experimental Medicine, Department of Biology of the Cell Nucleus, Institute of
Molecular Genetics [corrected] Academy Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague,
Czech Republic.

Erratum in
    Blood. 2007 Jun 1;109(11):4606.

Promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML NBs), the structural domains of the
eukaryotic cell nucleus, play a role in cancer and apoptosis, and their
involvement in antiviral mechanisms mediated by interferons (IFNs) is proposed.
IFNs dramatically increase the transcription of the PML gene. In this study, we
have shown that the response of 2 structural PML NB components, PML and Sp100, to
interferon-alpha (IFNalpha) was suppressed in cells simultaneously treated with
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (trichostatin A, sodium butyrate, MS-275,
SAHA, and valproic acid). Trichostatin A (TSA) blocked the increase of PML NB
number and suppressed up-regulation of PML mRNA and protein levels in several
human cell lines and in normal diploid skin fibroblasts. Moreover, IFNalpha
induction of IRF-1 was also inhibited by TSA, although incompletely. Analysis of 
cellular fractions did not show any defects in cytoplasmic-nuclear transport of
STAT2, a component of transcription factor ISGF3 responsible for
IFNalpha/beta-dependent gene transcription. Moreover, chromatin
immunoprecipitation showed that after IFNalpha stimulation STAT2 binds to ISRE
element of PML promoter even in the presence of TSA and thus excluded
STAT2-dependent mechanism of TSA effect. These results indicate that the action
of histone deacetylases is necessary for the full transcriptional activation of
IFNalpha-stimulated genes.

PMID: 17062732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Dec;26(23):8814-25. Epub 2006 Sep 11.

Transcriptional regulation is affected by subnuclear targeting of reporter
plasmids to PML nuclear bodies.

Block GJ(1), Eskiw CH, Dellaire G, Bazett-Jones DP.

Author information: 
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G
1X8, Canada.

Whereas the PML protein has been reported to have both transcriptional
coactivator and corepressor potential, the contribution of the PML nuclear body
(PML NB) itself to transcriptional regulation is not well understood. Here we
demonstrate that plasmid DNA artificially tethered to PML or the PML NB-targeting
domain of Sp100 is preferentially localized to PML NBs. Using the tethering
technique, we targeted a simian virus 40 promoter-driven luciferase reporter
plasmid to PML NBs, resulting in the repression of the transgene transcriptional 
activity. Conversely, the tethering of a cytomegalovirus promoter-containing
reporter plasmid resulted in activation. Targeting a minimal eukaryotic promoter 
did not affect its activity. The expression of targeted promoters could be
modulated by altering the cellular concentration of PML NB components, including 
Sp100 and isoforms of the PML protein. Finally, we demonstrate that ICP0, the
promiscuous herpes simplex virus transactivator, increases the level of
transcriptional activation of plasmid DNA tethered to the PML NB. We conclude
that when PML NB components are artificially tethered to reporter plasmids, the
PML NB contributes to the regulation of the tethered DNA in a promoter-dependent 
manner. Our findings demonstrate that transient transcription assays are
sensitive to the subnuclear localization of the transgene plasmid.

PMCID: PMC1636819
PMID: 16966371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Virol. 2006 Aug;80(16):8019-29.

Differential role of Sp100 isoforms in interferon-mediated repression of herpes
simplex virus type 1 immediate-early protein expression.

Negorev DG(1), Vladimirova OV, Ivanov A, Rauscher F 3rd, Maul GG.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103, USA.

Nuclear domains called ND10 or PML nuclear bodies contain interferon
(IFN)-upregulated proteins like PML and Sp100. Paradoxically, herpes simplex
virus 1 (HSV-1) begins its transcriptional cascade at aggregates of
ND10-associated proteins, which in turn are destroyed by the HSV-1
immediate-early protein ICP0. While PML is essential in the formation of ND10,
the function of Sp100 in the cells' defense against viral infection is unknown.
In this study we investigated the potential antiviral effect of IFN-beta-induced 
Sp100. We found that IFN-beta treatment leads to a differential accumulation of
four Sp100 isoforms in different cell lines. Using an HEK293 cell line
derivative, 293-S, producing no detectable amounts of Sp100 even after IFN
exposure, we analyzed individual Sp100 isoforms for their effect on HSV-1
infection. Sp100 isoforms B, C, and HMG, but not Sp100A, suppressed ICP0 and ICP4
early after infection. Isoforms B, C, and HMG suppressed expression from the ICP0
promoter in transient transfection, whereas Sp100A enhanced expression. Moreover,
Sp100A localized in ND10, whereas the repressive isoforms were either dispersed
within the nucleus or, at unphysiologically higher expression levels, formed new 
aggregates. The repressive activity was dependent on an intact SAND domain, since
Sp100B bearing a W655Q mutation in the SAND domain lost this repressive activity 
and accumulated in ND10. Using RNA interference to knock down the repressive
Sp100 isoforms B, C, and HMG, we find that they are an essential part of the
IFN-beta-mediated suppression of ICP0 expression. These data suggest that
repression by the Sp100 isoforms B, C, and HMG takes place outside of ND10 and
raise the possibility that viral genomes at Sp100A accumulations are more likely 
to start their transcription program because of a more permissive local
environment.

PMCID: PMC1563809
PMID: 16873258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Virol. 2006 Aug;80(16):8006-18.

Evidence for a role of the cellular ND10 protein PML in mediating intrinsic
immunity against human cytomegalovirus infections.

Tavalai N(1), Papior P, Rechter S, Leis M, Stamminger T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische und Molekulare Virologie der Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Schlossgarten 4, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

Several viruses, including human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), encode proteins that
colocalize with a cellular subnuclear structure known as ND10. Since only viral
DNA deposited at ND10 initiates transcription, ND10 structures were hypothesized 
to be essential for viral replication. On the other hand, interferon treatment
induces an up-regulation of ND10 structures and viruses have evolved polypeptides
that disperse the dot-like accumulation of ND10 proteins, suggesting that ND10
could also be part of an intrinsic defense mechanism. In order to obtain evidence
for either a proviral or an antiviral function of ND10, we generated primary
human fibroblasts with a stable, short interfering RNA-mediated knockdown (kd) of
PML. In these cells, other ND10-associated proteins like hDaxx showed a diffuse
nuclear distribution. Interestingly, we observed that HCMV infection induced the 
de novo formation of ND10-like hDaxx and Sp100 accumulations that colocalized
with IE2 and were disrupted, in the apparent absence of PML, in an IE1-dependent 
manner during the first hours after infection. Furthermore, infection of PML-kd
cells with wild-type HCMV at a low multiplicity of infection resulted in enhanced
replication. In particular, a significantly increased plaque formation was
detected, suggesting that more cells are able to support initiation of
replication in the absence of PML. While there was no difference in viral DNA
uptake between PML-kd and control cells, we observed a considerable increase in
the number of immediate-early (IE) protein-positive cells, indicating that the
depletion of PML augments the initiation of viral IE gene expression. These
results strongly suggest that PML functions as part of an intrinsic immune
mechanism against cytomegalovirus infections.

PMCID: PMC1563799
PMID: 16873257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Virol. 2006 Aug;80(16):7995-8005.

PML contributes to a cellular mechanism of repression of herpes simplex virus
type 1 infection that is inactivated by ICP0.

Everett RD(1), Rechter S, Papior P, Tavalai N, Stamminger T, Orr A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Virology Unit, Church Street, Glasgow G11 5JR, Scotland, United Kingdom.
r.everett@mrcvu.gla.ac.uk

Promyelocytic leukemia (PML) nuclear bodies (also known as ND10) are nuclear
substructures that contain several proteins, including PML itself, Sp100, and
hDaxx. PML has been implicated in many cellular processes, and ND10 are
frequently associated with the replicating genomes of DNA viruses. During herpes 
simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection, the viral regulatory protein ICP0
localizes to ND10 and induces the degradation of PML, thereby disrupting ND10 and
dispersing their constituent proteins. ICP0-null mutant viruses are defective in 
PML degradation and ND10 disruption, and concomitantly they initiate productive
infection very inefficiently. Although these data are consistent with a
repressive role for PML and/or ND10 during HSV-1 infection, evidence in support
of this hypothesis has been inconclusive. By use of short interfering RNA
technology, we demonstrate that depletion of PML increases both gene expression
and plaque formation by an ICP0-negative HSV-1 mutant, while having no effect on 
wild-type HSV-1. We conclude that PML contributes to a cellular antiviral
repression mechanism that is countered by the activity of ICP0.

PMCID: PMC1563828
PMID: 16873256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Aug 1;98(5):1106-22.

SP100B, a repressor of gene expression preferentially binds to DNA with
unmethylated CpGs.

Isaac A(1), Wilcox KW, Taylor JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

SP100A and SP100B are mammalian nuclear proteins encoded by alternatively-spliced
transcripts from the SP100 gene. The N-terminal portion of SP100B (aa 1-476) is
identical to SP100A and contains an HP1 interaction domain. The C-terminal
portion of SP100B (aa 477-688) contains an HMG2 interaction domain and a SAND
domain. The SAND domain is a DNA-binding domain identified in several nuclear
proteins involved in transcriptional regulation. We have previously reported that
SP100B represses expression of genes present on transfected DNA in a SAND
domain-dependent manner. The goal of the present study was to characterize the
DNA binding properties of full-length SP100B expressed in mammalian cells. SP100B
associated with DNA whereas SP100A did not. The SP100B SAND domain was essential 
for DNA binding. Deletion of the HP1- or HMG2-binding domain had no effect on DNA
binding. SP100B preferentially associated with sequences containing CpG
dinucleotides. Our results did not reveal any preference of SP100B for bases
flanking CpG dinucleotides. The number of CpGs in a DNA sequence and spacing
between CpGs influenced SP100B binding, suggesting that multimers of SP100B bind 
DNA in a cooperative manner. Binding of SP100B was abrogated by methylation of
the cytosine residue within the context of the CpG dinucleotide. We propose that 
the preference of SP100B for non-methylated CpGs provides a mechanism to target
SP100B to foreign DNA, including plasmid DNA or viral DNA genomes, most of which 
are hypomethylated.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16775843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Cell Sci. 2006 Mar 15;119(Pt 6):1034-42. Epub 2006 Feb 21.

Mitotic accumulations of PML protein contribute to the re-establishment of PML
nuclear bodies in G1.

Dellaire G(1), Eskiw CH, Dehghani H, Ching RW, Bazett-Jones DP.

Author information: 
(1)Programme in Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University
Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1X8, Canada.

Although the mechanism of chromosomal segregation is well known, it is unclear
how other nuclear compartments such as promyelocytic leukemia (PML) nuclear
bodies partition during mitosis and re-form in G1. We demonstrate that PML
nuclear bodies partition via mitotic accumulations of PML protein (MAPPs), which 
are distinct from PML nuclear bodies in their dynamics, biochemistry and
structure. During mitosis PML nuclear bodies lose biochemical components such as 
SUMO-1 and Sp100. We demonstrate that MAPPs are also devoid of Daxx and these
biochemical changes occur prior to chromatin condensation and coincide with the
loss of nuclear membrane integrity. MAPPs are highly mobile, yet do not readily
exchange PML protein as demonstrated by fluorescence recovery after
photo-bleaching (FRAP). A subset of MAPPs remains associated with mitotic
chromosomes, providing a possible nucleation site for PML nuclear body formation 
in G1. As the nuclear envelope reforms in late anaphase, these nascent PML
nuclear bodies accumulate components sequentially, for example Sp100 and SUMO-1
before Daxx. After cytokinesis, MAPPs remain in the cytoplasm long after the
reincorporation of splicing components and their disappearance coincides with new
PML nuclear body formation even in the absence of new protein synthesis. The PML 
protein within MAPPs is not degraded during mitosis but is recycled to contribute
to the formation of new PML nuclear bodies in daughter nuclei. The recycling of
PML protein from one cell cycle to the next via mitotic accumulations may
represent a common mechanism for the partitioning of other nuclear bodies during 
mitosis.

PMID: 16492707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Med Genet. 2006 Jul;43(7):598-608. Epub 2006 Jan 13.

High throughput SNP and expression analyses of candidate genes for non-syndromic 
oral clefts.

Park JW(1), Cai J, McIntosh I, Jabs EW, Fallin MD, Ingersoll R, Hetmanski JB,
Vekemans M, Attie-Bitach T, Lovett M, Scott AF, Beaty TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent work suggests that multiple genes and several environmental
risk factors influence risk for non-syndromic oral clefts, one of the most common
birth defects in humans. Advances in high-throughput genotyping technology now
make it possible to test multiple markers in many candidate genes simultaneously.
METHODS: We present findings from family based association tests of single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers in 64 candidate genes genotyped using the
BeadArray approach in 58 case-parent trios from Maryland (USA) to illustrate how 
multiple markers in multiple genes can be analysed. To assess whether these genes
were expressed in human craniofacial structures relevant to palate and lip
development, we also analysed data from the Craniofacial and Oral Gene Expression
Network (COGENE) consortium, and searched public databases for expression
profiles of these genes.
RESULTS: Thirteen candidate genes showed significant evidence of linkage in the
presence of disequilibrium, and ten of these were found to be expressed in
relevant embryonic tissues: SP100, MLPH, HDAC4, LEF1, C6orf105, CD44, ALX4,
ZNF202, CRHR1, and MAPT. Three other genes showing statistical evidence (ADH1C,
SCN3B, and IMP5) were not expressed in the embryonic tissues examined here.
CONCLUSIONS: This approach demonstrates how statistical evidence on large numbers
of SNP markers typed in case-parent trios can be combined with expression data to
identify candidate genes for complex disorders. Many of the genes reported here
have not been previously studied as candidates for oral clefts and warrant
further investigation.

PMCID: PMC2564555
PMID: 16415175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Rev Med Brux. 2006;27 Spec No:Sp100-3.

[Pediatric psychiatry: evolution and developments].

[Article in French]

Appelboom J(1), Bruyer S, Callens A, Camus M, Causanschi C, Cogan N, Decocq C,
Devriendt C, François A, Frydman O, Jullian G, Haenecour B, Klees M, Luyckx F,
Magisson C, Martin N, Prové G, Soncarrieu M, Sangou D, Taban S, Van Pevenage C.

Author information: 
(1)Clinique de Psychiatrie Infanto-juvénile, Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants
Reine Fabiola.

Since 1986, the field of the child and adolescent clinics in the University
Children Hospital Queen Fabiola is much developed. It is divided in five areas:
the ambulatory sector, the medical psycho-psychiatry field, the day unit, the
psychiatric hospitalisation and the ward. The population consists in babies (not 
yet born and born), children, adolescents. The clinical approach is multi and
transdisciplinary including the child, his family and his life systems, caring
staff included. Clinical research is centered on four axes: medical psychology,
prevention, therapy and child psychiatry, somatic aspects included.

PMID: 21818903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. EMBO J. 2005 Oct 19;24(20):3565-75. Epub 2005 Sep 22.

Mediation of Epstein-Barr virus EBNA-LP transcriptional coactivation by Sp100.

Ling PD(1), Peng RS, Nakajima A, Yu JH, Tan J, Moses SM, Yang WH, Zhao B, Kieff
E, Bloch KD, Bloch DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. pling@bcm.tmc.edu

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) EBNA-LP protein is important for EBV-mediated B-cell
immortalization and is a potent gene-specific coactivator of the viral
transcriptional activator, EBNA2. The mechanism(s) by which EBNA-LP functions as 
a coactivator remains an important question in the biology of EBV-induced B-cell 
immortalization. In this study, we found that EBNA-LP interacts with the
promyelocytic leukemia nuclear body (PML NB)-associated protein Sp100 and
displaces Sp100 and heterochromatin protein 1alpha (HP1alpha) from PML NBs.
Interaction between EBNA-LP and Sp100 was mediated through conserved region 3 in 
EBNA-LP and the PML NB targeting domain in Sp100. Overexpression of Sp100 lacking
the N-terminal PML NB targeting domain, but not a mutant form of Sp100 lacking
the HP1alpha interaction domain, was sufficient to coactivate EBNA2 in a
gene-specific manner independent of EBNA-LP. These findings suggest that Sp100 is
a major mediator of EBNA-LP coactivation. These studies indicate that modulation 
of PML NB-associated proteins may be important for establishment of latent viral 
infections, and also identify a convenient model system to investigate the
functions of Sp100.

PMCID: PMC1276704
PMID: 16177824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Semin Liver Dis. 2005 Aug;25(3):298-310.

Antinuclear antibodies in primary biliary cirrhosis.

Invernizzi P(1), Selmi C, Ranftler C, Podda M, Wesierska-Gadek J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry, San Paolo School of Medicine,
University of Milan, Italy. pietro.invernizzi@unimi.it

Patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) generate a variety of
autoantibodies, which are primarily directed against mitochondrial antigens
(AMA). However, a subgroup of patient sera are also positive for antibodies to
nuclear components (ANAs). At indirect immunofluorescence (IIF), PBC sera mostly 
produce homogeneous, nuclear dot, speckled, centromere, or rim-like patterns.
During the last two decades, a number of nuclear structures have been recognized 
as specific targets of ANA in PBC. These include Sp100 and promyelocytic leukemia
proteins, which generate a nuclear dot IIF pattern, and two components of the
nuclear pore complex specifically associated with a perinuclear pattern (i.e.,
gp210 and p62). In recent years, the clinical significance of ANA in PBC has been
widely investigated and data indicate that, unlike AMAs, PBC-specific ANAs
correlate with disease severity and may therefore be a marker of poor prognosis.

PMID: 16143945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Jul;63 Suppl 7:640-2.

[Immunologic tests: Anti-Sp100 antibody].

[Article in Japanese]

Mori S(1), Wake H, Takahashi HK, Nishibori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine and
Dentistry.

PMID: 16111356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2005 Sep;56(3):559-65. Epub 2005 Jul 15.

Efficacy of pulsatile amoxicillin and clarithromycin dosing alone and in
combination in a murine pneumococcal pneumonia model.

Sun HK(1), Lee SY, Banevicius MA, Du X, Maglio D, Nicolau DP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Anti-Infective Research and Development, Hartford Hospital, 80
Seymour Street, Hartford, CT 06102, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Amoxicillin and clarithromycin have been proven to be effective in
the treatment of community-acquired pneumonia. This study investigated the in
vivo bactericidal efficacy of a novel, pulsatile dosing strategy for amoxicillin 
and clarithromycin, when used as monotherapy and combination therapy.
METHODS: A neutropenic murine pneumonia model was used to assess the bactericidal
activity of amoxicillin and clarithromycin, when the same total daily dose was
administered as a traditional regimen (every 8 h and every 12 h, respectively) or
as a pulsatile regimen (four doses of antibiotic given every 2 h over the first 6
h of the day) against three isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae of varying
resistance profiles. The three isolates consisted of SP21 (macrolide and
penicillin susceptible), SP100 [mef(A) gene], and SP107 [mef(A) + erm(B) genes].
RESULTS: Pulsatile dosing showed similar reductions in bacterial density for
amoxicillin and clarithromycin when either drug was given alone compared with
traditional dosing regimens against all three bacterial isolates. When
amoxicillin and clarithromycin were combined, improved activity was found
compared with monotherapy. Overall, when comparing the different combination
regimens, the pulsatile regimens provided similar activity compared with the
traditional regimens. For one isolate, SP107, pulsatile amoxicillin combination
regimens were less effective compared with traditionally dosed amoxicillin
combination regimens.
CONCLUSIONS: Pulsatile dosing resulted in comparable bactericidal activity
against the three isolates tested and may represent an alternative dosing
strategy, which may help to alleviate problems with patient adherence to drug
therapy.

PMID: 16024590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 10;280(23):21942-8. Epub 2005 Apr 11.

SUMOylation of the polyglutamine repeat protein, ataxin-1, is dependent on a
functional nuclear localization signal.

Riley BE(1), Zoghbi HY, Orr HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, Biophysics, Institute of Human 
Genetics, The University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

SUMO (small ubiquitin-like modifier) is a member of the ubiquitin family of
proteins. SUMO targets include proteins involved in numerous roles including
nuclear transport and transcriptional regulation. The previous finding that
mutant ataxin-1[82Q] disrupted promyelocytic leukemia (PML) oncogenic domains
prompted us to determine whether ataxin-1 disrupts another component of PML
oncogenic domains, Sp100 (100-kDa Speckled protein). Similar to the PML protein, 
mutant ataxin-1[82Q] redistributed Sp100 to mutant ataxin-1[82Q] nuclear
inclusions. Based on the ability of PML and Sp100 to be covalently modified by
SUMO, we investigated the ability of ataxin-1 to be SUMOylated. SUMO-1 was found 
to covalently modify the polyglutamine repeat protein ataxin-1. There was a
decrease in ataxin-1 SUMOylation in the presence of the expanded polyglutamine
tract, ataxin-1[82Q]. The phospho-mutant, ataxin-1[82Q]-S776A, restored SUMO
levels to those of wild-type ataxin-1[30Q]. SUMOylation of ataxin-1 was dependent
on a functional nuclear localization signal. Ataxin-1 SUMOylation was mapped to
at least five lysine residues. Lys(16), Lys(194) preceding the polyglutamine
tract, Lys(610)/Lys(697) in the C-terminal ataxin high mobility group domain, and
Lys(746) all contribute to ataxin-1 SUMOylation.

PMID: 15824120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Virol. 2005 Apr;79(8):5078-89.

ND10 components relocate to sites associated with herpes simplex virus type 1
nucleoprotein complexes during virus infection.

Everett RD(1), Murray J.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Virology Unit, Institute of Virology, University of Glasgow, Church St.,
Glasgow G11 5JR, Scotland, United Kingdom. r.everett@vir.gla.ac.uk

Infections with DNA viruses commonly result in the association of viral genomes
and replication compartments with cellular nuclear substructures known as
promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) nuclear bodies or ND10. While there is
evidence that viral genomes can associate with preexisting ND10, we demonstrate
in this study by live-cell microscopy that structures resembling ND10 form de
novo and in association with viral genome complexes during the initial stages of 
herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection. Consistent with previous studies, 
we found that the major ND10 proteins PML, Sp100, and hDaxx are exchanged very
rapidly between ND10 foci and the surrounding nucleoplasm in live cells. The
dynamic nature of the individual protein molecule components of ND10 provides a
mechanism by which ND10 proteins can be recruited to novel sites during virus
infection. These observations explain why the genomes and replication
compartments of DNA viruses that replicate in the cell nucleus are so commonly
found in association with ND10. These findings are discussed with reference to
the nature, location, and potential number of HSV-1 prereplication compartments
and to the dynamic aspects of HSV-1 genomes and viral products during the early
stages of lytic infection.

PMCID: PMC1069553
PMID: 15795293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Cell Biochem. 2005 May 15;95(2):352-65.

SP100B is a repressor of gene expression.

Wilcox KW(1), Sheriff S, Isaac A, Taylor JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA.

Mammalian cell nuclei exhibit discrete sites where specific proteins
characteristically localize. PML nuclear bodies (PML NBs) (nuclear domain 10s
(ND10s)) are the primary localization site for the promyelocytic leukemia (PML)
protein and the SP100 autoantigen. The observations that some PML and SP100
isoforms can function as transcriptional regulators, that both the size and
number of PML bodies increase in response to interferon treatment, and that many 
mammalian viruses encode proteins that mediate disruption of PML bodies suggest
that these sites suppress viral infection, perhaps by repressing viral gene
expression. We hypothesized that a component of PML NBs functions as a repressor 
of gene expression. To test this hypothesis, we characterized the effect of PML
or SP100 isoforms on expression of transfected reporter genes. PML-I, PML-VI, and
SP100A did not repress reporter gene expression. In contrast, SP100B repressed
reporter gene expression, especially under conditions in which the reporter gene 
expression was elevated by a viral transactivator or addition of trichostatin A
to the culture medium. The SP100B DNA binding domain was required for repression.
SP100B had no detectable effect on the amount, methylation pattern, or
topological form of plasmid DNA in the nuclei of transfected cells. The
demonstrated repressive activity of SP100B supports the hypothesis that SP100B is
a component of an innate immune response that represses expression of ectopic
DNA.

PMID: 15778999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Apr;25(7):2708-21.

Suppression of alternative lengthening of telomeres by Sp100-mediated
sequestration of the MRE11/RAD50/NBS1 complex.

Jiang WQ(1), Zhong ZH, Henson JD, Neumann AA, Chang AC, Reddel RR.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Medical Research Institute, 214 Hawkesbury Rd., Westmead, NSW 2145,
Australia.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2005 May;25(10):4334.

Approximately 10% of cancers overall use alternative lengthening of telomeres
(ALT) instead of telomerase to prevent telomere shortening, and ALT is especially
common in astrocytomas and various types of sarcomas. The hallmarks of ALT in
telomerase-negative cancer cells include a unique pattern of telomere length
heterogeneity, rapid changes in individual telomere lengths, and the presence of 
ALT-associated promyelocytic leukemia bodies (APBs) containing telomeric DNA and 
proteins involved in telomere binding, DNA replication, and recombination. The
ALT mechanism appears to involve recombination-mediated DNA replication, but the 
molecular details are largely unknown. In telomerase-null Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, an analogous survivor mechanism is dependent on the RAD50 gene. We
demonstrate here that overexpression of Sp100, a constituent of promyelocytic
leukemia nuclear bodies, sequestered the MRE11, RAD50, and NBS1 recombination
proteins away from APBs. This resulted in repression of the ALT mechanism, as
evidenced by progressive telomere shortening at 121 bp per population doubling, a
rate within the range found in telomerase-negative normal cells, suppression of
rapid telomere length changes, and suppression of APB formation. Spontaneously
generated C-terminally truncated Sp100 that did not sequester the MRE11, RAD50,
and NBS1 proteins failed to inhibit ALT. These findings identify for the first
time proteins that are required for the ALT mechanism.

PMCID: PMC1061646
PMID: 15767676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Hepatology. 2005 Mar;41(3):609-16.

Small ubiquitin-related modifiers: A novel and independent class of autoantigens 
in primary biliary cirrhosis.

Janka C(1), Selmi C, Gershwin ME, Will H, Sternsdorf T.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie and the
Universität Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.

Serum autoantibodies against components of nuclear dots (anti-NDs), namely PML
and Sp100, are specifically detected in 20% to 30% of patients with primary
biliary cirrhosis (PBC). Although anti-ND antibodies are nonpathogenic, the
mechanisms that lead to this unique reactivity are critical to understanding the 
loss of immune tolerance in PBC. Importantly, Sp100 and PML are both covalently
linked to small ubiquitin-related modifiers (SUMOs). Therefore, we investigated
whether SUMO proteins are independent autoantigens in PBC and studied 99 PBC sera
samples for reactivity against NDs, PML, and Sp100, as well as against SUMO-2 and
SUMO-1 recombinant proteins. Autoantibodies against SUMO-2 and SUMO-1 were found 
in 42% and 15% of anti-ND-positive PBC sera, respectively. Anti-SUMO reactivity
was not observed in anti-ND-negative sera. Anti-SUMO-2 autoantibodies were found 
in 58% of sera containing autoantibodies against both PML and Sp100 and were
detected exclusively in sera containing anti-Sp100 autoantibodies. In conclusion,
SUMO proteins constitute a novel and independent class of autoantigens in PBC.
Furthermore, we believe our data emphasize the post-translational modification of
lysine by either lipoylation in the case of AMA or SUMOylation in the case of
specific anti-ND autoantibodies as the pivotal site for autoantibody generation
in PBC.

PMID: 15726652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2005 Jan;12(1):67-74. Epub 2004 Dec 19.

Unique binding interactions among Ubc9, SUMO and RanBP2 reveal a mechanism for
SUMO paralog selection.

Tatham MH(1), Kim S, Jaffray E, Song J, Chen Y, Hay RT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, University of St. Andrews, North Haugh, St. 
Andrews, KY16 9ST, UK.

The conjugation of small ubiquitin-like modifiers SUMO-1, SUMO-2 and SUMO-3 onto 
target proteins requires the concerted action of the specific E1-activating
enzyme SAE1/SAE2, the E2-conjugating enzyme Ubc9, and an E3-like SUMO ligase. NMR
chemical shift perturbation was used to identify the surface of Ubc9 that
interacts with the SUMO ligase RanBP2. Unlike known ubiquitin E2-E3 interactions,
RanBP2 binds to the beta-sheet of Ubc9. Mutational disruption of Ubc9-RanBP2
binding affected SUMO-2 but not SUMO-1 conjugation to Sp100 and to a newly
identified RanBP2 substrate, PML. RanBP2 contains a binding site specific for
SUMO-1 but not SUMO-2, indicating that a Ubc9-SUMO-1 thioester could be recruited
to RanBP2 via SUMO-1 in the absence of strong binding between Ubc9 and RanBP2.
Thus we show that E2-E3 interactions are not conserved across the ubiquitin-like 
protein superfamily and identify a RanBP2-dependent mechanism for SUMO
paralog-specific conjugation.

PMID: 15608651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Oncogene. 2005 Jan 27;24(5):916-31.

SP100 inhibits ETS1 activity in primary endothelial cells.

Yordy JS(1), Moussa O, Pei H, Chaussabel D, Li R, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

SP100 was first identified as a nuclear autoimmune antigen and is a constituent
of the nuclear body. SP100 interacts with the ETS1 transcription factor, and we
have previously shown that SP100 reduces ETS1-DNA binding and inhibits ETS1
transcriptional activity on the MMP1 and uPA promoters. We now demonstrate that
SP100 expression is upregulated by interferons, which have been shown to be
antiangiogenic, in primary endothelial cells. As ETS1 is functionally important
in promoting angiogenesis, we tested the hypothesis that ETS1 activity is
negatively modulated by SP100 in endothelial cells. SP100 directly antagonizes
ETS1-mediated morphological changes in human umbilical vein endothelial cell
(HUVEC) network formation and reduces HUVEC migration and invasion. To further
understand the functional relationship between ETS1 and SP100, cDNA microarray
analysis was utilized to assess reprogramming of gene expression by ETS1 and
SP100. A subset of the differentially regulated genes, including heat-shock
proteins (HSPs) H11, HSPA1L, HSPA6, HSPA8, HSPE1 and AXIN1, BRCA1, CD14, CTGF
(connective tissue growth factor), GABRE (gamma-aminobutyric acid A receptor
epsilon), ICAM1, SNAI1, SRD5A1 (steroid-5-alpha-reductase 1) and THY1, were
validated by real-time PCR and a majority showed reciprocal expression in
response to ETS1 and SP100. Interestingly, genes that are negatively regulated by
ETS1 and upregulated by SP100 have antimigratory or antiangiogenic properties.
Collectively, these data indicate that SP100 negatively modulates ETS1-dependent 
downstream biological processes.

PMID: 15592518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Am J Gastroenterol. 2004 Nov;99(11):2150-7.

Serum immunological profile in patients with chronic autoimmune cholestasis.

Romero-Gómez M(1), Wichmann I, Crespo J, Parés A, Rodrigo L, Alvarez A, Diago M, 
Pons-Romero F, Sanchez-Munoz D, Aguilar-Reina J, Andrade RJ, Salmeron J,
Sánchez-Pobre P, Rebollo JM, Martin-Vivaldi R, Castellano-Megias V, Nuñez-Roldan 
A, Bruguera M; Spanish Group for the Study of Autoimmune Cholangitis.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Hepatología, Hospital Universitario de Valme, Sevilla, Spain.

AIM: To compare patients who had biochemical and histological features of chronic
autoimmune cholestasis (CAIC) using serological autoantibody profiling.
METHODS: Patients (n = 174 CAIC; 79 AMA(-) and 95 AMA(+)) were profiled for the
following antibodies: antinuclear antibodies (ANAs), antimitochondrial antibodies
(AMAs), antismooth muscle actin (SMA, mainly F-actin), antiperinuclear
cytoplasmic neutrophil antibodies (pANCAs), anti-SP100, anti-GP210, anti-M2
(2-oxo-acid dehydrogenase complexes), and antisoluble liver antigen (SLA). Liver 
specimens were reviewed according to staging, biliary interface activity, lobular
hepatitis, granulomas, cholestasis, and florid ductal lesion.
RESULTS: In patients who were AMA(-) by indirect immunofluorescence (IIF), 34.6% 
were positive for anti-M2 by immunoblotting. In 49 definitively AMA(-) patients, 
24 (48.9%) showed ANA-primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC)-related antibodies
(rim-like, multiple nuclear dots, anti-SP100, or anti-GP210). There were no
differences in immunological, biochemical, or histopathological features between 
IIF-AMA(+) patients and AMA(-) patients with anti-M2 or ANA-PBC-related
antibodies. AIH-related autoantibodies were found in 13 patients (7.5%). Patients
with AMAs or ANA-PBC-related antibodies had higher IgM levels, whereas patients
with antibodies highly specific for AIH had higher AST, bilirubin, and IgG
levels, and AIH scores, and higher grades of lobular hepatitis. Overall, three
distinct categories of patients were observed: AMA(+) or AMA(-) patients with
ANA-PBC-related antibodies; AMA(-) patients with non-PBC-related ANAs; and
patients with AIH-related antibodies together with serum PBC markers.
CONCLUSION: Since these three groups had immunological, biochemical, and
histopathological differences, they ought to be considered as separate clinical
subentities rather than as merely AMA(-) or AMA(+) patients with autoimmune
cholestasis.

PMID: 15554996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Curr Opin Immunol. 2004 Dec;16(6):746-52.

Aire: an update.

Su MA(1), Anderson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco, Box 0540, 513
Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Aire (autoimmune regulator), the gene responsible for the clinical disorder
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type I, has recently been identified as an
important mediator of central tolerance. Aire upregulates the transcription of
certain organ-specific self-antigens in medullary thymic epithelial cells, and
has a role in the negative selection of organ-specific thymocytes. However, the
molecular mechanisms by which Aire functions in these processes are still not
well understood. Structural characteristics and biochemical data suggest that
Aire might have a direct role in nuclear transcription and that it can function
as an ubiquitin ligase. Although these molecular details await further
characterization, the association of Aire with the prevention of autoimmunity
highlights the importance of thymic mechanisms in the maintenance of tolerance.

PMID: 15511668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Virol. 2004 Nov;78(21):11461-76.

Nuclear heat shock response and novel nuclear domain 10 reorganization in
respiratory syncytial virus-infected a549 cells identified by high-resolution
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis.

Brasier AR(1), Spratt H, Wu Z, Boldogh I, Zhang Y, Garofalo RP, Casola A, Pashmi 
J, Haag A, Luxon B, Kurosky A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, MRB 8.138, The University of Texas Medical Branch, 
301 University Blvd., Galveston, TX 77555-1060, USA. arbrasie@utmb.edu.

The pneumovirus respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a leading cause of epidemic 
respiratory tract infection. Upon entry, RSV replicates in the epithelial
cytoplasm, initiating compensatory changes in cellular gene expression. In this
study, we have investigated RSV-induced changes in the nuclear proteome of A549
alveolar type II-like epithelial cells by high-resolution two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis (2DE). Replicate 2D gels from uninfected and RSV-infected nuclei 
were compared for changes in protein expression. We identified 24 different
proteins by peptide mass fingerprinting after matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MS), whose average normalized spot
intensity was statistically significant and differed by +/-2-fold. Notable among 
the proteins identified were the cytoskeletal cytokeratins, RNA helicases,
oxidant-antioxidant enzymes, the TAR DNA binding protein (a protein that
associates with nuclear domain 10 [ND10] structures), and heat shock protein 70- 
and 60-kDa isoforms (Hsp70 and Hsp60, respectively). The identification of Hsp70 
was also validated by liquid chromatography quadropole-TOF tandem MS (LC-MS/MS). 
Separate experiments using immunofluorescence microscopy revealed that RSV
induced cytoplasmic Hsp70 aggregation and nuclear accumulation. Data mining of a 
genomic database showed that RSV replication induced coordinate changes in Hsp
family proteins, including the 70, 70-2, 90, 40, and 40-3 isoforms. Because the
TAR DNA binding protein associates with ND10s, we examined the effect of RSV
infection on ND10 organization. RSV induced a striking dissolution of ND10
structures with redistribution of the component promyelocytic leukemia (PML) and 
speckled 100-kDa (Sp100) proteins into the cytoplasm, as well as inducing their
synthesis. Our findings suggest that cytoplasmic RSV replication induces a
nuclear heat shock response, causes ND10 disruption, and redistributes PML and
Sp100 to the cytoplasm. Thus, a high-resolution proteomics approach, combined
with immunofluorescence localization and coupled with genomic response data,
yielded unexpected novel insights into compensatory nuclear responses to RSV
infection.

PMCID: PMC523268
PMID: 15479789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 Jan;13(1):41-51.

Subcellular distribution of HP1 proteins is altered in ICF syndrome.

Luciani JJ(1), Depetris D, Missirian C, Mignon-Ravix C, Metzler-Guillemain C,
Megarbane A, Moncla A, Mattei MG.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U 491, Faculté de Médecine, Marseille, France.

The Immunodeficiency, Centromeric instability, and Facial (ICF) syndrome is a
rare autosomal recessive disorder that results from mutations in the DNMT3B gene,
encoding a DNA-methyltransferase that acts on GC-rich satellite DNAs. This
syndrome is characterized by immunodeficiency, facial dysmorphy, mental
retardation of variable severity and chromosomal abnormalities that essentially
involve juxtacentromeric heterochromatin of chromosomes 1 and 16. These
abnormalities demonstrate that hypomethylation of satellite DNA can induce
alterations in the structure of heterochromatin. In order to investigate the
effect of DNA hypomethylation on heterochromatin organization, we analyzed the in
vivo distribution of HP1 proteins, essential components of heterochromatin, in
three ICF patients. We observed that, in a large proportion of ICF G2 nuclei, all
HP1 isoforms show an aberrant signal concentrated into a prominent bright focus
that co-localizes with the undercondensed 1qh or 16qh heterochromatin. We found
that SP100, SUMO-1 and other proteins from the promyelocytic leukemia nuclear
bodies (NBs) form a large body that co-localizes with the HP1 signal. This is the
first description of altered nuclear distribution of HP1 proteins in the
constitutional ICF syndrome. Our results show that satellite DNA hypomethylation 
does not prevent HP1 proteins from associating with heterochromatin. They suggest
that, at G2 phase, HP1 proteins are involved in the heterochromatin condensation 
and may therefore remain concentrated at these sites until the condensation is
complete. They also indicate that proteins from the NB could play a role in this 
process. Finally, satellite DNA length polymorphism could affect the efficiency
of heterochromatin condensation and thus contribute to the variability of the ICF
phenotype.

PMID: 15470359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Presse Med. 2004 Jun 15;33 Spec No:Sp100-2.

[Paediatrics, experience, concerns, and expectations].

[Article in French]

Bourrillon A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de pédiatrie générale, Hôpital Robert Debré, 48, bd Sérurier, 75935
Paris Cedex 19.

PMID: 15360164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Liver Int. 2004 Aug;24(4):322-9.

Diagnostic and therapeutic implications of bile duct injury in autoimmune
hepatitis.

Czaja AJ(1), Muratori P, Muratori L, Carpenter HA, Bianchi FB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic and Mayo Foundation, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA. czaja.albert@mayo.edu

BACKGROUND: Bile duct injury is not a feature of classical autoimmune hepatitis
(AIH), but it has been described in variant forms of the disease.
AIMS: Our goals were to assess the similarity of AIH with bile duct injury to
classical disease and to evaluate the possibility of concurrent primary biliary
cirrhosis (PBC).
METHODS: Fifteen patients with bile duct injury were compared with 151 patients
with classical AIH. Patterns of nuclear immunofluorescence and the frequency and 
nature of autoantibodies associated with AIH and PBC were determined.
RESULTS: Patients with bile duct injury had the same nuclear-staining patterns,
frequency and nature of autoantibodies, and genetic risk factors as the
comparison group. Features specific for PBC, including the multiple nuclear dot
pattern of immunofluorescence and antibodies to the M2 antigens, Sp100 and
nuclear pore complex antigen, gp210, did not distinguish them from classical
disease. Remission and treatment failure occurred with similar frequencies in
both groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with AIH and bile duct injury lack features of PBC, and
they respond as well to corticosteroid therapy as patients with classical
disease. Background bile duct changes should not alter the diagnosis or treatment
of AIH.

Copyright Blackwell Munksgaard 2004

PMID: 15287855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Pathol. 2004 Aug;203(4):877-83.

Stress responses of PML nuclear domains are ablated by ataxin-1 and other
nucleoprotein inclusions.

Dovey CL(1), Varadaraj A, Wyllie AH, Rich T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge, CB2 1QP, UK.

The polyglutamine diseases are characterized by expansion of triplet CAG repeats 
that encode polyglutamine tracts in otherwise unrelated proteins. One plausible
explanation for the neurodegeneration of these disorders proposes that inclusions
of such proteins sequester other significant nuclear proteins in inactive form.
The present study shows that PML protein is sequestered by inclusions of the
pathogenic mutant form of the polyglutamine protein ataxin-1 and that this
sequestration removes from the nucleus the free 0.2-1 microm diameter PML nuclear
domains (PML-NDs), together with at least one of their many cargo proteins
(Sp100). The present study demonstrates that this sequestration can be effected
equally by another nuclear protein, RED, which lacks a polyglutamine tract, but
expresses a polar zipper repeat. The sequestered PML-NDs no longer respond to
stress signals (heat shock or ionizing radiation) to which they are normally
sensitive. In both cases, there is independent evidence that the cells initiate
other responses to their injury (nuclear translocation of heat shock protein or
generation of gamma-H2AX-rich nuclear foci, respectively). The data thus provide 
strong evidence that multiple species of nuclear inclusion functionally sequester
PML-NDs. This mechanism is likely to distort cellular responses to injury of many
different types.

Copyright 2004 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland

PMID: 15258989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Oncogene. 2004 Aug 26;23(39):6654-65.

SP100 expression modulates ETS1 transcriptional activity and inhibits cell
invasion.

Yordy JS(1), Li R, Sementchenko VI, Pei H, Muise-Helmericks RC, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

The ETS1 transcription factor is a member of the Ets family of conserved
sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins. ETS1 has been shown to play important
roles in various cellular processes such as proliferation, differentiation,
lymphoid development, motility, invasion and angiogenesis. These diverse roles of
ETS1 are likely to be dependent on specific protein interactions. To identify
proteins that interact with ETS1, a yeast two-hybrid screen was conducted. Here, 
we describe the functional interaction between SP100 and ETS1. SP100 protein
interacts with ETS1 both in vitro and in vivo. SP100 is localized to nuclear
bodies and ETS1 expression alters the nuclear body morphology in living cells.
SP100 negatively modulates ETS1 transcriptional activation of the MMP1 and uPA
promoters in a dose-dependent manner, decreases the expression of these
endogenous genes, and reduces ETS1 DNA binding. Expression of SP100 inhibits the 
invasion of breast cancer cells and is induced by Interferon-alpha, which has
been shown to inhibit the invasion of cancer cells. These data demonstrate that
SP100 modulates ETS1-dependent biological processes.

PMID: 15247905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2004 Apr;39(4):406-7; author reply 407.

Anti-sp100 antibodies in primary biliary cirrhosis.

Rigopoulou EI, Dalekos GN.

PMID: 15125480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2004 Apr;39(4):405-6; author reply 407.

Specificity of anti-sp100 antibody for primary biliary cirrhosis.

Bogdanos DP, Vergani D, Muratori P, Muratori L, Bianchi FB.

Comment on
    Scand J Gastroenterol. 2003 Sep;38(9):996-9.

PMID: 15125479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Virol. 2004 Mar;78(6):3162-9.

Inhibition of different Lassa virus strains by alpha and gamma interferons and
comparison with a less pathogenic arenavirus.

Asper M(1), Sternsdorf T, Hass M, Drosten C, Rhode A, Schmitz H, Günther S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Bernhard-Nocht-Institute of Tropical Medicine, 20359
Hamburg, Germany.

The high pathogenicity of Lassa virus is assumed to involve resistance to the
effects of interferon (IFN). We have analyzed the effects of alpha IFN
(IFN-alpha), IFN-gamma, and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) on
replication of Lassa virus compared to the related, but less pathogenic,
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). Three low-passage Lassa virus strains 
(AV, NL, and CSF), isolated from humans with mild to fulminant Lassa fever, were 
tested. Lassa virus replication was inhibited by IFN-alpha and IFN-gamma, but not
TNF-alpha, in Huh7 and Vero cells. The degree of IFN sensitivity of a Lassa virus
isolate did not correlate with disease severity in human patients. Furthermore,
cytokine effects observed for Lassa virus and LCMV (strains CH-5692, Armstrong,
and WE) were similar. To address the mechanisms involved in the IFN effect, we
used cell lines in which overexpression of IFN-stimulated proteins promyelocytic 
leukemia protein (PML) and Sp100 could be induced. Both proteins reside in PML
bodies, a cellular target of the LCMV and Lassa virus Z proteins. Overexpression 
of PML or Sp100 did not affect replication of either virus. This, together with
the previous finding that PML knockout facilitates LCMV replication in vitro and 
in vivo (M. Djavani, J. Rodas, I. S. Lukashevich, D. Horejsh, P. P. Pandolfi, K. 
L. Borden, and M. S. Salvato, J. Virol. 75:6204-6208, 2001; W. V. Bonilla, D. D. 
Pinschewer, P. Klenerman, V. Rousson, M. Gaboli, P. P. Pandolfi, R. M.
Zinkernagel, M. S. Salvato, and H. Hengartner, J. Virol. 76:3810-3818, 2002),
describes PML as a mediator within the antiviral pathway rather than as a direct 
effector protein. In conclusion, the high pathogenicity of Lassa virus compared
to LCMV is probably not due to increased resistance to the effects of IFN-alpha
or IFN-gamma. Both cytokines inhibit replication which is relevant for the design
of antiviral strategies against Lassa fever with the aim of enhancing the IFN
response.

PMCID: PMC353741
PMID: 14990737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 30;279(18):19091-8. Epub 2004 Feb 19.

Myeloid Elf-1-like factor, an ETS transcription factor, up-regulates lysozyme
transcription in epithelial cells through interaction with promyelocytic leukemia
protein.

Suico MA(1), Yoshida H, Seki Y, Uchikawa T, Lu Z, Shuto T, Matsuzaki K, Nakao M, 
Li JD, Kai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medical and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

Myeloid elf-1-like factor (MEF) or Elf4, which is a member of the ETS
transcription factor family, up-regulates the basal expression of lysozyme gene
in epithelial cells and is constitutively localized in the nucleus. The mammalian
cell nucleus is organized into distinct nuclear domains or compartments that are 
essential for diverse physiological processes. Promyelocytic leukemia (PML)
nuclear body or nuclear domain 10 is one of the nuclear domains and is involved
in tumor suppression and regulation of transcription. Here, we investigate the
role of PML nuclear body in MEF transactivation. We show that PML, but not Sp100,
induced the accumulation of MEF in PML nuclear bodies and that MEF and PML
physically interacted. This interaction stimulated MEF transcriptional activity, 
resulting in the up-regulation of endogenous lysozyme expression. Amino acids
348-517 of MEF were required for the accumulation of MEF in PML nuclear bodies
and up-regulation of lysozyme transcription, which is enhanced by PML. Moreover, 
the C-terminal region of MEF spanning amino acids 477-517 was the putative region
required for interaction between MEF and PML as determined with the use of the
mammalian two-hybrid system. In addition, heat-shock treatment induced the
accumulation of MEF in endogenous PML nuclear bodies and enhanced MEF
transactivation of lysozyme gene. Thus, the recruitment of MEF to PML nuclear
bodies may partly regulate lysozyme transcription in epithelial cells.

PMID: 14976184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Oncogene. 2004 Jan 8;23(1):307-10.

Proteasome-dependent dispersal of PML nuclear bodies in response to alkylating
DNA damage.

Conlan LA(1), McNees CJ, Heierhorst J.

Author information: 
(1)St Vincent's Institute of Medical Research, 9 Princes Street, Fitzroy,
Victoria 3065, Australia.

Promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) nuclear bodies (NBs) are present in variable
number in most human cell types and have been linked to various cellular
functions, including roles as depots for DNA repair proteins. Here, we show that 
treatment of human cells with DNA methylating agents leads to redistribution of
PML from NBs to a diffuse nuclear localization. Biochemically, this correlates
with a specific reduction of PML levels in the nuclear matrix fraction without
affecting total PML levels. Similar results were obtained for the other major PML
NB component, the Sp100 protein, indicating that DNA methylating agents lead to a
general disassembly of PML NBs. Similar to the dispersal of PML NBs in response
to some viral infections, PML redistribution after DNA damage was inhibited by
the proteasome inhibitor MG132. We propose that the regulated dispersal of PML
NBs may facilitate the enhanced release of DNA repair proteins from NB depots in 
order to respond adequately to extensive DNA damage.

PMID: 14712236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Dig Liver Dis. 2003 Nov;35(11):801-5.

Association between the primary biliary cirrhosis specific anti-sp100 antibodies 
and recurrent urinary tract infection.

Bogdanos DP(1), Baum H, Butler P, Rigopoulou EI, Davies ET, Ma Y, Burroughs AK,
Vergani D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Liver Studies, King's College Hospital, Denmark Hill, London SE5 
9RS, UK.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Recurrent urinary tract infections (rUTI) have been
suggested to be involved in the induction of anti-mitochondrial antibodies (AMA),
the serological hallmark of primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), in view of the
presence of AMA in rUTI women without liver disease and conversely of a high
prevalence of rUTI in women with PBC. This prompted us to investigate whether
PBC-specific anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) to sp100, gp210 and lamin B receptor
(LBR) antigens may also be related to rUTI.
METHODS AND SUBJECTS: PBC-specific ANA reactivities were investigated in 20 women
with rUTI but without liver disease, some of whom were AMA-seropositive; 40 women
with PBC, with or without rUTI; and 104 pathological and 23 healthy controls.
RESULTS: Among the women with rUTI but without liver disease, 8 (80%) of 10
AMA-positive women reacted with sp100 compared with none of the 10 AMA-negative
women. Among the PBC patients, 14 (74%) of 19 with rUTI and 1 (4.8%) of the 21
without rUTI reacted with sp100. None of the rUTI women without liver disease
reacted with gp210 or LBR. None of 127 pathological and healthy controls had
PBC-specific ANA reactivity.
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-sp100 reactivity strongly correlates with AMA seropositivity in
rUTI women, with or without evidence of primary biliary cirrhosis. These findings
provide additional support to the notion that E. coli infection is involved in
the induction of PBC-specific autoimmunity. Additional factors must be involved
in the progression to overt autoimmune disease.

PMID: 14674671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Oncogene. 2003 Nov 27;22(54):8731-7.

Sp100 is important for the stimulatory effect of homeodomain-interacting protein 
kinase-2 on p53-dependent gene expression.

Möller A(1), Sirma H, Hofmann TG, Staege H, Gresko E, Lüdi KS, Klimczak E, Dröge 
W, Will H, Schmitz ML.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center, Division of Immunochemistry (G0200), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg D-69120, Germany.

HIPK2 shows overlapping localization with p53 in promyelocytic leukemia (PML)
nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) and functionally interacts with p53 to increase gene
expression. Here we demonstrate that HIPK2 and the PML-NB resident protein Sp100 
synergize for the activation of p53-dependent gene expression. Sp100 and HIPK2
interact and partially colocalize in PML-NBs. The cooperation of HIPK2 and Sp100 
for the induction of p21(Waf1) is completely dependent on the presence of p53 and
the kinase function of HIPK2. Downregulation of Sp100 levels by expression of
siRNA does not interfere with p53-mediated transcription, but obviates the
enhancing effect of HIPK2. In summary, these experiments reveal a novel function 
for Sp100 as a coactivator for HIPK2-mediated p53 activation.

PMID: 14647468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz). 2003;51(5):295-300.

Viruses as hijackers of PML nuclear bodies.

Möller A(1), Schmitz ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Bern, CH-3012 Bern,
Switzerland.

Promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) are discrete interchromosomal
macromolecular structures. The integrity of this dynamic nuclear subcompartment
critically depends on the presence of the name-giving PML protein. Among the
permanent or transient residents of PML-NBs are various regulatory proteins,
including Sp100, CBP, pRb, HIPK2, RAD51 and p53. PML-NBs are frequently targeted 
by viral infections, as a number of different RNA and DNA viruses, including
herpesviruses, adenoviruses, papovaviruses, papillomaviruses and arenaviruses,
cause changes in PML-NBs. Viruses interfere with PML-NB in two ways: 1) some
viral proteins can associate with PML-NB proteins and/or lead to the destruction 
and lysis of this subnuclear compartment, thus aiding viral gene expression and
disabling the host's innate immunity; 2) the parental genomes of some
nuclear-replicating DNA viruses associate preferentially with PML-NBs, which
presumably serves to assist in viral gene expression or replication. Here we
feature the different viral strategies leading to the hijacking of PML-NBs and
discuss the consequences for the immune response.

PMID: 14626429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Virol. 2003 Dec;77(23):12603-16.

The differential requirement for cyclin-dependent kinase activities distinguishes
two functions of herpes simplex virus type 1 ICP0.

Davido DJ(1), Von Zagorski WF, Maul GG, Schaffer PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School at the Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) ICP0 directs the degradation of cellular
proteins associated with nuclear structures called ND10, a function thought to be
closely associated with its broad transactivating activity. Roscovitine (Rosco), 
an inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks), inhibits the replication of
HSV-1, HSV-2, human cytomegalovirus, varicella-zoster virus, and human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 by inhibiting specific steps or activities of viral
regulatory proteins, indicating the broad and pleiotropic effects that cdks have 
on the replication of these viruses. We previously demonstrated that Rosco
inhibits the transactivating activity of ICP0. In the present study, we asked
whether Rosco also affects the ability of ICP0 to direct the degradation of
ND10-associated proteins. For this purpose, WI-38 cells treated with
cycloheximide (CHX) were mock infected or infected with wild-type HSV-1 or an
ICP0(-) mutant (7134). After release from the CHX block, the infections were
allowed to proceed for 2 h in the presence or absence of Rosco at a concentration
known to inhibit ICP0's transactivating activity. The cells were then examined
for the presence of ICP0 and selected ND10-associated antigens (promyelocytic
leukemia antigen [PML], sp100, hDaxx, and NDP55) by immunofluorescence. Staining 
for the ND10-associated antigens was detected in </=20% of KOS-infected cells in 
the presence or absence of Rosco, demonstrating that Rosco-sensitive kinases are 
not required for ICP0's ability to direct the dispersal or degradation of these
antigens. In contrast, >90% of 7134- and mock-infected cells stained positive for
all ND10-associated antigens in the presence or absence of Rosco. Similar results
were obtained with a non-ND10-associated antigen, DNA-PK(cs), a known target of
ICP0-directed degradation. The results of the PML and DNA-PK(cs)
immunofluorescence studies correlated with a decrease in the levels of these
proteins as determined by Western blotting. Thus, the differential requirement
for Rosco-sensitive cdk activities distinguishes ICP0's ability to direct the
dispersal or degradation of cellular proteins from its transactivating activity.

PMCID: PMC262587
PMID: 14610183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2003 Sep;38(9):996-9.

Clinical significance of anti-multiple nuclear dots/Sp100 autoantibodies.

Wichmann I(1), Montes-Cano MA, Respaldiza N, Alvarez A, Walter K, Franco E,
Sanchez-Roman J, Núñez-Roldán A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Immunología, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Servicio
Andaluz de Salud, Seville, Spain.

Comment in
    Scand J Gastroenterol. 2004 Apr;39(4):405-6; author reply 407.

BACKGROUND: Autoantibodies against discrete variable-sized dots observed in HEp2 
cells by indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) test, called multiple nuclear dots
(MND), have been closely associated with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC). Some
authors have argued that this antibody is also present in connective tissue
diseases or liver diseases other than PBC as autoimmune chronic active hepatitis,
particularly of the cholestatic type. We studied an unselected group of patients 
routinely tested for autoantibodies and positive for the MND pattern and tried to
establish the correlation between the presence of this antibody and their
diagnosis.
METHODS: A commercial ELISA test, using a recombinant 26 kD truncated sequence of
the Sp100 protein, corresponding to an immunodominant molecular region, was used 
to assess the clinical correlation of these autoantibodies in 110 patients
showing an anti-MND immunofluorescence pattern.
RESULTS: One-hundred-and-ten patients were MND positive by IIF. Of these, 100
were Sp100 positive by ELISA. In the Sp100 positive group, 34 had a diagnosis of 
PBC (30 definite and 4 suspected) while 15 patients had a non-PBC hepatopathy.
Unexpectedly, 13 of the MND/Sp100 positive pattern corresponded to systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) patients and 5 cases to collagen diseases. Another divergence
with previous reports was that 34 of the positive patients showed very
heterogeneous clinical pictures, different from hepatopathies or collagen
diseases.
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-Sp100 antibodies can be found in many clinical conditions.
Testing for MND/Sp100 positivity is useful for the diagnosis of PBC, but only
when the right clinical context is present. Other diseases cannot be excluded in 
first line SLE.

PMID: 14531539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Virology. 2003 Sep 15;314(1):161-7.

Dissection of human papillomavirus type 33 L2 domains involved in nuclear domains
(ND) 10 homing and reorganization.

Becker KA(1), Florin L, Sapp C, Sapp M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Mainz, 55101
Mainz, Germany.

We have recently shown that the minor capsid protein L2 of human papillomavirus
type 33 (HPV33) recruits the transcriptional repressor Daxx into nuclear domains 
(ND) 10 and causes the loss of the transcriptional activator Sp100 from these
subnuclear structures. In order to dissect L2 domains involved in nuclear
translocation, ND10 homing, loss of Sp100, and recruitment of Daxx, a detailed
deletion mutagenesis of L2 was performed. Using immunofluorescence and green
fluorescent protein fusions, we have identified two nuclear localization signals 
(NLS) in the central and C-terminal part of L2, respectively, homologous to
previously identified NLS in HPV6B L2 (Sun et al., 1995). We mapped the ND10
localization domain to within a 30 amino acid peptide in the C-terminal half of
L2. L2-induced attraction of Daxx into ND10, coimmunoprecipitation of L2 and
Daxx, as well as induction of the loss of Sp100 from ND10 require an intact ND10 
localization domain. This domain contains conserved PXXP motives characteristic
of some protein/protein interacting domains. Our data also suggest that the
Daxx/L2 interaction may be the driving force for L2 accumulation in ND10.

PMID: 14517069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jul 22;100(15):8963-8. Epub 2003 Jul 10.

The degradation of promyelocytic leukemia and Sp100 proteins by herpes simplex
virus 1 is mediated by the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UbcH5a.

Gu H(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, University of Chicago, 910
East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Infected cell protein 0 (ICP0) of herpes simplex virus 1 expresses two E3
ubiquitin (Ub) ligase activities mapping in the domains encoded by exons 2 and 3,
respectively. Site 1 (exon 3) is responsible for the degradation of the E2
Ub-conjugating enzyme cdc34 whereas site 2 (exon 2) is associated with a ring
finger and has been shown to mediate the degradation of promyelocytic leukemia
(PML) and Sp100 proteins and the dispersal of nuclear domain 10 (ND10). In in
vitro assays site 2 polyubiquitylates the E2 enzymes UbcH5a and UbcH6 but not
other (e.g., UbcH7) enzymes. In this article, we show that ectopic expression of 
dominant negative UbcH5a carrying the substitution C85A delayed or blocked the
degradation of PML and Sp100 and dispersal of ND10 whereas ectopic expression of 
wild-type UbcH5a or dominant negative UbcH6 and UbcH7 carrying the substitutions 
C131A and C86A, respectively, had no effect. These results link the degradation
of PML and Sp100 and the dispersal of ND10 to the E3 activities of ICP0
associated with the UbcH5a E2 enzyme.

PMCID: PMC166421
PMID: 12855769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Autoimmun Rev. 2003 Jun;2(4):211-7.

Antinuclear antibodies specific for primary biliary cirrhosis.

Worman HJ(1), Courvalin JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, 630 West 168th Street, 10th Floor, Room 508, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The serological hallmark of primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is the presence of
antimitochondrial antibodies. However, antinuclear antibodies (ANA) are also
detectable in approximately 50% of subjects with PBC. Most clinical laboratories 
use indirect immunofluorescence microscopy to detect ANA and two labeling
patterns that predominate in PBC are 'punctate nuclear rim' and 'multiple nuclear
dots.' Work over the past several years has shown that antibodies giving these
patterns most often recognize nuclear pore membrane protein gp210 and nuclear
body protein sp100, respectively. These ANA are highly specific for PBC and
detected in approximately 25% of patients. Less frequently, ANA apparently unique
to PBC recognize other proteins of the nuclear envelope and nuclear bodies. While
antibodies against gp210, sp100 and some other nuclear proteins are very specific
to PBC and may therefore be useful diagnostic markers, their connection to
pathogenesis remains to be elucidated.

PMID: 12848948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Am J Manag Care. 2003 Jun;9 Spec No 2:SP100-10.

Physicians' reports of their experience with health plan care management
practices.

Bindman AB(1), Wholey DR, Christianson JB; Physicians Evaluating Health Plans
Research Team.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, Calif 94110,
USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the availability of care management practices in various 
practice settings, the degree to which physicians report that these practices are
useful, and whether physicians' reports vary by their relationships with health
plans.
STUDY DESIGN: Cross-sectional survey.
PARTICIPANT: In 2001, we surveyed generalist and specialist physicians serving
commercial, Medicaid, and Medicare patients. This report focuses on the responses
of 2134 physicians (1252 generalists, 882 specialists) who contracted with
independent practice associations and preferred provider organizations.
MEASURES: Physicians were asked about the availability, accuracy, and usefulness 
of specified care management practices. The responses were analyzed according to 
their relationships with their health plan.
RESULTS: Generalists, physicians with a higher percentage of health plan
patients, and physicians who reported that health plans sought their views were
more likely to report that they used care management practices. The majority who 
used these practices found them somewhat or very useful. Guidelines and disease
management were among the most commonly available and most highly rated care
management practices. Physicians' ratings of the usefulness of practice reports
were associated with their perceptions of the reports' accuracy and with whether 
health plans sought their views on other aspects of the care management process.
CONCLUSION: The stronger a physician's relationship with a health plan, the more 
positive the physician's experience with care management practices and policies
was. The concordance between the types of available practices and physicians'
ratings suggests that health plans and physicians agree about how to improve the 
quality of care.

PMID: 12822719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Gastroenterology. 2003 Jun;124(7):1915-25.

Molecular mimicry of mitochondrial and nuclear autoantigens in primary biliary
cirrhosis.

Shimoda S(1), Nakamura M, Ishibashi H, Kawano A, Kamihira T, Sakamoto N,
Matsushita S, Tanaka A, Worman HJ, Gershwin ME, Harada M.

Author information: 
(1)Medicine and Biosystemic Science, Kyushu University Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-Ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
sshimoda@intmed1.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The mechanism for development of primary biliary cirrhosis
(PBC) remains enigmatic, but molecular mimicry has been implicated because of
well-known cross-reactivity of human mitochondrial autoantigens and equivalent
bacterial antigens. Virtually all patients with PBC have antimitochondrial
autoantibodies (AMA), but, interestingly, approximately 50% also manifest
antinuclear antibodies (ANA).
METHODS: To determine whether generation of ANA are due to molecular mimicry of
mitochondrial peptides, we established 6 T-cell clones selected by a peptide
corresponding to the E2 subunit of mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex
and analyzed for reactivity to mimicry peptides derived from mitochondrial and
nuclear autoantigens, including control sequences.
RESULTS: For mitochondrial autoantigens, 1 peptide from the E2 subunit of the
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, 1 peptide from the E2 subunit of the
oxo-glutarate dehydrogenase complex, 1 peptide from the E2 subunit of the
branched-chain 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase complex, and 1 peptide from the E3-binding
protein cross-reacted with these T-cell clones. For the nuclear autoantigens, 5
peptides from gp210 and 1 from Sp100 cross-reacted with these clones.
Furthermore, 1 of 3 T-cell clones selected by recombinant gp210 protein reacted
with a mimicry peptide corresponding to amino acids 188-201 of gp210, indicating 
that this part of the protein is a naturally processed immunodominant T-cell
epitope.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate molecular mimicry between mitochondrial
and nuclear autoantigens in PBC and that a mimicry peptide may become an
immunodominant T-cell epitope. These data have significance not only for PBC but 
also for the production of ANA in other disease processes.

PMID: 12806624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Jul;17(7):1283-95. Epub 2003 Apr 17.

Crystal structure and nuclear magnetic resonance analyses of the SAND domain from
glucocorticoid modulatory element binding protein-1 reveals deoxyribonucleic acid
and zinc binding regions.

Surdo PL(1), Bottomley MJ, Sattler M, Scheffzek K.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and Computational Biology
Programme, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

The glucocorticoid-modulatory element-binding proteins, GMEB1 and GMEB2, are
ubiquitous, multifunctional DNA-binding proteins with important roles in the
modulation of transcription upon steroid hormone activation. The GMEB proteins
have intrinsic transactivation ability, but also control the glucocorticoid
response via direct binding to the glucocorticoid receptor. They are also
mandatory host proteins for Parvovirus replication. Here we present the 1.55 A
resolution crystal structure of a central portion of GMEB1, encompassing its SAND
domain, which shares 80% sequence identity with the GMEB2 SAND domain. We
demonstrate that this domain, also present in numerous proteins implicated in
chromatin-associated transcriptional regulation, is necessary and sufficient to
bind the glucocorticoid-modulatory element (GME) DNA target. We use nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) and binding studies to map the DNA recognition surface
to an alpha-helical region exposing the conserved KDWK motif. Using site-directed
mutagenesis, key residues for DNA binding are identified. In contrast to the
previously determined NMR structure of the Sp100b SAND domain, we find that the
GMEB1 SAND domain also comprises a zinc-binding motif. Although the zinc ion is
not necessary for DNA binding, it is found to determine the C-terminal
conformation of the GMEB1 SAND domain. We also show that homologous zinc-binding 
motifs exist in a subset of SAND domain proteins and probe the roles of this
novel motif.

PMID: 12702733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Meded Rijksuniv Gent Fak Landbouwkd Toegep Biol Wet. 2002;67(3):487-97.

Effect of sequential applications of foliar nutrients, biofertilizers and sowing 
dates on the incidence of corn stem borers in Egypt.

Mesbah HA(1), Mourad AK, el-Nimr HM, el-Kady MB, Haroun NS.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agricultural, Saba Pacha. Department of Plant Protection,
Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt.

In this study either early sown (May 1st) or lately sown (June 2nd) corn plants
were treated with Phosphorin & Rhizobactrin as biofertilizers and sprayed with
six selected foliar nutrients, i.e. Polymex; Greenzit SP100, Greenzit NPK,
Potasin-F, Copper sulphate and Ascorbic acid; in mono-, bi-, and/or
tri-sequential applications. Such practices were conducted to show their
beneficial effects compared with the chemical treatment in checking the incidence
of the stem borers and hence increasing the corn yield. The obtained results
could be summarized in the following chief points: (a) the lately sown
biofertilized plants showed somewhat higher levels of infestation than the early 
planted ones., (b) in general, spraying the biofertilized corn plants in both
sowing dates with the tested foliar nutrients, significantly decreased the rate
of the stem borers infestation than the untreated plants of control., (c) the
foliar sprays of Greenzit NPK alone, bi- or tri-sequential applications of
Potasin-F, Polymex, Ascorbic acid and Copper sulphate achieved considerable
success in reducing larval numbers of the borers species. For example, in case of
using the bi-sequential nutrients (Polymex/Ascorbic acid) the numbers were 1.2,
1.5 and 1.2 larvae/5 plants, whereas the numbers were 1.3, 1.0 and 0.7 larvae/5
plants as a result, of the tri-sequential applications (Potasin-F/Ascorbic
acid/Polymex) for the pink stem borer, Sesamia cretica, (Led.), the purple lined 
borer, Chilo agamemnon, (Bels.), and the European corn borer Ostrinia nubilalis
(Hb.), in respect, vs. 4.8, 4.5 and 2.9 larvae/5 plants for the same stem borers,
respectively, in case of the untreated corn plants. In addition, the other
trisequential applications (Polymex/ascorbic acid/Copper sulphate),
(Potasin-F/Copper sulphate/ascorbic acid) and (Potasin-F/Copper sulphate/Polymex)
reduced the stem borers infestation; (d) from the view point of the interaction
effects of sowing dates and the tested foliar nutrients, it was found that the
tri-sequential sprayings (Potasin-F/Copper sulphate/Polymex) and/or
(Potasin-F/Copper sulphate/Ascorbic acid) have lowered the rate of the stem
borers infestation to 3.3 and 3.3 and 5.7 and 4.3 larvae/5 plants for the
tri-applications in the 1st and 2nd sowing dates, respectively. Such reductions
in the levels of infestation led to an increase in the grain yield up to 6.9 and 
7.2 and 5.4 and 5.8 ton/fed, for the early and lately sown corn plants, in
respect, and (e) All the foliar nutrients, with no exception, proved to be
efficient in managing the stem borers infestation as compared with the
insecticide treatment using Polytrin. Although the chemical application had
lowered the level of infestation to 2.3 and 5.7 larvae/5 plants in the 1st and
2nd sowing dates as compared with 9.7 and 14.7 larvae/5 untreated plants for the 
same sowing dates, lesser grain yield of 5.6 and 4.4 ton/fed. was obtained in the
first and second dates of planting, successively, in comparison to the grain
yield resulted from the tri-applications of Potasin-F/Copper sulphate with either
Polymex or Ascorbic acid. The abovementioned results assured the profitable
effects of using foliar nutrients as well as the biofertilizers for attaining
healthy corn plants, which would be capable of tolerating the injury inflicted by
the studied stem borers and compensating for the harmful effects of insects
infestation, so high grain yields could be obtained than those of the untreated
and/or the insecticide treated plants.

PMID: 12696416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Genes Immun. 2003 Jan;4(1):12-21.

Autoimmune regulator: from loss of function to autoimmunity.

Pitkänen J(1), Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere and Tampere Hospital,
Finland.

The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is a gene where mutations cause the recessively
inherited disorder called autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal
dystrophy (APECED) or autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 (APS1).
Variable combinations of autoimmune endocrine diseases such as Addison's disease,
hypoparathyroidism, and type 1 diabetes characterize APECED. The AIRE protein has
several domains indicative of a transcriptional regulator. AIRE contains two PHD 
(plant homeodomain) type zinc fingers, four nuclear receptor binding LXXLL
motifs, a putative DNA-binding domain named SAND and, in addition, a highly
conserved N-terminal domain similar to the homogenously staining region domain of
the Sp100 protein. At the subcellular level, AIRE is expressed in nuclear dots
resembling promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies, which are associated with
several transcriptionally active proteins. AIRE is primarily expressed in thymic 
medullary epithelial cells and monocyte-dendritic cells in the thymus but also in
a rare subset of cells in the lymph nodes, spleen and fetal liver. The disease,
caused by mutations in AIRE, its function as a protein involved in transcription,
and its restricted expression in cells important in negative selection, all
together suggest that AIRE is a central protein in the maintenance of immune
tolerance. In this review of the recent literature we discuss the results of
these studies with particular attention on the AIRE expression pattern and its
function as a transcriptional regulator, as well as the effects of patient
mutations on the molecular characteristics of the protein.

PMID: 12595897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003 Feb;98(2):431-7.

Characterization and clinical impact of antinuclear antibodies in primary biliary
cirrhosis.

Muratori P(1), Muratori L, Ferrari R, Cassani F, Bianchi G, Lenzi M, Rodrigo L,
Linares A, Fuentes D, Bianchi FB.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, Cardioangiologia, Epatologia, Alma Mater
Studiorum, Università di Bologna, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Italy.

Comment in
    Am J Gastroenterol. 2004 Apr;99(4):763-4; author reply 765.
    Am J Gastroenterol. 2003 Feb;98(2):241-3.

OBJECTIVES: The clinical impact of antinuclear antibodies in primary biliary
cirrhosis is uncertain. We analyzed in detail the antinuclear antibodies
reactivity of primary biliary cirrhosis patients and correlated the fine
specificities observed with clinical, biochemical, and immunologic parameters.
METHODS: A total of 96 consecutive primary biliary cirrhosis patients and 283
pathologic controls were studied. To dissect the fine antinuclear antibodies
specificities we used different techniques, such as indirect immunofluorescence
on cryostat tissue sections and cell culture (HEp-2 cells),
counterimmunoelectrophoresis with thymus and spleen extracts, ELISA assays with
recombinant Sp100 and purified gp210 and Lamin B receptor, and immunoblot with
several recombinant nuclear and cytoplasmic antigens.
RESULTS: Antinuclear antibodies were detected in 53% of patients, with the
following hierarchy of specificities: 27% anti-Sp100, 16% "multiple nuclear
dots," 16% anti-gp210, 16% anti-centromere, 7% XR1, 6% anti-lamin B receptor, 5% 
anti-SS-A/Ro, 5% anti-ribonucleoprotein, 4% XR2, 2% anti-SS-B/La, 2% perinuclear 
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, and 1% anti-double-stranded
deoxyribonucleic acid. Several patients showed multiple specificities. The
"multiple nuclear dots" pattern was detected more often in antimitochondrial
antibodies negative patients. In particular, primary biliary cirrhosis specific
antinuclear antibodies (anti-Sp100, anti-gp210, and anti-lamin B receptor) were
detected in nine of 13 antimitochondrial negative primary biliary cirrhosis
cases. Anti-gp210 was more frequent in patients with more pronounced cholestasis 
and more impaired liver function.
CONCLUSIONS: Antinuclear antibodies reactivities are present in more than half of
primary biliary cirrhosis patients and target diverse autoantigens located in
distinct subnuclear structures. Anti-gp210 identifies a subgroup of primary
biliary cirrhosis patients with more serious liver disease. Positivity for
anti-Sp100, anti-gp210, and anti-lamin B receptor, either alone or in
combination, may act as a serologic marker of antimitochondrial antibodies
negative primary biliary cirrhosis.

PMID: 12591064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Feb 1;283(1):36-50.

The homeodomain-interacting kinase PKM (HIPK-2) modifies ND10 through both its
kinase domain and a SUMO-1 interaction motif and alters the posttranslational
modification of PML.

Engelhardt OG(1), Boutell C, Orr A, Ullrich E, Haller O, Everett RD.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Virologie, Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene,
Universität Freiburg, Hermann-Herder-Strasse 11, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Homeodomain-interacting protein kinases (HIPK-1, -2, and -3) are a family of
enzymes that have been implicated in the phosphorylation and repression of
homeodomain-containing transcription factors. HIPK-2 has been found to interact
with the SUMO-1-conjugating enzyme Ubc9 and can be covalently modified by SUMO-1.
It has also been shown to interact with and phosphorylate p53 and to form
punctate speckles in the nucleus of which a proportion colocalize with PML
nuclear bodies (ND10). We have previously shown that the hamster equivalent of
HIPK-2 (named PKM) interacts with the interferon-induced antiviral GTPase Mx1 and
associates with ND10 in interferon-treated cells. Given the connections between
the interferon response pathway, constituents of ND10, and SUMO-1-conjugated
proteins, we have studied the effects of exogenously expressed PKM on endogenous 
ND10 proteins. We found that PKM induces structural changes in ND10 that can be
attributed both to its kinase activity and to the presence of a functional SUMO-1
interaction motif in the C-terminal half of the protein. The changes in the
localization of PML, Sp100, and hDaxx induced by exogenous PKM or fragments
thereof correlate with changes in the posttranslationally modified species of
PML. We propose that PKM is able to modify ND10 structure by inducing changes in 
the posttranslational modification of PML and by interacting with SUMO-1
modification pathways.

Copyright 2003 Elsevier Science (USA)

PMID: 12565818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Jan;17(1):128-40.

Role of the promyelocytic leukemia body in the dynamic interaction between the
androgen receptor and steroid receptor coactivator-1 in living cells.

Rivera OJ(1), Song CS, Centonze VE, Lechleiter JD, Chatterjee B, Roy AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular & Structural Biology, The University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78245-3207, USA.

The dynamic interaction between the androgen receptor (AR) and steroid receptor
coactivator-1 (SRC-1) was explored in living cells expressing chimeric forms of
the receptor and the coactivator containing two spectral variants of jellyfish
fluorescent protein. Laser scanning confocal imaging of transfected cells
expressing fluorescently labeled SRC-1 revealed that in an unsynchronized cell
population, the coactivator is distributed in approximately 40% cells as nuclear 
bodies of 0.2-1.0 microm in diameter. Immunostaining of cyan fluorescent
protein-labeled SRC-1 (CFP-SRC1)-expressing cells with antibody to promyelocytic 
leukemia (PML) protein showed significant overlap of the CFP fluorescence with
the antibody stain. Cotransfection of cells with a plasmid expressing the CFP
conjugate of Sp100 (another marker protein for the PML nuclear body) also showed 
colocalization of the yellow fluorescent protein (YFP)-SRC1 containing nuclear
foci with the PML bodies in living cells. Analysis of the three-dimensional
structure revealed that the PML bodies are round to elliptical in shape with
multiple satellite bodies on their surface. Some of these satellite bodies
contain the SRC-1. Activation and nuclear import of CFP-AR by the agonistic
ligand 5alpha-dihydrotestosterone, but not by the antagonist casodex, transferred
YFP-SRC1 from the PML bodies to an interlacing filamentous structure. In a single
living cell, agonist-activated AR caused a time-dependent movement of YFP-SRC1
from the PML bodies to this filamentous structure. Additionally, coexpression of 
a constitutively active mutant of AR (AR-deltaligand binding domain) also
displaced YFP-SRC1 from the PML bodies to this intranuclear filamentous
structure. The fluorescence recovery after photobleaching approach was used to
examine changes in the kinetics of movement of YFP-SRC1 during its mobilization
from the PML bodies to the intranuclear filamentous structure by the
agonist-activated AR. Results of the relative half-times (t(1/2)) of replacement 
of YFP-SRC1 within the photobleached region of a single PML body from its
surrounding nuclear space supported the conclusion that SRC-1 is actively
transported from the PML bodies to the intranuclear filamentous structure by the 
ligand-activated AR. This observation also suggests an interaction between AR and
SRC-1 before its binding to the target gene. The PML bodies have been implicated 
as a cross-road for multiple regulatory pathways that control cell proliferation,
cellular senescence, and apoptosis. Our present results along with other recent
reports expand the role of this subnuclear structure to include the regulation of
steroid hormone action.

PMID: 12511612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Cell Sci. 2003 Feb 1;116(Pt 3):513-24.

Heat shock and Cd2+ exposure regulate PML and Daxx release from ND10 by
independent mechanisms that modify the induction of heat-shock proteins 70 and 25
differently.

Nefkens I(1), Negorev DG, Ishov AM, Michaelson JS, Yeh ET, Tanguay RM, Müller WE,
Maul GG.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Nuclear domains called ND10 or PML bodies might function as nuclear depots by
recruiting or releasing certain proteins. Although recruitment of proteins
through interferon-induced upregulation and SUMO-1 modification level of PML had 
been defined, it is not known whether release of proteins is regulated and has
physiological consequences. Exposure to sublethal environmental stress revealed a
sequential release of ND10-associated proteins. Upon heat shock Daxx and Sp100
were released but PML remained, whereas exposure to subtoxic concentrations of
CdCl(2) induced the release of ND10-associated proteins, including PML, with
Sp100 remaining in a few sites. In both cases, recovery times were similar and
were followed by a burst of mitotic activity. Cadmium-induced release of proteins
from ND10 could be blocked by inhibiting activation of p38 MAPK or ERK1/2. By
contrast, heat-shock-induced desumolation of PML and release of proteins from
ND10 are unaffected by these inhibitors but can be recapitulated by
overexpression of the SUMO isopeptidase SENP-1. Therefore, activation of
SENP-1-like SUMO isopeptidase(s) during heat shock is not affected by these
kinases. Thus, the release of ND10-associated proteins is not due to a general
dispersal of nuclear domains but seems to be regulated by rapid desumolation
during thermal stress and through the phosphorylation cascade of stress and
mitogenic signaling pathways in the case of CdCl(2). Whether the release of
certain proteins had consequences was tested for heat-shock-protein transcription
and synthesis. Release of Daxx correlated with Hsp25 suppression, suggesting that
Daxx normally inhibits immediate Hsp25 production. Release of PML correlated with
lower production of Hsp70. These results suggest that segregation or release of
PML or Daxx have differential physiological relevance during the stress response.
The fact that enzymatic activation of protein release or segregation after stress
modifies the heat-shock response strengthens the concept of ND10 as a regulated
depot of effector proteins.

PMID: 12508112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Struct Biol. 2002 Oct-Dec;140(1-3):180-8.

Mobile foci of Sp100 do not contain PML: PML bodies are immobile but PML and
Sp100 proteins are not.

Wiesmeijer K(1), Molenaar C, Bekeer IM, Tanke HJ, Dirks RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Wassenaarseweg 72, Leiden, 2333 AL, The Netherlands.

PML bodies are nuclear organelles that are associated with various diseases and
are suggested to be involved in multiple cellular activities including
transcriptional regulation, apoptosis, and antiviral defence. Because many
proteins with different functions aggregate in PML bodies, it has also been
suggested that these bodies function as nuclear depots. Some proteins
consistently found in PML bodies may form a stable scaffold that regulates the
recruitment of other proteins. Thus, some proteins might be stably integrated
into PML bodies while others continuously exchange with the nucleoplasm. To study
the dynamic properties of PML bodies and resident proteins, we constructed fusion
proteins of Sp100, PML, and CBP with autofluorescent proteins. Using time-lapse
imaging, we show that PML bodies exhibit little movement but that small foci that
contain Sp100 but not PML are dynamic and fuse with PML bodies. Furthermore, we
show by monitoring fluorescence recovery after photobleaching that Sp100, PML,
and CBP are dynamic components of PML bodies. This suggests that these proteins
do not play a strict structural role in these bodies but that they function at
other sites in the nucleoplasm.

PMID: 12490166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Autoimmun. 2002 Dec;19(4):251-7.

Autoantibodies to the transcriptional factor SOX13 in primary biliary cirrhosis
compared with other diseases.

Fida S(1), Myers MA, Whittingham S, Rowley MJ, Ozaki S, Mackay IR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University,
Wellington Road, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia.

The molecule SOX13 was initially identified as an autoantigen (ICA12) in Type 1
diabetes. SOX13 is a member of the SOX family of transcriptional regulatory
proteins that contain a high mobility group (HMG) motif with structural
similarity to HMG proteins 1 and 2. Antibodies to HMG 1 and 2 occur in autoimmune
diseases of the liver and in ulcerative colitis. We measured the occurrence and
levels of anti-SOX13 by radioimmunoprecipitation in primary biliary cirrhosis
(PBC) and other diseases, and compared frequencies with anti-HMG measured by
ELISA. Anti-SOX13 was detected in 18% of patients with PBC, 13% with autoimmune
hepatitis, 18% with Type 1 diabetes, at lower frequencies in other conditions
including the multisystem autoimmune diseases, systemic lupus erythematosus and
rheumatoid arthritis, and in 1% of normal sera. Anti-HMG1 and anti-HMG2 occurred 
at frequencies of 30% and 35% respectively in PBC. Serum levels of anti-SOX13 and
anti-HMG correlated significantly for PBC although not for Type 1 diabetes.
Anti-SOX13 in PBC may occur merely as an immune response to products of damage to
parenchymal tissue, or may be illustrative of a general proclivity of
transcriptional regulatory proteins to elicit autoimmune responses.

PMID: 12473246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Dec 20;299(5):863-71.

Recruitment of NBS1 into PML oncogenic domains via interaction with SP100
protein.

Naka K(1), Ikeda K, Motoyama N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Research, National Institute for Longevity Sciences,
36-3 Gengo, Morioka, Obu, Aichi 474-8522, Japan.

Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized
by microcephaly, chromosomal instability, radiation sensitivity, and an increased
incidence of malignancies. NBS1, the protein responsible for NBS, forms a complex
with MRE11 and RAD50, and plays a vital role in DNA repair, cell cycle
checkpoint, and telomere maintenance. Here, we show that a BRCA carboxyl terminus
(BRCT) domain-containing region of NBS1 interacts with a nuclear dots-associated 
protein, SP100. The SP100 and NBS1 proteins co-localized in PODs and APBs in
normal human fibroblast MRC5 and ALT line VA13 at G2 phase, respectively.
Introduction of PML and SP100 into NT2 cells, which express no detectable amount 
of PML or SP100 proteins, resulted in localization of NBS1 in ectopically
expressed PODs. These results indicate that NBS1 is recruited into PODs via
interaction with SP100 protein. Thus, interaction between the NBS1 and SP100
proteins may be involved in genomic stability and telomere maintenance.

PMID: 12470659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Virol. 2002 Oct;76(19):10009-14.

Assembly and translocation of papillomavirus capsid proteins.

Florin L(1), Sapp C, Streeck RE, Sapp M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Mainz, Mainz,
Germany.

The major and minor capsid proteins of polyomavirus are preassembled in the
cytoplasm and translocated to the nucleus only as a VP1-VP2/VP3 complex. In this 
study, we describe independent nuclear translocation of the L1 major protein and 
the L2 minor capsid protein of human papillomavirus type 33 by several
approaches. First, we observed that expression and nuclear translocation of L2 in
natural lesions precede expression of L1. Second, using a cell culture system for
coexpression, we found that accumulation of L2 in nuclear domain 10 (ND10)
subnuclear structures precedes L1 by several hours. In contrast, complexes of L2 
and mutants of L1 forced to assemble in the cytoplasm are translocated directly
to ND10, like L2 expressed alone. Interestingly, accumulation of wild-type L1 is 
observed only after L2-induced release of the ND10-associated protein Sp100.
Third, nuclear translocation of L2 but not of L1 was blocked by the proteasome
inhibitor MG132. Our data suggest that L1 and L2 interaction occurs after
L2-induced reorganization of ND10 subnuclear domains.

PMCID: PMC136525
PMID: 12208977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. EMBO J. 2002 Jul 1;21(13):3358-69.

Deconstructing PML-induced premature senescence.

Bischof O(1), Kirsh O, Pearson M, Itahana K, Pelicci PG, Dejean A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique, INSERM U 163, Institut
Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

In this study, we investigated the subcellular and molecular mechanisms
underlying promyelocytic leukemia (PML)-induced premature senescence. We
demonstrate that intact PML nuclear bodies are not required for the induction of 
senescence. We have determined further that of seven known PML isoforms, only PML
IV is capable of causing premature senescence, providing the first evidence for
functional differences among these isoforms. Of interest is the fact that in
contrast to PML(+/+) fibroblasts, PML(-/-) cells are resistant to PML IV-induced 
senescence. This suggests that although PML IV is necessary for this process to
occur, it is not sufficient and requires other components for activity. Finally, 
we provide evidence that PML IV-induced senescence involves stabilization and
activation of p53 through phosphorylation at Ser46 and acetylation at Lys382, and
that it occurs independently of telomerase and differs from that elicited by
oncogenic Ras. Taken together, our data assign a specific pro-senescent activity 
to an individual PML isoform that involves p53 activation and is independent from
PML nuclear bodies.

PMCID: PMC126090
PMID: 12093737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Virology. 2002 Mar 30;295(1):97-107.

Reorganization of nuclear domain 10 induced by papillomavirus capsid protein l2.

Florin L(1), Schäfer F, Sotlar K, Streeck RE, Sapp M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Mainz, Mainz,
55101, Germany.

Nuclear domains (ND) 10 are associated with proteins implicated in
transcriptional regulation, growth suppression, and apoptosis. We now show that
the minor capsid protein L2 of human papillomavirus (HPV) type 33 induces a
reorganization of ND10-associated proteins. Whereas the promyelocytic leukemia
protein, the major structural component of ND10, was unaffected by L2, Sp100 was 
released from ND10 upon L2 expression. The total cellular amount of Sp100, but
not of Sp100 mRNA, decreased significantly, suggesting degradation of Sp100.
Proteasome inhibitors induced the dispersal of Sp100 and inhibited the nuclear
translocation of L2. In contrast to Sp100, Daxx was recruited to ND10 by L2
expression. Coimmunoprecipitation demonstrated interaction of the two proteins.
L2-induced reorganization of ND10 was observed both in cell culture and in
natural HPV lesions. The differential change in protein composition observed
provides further evidence to suggest that the ND10-associated proteins are an
important interface of viral life cycle and host cell.

PMID: 12033769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Virol. 2002 Jun;76(11):5769-83.

Functional interaction between the pp71 protein of human cytomegalovirus and the 
PML-interacting protein human Daxx.

Hofmann H(1), Sindre H, Stamminger T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische und Molekulare Virologie der Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

The tegument protein pp71 (UL82) of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) has previously
been shown to transactivate the major immediate-early enhancer-promoter of HCMV. 
Furthermore, this protein is able to enhance the infectivity of viral DNA and to 
accelerate the infection cycle, suggesting an important regulatory function
during viral replication. To gain insight into the underlying mechanisms that are
used by pp71 to exert these pleiotropic effects, we sought for cellular factors
interacting with pp71 in a yeast two-hybrid screen. Here, we report the isolation
of the human Daxx (hDaxx) protein as a specific interaction partner of HCMV pp71.
hDaxx, which was initially described as an adapter protein involved in apoptosis 
regulation, has recently been identified as a nuclear protein that interacts and 
colocalizes with PML in the nuclear domain ND10. In order to assess whether pp71 
can also be detected in ND10 structures, a vector expressing pp71 in fusion with 
the green fluorescent protein was used for transfection of human fibroblasts.
This revealed a colocalization of pp71 with the ND10 proteins PML and Sp100. In
addition, cotransfection of a hDaxx expression vector resulted in an enhanced
recruitment of pp71 to ND10. Targeting of pp71 to nuclear dots could also be
observed in infected human fibroblasts in the absence of de novo viral protein
synthesis. Moreover, cotransfection experiments revealed that pp71-mediated
transactivation of the major immediate-early enhancer-promoter was
synergistically enhanced in the presence of hDaxx. These results suggest an
important role of hDaxx for pp71 protein function.

PMCID: PMC137040
PMID: 11992005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Apr;22(8):2687-702.

Sp100 interacts with ETS-1 and stimulates its transcriptional activity.

Wasylyk C(1), Schlumberger SE, Criqui-Filipe P, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, France.

The cell nucleus is highly organized into distinct domains that spatially
separate physiological processes. One of these domains, the Sp100-promyelocytic
leukemia protein nuclear body (NB), is implicated in pathological processes, such
as cancer and viral infection, yet its functions remain poorly understood. We
show here that Sp100 interacts physically and functionally with ETS-1 and that NB
morphology is affected by ETS-1. ETS-1 is a member of the ets family of
transcription factors, which are key mediators of physiological and pathological 
processes. We have found that Sp100 interacts with two regions of ETS-1 (domains 
A+B and D+E+F). ETS-1 alters NBs while remaining localized throughout the
nucleus, apparently by recruitment of the core component Sp100 away from the NBs.
Sp100 strongly increases ETS-1 activation of natural and ets-focused promoters,
through a mechanism involving the activation (C) domain of ETS-1 in addition to
the interaction domains. Sp100 acts as a novel coactivator that potentiates the
activator function of ETS-1. Our results provide an important new connection
between nuclear structures and an important regulator of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC133711
PMID: 11909962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Clin Exp Immunol. 2002 Jan;127(1):172-5.

Anti-multiple nuclear dots (anti-MND) and anti-SP100 antibodies in hepatic and
rheumatological disorders.

Muratori P(1), Muratori L, Cassani F, Terlizzi P, Lenzi M, Rodrigo L, Bianchi FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardioangiology, Hepatology, Alma Mater
Studiorum-University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. paolomuratori@tin.it

Multiple nuclear dots pattern has been described in primary biliary cirrhosis
and, less often, in rheumatological disorders. Sp100 is the major antigen of
multiple nuclear dots. We evaluated prevalence and diagnostic significance of
multiple nuclear dots and anti-Sp100 reactivity both in hepatic and
rheumatological diseases. A series of 283 consecutive liver patients (89 primary 
biliary cirrhosis, 12 primary sclerosing cholangitis, 85 autoimmune hepatitis, 97
hepatitis C virus-related chronic liver disease) and of 89 consecutive
rheumatological cases were evaluated. Presence of multiple nuclear dots was
assessed by indirect immunofluorescence on HEp-2 cells, anti-Sp100 reactivity by 
ELISA with recombinant protein. Multiple nuclear dots were detected in 20
patients (7%) with liver disease (of whom 15 with primary biliary cirrhosis), and
in eight patients (9%) with rheumatological disorders. Anti-Sp100 was detected in
45 liver patients (16%), of whom 30 with primary biliary cirrhosis, but in only
two with rheumatological disorders (2%) (P =0.0004). The concordance between
multiple nuclear dots and anti-Sp100 in liver and rheumatological patients was
90% and 25% (P=0.0018), respectively. Among 89 consecutive patients with primary 
biliary cirrhosis, multiple nuclear dots and anti-Sp100 were present in 17% and
34%, respectively (P=0.0152). Anti-Sp100 positivity was associated with older age
and higher gamma-globulin levels. Multiple nuclear dots are similarly observed in
liver and rheumatological patients. In contrast, anti-Sp100 is more frequent in
liver patients and is significantly more often detected in primary biliary
cirrhosis, of which it can be regarded as a highly specific serological marker.
The antigenic target of multiple nuclear dots in most rheumatological patients is
other than Sp100.

PMCID: PMC1906296
PMID: 11882049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Tsitologiia. 2001;43(12):1123-9.

[Monoclonal antibodies against protein Daxx and its localization in nuclear
domains 10].

[Article in Russian]

Sotnikov AG(1), Negorev D, Ishov AM, Maul GG.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology, Philadelphia, USA.

Nuclear domains 10 (ND10) were first detected occasionally using antibodies to an
antigen of unknown nature (Ascoli, Maul, 1991). Further on it was shown that ND10
were sites of locality of the number of proteins (PML, Sp 100, pRB) (Sterndorf et
al., 1992; Kamitani et al., 1998), the majority of which are modified with
ubiquitin-like small proteins-modifiers (SUMO) (Ishov, Maul, 1996). In addition, 
it was shown that ND10 were sites of primary localization, transcription and
replication of some DNA-viruses (SV40, virus of simple herpes 1, adenovirus 5)
(Ishov, Maul, 1996; Ishov et al., 1997). Except for SV40, these viruses produce
proteins able to modify ND10, or leading to degradation of ND10-associated
proteins (Maul et al., 1993; Maul, Everett, 1994). This degradation is
accompanied with protein desumofication and, later, with hydrolysis on the
ubiquitin-proteosomal way (Everett et al., 1998, 1999). Cell incubation with
interferon leads to augmentation of the number and dimension of ND10 owing to
increased expression of Sp100 and PML (Lavau et al., 1995; Grotzinger et al.,
1996). In all, these data make it possible to put forward a hypothesis that ND10 
may represent a peculiar cell storage ("dépôt") of proteins regulated according
to the "accumulation-drop" principle (Ishov et al., 1997; Maul, 1998). However,
this hypothesis requires further factual grounds.

PMID: 11881150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Cell. 2002 Jan 11;108(1):109-20.

The nucleoporin RanBP2 has SUMO1 E3 ligase activity.

Pichler A(1), Gast A, Seeler JS, Dejean A, Melchior F.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18a, 82152 Martinsried,
Germany.

Posttranslational modification with SUMO1 regulates protein/protein interactions,
localization, and stability. SUMOylation requires the E1 enzyme Aos1/Uba2 and the
E2 enzyme Ubc9. A family of E3-like factors, PIAS proteins, was discovered
recently. Here we show that the nucleoporin RanBP2/Nup358 also has SUMO1 E3-like 
activity. RanBP2 directly interacts with the E2 enzyme Ubc9 and strongly enhances
SUMO1-transfer from Ubc9 to the SUMO1 target Sp100. The E3-like activity is
contained within a 33 kDa domain of RanBP2 that lacks RING finger motifs and does
not resemble PIAS family proteins. Our findings place SUMOylation at the
cytoplasmic filaments of the NPC and suggest that, at least for some substrates, 
modification and nuclear import are linked events.

PMID: 11792325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Nat Cell Biol. 2002 Feb;4(2):106-10.

Metabolic-energy-dependent movement of PML bodies within the mammalian cell
nucleus.

Muratani M(1), Gerlich D, Janicki SM, Gebhard M, Eils R, Spector DL.

Author information: 
(1)Watson School of Biological Sciences, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, One
Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA.

Promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) nuclear bodies are present in most mammalian cell
nuclei. PML bodies are disrupted by PML retinoic acid receptor alpha (RAR alpha) 
oncoproteins in acute promyelocytic leukaemia. These bodies contain numerous
proteins, including Sp100, SUMO-1, HAUSP(USP7), CBP and BLM, and they have been
implicated in aspects of transcriptional regulation or as nuclear storage depots.
Here, we show that three classes of PML nuclear bodies can be distinguished, on
the basis of their dynamic properties in living cells. One class of PML bodies is
particularly noteworthy in that it moves by a metabolic-energy-dependent
mechanism. This represents the first example of metabolic-energy-dependent
transport of a nuclear body within the mammalian cell nucleus.

PMID: 11753375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Biophys J. 2002 Jan;82(1 Pt 1):36-49.

A physical approach to protein structure prediction.

Crivelli S(1), Eskow E, Bader B, Lamberti V, Byrd R, Schnabel R, Head-Gordon T.

Author information: 
(1)Physical Biosciences and NERSC Divisions, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA.

We describe our global optimization method called Stochastic Perturbation with
Soft Constraints (SPSC), which uses information from known proteins to predict
secondary structure, but not in the tertiary structure predictions or in
generating the terms of the physics-based energy function. Our approach is also
characterized by the use of an all atom energy function that includes a novel
hydrophobic solvation function derived from experiments that shows promising
ability for energy discrimination against misfolded structures. We present the
results obtained using our SPSC method and energy function for blind prediction
in the 4th Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction
competition, and show that our approach is more effective on targets for which
less information from known proteins is available. In fact our SPSC method
produced the best prediction for one of the most difficult targets of the
competition, a new fold protein of 240 amino acids.

PMCID: PMC1302447
PMID: 11751294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Exp Cell Res. 2001 Dec 10;271(2):286-95.

Interferon-induced antiviral Mx1 GTPase is associated with components of the
SUMO-1 system and promyelocytic leukemia protein nuclear bodies.

Engelhardt OG(1), Ullrich E, Kochs G, Haller O.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Virologie, Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene,
Freiburg, D-79008, Germany. oengel@ukl.uni-freiburg.de

Mx proteins are interferon-induced large GTPases, some of which have antiviral
activity against a variety of viruses. The murine Mx1 protein accumulates in the 
nucleus of interferon-treated cells and is active against members of the
Orthomyxoviridae family, such as the influenza viruses and Thogoto virus. The
mechanism by which Mx1 exerts its antiviral action is still unclear, but an
involvement of undefined nuclear factors has been postulated. Using the yeast
two-hybrid system, we identified cellular proteins that interact with Mx1
protein. The Mx1 interactors were mainly nuclear proteins. They included Sp100,
Daxx, and Bloom's syndrome protein (BLM), all of which are known to localize to
specific subnuclear domains called promyelocytic leukemia protein nuclear bodies 
(PML NBs). In addition, components of the SUMO-1 protein modification system were
identified as Mx1-interacting proteins, namely the small ubiquitin-like modifier 
SUMO-1 and SAE2, which represents subunit 2 of the SUMO-1 activating enzyme.
Analysis of the subcellular localization of Mx1 and some of these interacting
proteins by confocal microscopy revealed a close spatial association of Mx1 with 
PML NBs. This suggests a role of PML NBs and SUMO-1 in the antiviral action of
Mx1 and may allow us to discover novel functions of this large GTPase.

PMID: 11716541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Exp Cell Res. 2001 Dec 10;271(2):277-85.

Identification of PML oncogenic domains (PODs) in human megakaryocytes.

Drouin A(1), Schmitt A, Massé JM, Cieutat AM, Fichelson S, Cramer EM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, INSERM U. 474, Paris, France.

Megakaryocytes (Mks) are unique cells in the human body in that they carry a
single and polyploid nucleus. It is therefore of interest to understand their
nuclear ultrastructure. PML oncogenic domains (PODs) were described in several
types of eukaryotic cells using human autoantibodies which recognize nuclear
antigens with a specific speckled pattern (dots) in indirect immunofluorescence
(IF). Two main antigens, PML and Sp 100, usually colocalize and concentrate in
these nuclear subdomains. We investigated the presence of PODs using IF and
immunoelectron microscopy (IEM) in cells from megakaryocytic lineage: the HEL
cell line and human cultured Mks. Antibodies against PML, Sp100, and anti-nuclear
dots were used in single and double labeling. PODs were identified in HEL cells
and in human Mks, and their ultrastructure was characterized. We then used IF to 
quantify PODs within Mks and showed that their number increased proportionally to
nuclear lobularity. In summary, we report the identification of PODs in human Mks
at an ultrastructural level and an increase in PODs number in parallel with Mk
ploidy. We show that endomitosis not only leads to DNA increase but also to the
multiplication of at least one of the associated nuclear structures.

PMID: 11716540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Int J Oncol. 2001 Dec;19(6):1303-9.

Identification of immunogenic antigens using a phage-displayed cDNA library from 
an invasive ductal breast carcinoma tumour.

Hansen MH(1), Ostenstad B, Sioud M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Molecular Medicine Group, The Norwegian Radium
Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

The identification of immunogenic antigens for serological testing and vaccine
development is a major challenge facing cancer immunology research. To study the 
humoral immune response in patients with breast cancer, a T7 phage display cDNA
library from an invasive ductal breast carcinoma was panned on patient serum IgG 
antibodies. By monitoring the selection with an immunoscreening technique,
positive phage-displayed cDNA products reacting with breast cancer patient IgG
antibodies were selected. Sequence analysis identified immunogenic antigens such 
as the cytochrome oxidase I, sp100 and Ran GTPase activating protein.
Additionally, immunogenic uncharacterized gene products were also identified.
Both the known and unknown immunoselected gene products should offer an
additional source for cancer gene discovery for diagnostic testing and vaccine
development.

PMID: 11713604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Oncogene. 2001 Oct 29;20(49):7274-86.

Role and fate of PML nuclear bodies in response to interferon and viral
infections.

Regad T(1), Chelbi-Alix MK.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 9045 CNRS, Institut André Lwoff, 7 rue Guy Moquet 94801, Villejuif, Cedex,
France.

Interferons (IFNs) are a family of secreted proteins with antiviral,
antiproliferative and immunomodulatory activities. The different biological
actions of IFN are believed to be mediated by the products of specifically
induced cellular genes in the target cells. The promyelocytic leukaemia (PML)
protein localizes both in the nucleoplasm and in matrix-associated multi-protein 
complexes known as nuclear bodies (NBs). PML is essential for the proper
formation and the integrity of the NBs. Modification of PML by the Small
Ubiquitin MOdifier (SUMO) was shown to be required for its localization in NBs.
The number and the intensity of PML NBs increase in response to interferon (IFN).
Inactivation of the IFN-induced PML gene by its fusion to retinoic acid receptor 
alpha alters the normal localization of PML from the punctuate nuclear patterns
of NBs to micro-dispersed tiny dots and results in uncontrolled growth in Acute
Promyelocytic Leukaemia. The NBs-associated proteins, PML, Sp100, Sp140, Sp110,
ISG20 and PA28 are induced by IFN suggesting that nuclear bodies could play a
role in IFN response. Although the function of PML NBs is still unclear, some
results indicate that they may represent preferential targets for viral
infections and that PML could play a role in the mechanism of the antiviral
action of IFNs. Viruses, which require the cellular machinery for their
replication, have evolved different ways to counteract the action of IFN by
inhibiting IFN signalling, by blocking the activities of specific antiviral
mediators or by altering PML expression and/or localization on nuclear bodies.

PMID: 11704856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Oncogene. 2001 Oct 29;20(49):7243-9.

SUMO: of branched proteins and nuclear bodies.

Seeler JS(1), Dejean A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique, INSERM U 163, Institut
Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr. Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

SUMO belongs to a growing number of ubiquitin-like proteins that covalently
modify their target proteins. Although some evidence supports a role of SUMO
modification in regulating protein stability, most studied examples support a
model by which SUMO alters the interaction properties of its targets, often
affecting their subcellular localization behavior. Examination of the PML nuclear
bodies, whose principal components are SUMO-modified, has revealed this
modification to be essential for their structural and functional integrity. This 
and other examples thus support the view that SUMO regulates the stability not of
individual proteins, but rather that of entire multiprotein complexes.

PMID: 11704852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Immunol Res. 2001;24(2):149-61.

The transcription factor, Bright, and immunoglobulin heavy chain expression.

Webb CF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,
Oklahoma City 73104, USA. Carol-Webb@mail.omrf.ouhsc.edu

Bright, or B cell regulator of immunoglobulin heavy chain transcription, is a B
lymphocyte-specific protein first discovered for its ability to increase
immunoglobulin transcription three- to sevenfold in antigen-activated B cells. It
interacts with DNA through an ARID, or A/T-rich interaction domain, and is the
only member of a previously undescribed family of DNA-binding proteins for which 
target genes have been identified. The mechanism(s) by which Bright facilitates
transcription are unknown. Several proteins that associate with Bright may shed
light upon its function. These include the nuclear matrix proteins sp100 and
LYSp100B, and suggest that Bright may affect chromatin configuration and nuclear 
sublocalization. Furthermore, Bruton's tyrosine kinase is required for Bright
binding activity, suggesting links between Bright, cell signaling cascades, and
X-linked immunodeficiency disease.

PMID: 11594453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Virol. 2001 Nov;75(21):10334-47.

Identification of acidic and aromatic residues in the Zta activation domain
essential for Epstein-Barr virus reactivation.

Deng Z(1), Chen CJ, Zerby D, Delecluse HJ, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) lytic cycle transcription and DNA replication require
the transcriptional activation function of the viral immediate-early protein Zta.
We describe a series of alanine substitution mutations in the Zta activation
domain that reveal two functional motifs based on amino acid composition. Alanine
substitution of single or paired hydrophobic aromatic amino acid residues
resulted in modest transcription activation defects, while combining four
substitutions of aromatic residues (F22/F26/W74/F75) led to more severe
transcription defects. Substitution of acidic amino acid residue E27, D35, or E54
caused severe transcription defects on most viral promoters. Promoter- and
cell-specific defects were observed for some substitution mutants. Aromatic
residues were required for Zta interaction with TFIIA-TFIID and the CREB-binding 
protein (CBP) and for stimulation of CBP histone acetyltransferase activity in
vitro. In contrast, acidic amino acid substitution mutants interacted with
TFIIA-TFIID and CBP indistinguishably from the wild type. The nuclear domain 10
(ND10) protein SP100 was dispersed by most Zta mutants, but acidic residue
mutations led to reduced, while aromatic substitution mutants led to increased
SP100 nuclear staining. Acidic residue substitution mutants had more pronounced
defects in transcription activation of endogenous viral genes in latently
infected cells and for viral replication, as measured by the production of
infectious virus. One mutant, K12/F13, was incapable of stimulating EBV lytic
replication but had only modest transcription defects. These results indicate
that Zta stimulates viral reactivation through two nonredundant structural
motifs, one of which interacts with general transcription factors and
coactivators, and the other has an essential but as yet not understood function
in lytic transcription.

PMCID: PMC114608
PMID: 11581402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Genome Biol. 2001;2(9):RESEARCH0040. Epub 2001 Aug 30.

Molecular archeology of an SP100 splice variant revisited: dating the
retrotranscription and Alu insertion events.

Devor EJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Bioinformatics, Integrated DNA Technologies, 1710
Commercial Park, Coralville, Iowa 52241, USA. rdevor@idtdna.com

BACKGROUND: SP100 is a nuclear protein that displays a number of alternative
splice variants. In Old World monkeys, apes and humans one of these variants is
extended by a retroprocessed pseudogene, HMG1L3, whose antecedent gene is a
member of the family of high-mobility-group proteins, HMG1. This is one of only a
few documented cases of a retropseudogene being incorporated into another gene as
a functional exon. In addition to the HMG1L3 insertion, Old World monkey genomes 
also contain an Alu sequence within the last SP100-HMG intron. PCR amplification 
of the 3' end of the SP100 gene using genomic DNAs from human and New World and
Old World monkey species, followed by direct sequencing of the amplicons has made
dating the HMG1L3 and Alu insertion events possible.
RESULTS: PCR amplifications confirm that the HMG1L3 retrotransposition into the
SP100 locus occurred after divergence of New World and Old World monkey lineages,
some 35-40 million years ago. PCR amplification also shows that an upstream Alu
sequence was inserted in the last SP100-HMG intron after divergence of the Old
World monkey and ape lineages. Direct sequencing of the Alu in five Old World
monkey species places the latter event at around 19 million years ago. Finally,
ten single base mutations and one deletion in the Alu differentiate African from 
Asian Old World monkey species.
CONCLUSIONS: PCR and DNA sequence analysis of 'genetic fossils' such as
retropseudogenes and Alu elements in primates give details as to the timing of
such events and can reveal sequence features useful for other molecular
phylogenetic applications.

PMCID: PMC56901
PMID: 11574059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Chromosoma. 2001 Aug;110(4):247-52.

Evolution of a 6-200 Mb long-range repeat cluster in the genus Mus.

Traut W(1), Rahn IM, Winking H, Kunze B, Weichehan D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie, Medizinische Universität zu Lübeck, Germany.
traut@molbio.mu-luebeck.de

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, we mapped the location of genes associated
with the Sp100-rs cluster, a long-range repeat cluster in chromosome 1 of the
house mouse, Mus musculus. The cluster comprises between 60 and 2000 repeats and 
extends over 6-200 Mb of the M. musculus genome, depending on the source of the
cluster. The cluster evolved during the last two million years in the genus Mus
in the lineage to which M. musculus belongs. The Asiatic mouse species M. caroli 
is not in this lineage and does not possess the cluster. M. caroli represents the
ancestral genomic organization of the cluster source components Sp100, Csprs and 
Ifi75: they are located close to each other in the same chromosome band (1D).
However, Sp100-rs, the principal gene of the cluster, is not present in the M.
caroli genome. It is a chimeric M. musculus gene that arose by fusion of Csprs
and the 5' part of Sp100. Sp100-rs and Ifi75 are homogeneously distributed
throughout the cluster while Sp100 and Csprs in its original sequence context
flank the cluster on opposite sides. Our results suggest a model for the origin
and evolution of the long-range repeat cluster by duplication, gene fusion and
amplification.

PMID: 11534816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Hepatology. 2001 Sep;34(3):478-86.

A comparative study of antibody expressions in primary biliary cirrhosis and
autoimmune cholangitis using phage display.

Ikuno N(1), Scealy M, Davies JM, Whittingham SF, Omagari K, Mackay IR, Rowley MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, 
Victoria, Australia.

Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) and autoimmune cholangitis (AIC) are serologic
expressions of an autoimmune liver disease affecting biliary ductular cells.
Previously we screened a phage-displayed random peptide library with polyclonal
IgG from 2 Australian patients with PBC and derived peptides that identified a
single conformational (discontinuous) epitope in the inner lipoyl domain of the
E2 subunit of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC-E2), the characteristic
autoantigen in PBC. Here we have used phage display to investigate the reactivity
of PBC sera from 2 ethnically and geographically distinct populations, Japanese
and Australian, and the 2 serologic expressions, PBC and AIC. Random 7-mer and
12-mer peptide libraries were biopanned with IgG from 3 Japanese patients with
PBC and 3 with AIC who did not have anti-PDC-E2. The phage clones (phagotopes)
obtained were tested by capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for
reactivity with affinity-purified anti-PDC-E2, and compared with those obtained
from Australian patients with PBC. Peptide sequences of the derived phagotopes
and sequences derived by biopanning with irrelevant antisera were aligned to
develop a guide tree based on physicochemical similarity. Both Australian and
Japanese PBC-derived phagotopes were distributed in branches of the guide tree
that contained the peptide sequences MH and FV previously identified as part of
an immunodominant conformational epitope of PDC-E2, indicating that epitope
selection was not influenced by the racial origin of the PBC sera. Biopanning
with either PBC or AIC-derived IgG yielded phagotopes that reacted with
anti-PDC-E2 by capture ELISA, further establishing that there is a similar
autoimmune targeting in PBC and AIC.

PMID: 11526532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mamm Genome. 2001 Aug;12(8):590-4.

Source and component genes of a 6-200 Mb gene cluster in the house mouse.

Weichenhan D(1), Kunze B, Winking H, van Geel M, Osoegawa K, de Jong PJ, Traut W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie, Medizinische Universität zu Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee
160, D-23538 Lübeck, Germany. weichenh@molbio.muluebeck.de

We identified and analyzed the genes Sp100, Csprs, and Ifi75 in two members of
the genus Mus, M. musculus and M. caroli. Sp100 is a nuclear dot gene; Csprs and 
Ifi75 are novel genes encoding a putative G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) and a
putative transcriptional coactivator, respectively. A fourth gene, Sp100-rs,
occurs in M. musculus, but not in M. caroli. Sp100-rs is a chimeric gene which
arose by fusion of Sp100 and Csprs copies. Sp100-rs and Ifi75 are components of a
repeat cluster that extends over 6-200 Mb of the M. musculus genome. The Sp100-rs
fusion gene arose only 1-2 million years ago and has become fixed and amplified
in M. musculus. Although the gene is transcribed, it appears to have no function.
The repeat cluster may have become fixed in the species as a 'hitchhiker' in a
'selective sweep'.

PMID: 11471051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Nat Struct Biol. 2001 Jul;8(7):626-33.

The SAND domain structure defines a novel DNA-binding fold in transcriptional
regulation.

Bottomley MJ(1), Collard MW, Huggenvik JI, Liu Z, Gibson TJ, Sattler M.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg,
Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Biol. 2001 Jul;8(7):568-70.

The SAND domain is a conserved sequence motif found in a number of nuclear
proteins, including the Sp100 family and NUDR. These are thought to play
important roles in chromatin-dependent transcriptional regulation and are linked 
to many diseases. We have determined the three-dimensional (3D) structure of the 
SAND domain from Sp100b. The structure represents a novel alpha/beta fold, in
which a conserved KDWK sequence motif is found within an alpha-helical,
positively charged surface patch. For NUDR, the SAND domain is shown to be
sufficient to mediate DNA binding. Using mutational analyses and chemical shift
perturbation experiments, the DNA binding surface is mapped to the alpha-helical 
region encompassing the KDWK motif. The DNA binding activity of wild type and
mutant proteins in vitro correlates with transcriptional regulation activity of
full length NUDR in vivo. The evolutionarily conserved SAND domain defines a new 
DNA binding fold that is involved in chromatin-associated transcriptional
regulation.

PMID: 11427895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Nat Struct Biol. 2001 Jul;8(7):568-70.

Finding the function buried in SAND.

Wojciak JM, Clubb RT.

Comment on
    Nat Struct Biol. 2001 Jul;8(7):626-33.

PMID: 11427878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 May;21(10):3314-24.

Common properties of nuclear body protein SP100 and TIF1alpha chromatin factor:
role of SUMO modification.

Seeler JS(1), Marchio A, Losson R, Desterro JM, Hay RT, Chambon P, Dejean A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique, INSERM U163, Institut Pasteur,
75074 Paris Cedex 15, France.

The SP100 protein, together with PML, represents a major constituent of the
PML-SP100 nuclear bodies (NBs). The function of these ubiquitous subnuclear
structures, whose integrity is compromised in pathological situations such as
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) or DNA virus infection, remains poorly
understood. There is little evidence for the occurrence of actual physiological
processes within NBs. The two NB proteins PML and SP100 are covalently modified
by the ubiquitin-related SUMO-1 modifier, and recent work indicates that this
modification is critical for the regulation of NB dynamics. In exploring the
functional relationships between NBs and chromatin, we have shown previously that
SP100 interacts with members of the HP1 family of nonhistone chromosomal proteins
and that a variant SP100 cDNA encodes a high-mobility group (HMG1/2) protein.
Here we report the isolation of a further cDNA, encoding the SP100C protein, that
contains the PHD-bromodomain motif characteristic of chromatin proteins. We
further show that TIF1alpha, a chromatin-associated factor with homology to both 
PML and SP100C, is also modified by SUMO-1. Finally, in vitro experiments
indicate that SUMO modification of SP100 enhances the stability of SP100-HP1
complexes. Taken together, our results suggest an association of SP100 and its
variants with the chromatin compartment and, further, indicate that SUMO
modification may play a regulatory role in the functional interplay between the
nuclear bodies and chromatin.

PMCID: PMC100253
PMID: 11313457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 1;276(22):19617-23. Epub 2001 Mar 23.

Interaction of the ring finger-related U-box motif of a nuclear dot protein with 
ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes.

Pringa E(1), Martinez-Noel G, Muller U, Harbers K.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für Experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der
Universität Hamburg, Martinistrasse 52, D-20251 Hamburg, Germany.

The U-box domain has been suggested to be a modified RING finger motif where the 
metal-coordinating cysteines and histidines have been replaced with other amino
acids. Known U-box-containing proteins have been implicated in the
ubiquitin/proteasome system. In a search for proteins interacting with the
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UbcM4/UbcH7, we have identified a novel U-box
containing protein, termed UIP5, that is exclusively found in the nucleus as part
of a nuclear dot-like structure. Interaction between UbcM4 and UIP5 was observed 
in vivo and in vitro with bacterially expressed proteins. In addition to UbcM4,
several other ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes (E2s) that share the same sequence
within the L1 loop bind to UIP5. Mutational analysis showed that the U-box, like 
the RING finger in other proteins, forms the physical basis for the interaction
with E2 enzymes. Further support for the structural similarity between U-box and 
RING finger comes from the observation that, in both cases, the same regions
within the UbcM4 molecule are required for interaction. Our results establish at 
the molecular level a link between the U-box and the ubiquitin conjugating system
and strongly suggest that proteins containing U-box domains are functionally
closely related to RING finger proteins.

PMID: 11274149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Apr;15(4):485-500.

The glucocorticoid receptor interacting protein 1 (GRIP1) localizes in discrete
nuclear foci that associate with ND10 bodies and are enriched in components of
the 26S proteasome.

Baumann CT(1), Ma H, Wolford R, Reyes JC, Maruvada P, Lim C, Yen PM, Stallcup MR,
Hager GL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland 20892-5055, USA.

The glucocorticoid receptor interacting protein-1 (GRIP1) is a member of the
steroid receptor coactivator (SRC) family of transcriptional regulators. Green
fluorescent protein (GFP) fusions were made to full-length GRIP1, and a series of
GRIP1 mutants lacking the defined regulatory regions and the intracellular
distribution of these proteins was studied in HeLa cells. The distribution of
GRIP1 was complex, ranging from diffuse nucleoplasmic to discrete intranuclear
foci. Formation of these foci was dependent on the C-terminal region of GRIP1,
which contains the two characterized transcriptional activation domains, AD1 and 
AD2. A subpopulation of GRIP1 foci associate with ND10s, small nuclear bodies
that contain several proteins including PML, SP100, DAXX, and CREB-binding
protein (CBP). Association with the ND10s is dependent on the AD1 of GRIP1, a
region of the protein previously described as a CBP-interacting domain. The GRIP1
foci are enriched in components of the 26S proteasome, including the core 20S
proteasome, PA28alpha, and ubiquitin. In addition, the irreversible proteasome
inhibitor lactacystin induced an increase in the total fluorescence intensity of 
the GFP-GRIP1 expressing cells, demonstrating that GRIP1 is degraded by the
proteasome. These findings suggest the intriguing possibility that degradation of
GRIP1 by the 26S proteasome may be a key component of its regulation.

PMID: 11266502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Virol. 2001 Apr;75(8):3819-31.

Human neuron-committed teratocarcinoma NT2 cell line has abnormal ND10 structures
and is poorly infected by herpes simplex virus type 1.

Hsu WL(1), Everett RD.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Virology Unit, Institute of Virology, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G11
5JR, Scotland, United Kingdom.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) immediate-early regulatory protein ICP0
stimulates the initiation of lytic infection and reactivation from quiescence in 
human fibroblast cells. These functions correlate with its ability to localize to
and disrupt centromeres and specific subnuclear structures known as ND10, PML
nuclear bodies, or promyelocytic oncogenic domains. Since the natural site of
herpesvirus latency is in neurons, we investigated the status of ND10 and
centromeres in uninfected and infected human cells with neuronal characteristics.
We found that NT2 cells, a neuronally committed human teratocarcinoma cell line, 
have abnormal ND10 characterized by low expression of the major ND10 component
PML and no detectable expression of another major ND10 antigen, Sp100. In
addition, PML is less extensively modified by the ubiquitin-like protein SUMO-1
in NT2 cells compared to fibroblasts. After treatment with retinoic acid, NT2
cells differentiate into neuron-like hNT cells which express very high levels of 
both PML and Sp100. Infection of both NT2 and hNT cells by HSV-1 was poor
compared to human fibroblasts, and after low-multiplicity infection yields of
virus were reduced by 2 to 3 orders of magnitude. ICP0-deficient mutants were
also disabled in the neuron-related cell lines, and cells quiescently infected
with an ICP0-null virus could be established. These results correlated with
less-efficient disruption of ND10 and centromeres induced by ICP0 in NT2 and hNT 
cells. Furthermore, the ability of ICP0 to activate gene expression in
transfection assays in NT2 cells was poor compared to Vero cells. These results
suggest that a contributory factor in the reduced HSV-1 replication in the
neuron-related cells is inefficient ICP0 function; it is possible that this is
pertinent to the establishment of latent infection in neurons in vivo.

PMCID: PMC114873
PMID: 11264371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Cell Biol. 2001 Mar 5;152(5):1099-106.

The transcription coactivator CBP is a dynamic component of the promyelocytic
leukemia nuclear body.

Boisvert FM(1), Kruhlak MJ, Box AK, Hendzel MJ, Bazett-Jones DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Calgary, Calgary,
Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada.

The transcription coactivator and histone acetyltransferase CAMP response
element-binding protein (CBP) has been demonstrated to accumulate in
promyelocytic leukemia (PML) bodies. We show that this accumulation is cell type 
specific. In cells where CBP does not normally accumulate in PML bodies, it can
be induced to accumulate in PML bodies through overexpression of either CBP or
Pml, but not Sp100. Using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching, we
demonstrate that CBP moves rapidly into and out of PML bodies. In contrast, Pml
and Sp100 are relatively immobile in the nucleoplasm and within PML nuclear
bodies. They possess the characteristics expected of proteins that would play a
structural role in the integrity of these subnuclear domains. Our results are
consistent with CBP being a dynamic component of PML bodies and that the
steady-state level in these structures can be modulated by Pml.

PMCID: PMC2198823
PMID: 11238464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jan 30;98(3):1012-7. Epub 2001 Jan 23.

Proteins associated with the promyelocytic leukemia gene product (PML)-containing
nuclear body move to the nucleolus upon inhibition of proteasome-dependent
protein degradation.

Mattsson K(1), Pokrovskaja K, Kiss C, Klein G, Szekely L.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, S-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.

Several recent findings have indicated that the promyelocytic leukemia gene
product (PML) oncogenic domains (PODs) are involved in proteasome-mediated
degradation of ubiquitinated proteins. We wanted to examine the intracellular
distribution of PML protein in the presence of a proteasome inhibitor. We used
high-resolution microscopy to study the distribution of PML protein and other
POD-associated proteins along with the proteasomes themselves under normal
conditions and in cells treated with the proteasome inhibitor, MG132. Inhibition 
of the proteasomes in MCF-7, HeLa, and IB-4 cell lines resulted in a radical
redistribution of the POD-associated proteins PML, Sp100, and SUMO-1. After 6-10 
h of MG132 treatment, PML, Sp100, and SUMO-1 were no longer detectable in the
PODs and accumulated mainly in the nucleolus. Moreover, MG132 treatment changed
the cellular distribution of the proteasomes. Interestingly, this included the
accumulation in euchromatin areas of the nucleus and within the nucleoli. Several
non-POD-associated proteins did not change their cellular distribution under the 
same conditions. The accumulation of POD-associated proteins and proteasomes in
the nucleoli of MG132-treated cells indicates that these proteins may target the 
nucleoli under normal conditions and that the nucleolus may have a function in
the regulation of proteasomal protein degradation.

PMCID: PMC14700
PMID: 11158586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Cell Sci. 2001 Jan;114(Pt 1):59-68.

Evidence for separate ND10-binding and homo-oligomerization domains of Sp100.

Negorev D(1), Ishov AM, Maul GG.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Nuclear domains called ND10 or PML nuclear bodies consist of an aggregation of
several proteins, most notably PML and Sp100. PML is essential in the nucleation 
and formation of ND10 as well as in the recruitment of other ND10-associated
proteins such as Daxx, pRb, BLM and Sp100. In cells induced to overexpress Sp100,
ND10 binding of Sp100 was saturable and excess Sp100 formed new aggregation sites
devoid of other ND10-associated proteins, suggesting that homo-oligomerization is
the basis for aggregation. To determine whether Sp100 binds to ND10 through
hetero- or oligomerization, Sp100 deletion variants fused with GFP were
transfected into cells with and without endogenous Sp100, and the localization of
the GFP-labeled fragments was determined relative to ND10. Amino acids 29-152
were sufficient for deposition of the GFP-labeled fragments at ND10 in the
absence of endogenous Sp100 (heterologous binding) and for self-aggregation
(formation of new Sp100 deposits). None of the shorter fragments was deposited at
ND10 or self-aggregated. The 29-152 amino acid fragment and some larger
fragments, but not the full-size Sp100, induced elongation of ND10, which at
their ends contain only Sp100, probably due to self-aggregation. By fusing a
peptide consisting of the p53-binding domain from hMDM2 to the Sp100(29-152)
fragment, this self-aggregation could be blocked while retaining the limited ND10
binding capacity, indicating that the Sp100 self-aggregation domain and the ND10 
binding domain are separate entities. This fusion peptide was used to demonstrate
the potential of ND10 to recruit p53 as a protein not usually present at this
site. Such deposited p53 was protected from turnover. The capacity of ND10 to
recruit Sp100 may serve primarily to reduce its availability.

PMID: 11112690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Virol. 2000 Dec;74(24):11800-10.

Lytic but not latent replication of epstein-barr virus is associated with PML and
induces sequential release of nuclear domain 10 proteins.

Bell P(1), Lieberman PM, Maul GG.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Nuclear domains called ND10 (nuclear domain 10) are discrete nuclear protein
aggregations characterized by a set of interferon-upregulated proteins including 
Sp100 and PML, where papova-, adeno-, and herpesviruses begin their transcription
and DNA replication. Both the alpha- and betaherpesvirus subfamilies disrupt ND10
upon infection by dispersing and/or destroying ND10-associated proteins. We
studied the effect of the gammaherpesvirus Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) on ND10 and
its spatial distribution in the nucleus of cells during latency and lytic
reactivation. In latently infected Burkitt's lymphoma, lymphoblastoid, and
D98/HR1 cells, ND10 were intact, as judged by immunofluorescence localization of 
PML, Sp100, NDP55, and Daxx. Fluorescent in situ hybridization revealed no
association between viral episomes and ND10 during latency, implying that the
maintenance replication of EBV, which depends on host cell proliferation, occurs 
independent of ND10. As in mitosis, the EBV genomes were attached to interphase
chromosomes, suggesting that they are unable to move freely within the
interchromosomal space and thus unable to associate with the interchromosomally
located ND10 or other nuclear domains. Upon lytic activation, ND10 became
dispersed in cells expressing lytic proteins. Redistribution of ND10 proteins
occurred sequentially at different stages of the lytic cycle, with Sp100, Daxx,
and NDP55 dispersed before and PML dispersed after the onset of lytic
replication. ND10 remnants were retained until the early stages of lytic
replication, and replicating EBV genomes were frequently found beside this
nuclear domain; the number of replication domains was usually lower than the
average latent virus frequency. Thus, latency does not require or induce
interaction of EBV with ND10 for transcription and replication, whereas lytic
replication triggers dispersion of ND10 proteins and occurs in close association 
with PML aggregates. The required movement of chromosome-attached latent EBV
episomes to ND10 after reactivation from latency might include physical release
of the chromosome-bound episomes. Only episomes contacting ND10 after such a
release might be able to begin lytic replication.

PMCID: PMC112463
PMID: 11090180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Virol. 2000 Nov;74(21):10006-17.

Alphaherpesvirus proteins related to herpes simplex virus type 1 ICP0 affect
cellular structures and proteins.

Parkinson J(1), Everett RD.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Virology Unit, Glasgow G11 5JR, Scotland, United Kingdom.
j.parkinson@vir.gla.ac.uk

The herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) immediate-early protein ICP0 interacts
with several cellular proteins and induces the proteasome-dependent degradation
of others during infection. In this study we show that ICP0 is required for the
proteasome-dependent degradation of the ND10 protein Sp100 and, as with the other
target proteins, the ICP0 RING finger domain is essential. Further, comparison of
the kinetics and ICP0 domain requirements for the degradation of PMI and Sp100
suggests that a common mechanism is involved. Homologues of ICP0 are encoded by
other members of the alphaherpesvirus family. These proteins show strong sequence
homology to ICP0 within the RING finger domain but limited similarity elsewhere. 
Using transfection assays, we have shown that all the ICP0 homologues that we
tested have significant effects on the immunofluorescence staining character of
at least one of the proteins destabilized by ICP0, and by using a recombinant
virus, we found that the equine herpesvirus ICP0 homologue induced the
proteasome-dependent degradation of endogenous CENP-C and modified forms of PML
and Sp100. However, in contrast to ICP0, the homologue proteins had no effect on 
the distribution of the ubiquitin-specific protease USP7 within the cell,
consistent with their lack of a USP7 binding domain. We also found that ICP0 by
itself could induce the abrogation of SUMO-1 conjugation and then the
proteasome-dependent degradation of unmodified exogenous PML in transfected
cells, thus demonstrating that other HSV-1 proteins are not required.
Surprisingly, the ICP0 homologues were unable to cause these effects. Overall,
these data suggest that the members of the ICP0 family of proteins may act via a 
similar mechanism or pathway involving their RING finger domain but that their
intrinsic activities and effects on endogenous and exogenous proteins differ in
detail.

PMCID: PMC102039
PMID: 11024129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(17):6449-65.

Molecular determinants for targeting heterochromatin protein 1-mediated gene
silencing: direct chromoshadow domain-KAP-1 corepressor interaction is essential.

Lechner MS(1), Begg GE, Speicher DW, Rauscher FJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The KRAB domain is a highly conserved transcription repression module commonly
found in eukaryotic zinc finger proteins. KRAB-mediated repression requires
binding to the KAP-1 corepressor, which in turn recruits members of the
heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) family. The HP1 proteins are nonhistone
chromosomal proteins, although it is unclear how they are targeted to unique
chromosomal domains or promoters. In this report, we have reconstituted and
characterized the HP1-KAP-1 interaction using purified proteins and have compared
KAP-1 to three other known HP1 binding proteins: SP100, lamin B receptor (LBR),
and the p150 subunit from chromatin assembly factor (CAF-1 p150). We show that
the chromoshadow domain (CSD) of HP1 is a potent repression domain that binds
directly to all four previously described proteins. For KAP-1, we have mapped the
CSD interaction region to a 15-amino-acid segment, termed the HP1BD, which is
also present in CAF-1 p150 but not SP100 or LBR. The region of KAP-1 harboring
the HP1BD binds as a monomer to a dimer of the CSD, as revealed by gel
filtration, analytical ultracentrifugation, and optical biosensor analyses. The
use of a spectrum of amino acid substitutions in the human HP1alpha CSD revealed 
a strong correlation between CSD-mediated repression and binding to KAP-1, CAF-1 
p150, and SP100 but not LBR. Differences among the HP1 binding partners could
also be discerned by fusion to a heterologous DNA binding domain and by the
potential to act as dominant negative molecules. Together, these results strongly
suggest that KAP-1 is a physiologically relevant target for HP1 function.

PMCID: PMC86120
PMID: 10938122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. EMBO J. 2000 Aug 1;19(15):4123-33.

Regulation of matrix attachment region-dependent, lymphocyte-restricted
transcription through differential localization within promyelocytic leukemia
nuclear bodies.

Zong RT(1), Das C, Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and The Institute for Cellular and Molecular 
Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Bright (B cell regulator of IgH transcription) transactivates the immunoglobulin 
heavy chain (IgH) intronic enhancer, Emicro, by binding to matrix attachment
regions (MARs), sites necessary for DNA attachment to the nuclear matrix. Here we
report that Bright interacts with the ubiquitous autoantigen Sp100, a component
of promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML NBs), and with LYSp100B/Sp140, the 
lymphoid-restricted homolog of Sp100. Both in intact cells and in nuclear matrix 
preparations, the majority of Bright and Sp100 colocalize within PML NBs. In
contrast, Bright colocalizes with only a small fraction of LYSp100B while
inducing a redistribution of the majority of LYSp100B from its associated nuclear
domains (LANDs) into nucleoplasm and cytoplasm. Sp100 represses the MAR-binding
and transactivation activity of Bright. LYSp100B interacts more weakly with
Bright but requires significantly higher levels than Sp100 to inhibit MAR
binding. However, it strongly stimulates Bright transactivation through E mu. We 
suggest that Sp100 and LYSp100B interactions with Bright have different
consequences for IgH transcription, potentially through differential association 
of E mu MARs with nuclear matrix- associated PML NBs and LANDs.

PMCID: PMC306587
PMID: 10921892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;20(16):6138-46.

Sp110 localizes to the PML-Sp100 nuclear body and may function as a nuclear
hormone receptor transcriptional coactivator.

Bloch DB(1), Nakajima A, Gulick T, Chiche JD, Orth D, de La Monte SM, Bloch KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. bloch@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

The nuclear body is a multiprotein complex that may have a role in the regulation
of gene transcription. This structure is disrupted in a variety of human
disorders including acute promyelocytic leukemia and viral infections, suggesting
that alterations in the nuclear body may have an important role in the
pathogenesis of these diseases. In this study, we identified a cDNA encoding a
leukocyte-specific nuclear body component designated Sp110. The N-terminal
portion of Sp110 was homologous to two previously characterized components of the
nuclear body (Sp100 and Sp140). The C-terminal region of Sp110 was homologous to 
the transcription intermediary factor 1 (TIF1) family of proteins. High levels of
Sp110 mRNA were detected in human peripheral blood leukocytes and spleen but not 
in other tissues. The levels of Sp110 mRNA and protein in the human promyelocytic
leukemia cell line NB4 increased following treatment with all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA), and Sp110 localized to PML-Sp100 nuclear bodies in ATRA-treated NB4
cells. Because of the structural similarities between Sp110 and TIF1 proteins,
the effect of Sp110 on gene transcription was examined. An Sp110 DNA-binding
domain fusion protein activated transcription of a reporter gene in transfected
mammalian cells. In addition, Sp110 produced a marked increase in ATRA-mediated
expression of a reporter gene containing a retinoic acid response element. Taken 
together, the results of this study demonstrate that Sp110 is a member of the
Sp100/Sp140 family of nuclear body components and that Sp110 may function as a
nuclear hormone receptor transcriptional coactivator. The predominant expression 
of Sp110 in leukocytes and the enhanced expression of Sp110 in NB4 cells treated 
with ATRA raise the possibility that Sp110 has a role in inducing differentiation
of myeloid cells.

PMCID: PMC86089
PMID: 10913195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Biochem J. 2000 Jun 15;348 Pt 3:585-90.

A new method for the selection of protein interactions in mammalian cells.

Rojo-Niersbach E(1), Morley D, Heck S, Lehming N.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Laboratorium in der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, Carl-von-Linné-Weg
10, 50829 Köln, Germany.

In the present study we present a new method that allows for the selection of
protein interactions in mammalian cells. We have used this system to verify two
interactions previously characterized in vitro. (1) The interaction between human
TATA-binding protein 1 and nuclear factor kappaB and (2) the association of Homo 
sapiens nuclear autoantigen SP100B with human heterochromatin protein 1alpha, a
protein implicated in chromatin remodelling. We observe for the first time that
these interactions also occur in vivo. One protein was fused to the N-terminal
half of ubiquitin, while the interacting partner was fused to the C-terminal half
of ubiquitin, that was itself linked to guanine phosphoryltransferase 2 (gpt2)
modified to begin with an arginine residue. Upon interaction of both proteins,
ubiquitin is reconstituted, and its association with the Rgpt2 reporter is
subsequently cleaved off by ubiquitin-processing enzymes. The presence of
arginine in the Rgpt2 gene product leads to the degradation of the product by the
N-end rule pathway. In the human fibroblast cell line HT1080HPRT(-) (that is
deficient in the enzyme for hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase) cells
in which interaction between both proteins of interest occurs can then be
selected for by hypoxanthine/aminopterin/thymine medium and counterselected
against by 6-thioguanine medium. This method provides a suitable alternative to
the yeast two-hybrid system and is generally applicable.

PMCID: PMC1221101
PMID: 10839990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Struct Biol. 2000 Apr;129(2-3):278-87.

Review: properties and assembly mechanisms of ND10, PML bodies, or PODs.

Maul GG(1), Negorev D, Bell P, Ishov AM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19104,
USA.

Nuclear domain 10 (ND10), also referred to as PML bodies or PODs, are discrete
interchromosomal accumulations of several proteins including PML and Sp100. We
describe here developments in the visualization of ND10 and the mechanism of ND10
assembly made possible by the identification of proteins that are essential for
this process using cell lines that lack individual ND10-associated proteins. PML 
is critical for the proper localization of all other ND10-associated proteins
under physiological conditions. Introducing PML into a PML -/- cell line by
transient expression or fusion with PML-producing cells recruited ND10-associated
proteins into de novo formed ND10, attesting to its essential nature in ND10
formation. This recruitment includes Daxx, a protein that can bind PML and is
highly enriched in condensed chromatin in the absence of PML. The segregation of 
Daxx from condensed chromatin to ND10 by increased accumulation of Sentrin/SUMO-1
modified PML suggests the presence of a variable equilibrium between these two
nuclear sites. These findings identify the basic requirements for ND10 formation 
and suggest a dynamic mechanism for protein recruitment to these nuclear domains 
controlled by the SUMO-1 modification state of PML. Additional adapter proteins
are suggested to exist by the behavior of Sp100, and Sp100 will provide the basis
for their identification. Further information about the dynamic balance of
proteins between ND10 and the actual site of functional activity of these
proteins will establish whether ND10 function as homeostatic regulators or only
in storage of excess proteins destined for turnover.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10806078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Virol. 2000 Jun;74(11):5329-36.

Hepatitis delta virus replication generates complexes of large hepatitis delta
antigen and antigenomic RNA that affiliate with and alter nuclear domain 10.

Bell P(1), Brazas R, Ganem D, Maul GG.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Hepatitis delta virus (HDV), a single-stranded RNA virus, bears a single coding
region whose product, the hepatitis delta antigen (HDAg), is expressed in two
isoforms, small (S-HDAg) and large (L-HDAg). S-HDAg is required for replication
of HDV, while L-HDAg inhibits viral replication and is required for the
envelopment of the HDV genomic RNA by hepatitis B virus proteins. Here we have
examined the spatial distribution of HDV RNA and proteins in infected nuclei,
with particular reference to specific nuclear domains. We found that L-HDAg was
aggregated in specific nuclear domains and that over half of these domains were
localized beside nuclear domain 10 (ND10). At later times, ND10-associated
proteins like PML were found in larger HDAg complexes that had developed into
apparently hollow spheres. In these larger complexes, PML was found chiefly in
the rims of the spheres, while the known ND10 components Sp100, Daxx, and NDP55
were found in the centers of the spheres. Thus, ND10 proteins that normally are
closely linked separate within HDAg-associated complexes. Viral RNA of
antigenomic polarity, whether expressed from genomic RNA or directly from
introduced plasmids, colocalizes with L-HDAg and the transcriptional repressor
PML. In contrast, HDV genomic RNA was distributed more uniformly throughout the
nucleus. These results suggest that different host protein complexes may assemble
on viral RNA strands of different polarities, and they also suggest that this RNA
virus, like DNA viruses, can alter the distribution of ND10-associated proteins. 
The fact that viral components specifically linked to repression of replication
can associate with one of the ND10-associated proteins (PML) raises the
possibility that this host protein may play a role in the regulation of HDV RNA
synthesis.

PMCID: PMC110888
PMID: 10799610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Blood. 2000 May 1;95(9):2748-52.

Role of SUMO-1-modified PML in nuclear body formation.

Zhong S(1), Müller S, Ronchetti S, Freemont PS, Dejean A, Pandolfi PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Molecular Biology Program, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Sloan-Kettering Division, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The tumor-suppressive promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein of acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL) has served as one of the defining components of a class of
distinctive nuclear bodies (NBs). PML is delocalized from NBs in APL cells and is
degraded in cells infected by several viruses. In these cells, NBs are disrupted,
leading to the aberrant localization of NB proteins. These results have suggested
a critical role for the NB in immune response and tumor suppression and raised
the question of whether PML is crucial for the formation or stability of NB. In
addition, PML is, among other proteins, covalently modified by SUMO-1. However,
the functional relevance of this modification is unclear. Here, we show in
primary PML(-/-) cells of various histologic origins, that in the absence of PML,
several NB proteins such as Sp100, CBP, ISG20, Daxx, and SUMO-1 fail to
accumulate in the NB and acquire aberrant localization patterns. Transfection of 
PML in PML(-/-) cells causes the relocalization of NB proteins. By contrast, a
PML mutant that can no longer be modified by SUMO-1 fails to do so and displays
an aberrant nuclear localization pattern. Therefore, PML is required for the
proper formation of the NB. Conjugation to SUMO-1 is a prerequisite for PML to
exert this function. These data shed new light on both the mechanisms underlying 
the formation of the NBs and the pathogenesis of APL. (Blood. 2000;95:2748-2752)

PMID: 10779416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Gene. 2000 Apr 4;246(1-2):93-102.

Transcription and proper splicing of a mammalian gene in yeast.

Kunze B(1), Hellwig-Bürgel T, Weichenhan D, Traut W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie, Medizinische Universität zu Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee
160, D-23538, Lübeck, Germany. Kunze@molbio.mu-luebeck.de

The house mouse strain C57BL/6 harbours 64 copies of the multicopy gene Sp100-rs.
Three of these are contained in the yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) clone
yMm75. Four Sp100-rs transcripts of 3.0, 2.6, 1.6 and 1.3kb were detected by
Northern hybridization in the yMm75-harbouring line of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
Additional and less abundant transcripts were detected by RT-PCR. With one
exception, the YAC-derived Sp100-rs transcripts were a subset of those found in
the C57BL/6 mouse. This indicates transcription and proper splicing of murine
pre-mRNAs in yeast. Analysis of the splice sites shows that the yeast splicing
machinery accepts splice sites that deviate from the standard yeast consensus
sequences. It may be feasible, therefore, at least in a fair proportion of cases,
to exploit the mammalian mRNAs present in transgenic yeast for gene recognition
of YAC-inserts.

PMID: 10767530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Genomics. 2000 Jan 1;63(1):117-22.

Back to the roots of a new exon--the molecular archaeology of a SP100 splice
variant.

Rogalla P(1), Kazmierczak B, Flohr AM, Hauke S, Bullerdiek J.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Human Genetics and Genetic Counselling, University of Bremen,
Bremen, Germany.

Retropseudogenes are intronless DNA sequences sharing a high degree of homology
with the cDNA of their corresponding active genes. They are thought to have
originated by reverse transcription of messenger RNA and reintegration of the
cDNA into the genome. Usually considered a type of evolutionary waste, they melt 
into the background of their surrounding DNA by the loss of similarity to the
active gene or disappear from the genome by the accumulation of deletions. On the
other hand, in this paper we describe the evolutionary recycling of this genomic 
waste. Recently, a splice variant of the gene encoding the nuclear protein SP100 
was identified in which the 3' part of the cDNA is replaced by an alternative
exon apparently encoding an HMG1-DNA-binding domain. We were able to show that
this HMG box is contributed by a new exon arising from an HMG1 retropseudogene
that we have molecularly characterized in detail. In addition to being found in
human cells, corresponding fusion transcripts were shown in Pan troglodytes,
Gorilla gorilla, and Hylobates lar, but not in Macaca mulatta. Genomic DNA from
M. mulatta enabled us to amplify by PCR the 5' part but not the 3' part of the
HMG1 retropseudogene. From our data we thus can date the underlying
retrotransposition to more than 35 million years ago. Our findings offer a model 
as to how new exons may evolve during evolution. To our knowledge this is the
first example of a retropseudogene becoming part of an active gene in which both 
parental parts are well characterized and remain in-frame with their cDNA.

PMID: 10766566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Int J Radiat Biol. 2000 Feb;76(2):189-98.

Identification of genes regulated by UV/salicylic acid.

Paunesku T(1), Chang-Liu CM, Shearin-Jones P, Watson C, Milton J, Oryhon J,
Salbego D, Milosavljevic A, Woloschak GE.

Author information: 
(1)Bioscience Division, Argonne National Laboratory, IL 60439, USA.

PURPOSE: Previous work from the authors' group and others has demonstrated that
some of the effects of UV irradiation on gene expression are modulated in
response to the addition of salicylic acid to irradiated cells. The presumed
effector molecule responsible for this modulation is NF-kappaB. In the
experiments described here, differential-display RT-PCR was used to identify
those cDNAs that are differentially modulated by UV radiation with and without
the addition of salicylic acid.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Differential-display RT-PCR was used to identify
differentially expressed genes.
RESULTS: Eight such cDNAs are presented: lactate dehydrogenase (LDH-beta),
nuclear encoded mitochondrial NADH ubiquinone reductase 24 kDa (NDUFV2),
elongation initiation factor 4B (eIF4B), nuclear dots protein SP100, nuclear
encoded mitochondrial ATPase inhibitor (IF1), a cDNA similar to a subunit of
yeast CCAAT transcription factor HAP5, and two expressed sequence tags (AA187906 
and AA513156).
CONCLUSIONS: Sequences of four of these genes contained NF-kappaB DNA binding
sites of the type that may attract transrepressor p55/p55 NF-kappaB homodimers.
Down-regulation of these genes upon UV irradiation may contribute to increased
cell survival via suppression of p53 independent apoptosis.

PMID: 10716640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 10;275(10):7373-7.

Characterization of a novel serine/threonine kinase associated with nuclear
bodies.

Trost M(1), Kochs G, Haller O.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Virologie, Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene,
Universität Freiburg, D-79008 Freiburg, Germany.

A novel protein kinase, Mx-interacting protein kinase (PKM), has been identified 
in a yeast two-hybrid screen for interaction partners of human MxA, an
interferon-induced GTPase with antiviral activity against several RNA viruses. A 
highly conserved protein kinase domain is present in the N-terminal moiety of
PKM, whereas an Mx interaction domain overlaps with C-terminal PEST sequences.
PKM has a molecular weight of about 127,000 and exhibits high sequence homology
to members of a recently described family of homeodomain-interacting protein
kinases. Recombinant PKM has serine/threonine kinase activity that is abolished
by a single amino acid substitution in the ATP binding domain (K221W). PKM
catalyzes autophosphorylation and phosphorylation of various cellular and viral
proteins. PKM is expressed constitutively and colocalizes with the
interferon-inducible Sp100 protein and murine Mx1 in discrete nuclear structures 
known as nuclear bodies.

PMID: 10702310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Virol. 2000 Mar;74(6):2510-24.

Covalent modification of the transactivator protein IE2-p86 of human
cytomegalovirus by conjugation to the ubiquitin-homologous proteins SUMO-1 and
hSMT3b.

Hofmann H(1), Flöss S, Stamminger T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische und Molekulare Virologie der Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

The 86-kDa IE2 protein (IE2-p86) of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a potent
transactivator of viral as well as cellular promoters. Several lines of evidence 
indicate that this broad transactivation spectrum is mediated by protein-protein 
interactions. To identify novel cellular binding partners, we performed a yeast
two-hybrid screen using a N-terminal deletion mutant of IE2-p86 comprising amino 
acids 135 to 579 as a bait. Here, we report the isolation of two
ubiquitin-homologous proteins, SUMO-1 and hSMT3b, as well as their conjugating
activity hUBC9 (human ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme 9) as specific interaction
partners of HCMV IE2. The polypeptides SUMO-1 and hSMT3b have previously been
shown to be covalently coupled to a subset of nuclear proteins such as the
nuclear domain 10 (ND10) proteins PML and Sp100 in a manner analogous to
ubiquitinylation, which we call SUMOylation. By Western blot analysis, we were
able to show that the IE2-p86 protein can be partially converted to a 105-kDa
isoform in a dose-dependent manner after cotransfection of an epitope-tagged
SUMO-1. Immunoprecipitation experiments of the conjugated isoforms using
denaturing conditions further confirmed the covalent coupling of SUMO-1 or hSMT3b
to IE2-p86 both after transient transfection and after lytic infection of human
primary fibroblasts. Moreover, we defined two modification sites within IE2,
located in an immediate vicinity at amino acid positions 175 and 180, which
appear to be used alternatively for coupling. By using a SUMOylation-defective
mutant, we showed that the targeting of IE2-p86 to ND10 occurs independent of
this modification. However, a strong reduction of IE2-mediated transactivation of
two viral early promoters and a heterologous promoter was observed in
cotransfection analysis with the SUMOylation-defective mutant. This suggests a
functional relevance of covalent modification by ubiquitin-homologous proteins
for IE2-mediated transactivation, possibly by providing an additional interaction
motif for cellular cofactors.

PMCID: PMC111739
PMID: 10684265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Biol Cell. 1999 Nov;91(8):617-28.

Deletion of the fiber gene induces the storage of hexon and penton base proteins 
in PML/Sp100-containing inclusions during adenovirus infection.

Puvion-Dutilleul F(1), Legrand V, Mehtali M, Chelbi-Alix MK, de Thé H, Puvion E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Organisation fonctionnelle du Noyau de I'UPR 1983, Institut de
Recherches sur le Cancer CNRS/IFR1221, Villejuif, France.

The present study has documented changes in the in situ distribution of viral DNA
and capsid proteins in 293 cells infected with fiber gene-deleted adenoviruses.
It shows that infection results in the intense production of progeny viruses
which appear morphologically intact although they are devoid of fiber-coding
sequence in their genome and hence of fiber protein in their capsid. The data
confirm, therefore, that fiber protein is not essential for the assembly of
progeny viruses. The main contribution of our observations concerns specific
intranuclear structures induced by infection with either wild-type or fiber
gene-deleted viruses. These clear amorphous inclusions contain two cellular
proteins, PML and Sp100, which in non-infected cells co-localize to a special
type of nuclear bodies. PML and Sp100 nuclear bodies appear to directly modulate 
or to be altered in a wide variety of situations including viral infections, cell
death and transformation. In cells infected with fiber gene-deleted viruses, the 
clear amorphous inclusions now accumulate non-used hexon and penton base
proteins, whereas the absence of fiber protein prevents the assembly of capsid
proteins in crystallin arrays. Taken together, the data suggest that the clear
amorphous inclusions may correspond to storage sites of structural and regulatory
proteins. Consequently, these virus-induced structures may promote the productive
cycle of adenoviruses by regulating the amount of over-produced viral proteins
and the shutoff of the host cell metabolism.

PMID: 10629941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Feb;20(3):1072-82.

Covalent modification of the transcriptional repressor tramtrack by the
ubiquitin-related protein Smt3 in Drosophila flies.

Lehembre F(1), Badenhorst P, Müller S, Travers A, Schweisguth F, Dejean A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique, INSERM U 163, Institut
Pasteur, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

The ubiquitin-related SUMO-1 modifier can be covalently attached to a variety of 
proteins. To date, four substrates have been characterized in mammalian cells:
RanGAP1, IkappaBalpha, and the two nuclear body-associated PML and Sp100
proteins. SUMO-1 modification has been shown to be involved in protein
localization and/or stabilization and to require the activity of specialized
E1-activating and E2 Ubc9-conjugating enzymes. SUMO-1 homologues have been
identified in various species and belong to the so-called Smt3 family of
proteins. Here we have characterized the Drosophila homologues of mammalian
SUMO-1 and Ubc9 (termed dSmt3 and dUbc9, respectively). We show that dUbc9 is the
conjugating enzyme for dSmt3 and that dSmt3 can covalently modify a number of
proteins in Drosophila cells in addition to the human PML substrate. The dSmt3
transcript and protein are maternally deposited in embryos, where the protein
accumulates predominantly in nuclei. Similar to its human counterpart, dSmt3
protein is observed in a punctate nuclear pattern. We demonstrate that Tramtrack 
69 (Ttk69), a repressor of neuronal differentiation, is a bona fide in vivo
substrate for dSmt3 conjugation. Finally, we show that both the modified and
unmodified forms of Ttk69 can bind to a Ttk69 binding site in vitro. Moreover,
dSmt3 and Ttk69 proteins colocalize on polytene chromosomes, indicating that the 
dSmt3-conjugated Ttk69 species can bind at sites of Ttk69 action in vivo.
Altogether, these data indicate a high conservation of the Smt3 conjugation
pathway and further suggest that this mechanism may play a role in the
transcriptional regulation of cell differentiation in Drosophila flies.

PMCID: PMC85224
PMID: 10629064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Chromosome Res. 1999;7(8):649-53.

Origin of the chromosome 1 HSR of the house mouse detected by CGH.

Traut W(1), Weichenhan D, Eickhoff U, Winking H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie, Medizinische Universität Lübeck, Germany.
traut@molbio.mu-leubeck.de

The polymorphic Sp100-rs repeat cluster in chromosome band 1D of the house mouse,
Mus musculus, makes up as much as 0.1-5% of the haploid genome. 'High-copy'
versions of this long-range repeat cluster are cytogenetically apparent as
DAPI-negative chromomycin-A3-positive homogeneously staining regions (HSRs). The 
cluster is a relatively recent acquisition in the genus Mus; the related species 
M. caroli possesses neither the Sp100-rs cluster nor even the Sp100-rs gene.
Except for chromosomes with high-copy clusters, no major rearrangements are
visible in chromosomes 1 from M. musculus and M. caroli: they have the same order
of G-bands, DAPI-bands and chromomycin A3-bands. Comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) visualizes the cluster in M. musculus and detects a single
region of sequence homology to the cluster in M. caroli chromosome band 1D. This 
indicates that the M. musculus cluster has evolved in situ from sequences
originally present in the same chromosome band.

PMID: 10628666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Cell Sci. 1999 Dec;112 ( Pt 24):4581-8.

Cell cycle regulation of PML modification and ND10 composition.

Everett RD(1), Lomonte P, Sternsdorf T, van Driel R, Orr A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Virology Unit, Church Street, Glasgow G11 5JR, Scotland, UK.
r.everett@vir.gla.ac.uk

The nuclear sub-structures known as ND10, PODs or PML nuclear bodies can be
rapidly modified by diverse stimuli, and the resultant structural changes
correlate with events such as cellular transformation and successful virus
infection. We show that the ND10 components PML and Sp100 undergo profound
biochemical changes during the cell cycle. Both proteins are conjugated to the
ubiquitin-like protein SUMO-1 during interphase, but they become de-conjugated
during mitosis and an isoform of PML of distinct electrophoretic mobility
appears. This mitosis-specific form of PML is highly labile in vitro, but is
partially stabilised by phosphatase inhibitors. Treatment of interphase cells
with phosphatase inhibitors induces the production of a PML isoform of similar
gel mobility to the mitosis-specific species, and taken together these results
suggest that phosphorylation is an important factor in the differential
modification of PML during the cell cycle. PML and Sp100 normally tightly
co-localise in ND10 in interphase cells, but they become separated during
mitosis. Interphase cells treated with phosphatase inhibitors or subjected to
heat shock also show structural changes in ND10, accompanied by alterations to
the normal pattern of PML modification. Taken with previous findings on the
effects of infection by herpes simplex virus and adenovirus on ND10 structure and
PML modification, these results suggest that the many factors which have been
shown to modify ND10 structure may do so by interaction with the biochemical
mechanisms that act on ND10 components during the cell cycle.

PMID: 10574707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Cell Biol. 1999 Oct 18;147(2):221-34.

PML is critical for ND10 formation and recruits the PML-interacting protein daxx 
to this nuclear structure when modified by SUMO-1.

Ishov AM(1), Sotnikov AG, Negorev D, Vladimirova OV, Neff N, Kamitani T, Yeh ET, 
Strauss JF 3rd, Maul GG.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Nuclear domain 10 (ND10), also referred to as nuclear bodies, are discrete
interchromosomal accumulations of several proteins including promyelocytic
leukemia protein (PML) and Sp100. In this study, we investigated the mechanism of
ND10 assembly by identifying proteins that are essential for this process using
cells lines that lack individual ND10-associated proteins. We identified the
adapter protein Daxx and BML, the RecQ helicase missing in Bloom syndrome, as new
ND10-associated proteins. PML, but not BLM or Sp100, was found to be responsible 
for the proper localization of all other ND10-associated proteins since they are 
dispersed in PML-/- cells. Introducing PML into this cell line by transient
expression or fusion with PML-producing cells recruited ND10-associated proteins 
into de novo formed ND10 attesting to PMLs essential nature in ND10 formation. In
the absence of PML, Daxx is highly enriched in condensed chromatin. Its
recruitment to ND10 from condensed chromatin requires a small ubiquitin-related
modifier (SUMO-1) modification of PML and reflects the interaction between the
COOH-terminal domain of Daxx and PML. The segregation of Daxx from condensed
chromatin in the absence of PML to ND10 by increased accumulation of
SUMO-1-modified PML suggests the presence of a variable equilibrium between these
two nuclear sites. Our findings identify the basic requirements for ND10
formation and suggest a dynamic mechanism for protein recruitment to these
nuclear domains controlled by the SUMO-1 modification state of PML.

PMCID: PMC2174231
PMID: 10525530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Cell Sci. 1999 Oct;112 ( Pt 20):3443-54.

A dynamic connection between centromeres and ND10 proteins.

Everett RD(1), Earnshaw WC, Pluta AF, Sternsdorf T, Ainsztein AM, Carmena M,
Ruchaud S, Hsu WL, Orr A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Virology Unit, Church Street, Glasgow G11 5JR, Scotland UK.
r.everett@vir.gla.ac.uk

ND10, otherwise known as nuclear dots, PML nuclear bodies or PODs, are punctate
foci in interphase nuclei that contain several cellular proteins. The functions
of ND10 have not been well defined, but they are sensitive to external stimuli
such as stress and virus infection, and they are disrupted in malignant
promyelocytic leukaemia cells. Herpes simplex virus type 1 regulatory protein
Vmw110 induces the proteasome-dependent degradation of ND10 component proteins
PML and Sp100, particularly the species of these proteins which are covalently
conjugated to the ubiquitin-like protein SUMO-1. We have recently reported that
Vmw110 also induces the degradation of centromere protein CENP-C with consequent 
disruption of centromere structure. These observations led us to examine whether 
there were hitherto undetected connections between ND10 and centromeres. In this 
paper we report that hDaxx and HP1 (which have been shown to interact with CENP-C
and Sp100, respectively) are present in a proportion of both ND10 and interphase 
centromeres. Furthermore, the proteasome inhibitor MG132 induced an association
between centromeres and ND10 proteins PML and Sp100 in a significant number of
cells in the G(2) phase of the cell cycle. These results imply that there is a
dynamic, cell cycle regulated connection between centromeres and ND10 proteins
which can be stabilised by inhibition of proteasome-mediated proteolysis.

PMID: 10504293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1999 Jun;9(3):362-7.

The PML nuclear bodies: actors or extras?

Seeler JS(1), Dejean A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique INSERM U163 Institut Pasteur 28
rue du Docteur Roux, 75724, Paris, Cedex 15, France.

The PML and SP100-containing nuclear bodies (NBs) represent the best-studied
example of a defined nuclear substructure the integrity of which is compromised
in certain human diseases, including leukemia, neurodegenerative disorders and
viral infection. Although recent progress has underscored the unexpectedly broad 
involvement of NB constituents in the control of cell growth, gene regulation and
apoptosis in both pathological and normal contexts, evidence for a specific
physiological activity within the NBs remains scant, thus precluding a unifying
hypothesis for NB function.

PMID: 10377280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jun;19(6):4423-30.

Structural and functional heterogeneity of nuclear bodies.

Bloch DB(1), Chiche JD, Orth D, de la Monte SM, Rosenzweig A, Bloch KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. bloch@helix.mgh.harvard

The nuclear body is a cellular structure that appears to be involved in the
pathogenesis of acute promyelocytic leukemia and viral infection. In addition,
the nuclear body is a target of autoantibodies in patients with the autoimmune
disease primary biliary cirrhosis. Although the precise function of the nuclear
body in normal cellular biology is unknown, this structure may have a role in the
regulation of gene transcription. In a previous investigation, we identified a
leukocyte-specific, gamma interferon (IFN-gamma)-inducible autoantigen designated
Sp140. The objectives of the present study were to investigate the cellular
location of Sp140 with respect to the nuclear-body components PML and Sp100 and
to examine the potential role of Sp140 in the regulation of gene transcription.
We used adenovirus-mediated gene transfer to express Sp140 in human cells and
observed that the protein colocalized with PML and Sp100 in resting cells and
associated with structures containing PML during mitosis. In cells infected with 
the adenovirus expressing Sp140 and incubated with IFN-gamma, the number of
PML-Sp100 nuclear bodies per cell increased but immunoreactive Sp140 was not
evenly distributed among the nuclear bodies. Sp140 associated with a subset of
IFN-gamma-induced PML-Sp100 nuclear bodies. To examine the potential effect of
Sp140 on gene transcription, a plasmid encoding Sp140 fused to the DNA-binding
domain of GAL4 was cotransfected into COS cells with a chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene containing five GAL4-binding sites and a
simian virus 40 enhancer region. The GAL4-Sp140 fusion protein increased the
expression of the reporter gene. In contrast, Sp100 fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding
domain inhibited CAT activity in transfected mammalian cells. The results of this
study demonstrate that Sp140 associates with a subset of PML-Sp100 nuclear bodies
in IFN-gamma-treated cells and that Sp140 may activate gene transcription. Taken 
together, these observations suggest that the nuclear bodies within a cell may be
heterogeneous with respect to both composition and function.

PMCID: PMC104401
PMID: 10330182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Virol. 1999 Jun;73(6):5137-43.

Viral immediate-early proteins abrogate the modification by SUMO-1 of PML and
Sp100 proteins, correlating with nuclear body disruption.

Müller S(1), Dejean A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique, INSERM U 163, Institut
Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr. Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

PML nuclear bodies (NBs) are subnuclear structures whose integrity is compromised
in certain human diseases, including leukemia and neurodegenerative disorders.
Infection by a number of DNA viruses similarly triggers the reorganization of
these structures, suggesting an important role for the NBs in the viral infection
process. While expression of the adenovirus E4 ORF3 protein leads to only a
moderate redistribution of PML to filamentous structures, the herpes simplex
virus (HSV) ICP0 protein and the cytomegalovirus (CMV) IE1 protein both induce a 
complete disruption of the NB structure. Recently, we and others have shown that 
the NB proteins PML and Sp100 are posttranslationally modified by covalent
linkage with the ubiquitin-related SUMO-1 protein and that this modification may 
promote the assembly of these structures. Here we show that the HSV ICP0 and CMV 
IE1 proteins specifically abrogate the SUMO-1 modification of PML and Sp100,
whereas the adenovirus E4 ORF3 protein does not affect this process. The
potential of ICP0 and IE1 to alter SUMO-1 modification is directly linked to
their capacity to disassemble NBs, thus strengthening the role for SUMO-1
conjugation in maintenance of the structural integrity of the NBs. This
observation supports a model in which ICP0 and IE1 disrupt the NBs either by
preventing the formation or by degrading of the SUMO-1-modified PML and Sp100
protein species. Finally, we show that the IE1 protein itself is a substrate for 
SUMO-1 modification, thus representing the first viral protein found to undergo
this new type of posttranslational modification.

PMCID: PMC112559
PMID: 10233977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Liver. 1999 Apr;19(2):122-8.

Autoimmune cholangitis and primary biliary cirrhosis--an autoimmune enigma.

Kinoshita H(1), Omagari K, Whittingham S, Kato Y, Ishibashi H, Sugi K, Yano M,
Kohno S, Nakanuma Y, Penner E, Wesierska-Gadek J, Reynoso-Paz S, Gershwin ME,
Anderson J, Jois JA, Mackay IR.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Nagasaki University School of
Medicine, Japan.

AIMS/BACKGROUND: Autoimmune cholangitis/cholangiopathy (AIC) is an enigmatic
disease marked by chronic cholangitis, antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and
sero-negativity for conventionally detected antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA).
We examined whether AIC is a distinct entity, an AMA-negative variant of primary 
biliary cirrhosis (PBC), or a cholangiopathic variant of autoimmune hepatitis
(AIH) by comparing the clinical, laboratory and autoantibody profiles of 21 cases
of AIC, 37 cases PBC and 16 cases of AIH from selected Japanese patients.
METHODS: The specificities of AMA and ANA were determined by immunofluorescence, 
immunoblotting and enzyme inhibition assays using various mitochondrial and
nuclear autoantigens, and the frequencies for these groups were compared.
RESULTS: By clinical, biochemical and histological data, AIC and PBC were similar
and both were clearly distinct from AIH. Serologically, by immunofluorescence of 
AMA and ANA, there was polarisation. By immunoblotting, and notwithstanding the
negative test for AMA, a proportion of the AIC sera reacted with the E2 subunits 
of the 2-oxo-acid dehydrogenase enzyme complexes, but more particularly with the 
lower molecular weight E2 subunits. The antinuclear reactivity in AIC was with
centromere, Sp100 and nuclear pore complex proteins as in PBC, but preferentially
with the nuclear pore complex.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that AIC and PBC are similar diseases.
However this duo is of interest because, usually, among sets of autoimmune
syndromes, differences in serological targetting are matched by differences in
clinical presentation: AIC and PBC are an exception to this.

PMID: 10220742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 30;274(18):12555-66.

The nuclear dot protein sp100, characterization of domains necessary for
dimerization, subcellular localization, and modification by small ubiquitin-like 
modifiers.

Sternsdorf T(1), Jensen K, Reich B, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für Experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der
Universität Hamburg, Martinistrasse 52, D-20251 Hamburg, Germany.

The Sp100 and promyelocytic leukemia proteins (PML) are constituents of nuclear
domains, known as nuclear dots (NDs) or PML bodies, and are both covalently
modified by the small ubiquitin-related protein SUMO-1. NDs play a role in
autoimmunity, virus infections, and in the etiology of acute promyelocytic
leukemia. To date, little is known about the function of the Sp100 protein. Here 
we analyzed Sp100 domains that determine its subcellular localization,
dimerization, and SUMOylation. A functional nuclear localization signal and an
ND-targeting region that coincides with an Sp100 homodimerization domain were
mapped. Sequences similar to the Sp100 homodimerization/ND-targeting region occur
in several other proteins and constitute a novel protein motif, termed HSR
domain. The lysine residue of the Sp100 protein, to which SUMO-1 is covalently
linked, was mapped within and may therefore modulate the previously described HP1
protein-binding site. A consensus sequence for SUMOylation of proteins in general
is suggested. SUMOylation strictly depended on a functional nuclear localization 
signal but was not necessary for nuclear import or ND targeting. A
three-dimensional structure of Sp100, which supports the mapping data and
provides additional information on Sp100 structure/function relationships, was
generated by computer modeling. Taken together, our studies indicate the
existence of well defined Sp100 domains with functions in ND targeting, nuclear
import, nuclear SUMOylation, and protein-protein interaction.

PMID: 10212234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Gastroenterol Hepatol. 1999 Jan;22(1):11-3.

[Anti-Sp100 and anti-Gp210 in the diagnosis of primary biliary cirrhosis in
patients with autoimmune cholangitis].

[Article in Spanish]

Romero Gómez M(1), Wichmann I, Otero Fernández MA, Suárez García E, Grande L,
Núñez J, Nevado Santos M, Castro Fernández M.

Author information: 
(1)Sección de Aparato Digestivo, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío,
Sevilla.

We describe 2 women with features of autoimmune cholangitis. Serum biochemical
studies showed cholestasis and increased immunoglobulin M with negative
antimitochondrial antibodies. Markers of hepatitis B and C viruses were absent.
Both had positive antinuclear antibodies. One had a speckled pattern (multiple
nuclear dots) and the other a perinuclear pattern (pore nuclear). In the first
case anti-Sp100 was positive by EIA and in the second anti-Gp210 was detected by 
immunoblot. Diagnosis of primary biliary cirrhosis was made and the patients were
treated with UDCA. Current knowledge indicates that determination of anti-Sp100
and anti-Gp210 substantially improves diagnosis of primary biliary cirrhosis as
these ANA are highly specific for this disease. These autoantibodies may lead to 
the classification of different groups of patient included in autoimmune
cholangitis. All patients with autoimmune cholangitis should be tested for
anti-Sp100 and anti-Gp210.

PMID: 10089705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Autoimmunity. 1999;29(1):33-42.

Identification of major linear epitopes on the sp100 nuclear PBC autoantigen by
the gene-fragment phage-display technology.

Blüthner M(1), Schäfer C, Schneider C, Bautz FA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Germany.

Approximately 20-30% of sera from patients suffering from primary biliary
cirrhosis contain autoantibodies against a nuclear protein termed sp100. By
indirect cytoimmunofluorescence it was shown that the sp100 autoantigen is
distributed in up to 20 dot-like structures per nucleus co-localizing with the
so-called nuclear bodies. In western blots these sera react with a protein with
an apparent molecular mass of 100kDa. By screening expression libraries with
affinity-purified anti-sp100 antibodies we isolated a full-length sp100 cDNA
whose sequence exactly matched the previously published sp100 sequence and
encodes a protein of 481 amino acids with a deduced molecular mass of 53 kDa. In 
an attempt to determine immunoreactive regions on the sp100 antigen with the
recently developed gene-fragment phage-display technology we were able to
identify a stretch of sixteen amino acids (IKKEKPFSNSKVECQA) at position 296-311 
as a major antigenic region (antigenic region 1) on the sp100-autoantigen. A
second antigenic region (antigenic region 2) of twenty amino acids in length
could be identified between amino acids 332-351 (EGSTDVDEPLEVFISAPRSE). By using 
immobilized synthetic peptides and various sp100-positive PBC patient sera the
corresponding epitopes could be shown to be centered around epitope cores of six 
amino acids (SNSKVE, antigenic region 1) and nine amino acids (EPLEVFISA,
antigenic region 2) respectively.

PMID: 10052683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Oncogene. 1999 Jan 28;18(4):935-41.

Herpes virus induced proteasome-dependent degradation of the nuclear
bodies-associated PML and Sp100 proteins.

Chelbi-Alix MK(1), de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Propre de Recherche 9051,
Laboratoire associé au Comité de Paris de la Ligue Contre le Cancer, Institut
Universitaire d'Hématologie de l'université de Paris VII, France.

The PML protein is associated to nuclear bodies (NBs) whose functions are as yet 
unknown. PML and two other NBs-associated proteins, Sp100 And ISG20 are directly 
induced by interferons (IFN). PML and Sp100 proteins are covalently linked to
SUMO-1, and ubiquitin-like peptide. PML NBs are disorganized in acute
promyelocytic leukemia and during several DNA virus infections. In particular,
the HSV-1 ICP0 protein is known to delocalize PML from NBs. Thus, NBs could play 
an important role in oncogenesis, IFN response and viral infections. Here, we
show that HSV-1 induced PML protein degradation without altering its mRNA level. 
This degradation was time- and multiplicity of infection-dependent. Sp100 protein
was also degraded, while another SUMO-1 conjugated protein, RanGAP1 and the
IFN-induced protein kinase PKR were not. The proteasome inhibitor MG132 abrogated
the HSV-1-induced PML and Sp100 degradation and partially restored their
NB-localization. HSV-1 induced PML and Sp100 degradation constitutes a new
example of viral inactivation of IFN target gene products.

PMID: 10023669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Cell Sci. 1999 Mar;112 ( Pt 5):733-47.

Splice variants of the nuclear dot-associated Sp100 protein contain homologies to
HMG-1 and a human nuclear phosphoprotein-box motif.

Guldner HH(1), Szostecki C, Schröder P, Matschl U, Jensen K, Lüders C, Will H,
Sternsdorf T.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der
Universität Hamburg, Martinistr. 52, D-20251 Hamburg, Germany.

Sp100 and PML are interferon-inducible proteins associated with a new class of
nuclear domains (known as nuclear dots or PML bodies) which play a role in
tumorigenesis, virus infections, and autoimmunity. While PML is extensively
alternatively spliced, only two splice variants are known for Sp100. Here we
describe the identification and characterization of several Sp100 splice variant 
proteins and support their existence by elucidation of the 3'-end of the Sp100
gene. Some of the splice variants contain a domain of significant sequence
similarity with two previously described highly related interferon-inducible
nuclear phosphoproteins as well as to suppressin and DEAF-1, which altogether
define a novel protein motif, termed HNPP-box. One class of splice variants
contains an almost complete and highly conserved copy of the DNA-binding high
mobility group 1 protein sequence and thus represent novel HMG-box proteins. When
expressed transiently, both major classes of Sp100 splice variant proteins
localize in part to nuclear dots/PML bodies and in addition to different nuclear 
domains. Furthermore, PML was occasionally redistributed. These data indicate
that alternatively spliced Sp100 proteins are expressed, differ in part in
localization from Sp100, and might bind to chromatin via the HMG domain.

PMID: 9973607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Oct;12(10):1619-39.

Characterization of a nuclear deformed epidermal autoregulatory factor-1
(DEAF-1)-related (NUDR) transcriptional regulator protein.

Huggenvik JI(1), Michelson RJ, Collard MW, Ziemba AJ, Gurley P, Mowen KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine,
Carbondale 62901-6523, USA. jhuggenvik@som.siu.edu

A monkey kidney cDNA that encodes a nuclear regulatory factor was identified by
expression and affinity binding to a synthetic retinoic acid response element
(RARE) and was used to isolate human placental and rat germ cell cDNAs by
hybridization. The cDNAs encode a 59-kDa protein [nuclear DEAF-1-related (NUDR)] 
which shows sequence similarity to the Drosophila Deformed epidermal
autoregulatory factor-1 (DEAF-1), a nonhomeodomain cofactor of embryonic Deformed
gene expression. Similarities to other proteins indicate five functional domains 
in NUDR including an alanine-rich region prevalent in developmental transcription
factors, a domain found in the promyelocytic leukemia-associated SP100 proteins, 
and a zinc finger homology domain associated with the AML1/MTG8 oncoprotein.
Although NUDR mRNA displayed a wide tissue distribution in rats, elevated levels 
of protein were only observed in testicular germ cells, developing fetus, and
transformed cell lines. Nuclear localization of NUDR was demonstrated by
immunocytochemistry and by a green fluorescent protein-NUDR fusion protein.
Site-directed mutagenesis of a nuclear localization signal resulted in
cytoplasmic localization of the protein and eliminated NUDR-dependent
transcriptional activation. Recombinant NUDR protein showed affinity for the RARE
in mobility shifts; however it was efficiently displaced by retinoic acid
receptor (RAR)/retinoid X receptor (RXR) complexes. In transient transfections,
NUDR produced up to 26-fold inductions of a human proenkephalin promoter-reporter
plasmid, with minimal effects on the promoters for prodynorphin or thymidine
kinase. Placement of a RARE on the proenkephalin promoter increased
NUDR-dependent activation to 41-fold, but this RARE-dependent increase was not
transferable to a thymidine kinase promoter. Recombinant NUDR protein showed
minimal binding affinity for proenkephalin promoter sequences, but was able to
select DNA sequences from a random oligonucleotide library that had similar
core-binding motifs (TTCG) as those recognized by DEAF-1. This motif is also
present between the half-sites of several endogenous RAREs. The derived
consensus- binding motif recognized by NUDR (TTCGGGNNTTTCCGG) was confirmed by
mobility shift and deoxyribonuclease I (DNase I) protection assays; however, the 
consensus sequence was also unable to confer NUDR-dependent transcriptional
activation to the thymidine kinase promoter. Our data suggests that NUDR may
activate transcription independently of promoter binding, perhaps through
protein-protein interaction with basal transcription factors, or by activation of
secondary factors. The sequence and functional similarities between NUDR and
DEAF-1 suggest that NUDR may also act as a cofactor to regulate the transcription
of genes during fetal development or differentiation of testicular cells.

PMID: 9773984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;80(1-4):226-31.

Evolution by fusion and amplification: the murine Sp100-rs gene cluster.

Weichenhan D(1), Kunze B, Traut W, Winking H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie, Medizinische Universität zu Lübeck, Germany.

Sp100 is a single-copy gene in the human and the mouse. A related gene, Sp100-rs,
occurs in multiple copies and forms a conspicuous cluster in the mouse chromosome
1. Murine Sp100 and Sp100-rs are homologous from the promoter up to a position in
intron 3, but they differ 3' of that position. In the genus Mus, Sp100-rs is
present in one phylogenetic branch, represented by the house mouse, M. musculus, 
but probably does not exist in another branch, represented by M. caroli. Thus,
Sp100-rs arose relatively late in the evolution of the genus Mus, whereas Sp100
existed in the common ancestor of the human and the mouse. The Sp100-rs gene
cluster probably evolved by gene fusion followed by amplification and
diversification.

PMID: 9678363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Jun 23;95(13):7322-6.

Chromatin components as part of a putative transcriptional repressing complex.

Lehming N(1), Le Saux A, Schüller J, Ptashne M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 7 Divinity
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

The Drosophila HMG1-like protein DSP1 was identified by its ability to inhibit
the transcriptional activating function of Dorsal in a promoter-specific fashion 
in yeast. We show here that DSP1 as well as its mammalian homolog hHMG2 bind to
the mammalian protein SP100B and that SP100B in turn binds to human homologs of
HP1. The latter is a Drosophila protein that is involved in transcriptional
silencing. Each of these proteins represses transcription when tethered to DNA in
mammalian cells. These results suggest how heterochromatin proteins might be
recruited to specific sites on DNA with resultant specific effects on gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC22604
PMID: 9636147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Jun 23;95(13):7316-21.

Interaction of SP100 with HP1 proteins: a link between the promyelocytic
leukemia-associated nuclear bodies and the chromatin compartment.

Seeler JS(1), Marchio A, Sitterlin D, Transy C, Dejean A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique, Institut National de la Santé 
et de la Recherche Médicale U163, Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr. Roux, 75724
Paris Cedex 15.

The PML/SP100 nuclear bodies (NBs) were first described as discrete subnuclear
structures containing the SP100 protein. Subsequently, they were shown to contain
the PML protein which is part of the oncogenic PML-RARalpha hybrid produced by
the t(15;17) chromosomal translocation characteristic of acute promyelocytic
leukemia. Yet, the physiological role of these nuclear bodies remains unknown.
Here, we show that SP100 binds to members of the heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) 
families of non-histone chromosomal proteins. Further, we demonstrate that a
naturally occurring splice variant of SP100, here called SP100-HMG, is a member
of the high mobility group-1 (HMG-1) protein family and may thus possess
DNA-binding potential. Both HP1 and SP100-HMG concentrate in the PML/SP100 NBs,
and overexpression of SP100 leads to enhanced accumulation of endogenous HP1 in
these structures. When bound to a promoter, SP100, SP100-HMG and HP1 behave as
transcriptional repressors in transfected mammalian cells. These observations
present molecular evidence for an association between the PML/SP100 NBs and the
chromatin nuclear compartment. They support a model in which the NBs may play a
role in certain aspects of chromatin dynamics.

PMCID: PMC22602
PMID: 9636146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Hepatol. 1998 May;28(5):824-8.

The antinuclear autoantibodies Sp100 and gp210 persist after orthotopic liver
transplantation in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis.

Luettig B(1), Boeker KH, Schoessler W, Will H, Loges S, Schmidt E, Worman HJ,
Gershwin ME, Manns MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hannover Medical School,
Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Primary biliary cirrhosis is an autoimmune liver disease which
is characterized by the presence of autoantibodies directed against mitochondrial
components which belong to the pyruvate dehydrogenase enzyme complex. Apart from 
antibodies against mitochondrial components, primary biliary cirrhosis patients
often show antibodies against nuclear components, of which anti-Sp100 and
anti-gp210 are considered to be disease specific. We investigated the incidence
and course of antibodies against nuclear components in primary biliary cirrhosis 
patients before and after liver transplantation.
METHODS: Sera from 42 primary biliary cirrhosis patients were studied using
indirect immunofluorescence to detect antibodies against mitochondrial components
and antibodies against nuclear components, ELISA to detect anti-Sp100, and
immunoblot analysis to detect anti-gp210 and antibodies against nuclear
components subtypes.
RESULTS: Ninety-three percent of primary biliary cirrhosis patients in our study 
were antimitochondrial antibody positive. Forty-three percent of the patients
were antinuclear antibody positive. Of these, 35% had antibodies against Sp100
and 36% were positive for anti-gp210. After transplantation, antimitochondrial
antibody titers as well as antinuclear antibody titers decreased in all patients.
Autoantibodies in low titer persisted for up to 13 years. The pattern of nuclear 
autoantigens recognized by patient sera was unchanged after liver
transplantation. However, the antinuclear antibody pattern was very different
between the individual patients. Anti-Sp100 and anti-gp210 were not detected in
sera of patients with autoimmune hepatitis, hepatitis C infection, inflammatory
bowel disease, connective tissue diseases, or primary sclerosing cholangitis. The
serum alkaline phosphatase level was not different in antinuclear antibody
negative or positive patients before or after transplantation.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the persistence of antibodies against mitochondrial
components, and anti-Sp100 and anti-gp210 in primary biliary cirrhosis patients
after liver transplantation is disease specific, but that this does not reflect
recurrent disease activity in the graft.

PMID: 9625318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Cell Biol. 1997 Dec 29;139(7):1621-34.

Evidence for covalent modification of the nuclear dot-associated proteins PML and
Sp100 by PIC1/SUMO-1.

Sternsdorf T(1), Jensen K, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für Experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der
Universität Hamburg, D-20251 Hamburg, Federal Republic of Germany.

PML and Sp100 proteins are associated with nuclear domains, known as nuclear dots
(NDs). They were discovered in the context of leukemic transformation and as an
autoantigen in primary biliary cirrhosis, respectively. Both proteins are
expressed in the form of many COOH-terminally spliced variants, and their
expression is enhanced by interferons (IFN). The recent finding that PIC1/SUMO-1,
a small ubiquitin-like protein, is covalently linked to the RanGAP1 protein of
the nuclear pore complex and also binds PML in yeast cells led us to determine
whether PML is covalently modified by PIC1/SUMO-1 and whether the same is true
for Sp100. We found an immune reaction of PML and Sp100 proteins with a
PIC1/SUMO-1-specific monoclonal antibody by immunoblotting when using cell
extracts prepared from stably transfected cells inducibly expressing one isoform 
of each protein as well as from nontransfected cells. In contrast, both proteins 
did not react when synthesized in vitro. Immunofluorescence staining showed that 
PIC1/SUMO-1 colocalized with Sp100 and PML in NDs except in mitotic cells, in
which PML and Sp100 are dissociated. Cell fractionation and immunoblotting
demonstrated that PIC1/SUMO-1 immunoreactive Sp100 in IFN-treated and untreated
cells was exclusively nuclear, whereas nonmodified Sp100 was also found in the
cytoplasm. Taken together, these data strongly suggest covalent modification of
specific nuclear isoforms of Sp100 and PML by PIC1/SUMO-1. This modification may 
play a regulatory role in ND structure, composition, and function.

PMCID: PMC2132645
PMID: 9412458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Virol. 1998 Feb;72(2):1043-51.

Resistance to virus infection conferred by the interferon-induced promyelocytic
leukemia protein.

Chelbi-Alix MK(1), Quignon F, Pelicano L, Koken MH, de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR 9051, Centre Hayem, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France.
mchelbi@infobiogen.fr

The interferon (IFN)-induced promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein is specifically
associated with nuclear bodies (NBs) whose functions are yet unknown. Two of the 
NB-associated proteins, PML and Sp100, are induced by IFN. Here we show that
overexpression of PML and not Sp100 induces resistance to infections by vesicular
stomatitis virus (VSV) (a rhabdovirus) and influenza A virus (an orthomyxovirus) 
but not by encephalomyocarditis virus (a picornavirus). Inhibition of viral
multiplication was dependent on both the level of PML expression and the
multiplicity of infection and reached 100-fold. PML was shown to interfere with
VSV mRNA and protein synthesis. Compared to the IFN mediator MxA protein, PML had
less powerful antiviral activity. While nuclear body localization of PML did not 
seem to be required for the antiviral effect, deletion of the PML coiled-coil
domain completely abolished it. Taken together, these results suggest that PML
can contribute to the antiviral state induced in IFN-treated cells.

PMCID: PMC124576
PMID: 9444998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Immunobiology. 1997 Dec;198(1-3):307-31.

Nuclear dots: actors on many stages.

Sternsdorf T(1), Grötzinger T, Jensen K, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie,
Universität Hamburg, Germany.

Nuclear dots (NDs), alternatively designated nuclear bodies (NBs), PML oncogenic 
domains (PODs), nuclear domain 10 (ND10) or Kr-bodies, became a major topic for
researchers in many fields only recently. Originally described as an
autoantigenic target in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis, they are now
also known to play a role in development of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
and possibly other forms of neoplasia. Size, number and composition of NDs are
regulated throughout the cell cycle. Infection with herpes simplex virus,
adenovirus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr-virus, influenza virus and human T cell
lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV I) strongly modifies ND structure through viral
regulatory proteins. Due to this finding and because at least three of the
cellular ND proteins are highly interferon-inducible, a function of NDs in early 
viral infection or in antiviral response has been postulated. Functional data are
currently available only for two of the ND-associated proteins. The Sp100 protein
seems to have transcriptional transactivating property, whereas the promyelocytic
leukemia protein (PML) was reported to suppress growth and transformation. Here, 
we give a brief overview of the data currently available on NDs. Thus, we hope to
link seemingly unrelated findings in the literature on oncology, virology, cell
biology and immunology.

PMID: 9442402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Exp Cell Res. 1997 Nov 25;237(1):207-16.

Cystine starvation induces reversible large-body formation from nuclear bodies in
T24 cells.

Kamei H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Life Science and Biomolecular Engineering, Japan Tobacco, Inc., 
Yokohama, Japan. kamei@tcrl.jti.co.jp

Nuclear bodies (PML nuclear bodies; also referred to as PODs or ND10) are small
intranuclear structures which contain PML as an essential constituent and from
several to 20 or more of them are present per nucleus. When starved of amino
acids, nuclear bodies reversibly form one or more doughnut-shaped large bodies in
T24 cells. Here, I present evidence that cystine is essential for the maintenance
of normal-sized nuclear bodies: Cystine deficiency induces the formation of large
bodies, and the addition of cystine or cysteine induces the reappearance of many 
normal-sized nuclear bodies. Both PML and Sp100 exhibit the same behavior as that
of the nuclear body antigen(s) of AP435 MAb with regard to these changes,
L-buthionine-[S,R]-sulfoximine, an inhibitor of glutathione synthesis, also
induced the formation of large bodies that could be reversed to nuclear bodies by
both beta-mercaptoethanol and dithiothreitol as well as cystine. Large bodies
have the characteristic electron-dense, spherical, and concentric or reticulated 
features of nuclear bodies as observed by electron microscopy. The results
indicate that environmental cystine controls reversible change between nuclear
bodies and large bodies, which are not mere aggregates of nuclear bodies, but
rather reconstituted nuclear bodies.

PMID: 9417884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Oncogene. 1997 Nov 6;15(19):2349-59.

Retinoic acid enhances the expression of interferon-induced proteins: evidence
for multiple mechanisms of action.

Pelicano L(1), Li F, Schindler C, Chelbi-Alix MK.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UPR 9051, Hôpital St Louis, Paris, France.

Retinoic acid (RA) and interferons (IFNs) are negative regulators of cell
proliferation. In vitro and in vivo, their combination leads to a more potent
growth inhibition. However, the molecular mechanisms by which RA and IFNs
potentiate each other are not fully understood. As some IFN-induced gene products
regulate cell growth and/or antiviral activity, we analysed the effects of RA on 
their expressions. RA increases the level of 2'5'oligoadenylate synthetase, p68
kinase, the promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) and Sp100 in both HL-60 and WISH
cells. Moreover, RA and IFN act cooperatively to increase the expression of these
proteins. RA also inhibits vesicular stomatitis virus replication and induces a
higher antiviral state and growth inhibition when combined with IFN. RA
stimulates the IFN regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) gene expression directly through
the GAS motif and causes the induction and secretion of IFNalpha. Additional
mechanisms could be involved as RA increases the level of signal transducing
activators of transcription (STAT) proteins, and enhances the IFN-induced STAT
activation, suggesting that cooperative effects by RA and IFN are mediated
through multiple pathways.

PMID: 9393879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Hepatology. 1997 Nov;26(5):1123-30.

Prevalence, kinetics, and therapeutic modulation of autoantibodies against Sp100 
and promyelocytic leukemia protein in a large cohort of patients with primary
biliary cirrhosis.

Züchner D(1), Sternsdorf T, Szostecki C, Heathcote EJ, Cauch-Dudek K, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der
Universität Hamburg, Germany.

Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) staining nuclear dot structures predominantly occur 
in primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) patients and recognize the Sp100 and
promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML). From retrospective analysis of sera from a 
clinically well-defined Canadian series of 170 PBC patients included into a
24-month therapeutic trial of ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), we report the
prevalence of these ANA and their dynamics in the course of the disease. Using an
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), anti-Sp100 autoantibodies were shown
in 35 (21%) patients. Thirty-three patients (19%) had autoantibodies against PML 
as determined by indirect immunostaining of cells overexpressing PML. Altogether,
anti-nuclear dot autoantibodies were present in 25% of the 170 PBC patients.
Their occurrence correlated with an unfavorable disease course, because these
patients progressed significantly more frequently from early stages (I/II) to
late stages (III/IV) within the 24-month observation period (P < .05). During the
course of the disease, the autoantibody levels against the Sp100 full-length
protein remained nearly constant in all 35 positive patients. However, 9 patients
showed remarkable changes in Sp100 epitope recognition as revealed by ELISA and
immunoblotting. When the occurrence of these changes and the treatment of the
patients were compared retrospectively, it became evident that 8 of the 9
patients had received UDCA (42% of all Sp100-positive patients treated with
UDCA). These findings indicate subtle changes of the Sp100 epitope recognition
pattern during the natural course of the disease and its induction or
acceleration by UDCA treatment. This implies that UDCA can modulate
immunoglobulin (Ig) expression not only quantitatively, but also qualitatively.

PMID: 9362351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Genomics. 1997 Aug 1;43(3):298-306.

Structure and expression of the murine Sp100 nuclear dot gene.

Weichenhan D(1), Kunze B, Zacker S, Traut W, Winking H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie, Medizinische Universität zu Lübeck, Germany.
weichenh@molbio.mu-luebeck.de

The human SP100 gene encodes an autoantigen that colocalizes with two other
proteins, PML and NDP52, in distinct nuclear domains, called "nuclear dots"
(NDs). NDs do not overlap with other known subnuclear structures, and their
function is still unknown. Patients suffering from the autoimmune disease primary
biliary cirrhosis often produce antibodies against the SP100 protein. The present
study describes the structure and expression of the murine Sp100 gene. In the
species Mus caroli, Sp100 consists of 17 exons that are distributed over a range 
of 52 kb. The human and murine Sp100 promoters are very similar, and both harbor 
an interferon-stimulated response element. Like its human counterpart, the murine
Sp100 gene is responsive to interferon treatment. The house mouse, Mus musculus, 
harbors the Sp100 gene and a second gene with homology to Sp100, the multicopy
Sp100-rs gene. However, in contrast to the genuine mouse homolog, Sp100-rs shares
only segmental homology with the human Sp100 gene. Replacement of the murine
Sp100 gene by a defective copy is now feasible and should shed light on its
function in an animal model.

PMID: 9268632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 1;272(31):19457-63.

Molecular cloning of a new interferon-induced PML nuclear body-associated
protein.

Gongora C(1), David G, Pintard L, Tissot C, Hua TD, Dejean A, Mechti N.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Genetique Moleculaire de Montpellier-UMR 9942, CNRS, 34033
Montpellier Cedex 1, France.

Transcriptional induction of genes is an essential part of the cellular response 
to interferons. We have established a cDNA library from human lymphoblastoid
Daudi cells treated for 16 h with human alpha/beta-interferon (IFN) and made use 
of differential screening to search for as yet unidentified IFN-regulated genes. 
In the course of this study, we have isolated a human cDNA that codes for a
20-kDa protein sharing striking homology with the product of the Xenopus laevis
XPMC2 gene. This new gene is induced by both type I and II IFNs in various cell
lines and will be referred to as ISG20 for interferon-stimulated gene product of 
20 kDa. Confocal immunofluorescence analysis of the subcellular localization of
ISG20 protein reveals that it is closely associated with PML and SP100 gene
products within the large nuclear matrix-associated multiprotein complexes termed
the PML nuclear bodies.

PMID: 9235947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Cell Biol. 1997 Jul 28;138(2):435-48.

Cellular localization, expression, and structure of the nuclear dot protein 52.

Sternsdorf T(1), Jensen K, Züchner D, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der
Universität Hamburg, D-20251 Hamburg, FRG.

Nuclear dots containing PML and Sp100 proteins (NDs) play a role in the
development of acute promyelocytic leukemia, are modified after infection with
various viruses, and are autoimmunogenic in patients with primary biliary
cirrhosis (PBC). PML and Sp100 gene expression is strongly enhanced by
interferons (IFN). Based on immunostaining with a monoclonal antibody (mAb C8A2),
a third protein, nuclear dot protein 52 (NDP52), was recently localized in NDs.
Here we analyzed the cellular localization, expression, and structure of NDP52 in
more detail. Our NDP52-specific sera revealed mainly cytoplasmic staining but no 
ND pattern, neither in untreated nor in IFN-treated cells. Cells transfected with
NDP52 expression vectors showed exclusively cytoplasmic staining. In subcellular 
fractionation experiments, NDP52 was found in cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions. 
Unlike as described for Sp100 and PML, NDP52 mRNA and protein levels were only
marginally enhanced by IFN gamma and not enhanced at all by IFN beta. NDP52
homodimerization but no heterodimerization with Sp100 or PML could be
demonstrated. None of the 93 PBC sera tested contained autoantibodies against
NDP52. Finally, mAb C8A2 reacted not only with NDP52 but also with a
conformation-dependent epitope on the Sp100 protein. These data imply that NDP52 
forms homodimers but no heterodimers with Sp100 and PML, lacks autoantigenicity
in PBC, localizes mainly in the cytoplasm, and is associated with the nucleus,
but not with NDs. Finally, unlike Sp100 and PML, NDP52 expression is neither
markedly enhanced nor localization detectably altered by type I and II IFNs.

PMCID: PMC2138200
PMID: 9230084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Virol. 1997 Jun;71(6):4599-613.

The major immediate-early proteins IE1 and IE2 of human cytomegalovirus
colocalize with and disrupt PML-associated nuclear bodies at very early times in 
infected permissive cells.

Ahn JH(1), Hayward GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

The major immediate-early (MIE) gene products of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) are
nuclear phosphoproteins that are thought to play key roles in initiating lytic
cycle gene regulation pathways. We have examined the intranuclear localization
pattern of both the IE1 and IE2 proteins in virus-infected and DNA-transfected
cells. When HCMV-infected human diploid fibroblast (HF) cells were stained with
specific monoclonal antibodies, IE1 localized as a mixture of nuclear diffuse and
punctate patterns at very early times (2 h) but changed to an exclusively nuclear
diffuse pattern at later times. In contrast, IE2 was distributed predominantly in
nuclear punctate structures continuously from 2 to at least 12 h after infection.
These punctate structures resembled the preexisting PML-associated nuclear bodies
(ND10 or PML oncogenic domains [PODs]) that are disrupted and dispersed by the
IE110 protein as a very early event in herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection.
However, HCMV differed from HSV by leading instead to a change in both the PML
and SP100 protein distribution from punctate bodies to uniform diffuse patterns, 
a process that was complete in 50% of the cells at 2 h and in 90% of the cells by
4 h after infection. Confocal double-label indirect immunofluorescence assay
analysis confirmed that both IE1 and IE2 colocalized transiently with PML in
punctate bodies at very early times after infection. In transient expression
assays, introduction of IE1-encoding plasmid DNA alone into Vero or HF cells
produced the typical total redistribution of PML into a uniform nuclear diffuse
pattern together with the IE1 protein, whereas introduction of IE2-encoding
plasmid DNA alone resulted in stable colocalization of the IE2 protein with PML
in the PODs. A truncated mutant form of IE1 gave large nuclear aggregates and
failed to redistribute PML, and similarly a deleted mutant form of IE2 failed to 
colocalize with the punctate PML bodies, confirming the specificity of these
effects. Furthermore, both Vero and U373 cell lines constitutively expressing IE1
also showed total PML relocalization together with the IE1 protein into a nuclear
diffuse pattern, although a very small percentage of the cells which failed to
express IE1 reverted to a punctate PML pattern. Finally, the PML redistribution
activity of IE1 and the direct association of IE2 with PML punctate bodies were
both confirmed by infection with E1A-negative recombinant adenovirus vectors
expressing either IE1 or IE2 alone. These results confirm that transient
colocalization with and disruption of PML-associated nuclear bodies by IE1 and
continuous targeting to PML-associated nuclear bodies by IE2 are intrinsic
properties of these two MIE regulatory proteins, which we suggest may represent
critical initial events for efficient lytic cycle infection by HCMV.

PMCID: PMC191682
PMID: 9151854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Semin Liver Dis. 1997 Feb;17(1):71-8.

Autoantibodies against "nuclear dots" in primary biliary cirrhosis.

Szostecki C(1), Guldner HH, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institu für Experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie,
Universität Hamburg, Germany.

Autoantibodies against nuclear proteins are not always but rather frequently
present in sera of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC). The specificity
and diagnostic value of these autoantibodies for PBC have only recently become
clear through cloning of the cDNA of some of the corresponding autoantigens which
allowed the establishment of immunological assays with recombinant autoantigens
expressed in E. coli and eukaryotic cells. In this report we summarize primarily 
the knowledge on the structure and putative function of two nuclear autoantigens,
the Sp100 and PML proteins, which are present in so-called nuclear dots (NDs) and
against which autoantibodies are present in a subpopulation of PBC patients.
Furthermore, the type of autoimmune response (epitope specificity and
immunoglobulin class) against both the Sp100 and PML proteins and the specificity
of the anti-Sp100 and anti-PML autoantibodies for PBC patients and patients with 
other autoimmune diseases is reviewed. Current knowledge clearly indicates that
determination of anti-Sp100 and anti-PML autoantibodies substantially improves
diagnosis of PBC as these autoantibodies are highly specific for this disease
even when autoantibodies against mitochondrial antigens, a hallmark of most PBC
patients, are not found. The type of autoimmune response against the Sp100 and
PML proteins also provides some clues about possible mechanisms which lead to
autoantigenicity of both proteins.

PMID: 9089912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Z Gastroenterol. 1997 Feb;35(2):113-21.

Antineutrophil nuclear antibodies (ANNA) in primary biliary cirrhosis: their
prevalence and antigen specificity.

Orth T(1), Gerken G, Meyer Zum Büschenfelde KH, Mayet WJ.

Author information: 
(1)I. Department of Internal Medicine, Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz.

Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) are a group of autoantibodies first 
associated with Wegener's granulomatosis (WG). In autoimmune liver diseases, ANCA
have been described recently in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC),
autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) and primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC). Controversy 
exists about the prevalence and specificity of ANCA in patients with autoimmune
liver diseases. The purpose of this study was first to assess the prevalence of
antineutrophil antibodies in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis and second
to identify possible target antigens of antineutrophil antibodies. Sera from 33
patients with PBC, 75 patients with AIH, 16 patients with PSC, 90 control sera
(chronic hepatitis B, chronic hepatitis C, alcoholic liver cirrhosis, systemic
lupus erythematosus) and sera from healthy blood donors were enrolled in the
present study. ANA and ANCA were detected using standard protocols, antibodies
against the nuclear antigen SP100 were detected by ELISA with recombinant
antigen, antibodies against neutrophil alpha-granules were detected by ELISA.
P-ANCA were found in two of 33 PBC sera, both patients presented with PBC/AIH
overlap syndrome. In six of 33 (18%) PBC sera a nuclear dot like
immunofluorescence pattern (antineutrophil nuclear antibodies, ANNA) was
observed. These dots were small in size and located all over the nucleus, the
anti-SP100 fluorescence. This result was confirmed by IFT on HEp-2 cells and by
ELISA. High tier antibodies against SP100 were found to be specific for patients 
with PBC. Comparing the IFT results on HEp-2 cells and human neutrophils, we
found an excellent correlation (Spearman's rank correlation coefficient = 0.968, 
P < 0.001). ANCA were detected in AIH type-1 (75%), SLA-positive AIH (36%) and
PSC (63%). AIH type-2 was found to be ANCA negative. All PSC contained no
antibodies against neutrophil alpha-granules. Our results show: 1. P-ANCA in
patients with PBC indicate a PBC/AIH overlap syndrome; 2. ANNA in patients with
PBC are mostly directed against SP100; 3. neutrophil granule components are not
the ANCA specific antigens in patients with PSC.

PMID: 9066101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Exp Cell Res. 1996 Dec 15;229(2):253-60.

The PML and PML/RARalpha domains: from autoimmunity to molecular oncology and
from retinoic acid to arsenic.

Andre C(1), Guillemin MC, Zhu J, Koken MH, Quignon F, Herve L, Chelbi-Alix MK,
Dhumeaux D, Wang ZY, Degos L, Chen Z, de The H.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Immunologie Biologique and Service d'hépatologie et
Gastro-entérologie, CHU Henri Mondor, Creteil Cedex, 94010, France.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is specifically associated to a t(15; 17)
translocation which fuses a gene encoding a nuclear receptor for retinoic acid,
RARalpha, to a previously unknown gene PML. The PML protein is localized in the
nucleus on a specific domain of unknown function (PML nuclear bodies, NB)
previously detected with autoimmune sera from patients with primary biliary
cirrhosis (PBC). These bodies are nuclear matrix-associated and all of their
identified components (PML, Sp100, and NDP52) are sharply upregulated by
interferons. We show that autoantibodies against both PML and Sp100 are usually
associated in sera with multiple nuclear dot anti-nuclear antibodies and
demonstrate that PML is an autoantigen, not only in PBC, but also in other
autoimmune diseases. In APL, the PML/RARalpha fusion interferes with both the
retinoic acid (RA) response and PML localization on nuclear bodies, but the
respective contribution of each defect to leukemogenesis is unclear. RA induces
the terminal differentiation of APL blasts, yielding to complete remissions, and 
corrects the localization of NB antigens. Arsenic trioxide (As2O3) also induces
remissions in APL, seemingly through induction of apoptosis. We show that in APL,
As2O3 leads to the rapid reformation of PML bodies. Thus, both agents correct the
defect in NB antigen localization, stressing the role of nuclear bodies in the
pathogenesis of APL.

PMID: 8986606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Exp Cell Res. 1996 Nov 25;229(1):155-8.

The nuclear domain 10 (ND10) is disrupted by the human cytomegalovirus gene
product IE1.

Korioth F(1), Maul GG, Plachter B, Stamminger T, Frey J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry II, University of Bielefeld, Germany.

The nuclear domain 10 (ND10) is modified during the life cycle of a number of
viruses. In this study we report the effect of infection with human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) on the ND10 proteins PML, Sp100, and NDP52.
Immunofluorescence analyses revealed that 1-2 h after infection (p.i.) with HCMV 
the immediate early gene (IE) products IE1 and IE2 transiently colocalize with
ND10 proteins. At 4 h p.i. the IE gene products were distributed throughout the
nucleus, which was accompanied by a complete disruption of ND10, affecting all
analyzed proteins. Transfection studies using different HCMV-cDNA expression
plasmids revealed that the expression of IE1 alone was sufficient to induce this 
disruption. As reported for other ND10-modifying viral proteins, no direct
interaction between IE1 and the analyzed ND10 proteins could be detected. The
disruption of ND10 by HCMV IE1 is very similar to that described for HSV-1 ICP0. 
Although there is no sequence similarity between proteins, this observation might
suggest similar functions in virus-host interactions.

PMID: 8940259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Biol Chem. 1996 Nov 15;271(46):29198-204.

Identification and characterization of a leukocyte-specific component of the
nuclear body.

Bloch DB(1), de la Monte SM, Guigaouri P, Filippov A, Bloch KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02129, USA. bloch@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

The nuclear body (NB) is a cellular organelle that is involved in the
pathogenesis of acute promyelocytic leukemia and viral infection. The NB is also 
a target of antibodies in the serum of patients with the autoimmune disease
primary biliary cirrhosis. In this study, serum from a patient with primary
biliary cirrhosis was used to identify a cDNA encoding a novel component of the
NB, a 140-kDa protein designated Sp140. The predicted amino acid sequence of the 
amino-terminal portion of Sp140 was similar to Sp100, a previously identified NB 
protein. The carboxyl portion of Sp140 contained a zinc-finger domain and a
bromodomain, motifs that are present in proteins regulating gene transcription.
High levels of Sp140 mRNA were detected in human spleen and peripheral blood
leukocytes, but not other human tissues. The level of SP140 mRNA in myeloid
precursor cell lines HL60 and NB4 markedly increased in response to chemically
induced cellular differentiation. Immunohistochemical techniques were used to
demonstrate that SP140 localized to the NB in differentiated HL60 and NB4 cells. 
The location of Sp140 in the NB, and expression of this gene in cells involved in
host defense, suggest that Sp140 may be involved in the pathogenesis of acute
promyelocytic leukemia and viral infection.

PMID: 8910577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 11;271(41):25253-60.

The interferon (IFN)-stimulated gene Sp100 promoter contains an IFN-gamma
activation site and an imperfect IFN-stimulated response element which mediate
type I IFN inducibility.

Grötzinger T(1), Jensen K, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der
Universität Hamburg, 20251 Hamburg, Germany.

Expression of the nuclear domain-associated proteins Sp100, PML, and NDP52, is
enhanced by interferons (IFNs) on the mRNA and protein level. Increase both of
Sp100 and PML mRNA is due to enhanced transcription of the corresponding genes
which occurs independently of cellular protein synthesis immediately upon
IFN-beta addition. Here, we describe the molecular cloning and functional
analysis of the Sp100 promoter. DNA sequence analysis revealed potential binding 
sites for several constitutive and IFN-inducible transcription factors.
Consistent with the absence of a TATA box and an initiator element, several
transcription initiation sites were found. Transient expression studies
identified an imperfect IFN-stimulated response element within the first 100
nucleotides upstream of the major transcription start site. This element rendered
a heterologous promoter IFN-beta-inducible and bound IFN-stimulated gene factor 2
strongly but IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 only weakly. An IFN-gamma activation
site approximately 500 base pairs upstream of the IFN-stimulated response element
was found to bind three IFN-alpha/beta activation factors upon IFN-beta induction
and conferred both type I and type II IFN inducibility upon a heterologous
promoter. These data demonstrate a novel arrangement of a nonoverlapping
IFN-gamma activation site and an IFN-stimulated response element mediating type I
IFN inducibility, previously not reported for other IFN-stimulable promoters.

PMID: 8810287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Blood. 1996 Aug 15;88(4):1423-6.

LYSP100-associated nuclear domains (LANDs): description of a new class of
subnuclear structures and their relationship to PML nuclear bodies.

Dent AL(1), Yewdell J, Puvion-Dutilleul F, Koken MH, de The H, Staudt LM.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The PML gene is fused to the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RAR alpha) gene in
t(15;17) acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), creating a PML-RAR alpha fusion
oncoprotein. The PML gene product has been localized to subnuclear dot-like
structures variously termed PODs, ND10s, Kr bodies, or PML nuclear bodies (PML
NBs). The present study describes the cloning of a lymphoid-restricted gene,
LYSP100, that is homologous to another protein that localizes to PML NBs, SP100. 
In addition to SP100 homology regions, one LYSP100 cDNA isoform contains a
bromodomain and a PHD/TTC domain, which are present in a variety of
transcriptional regulatory proteins. By immunofluorescence, LYSP100 was localized
to nuclear dots that were surprisingly largely nonoverlapping with PML NBs.
However, a minority of LYSP100 nuclear dots exactly colocalized with PML and
SP100. We term the LYSP100 structures "LANDs," for LYSP100-associated nuclear
domains. Although LYSP100 is expressed only in lymphoid cells, LANDs could be
visualized in HeLa cells by transfection of a LYSP100 cDNA. Immunoelectron
microscopy revealed LANDs to be globular, electron-dense structures
morphologically distinct from the annular structures characteristic of PML NBs.
LANDs were most often found in the nucleoplasm, but were also found at the
nuclear membrane and in the cytoplasm, suggesting that these structures may
traffic between the cytoplasm and the nucleus. By double-immunogold labeling of
PML and LYSP100, some LANDs were shown to contain both PML and LYSP100. Thus, PML
is localized to a second subnuclear domain that is morphologically and
biochemically distinct from PML NBs.

PMID: 8695863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Jun 1;238(2):554-60.

Interferon-modulated expression of genes encoding the nuclear-dot-associated
proteins Sp100 and promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML).

Grötzinger T(1), Sternsdorf T, Jensen K, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der
Universität Hamburg, Germany.

Promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) and Sp100 are transcription-regulatory
proteins which colocalize in discrete nuclear dots and play a role in
autoimmunity, oncogenesis and virus-host interaction. Interferons (IFNs) were
shown previously to increase strongly the levels of Sp100 mRNA and protein. Here,
we examined which mechanisms lead to upregulation of Sp100 gene expression and
whether IFNs also increase expression of the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene.
We found that both mRNA and protein levels of PML are also strongly upregulated
by IFNs. In addition, new Sp100 and PML proteins were detected immunologically
after IFN treatment of cells. Nuclear run-on analysis revealed
protein-synthesis-independent, rapid IFN-enhanced transcription rates as well as 
synergistic activation of the Sp100 and PML genes by type-I and type-II IFNs.
These data demonstrate that PML and Sp100 belong to the growing family of
IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) upregulated most likely by the transcription factor
ISGF3, and indicate that IFNs also qualitatively alter the expression of these
two genes.

PMID: 8681971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Mar;16(3):1150-6.

A highly amplified mouse gene is homologous to the human interferon-responsive
Sp100 gene encoding an autoantigen associated with nuclear dots.

Grötzinger T(1), Jensen K, Guldner HH, Sternsdorf T, Szostecki C, Schwab M,
Savelyeva L, Reich B, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für Experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der
Universität Hamburg, Germany.

In human cells, three proteins are currently known to colocalize in di screte
nuclear domains (designated nuclear dots): Sp100, a transcription-activating
protein autoantigenic primarily in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis; PML, 
a tumor suppressor protein involved in development of acute promyelocytic
leukemia; and NDP52, a protein of unknown function. Here we report sequence
similarities between the Sp100 protein and a putative protein encoded by a highly
amplified mouse gene which is visible as an inherited homogeneously staining
region (HSR) on chromosome 1 of some mouse populations. By in situ hybridization,
the Sp100 gene was mapped to locus 2q37, the syntenic region of the HSR on mouse 
chromosome 1. Unlike the highly amplified mouse gene, Sp100 was found to be a
single-copy gene and showed no restriction fragment length polymorphisms.
Sequence similarities in the promoter regions and similar exon-intron
organizations of the two genes were revealed. As for Sp100, steady-state levels
of the mRNAs of the HSR-encoded genes could be greatly increased by interferon
(IFN) treatment. As in human cells, IFN treatment led to an enlargement in both
size and number of nuclear dots in mouse cells as visualized by
immunofluorescence staining with autoimmune sera from patients with primary
biliary cirrhosis. These data indicate that a gene located in the inherited HSR
of mice, designated mSp100, is homologous to the human Sp100 gene, has a similar 
gene organization, and responds similarly to IFN treatment.

PMCID: PMC231097
PMID: 8622659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Virology. 1996 Mar 1;217(1):67-75.

Nuclear domain 10 as preexisting potential replication start sites of herpes
simplex virus type-1.

Maul GG(1), Ishov AM, Everett RD.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) nuclear replication cycle begins at
localized sites, but it has remained unclear whether these sites are associated
with any defined nuclear structure. We have previously shown that during
infection, the HSV-1 immediate-early protein ICP0 dispersed proteins associated
with ND10, nuclear sites that contain high concentrations of PML and other
potentially regulatory proteins and correspond to the ultrastructurally defined
nuclear bodies. Using in situ hybridization and immunohistochemical techniques,
we found that ICP0 mutants of HSV-1 replicate in the close proximity with ND10,
but increasing replication sites develop away from these nuclear structures.
Input wild-type HSV-1 DNA was found preferentially adjacent to ND10 before ICP0
modified these nuclear structures and did not colocalize with ICP8 containing
so-called prereplication sites. The sites where HSV-1 can begin replication then 
need to be redefined as preexisting potential replication sites. Viral RNA was
also found associated with ND10 before early protein synthesis (ICP8), suggesting
that input virus genomes are deposited at ND10 before they start replication. The
deposition of input viral DNA at ND10 is virus gene expression independent,
probably indicating cell regulation of this process. Taken together, these data
demonstrate that some very early processes of the nuclear viral replication cycle
happen in close proximity or at the periphery of ND10. The localization of input 
HSV-1 to ND10 represents a new host-virus interaction and provides an unexpected 
functional property for this large nuclear site.

PMID: 8599237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Genes Dev. 1996 Jan 15;10(2):196-207.

Adenovirus replication is coupled with the dynamic properties of the PML nuclear 
structure.

Doucas V(1), Ishov AM, Romo A, Juguilon H, Weitzman MD, Evans RM, Maul GG.

Author information: 
(1)Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Wild-type PML and at least four other novel proteins are localized within
discrete nuclear structures known as PODs. We demonstrate here that during
adenovirus infection, immediate early viral proteins from the E1 and E4
transcription units associate with the POD, which in turn undergoes a dramatic
morphological change. During this process, the auto-antigen Sp-100 and NDP55 but 
not PML, relocate from the POD to the viral inclusion bodies, the sites of
adenovirus DNA replication and late RNA transcription. The E4-ORF3 11-kD protein 
alone will induce this reorganization and reciprocally, viruses carrying
mutations in the E4-domain fail to do so. These same viral mutants are defective 
in viral replication as well as the accumulation of late viral mRNAs and host
cell transcription shutoff. We show that interferon (INF) treatment enhances the 
expression of PML, reduces or blocks PODs reorganization, and inhibits BrdU
incorporation into viral inclusion bodies. In addition, cell lines engineered to 
overexpress PML prevent PODs from viral-induced reorganization and block or
severely delay adenovirus replication. These results suggest that viral
replication relies on components of the POD and that the structure is a target of
early viral proteins.

PMID: 8566753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Cell Biochem. 1995 Dec;59(4):498-513.

Nuclear domain 10 (ND10) associated proteins are also present in nuclear bodies
and redistribute to hundreds of nuclear sites after stress.

Maul GG(1), Yu E, Ishov AM, Epstein AL.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The promyelocytic leukemia protein fused to the retinoic acid receptor alpha in
t(15;17) acute promyelocytic leukemia, the primary biliary cirrhosis autoantigen,
Sp100, as well as the incompletely characterized protein NDP55, are co-localized 
in specific immunohistochemically defined nuclear domains (ND10), which are
potential equivalents of ultrastructurally defined nuclear bodies. We
investigated whether the distribution of these proteins depends on environmental 
conditions and whether ND10 correlate with nuclear bodies. Certain nuclear bodies
and ND10 react in a similar way and share antigens. Interferon exposure doubled
the number of ND10 and increased the frequency of nuclear bodies, whereas herpes 
simplex virus infection or heat shock modify both. Redistribution of
ND10-associated proteins to hundreds of small sites throughout the chromatin was 
inducible by stress in the form of heat shock and exposure to Cd++ ions. The
change of distribution was rapid and independent of protein synthesis, and thus
not part of the classical heat shock response. The very rapid redistribution of
these proteins after heat shock, together with the development of ND10 upon
interferon activation, raises the possibility that ND10 represent storage sites
of certain matrix proteins readily accessible throughout the chromatin in
response to stress or other effectors that induce global nuclear changes.

PMID: 8749719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Leukemia. 1995 Dec;9(12):2027-33.

Induction of the PML protein by interferons in normal and APL cells.

Chelbi-Alix MK(1), Pelicano L, Quignon F, Koken MH, Venturini L, Stadler M,
Pavlovic J, Degos L, de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR 43, Paris, France.

PML has been identified through its fusion to the RAR alpha gene in acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL). The PML protein is specifically associated to
nuclear bodies (NBs) whose alterations in APL were proposed to contribute to
leukemogenesis. The role of this nuclear domain (which also harbors the Sp100
autoantigen and the NDP52 protein) is unknown. Here, we show that the PML
protein, like Sp100 and NDP52, is induced by interferons (IFNs alpha, beta and
gamma) in a large variety of human cells. Interestingly, the NBs that contain the
three IFN-induced proteins appear to be associated to speckles labelled by the
IFN-mediator Mx1. These observations link NBs to IFN response pathways, which may
contribute to the elucidation of the biological role of these structures. In APL 
cells, IFNs induced both PML and PML/RAR alpha expression, resulting in an
increased sequestration of PML and RXRs in the microspeckles induced by the
fusion protein. As PML has growth suppressing properties, it may mediate some of 
the antiproliferative effects of IFN. In APL, inactivation of PML may result in
disruption of growth control.

PMID: 8609713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Exp Cell Res. 1995 Dec;221(2):448-61.

Sequestration of PML and Sp100 proteins in an intranuclear viral structure during
herpes simplex virus type 1 infection.

Puvion-Dutilleul F(1), Venturini L, Guillemin MC, de Thé H, Puvion E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire, Organisation fonctionnelle du Noyau de l'UPR 9044 CNRS,
Villejuif, Franc.

We investigated the intranuclear distribution of PML and Sp100 in HeLa cells at
the ultrastructural level and examined their relocalization in response to herpes
simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection. In the absence of infection, we observed 
that both are components, not only of nuclear bodies, but also of interchromatin 
granule-associated zones, which suggests a potential role for PML and Sp100 in
splicing events. Prolonged HSV-1 infection induced dramatic changes in nuclear
organization which consisted of the morphological disappearance of some nuclear
structures (nuclear bodies, interchromatin granule-associated zones, coiled
bodies) and of the development of a centrally located electron-translucent viral 
region which pushed the cellular clusters of interchromatin granules to the
nuclear border. Concomitantly, dense bodies, concentric arrays of reduplicated
inner nuclear membrane, and translucent patches containing a few viral capsids
occurred at the nuclear border. PML and Sp100 were exclusively detected over the 
finely granular material of the viral translucent patches which also contains
small amounts of p80-coilin and U1 and U2 snRNAs. An antiserum raised against
capsid proteins intensely labeled the viral translucent patches at the level of
their finely granular material and enclosed viral capsids. Our data, therefore,
suggest that these viral structures, in addition to being the site of
accumulation of viral capsid proteins and, possibly, a capsidworks, are also a
site of sequestration of cell factors including PML and Sp100. Viral capsid
proteins could interfere with and inactivate PML and Sp100 and be implicated in
the shutoff of host cell metabolism induced by HSV-1 infection.

PMID: 7493645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Oncogene. 1995 Sep 7;11(5):871-6.

The acute promyelocytic leukaemia-associated PML gene is induced by interferon.

Lavau C(1), Marchio A, Fagioli M, Jansen J, Falini B, Lebon P, Grosveld F,
Pandolfi PP, Pelicci PG, Dejean A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique, INSERM U.163, Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France.

The PML protein concentrates within discrete nuclear structures known as nuclear 
bodies, also called NDs or PODs, which contain several proteins including the
interferon (IFN)-inducible SP100 product. The function of these structures
remains elusive. We and others have shown recently that they represent specific
targets for adenovirus and herpes simplex virus. This prompted us to investigate 
whether PML, like SP100, might be induced by IFN and to explore the role of PML
in viral infection. Here we report that PML mRNA levels increase rapidly in
response to interferon treatment. This accumulation of PML transcripts is a
primary IFN response since it does not require de novo protein synthesis. The
IFN-induced activation of the PML gene is accompanied by enhanced protein
expression as revealed by immunolabelling. Both the intensity of the staining and
the number of labelled structures increased upon interferon exposure. To probe
the role of PML in IFN action, we compared the antiviral state established by
alpha-interferon in embryonic fibroblasts (EFs) derived from null mutant mice for
PML and from wild-type control mice. The resistance to viral infection conferred 
by IFN-alpha was identical in both PML+/+ and PMLm/m fibroblasts indicating that 
PML is not an essential mediator of the antiviral effect of interferon. We also
noted that DNA-binding factors are normally activated by IFN in PMLm/m cells.

PMID: 7545807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Scand J Immunol. 1995 Aug;42(2):257-68.

Two nuclear dot-associated proteins, PML and Sp100, are often co-autoimmunogenic 
in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis.

Sternsdorf T(1), Guldner HH, Szostecki C, Grötzinger T, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette Institute of Experimental Virology and Immunology, University
of Hamburg, Germany.

The nucleoproteins Sp100 and PML, the first an autoantigen predominant in
patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) and the second a transformation and
cell growth suppressing protein aberrantly expressed in promyelocytic leukaemia
cells, were recently shown to colocalize in dot-like nuclear domains. Here we
analysed whether PML, like Sp100, is also an autoantigen in patients with PBC and
other autoimmune diseases, and wether both proteins interact directly. Testing
sera from autoimmune patients using an immunoprecipitation assay with
radiolabelled PML and an immunofluorescence assay based on a cell line
overexpressing PML, autoantibodies (Aabs) against PML were found in the majority 
o anti-Sp100 Aab positive patients. Only very few patients with PBC or other
autoimmune diseases contained anti-PML or anti-Sp100 Aabs exclusively. In
contrast to Sp100, immunoreactivity of recombinant PML in immunoblots was only
weak and was directed to one region. This suggests that anti-PML Aabs recognize
fewer and preferentially conformation-dependent epitopes. In an
immunoprecipitation assay using in vitro synthesized Sp100 and PML proteins and
Abs to recombinant proteins, no direct interaction was observed. Taken together, 
these data indicate that Aabs against PML are as highly prevalent and specific
for patients with PBC as those against Sp100. The colocalization of these
autoantigens and the frequent co-occurrence of the corresponding Aabs might
reflect an association of both proteins mediated by one or several other
proteins.

PMID: 7631159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Cell Biol. 1995 Jul;130(1):1-13.

Molecular characterization of NDP52, a novel protein of the nuclear domain 10,
which is redistributed upon virus infection and interferon treatment.

Korioth F(1), Gieffers C, Maul GG, Frey J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Bielefeld, Faculty for Chemistry, Department of Biochemistry,
Germany.

The nuclear domain (ND)10 also described as POD or Kr bodies is involved in the
development of acute promyelocytic leukemia and virus-host interactions.
Immunofluorescence analysis using a variety of human autoimmune sera and
monoclonal antibodies showed a typical dot like nuclear staining for ND10,
suggesting that this structure consists of several proteins. Two of the ND10
proteins, Sp100 and PML are genetically characterized and show homology with
several transcription factors. Here we describe NDP52, an additional novel
protein of the ND10. We raised a new mAb C8A2, that specifically recognizes
NDP52. Immunofluorescence analysis using this mAb showed a typical nuclear dot
staining as it was described for ND10. Isolation and sequencing of the
corresponding cDNA revealed that NDP52 has a predicted molecular mass of 52 kD.
The deduced amino acid sequence exhibits an extended central coiled coil domain
containing a leucine zipper motif. The COOH terminus of NDP52 shows homology with
LIM domains, that have recently been described to mediate protein interactions,
which let NDP52 appear as a suitable candidate for mediating interactions between
ND10 proteins. In vivo, NDP52 is transcribed in all human tissues analyzed.
Furthermore, we show that NDP52 colocalizes with the ND10 protein PML and can be 
redistributed upon viral infection and interferon treatment. These data suggest
that ND10 proteins play an important role in the viral life cycle.

PMCID: PMC2120522
PMID: 7540613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Feb 28;92(5):1639-43.

Two short autoepitopes on the nuclear dot antigen are similar to epitopes encoded
by the Epstein-Barr virus.

Xie K(1), Snyder M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8103.

To understand the relationship between antibodies present in patients with
anti-nuclear dot (ND) autoimmune disease and the proteins they recognize,
epitopes that react with the autoantibodies were mapped. A panel of fusion
proteins containing different portions of the ND protein were overproduced in
Escherichia coli. Immunoblot analysis with anti-ND antibodies revealed that most 
(10 of 12) sera recognize two major autoepitopes that are each a maximum of 8
amino acids long. The other two sera recognize one of the two epitopes. In
addition to the short linear autoepitopes, a conformational epitope appears to be
present on the ND antigen. Each of the two linear epitope sequences shares
sequence similarities with those of several viral proteins found in the
databases. Furthermore, two fusion proteins containing short Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) protein sequences that are similar to the ND epitopes were recognized by
the human autoimmune sera, indicating that the autoepitopes are present in EBV
protein sequences. Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that ND
autoimmune disease might be associated with EBV infections.

PMCID: PMC42575
PMID: 7878031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Biol Cell. 1995;85(1):77-86.

A human autoantibody recognizing nuclear matrix-associated nuclear protein
localized in dot structures.

Zuber M(1), Heyden TS, Lajous-Petter AM.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine I, University of Saarland, Homburg-Saar, Germany.

A human autoimmune serum is used to characterize a protein which is located
within a dot-like structure of the interphase nucleus. The dots are located in
the nucleoplasma outside the nucleoli. The dot-like structure could be observed
on a variety of human substrates (HEp-2, HepG2, HeLa, Molt-4, WI-38 cell lines,
peripheral blood lymphocytes), mouse cell lines and tissues (3T3, L929, spleen
sections), rat sections, marsupial PtK2 cells and hamster cell lines. The range
of the number of dots and their size differed between cells and cell lines and
varied between 1 and 24. The antigen could be identified as a 53 kDa protein with
a pI of 8.7 and was named NDP53. Digestion experiments suggested that the protein
is not associated with DNA or RNA, but is associated with the nuclear matrix.
Immunelectron microscopy using ultra-thin sections revealed filamentous
structures with a diameter of 0.1 to 0.6 microns. The antigen colocalizes with
Sp100, PML and NDP55, which are part of a multiprotein complex known as PML
oncogenic domain (POD), nuclear bodies, Kr bodies or ND10.

PMID: 8882521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Hereditas. 1995;122(3):245-56.

A member of the mouse LRR transcript family with homology to the human Sp100
gene.

Plass C(1), Weichenhan D, Kunze B, Hellwig T, Schneider C, Bautz FA, Grzeschik
KH, Traut W, Winking H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie, Medizinische Universität zu Lübeck, Germany.

A previously isolated cDNA sequence with homology to the long-range repeat (LRR) 
cluster in chromosome 1 of the house mouse, Mus musculus, was identified as
derived from a 1.3 kb polyadenylated RNA. This transcript belongs to a family of 
polyadenylated RNAs which are synthesized from a multicopy gene included in the
LRR copies. The representation of the 1.3 kb transcript in genomic DNA was
studied in lambda and cosmid clones from the LRR cluster. Two different types of 
LRRs were detected with respect to the arrangement of coding regions. In the
type-1 arrangement, the sequence is split into five exons, and in the type-2
arrangement, into six exons. The respective exons with their flanking regions
were sequenced. The analysis of splice signals revealed that LRR copies with a
type-1 arrangement are presumably the source of the 1.3 kb transcript. The 1.3 kb
transcript has sequence homology to a human gene encoding Sp100, a nuclear
antigen recognized by autoantibodies from patients suffering from some autoimmune
diseases including primary biliary cirrhosis. Mouse exons II and III exhibit 71% 
homology at the nucleotide level and 56% homology at the amino acid level to the 
human Sp100 cDNA. We mapped the human Sp100 gene to chromosome 2. This location
corroborates the assumption that the human Sp100 gene and the mouse LRR gene are 
homologous, as the human chromosome 2 contains the segment which is homologous to
the mouse LRR region.

PMID: 8537240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Virol. 1995 Jan;69(1):476-91.

Evaluation of colocalization interactions between the IE110, IE175, and IE63
transactivator proteins of herpes simplex virus within subcellular punctate
structures.

Mullen MA(1), Gerstberger S, Ciufo DM, Mosca JD, Hayward GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205.

A number of previous studies have implied that three herpes simplex virus-encoded
nuclear transactivator proteins, IE175 (ICP4), IE110 (ICP0), and IE63 (ICP27),
may cooperate in transcriptional and posttranscriptional stimulation of viral
gene expression. Using double-label immunofluorescence assays (IFA) in transient 
expression assays, we have examined the intracellular localization of these three
proteins in DNA-transfected cells. The IE110 protein on its own forms spherical
punctate domains within the nucleus, whereas the IE175 and IE63 proteins alone
give uniform and speckled diffuse patterns, respectively. In infected cells, the 
IE110 punctate granules have been shown to correspond to novel preexisting
subnuclear structures referred to as ND10 domains or PODs that contain a variety 
of cellular proteins, including SP100 and the PML proto-oncogene product.
Cotransfection experiments with wild-type nuclear forms of both IE175 and IE110
provided direct evidence for partial redistribution of IE175 into the same
punctate granules that contained IE110. Surprisingly, nuclear forms of IE110 were
found to move a cytoplasmic form of IE175 into nuclear punctate structures, and a
cytoplasmic form of IE110 was able to retain nuclear forms of IE175 in
cytoplasmic punctate structures. Therefore, the punctate characteristic of IE110 
appeared to both dominate the interactions and override the normal nuclear
localization signals. The domains responsible for the interaction mapped to
between codons 518 and 768 in 1E110 and to between codons 835 and 1029 in IE175. 
Importantly, a truncated nuclear form of the 1,298-amino-acid IE175 protein,
which lacked the C-terminal domain beyond codon 834, was found to be excluded
from the IE110 punctate granules. Cotransfection of nuclear or cytoplasmic IE110 
with a truncated nuclear form of IE63 also led to partial redistribution of IE63 
into either nuclear or cytoplasmic punctate granules containing IE110. Both the
IE63-IE110 and IE175-IE110 colocalization interactions were demonstrated in Vero 
cells but not in 293 cells. Consequently, they differ from IE110
self-interactions, which correlate with in vitro dimerization and occur
efficiently in both cell types. These interactions may help to explain the
altered promoter target specificity and synergism observed when IE175 is
cotransfected with IE110 in transactivation studies.

PMCID: PMC188596
PMID: 7983744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Bull Cancer. 1994 Sep;81(9):755-63.

[Monoclonal antibodies and bronchial cancer].

[Article in French]

Charloux A(1), Kreisman H, Quoix E, Pauli G.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpitaux universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg.

Techniques of production of monoclonal antibodies (MoAb) have provided powerful
tools to study biological lung cancer behavior. Immunochemistry is more sensitive
than conventional light microscopy examination to detect tumour cells in sputum
or pleural effusion, or small cell lung cancer metastases in bone marrow.
Immunochemistry is also helpful for the differential diagnosis of carcinoma
versus lymphoma or sarcoma, using antibodies directed against antigens such as
cytokeratins, vimentin, EMA, LCA, SP100, CEA. In lung cancer, immunochemistry may
detect neuroendocrine differentiation, or help to distinguish metastatic
carcinoma from primary lung cancer. A positive immunostaining with CEA, Leu-M1,
SP1, B72-3 supports the diagnosis of pleural metastatic adenocarcinoma versus
mesothelioma. Immunoscintigraphy is a non invasive imaging technique which allows
local and distant disease evaluation and could replace in the future the present 
staging work up. To evaluate the potential therapeutic efficacy of MoAbs in Lung 
cancer, phase I studies have been performed. Therapeutic effect is based on: 1)
indirect cytotoxicity (cells are killed by ADCC or K cells) or direct
cytotoxicity (MoAb are carriers of toxins, radioisotopes or drugs). 2) Immune
response modulation by anti-idiotypic Ab. 3) Interferences with growth factors.
Results of most of phase I trials are disappointing. Improvement of MoAb
selectivity, improvement of conjugates stability, reduction of humoral response
to MoAb, enhanced tumour localisation, and reduction of nonspecific captation
should lead to a better efficacy.

PMID: 7703564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Z Arztl Fortbild (Jena). 1994 Aug;88(7-8):573-8.

[Humoral autoimmune response to nuclear Sp100 autoantigen in patients with
primary biliary cirrhosis].

[Article in German]

Szostecki C(1), Will H, Guldner HH.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie,
Universität Hamburg.

PMID: 7856263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Immunol. 1992 Dec 15;149(12):4067-73.

IFN enhance expression of Sp100, an autoantigen in primary biliary cirrhosis.

Guldner HH(1), Szostecki C, Grötzinger T, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für Experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie,
Universität Hamburg, Germany.

About 30% of patients suffering from the chronic autoimmune liver disease primary
biliary cirrhosis produce autoantibodies against Sp100, a protein migrating in
SDS-PAGE at a position corresponding to 100 kDa and located on discrete
dot-shaped nuclear structures. The human Sp100 cDNA has recently been cloned and 
the deduced amino acid sequence was found to contain similarities to several
transcriptional regulatory proteins; the biologic function of the Sp100 protein, 
however, is still unknown. In this study we present data which show that
infection of HEp2 cells with influenza A virus, transformation of glial cells
with SV40 DNA, and stimulation of PBL with mitogens affect the expression of the 
Sp100 autoantigen. These observations prompted us to investigate whether
expression of the Sp100 protein is modulated by the action of IFN.
Immunofluorescence staining of HEp2 and HeLa cells grown in the presence of
IFN-alpha, IFN-beta, or IFN-gamma revealed an increase both in size and number of
the Sp100 protein-containing nuclear dots, whereas no such effect was observed
with cells treated with TNF-alpha. As measured by an immunoblot-based ELISA the
amount of Sp100 protein in INF-beta-treated cells (1000 IU/ml, 18 h) was eight to
nine times higher than in untreated cells. The enhanced protein expression was
accompanied by an accumulation of the Sp100-specific mRNA (13-fold increase of
the normal level after 10 h of INF-beta treatment of HEp2 cells). These findings 
characterize the Sp100 protein as a new member of IFN-modulated proteins and
raise the question whether cytokine-mediated increase of Sp100 protein expression
plays a role in induction of anti-Sp100 autoantibodies.

PMID: 1281200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Scand J Immunol. 1992 Oct;36(4):555-64.

Autoantibodies to the nuclear Sp100 protein in primary biliary cirrhosis and
associated diseases: epitope specificity and immunoglobulin class distribution.

Szostecki C(1), Will H, Netter HJ, Guldner HH.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie, Hamburg,
Germany.

Sp100, a protein with a dot-like intranuclear localization in immunofluorescence 
microscopy, is a major target for patient autoantibodies in primary biliary
cirrhosis (PBC) and occasionally in rheumatic disorders. The human Sp100 cDNA has
recently been cloned, and the deduced amino acid sequence was found to contain
sequence similarities with an MHC class I domain and several transacting
regulatory proteins, including HIV-1 nef proteins. In this study, recombinant
Sp100 fusion proteins were used to differentiate the immunoglobulin isotypes and 
to map the epitopes involved in the anti-Sp100 autoimmune response. PBC patients 
developed IgG as well as IgM and/or IgA class anti-Sp100 autoantibodies whereas
most patients with rheumatic diseases developed IgG class autoantibodies only.
For epitope mapping, truncated versions of the Sp100 protein were probed for
immunoreactivity in ELISA and immunoblotting. With 55 sera, 17 different reaction
patterns were obtained, and at least three non-overlapping major autoantigenic
domains were recognized by the majority of sera. One domain, which contains the
sequence similarity with HIV nef proteins, was recognized by all anti-Sp100 sera 
and harbours multiple, in part discontinuous, epitopes. These data demonstrate a 
heterogeneous and patient-specific anti-Sp100 autoimmune response which is
antigen-driven and, at least in terms of isotype composition, different in PBC
and non-PBC patients.

PMID: 1384113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Immunol. 1990 Dec 15;145(12):4338-47.

Isolation and characterization of cDNA encoding a human nuclear antigen
predominantly recognized by autoantibodies from patients with primary biliary
cirrhosis.

Szostecki C(1), Guldner HH, Netter HJ, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, Martinsried, Federal Republic of Germany.

Autoantibodies to a novel nuclear Ag, Sp100, have recently been described that
recognize a nuclear protein with an apparent molecular mass of 95 to 100 kDa and 
a dot-like distribution within cell nuclei. By immunoscreening of a lambda gt11
cDNA expression library derived from HeLa cells with an anti-Sp100 autoimmune
serum a 0.7-kb cDNA (Sp26) coding for a fragment of Sp100 was isolated.
Expression of this cDNA and use of the recombinant protein in ELISA revealed that
the fragment carries major Sp100 autoepitopes and that anti-Sp100 autoantibodies 
predominantly occur in patients suffering from primary biliary cirrhosis
(50/184). The Sp26 cDNA was used as hybridization probe for isolation of longer
cDNA from human liver- and placenta-derived lambda gt10 cDNA libraries.
Overlapping fragments were assembled to generate a full length cDNA coding for a 
protein with a molecular mass of 53 kDa and an isoelectric point of 4.7. The
Sp100 autoantigen expressed in vitro from this cDNA and authenticated by a
capture immunoblot assay, comigrated in SDS-PAGE with the authentic HeLa
autoantigen of 95 to 100 kDa and thus showed an aberrant electrophoretic
mobility. Computer based protein sequence analysis of the Sp100 autoantigen
revealed regions of striking sequence similarities to the alpha 1 and alpha 2
domains of various human and non-human MHC class I Ag and to several transacting 
transcriptional regulatory proteins.

PMID: 2258622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Br J Anaesth. 1967 Sep;39(9):756.

Epileptiform convulsions following premedication with Pamergan SP100.

Ross KM.

PMID: 6051237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Br J Anaesth. 1967 Mar;39(3):268-70.

Epileptiform convulsions in children following premedication with Pamergan SP100.

Waterhouse RG.

PMID: 6020981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


