
1. Mol Genet Genomics. 2016 Mar 19. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular characterization of Sp110 gene in pigs.

Li LZ(1), Wang QS(1), Han LX(1), Wang JK(1), Shao SY(1), Wang L(2), Liu D(3),
Yang XQ(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northeast Agricultural University,
Harbin, China. (2)Institute of Animal Husbandry, Heilongjiang Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, China. (3)Institute of Animal Husbandry,
Heilongjiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, China. liudi1963@163.com. 
(4)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northeast Agricultural University,
Harbin, China. xiuqin163@163.com.

Speckled 110 kDa (Sp110) plays an important role in infectious diseases, as
revealed by studies in humans. However, little is known regarding porcine Sp110. 
To elucidate its potential role in porcine resistance to viral diseases, here,
the complete coding sequence of porcine Sp110 gene and its 26 alternatively
spliced isoforms were isolated using reverse transcription (RT)-polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR), and another seven splicing patterns were obtained using a
minigene construct. Subcellular distribution of 11 representative isoforms was
characterized in PK-15 cells transiently transfected with their respective GFP
fusion constructs, and only isoforms (R and V) bearing all functional domains
were localized in nucleus, indicating all the other isoforms lose normal
functions of Sp110 owing to alternative splicing. Real-time quantitative PCR and 
competitive RT-PCR showed that both isoforms R and V had similar tissue
expression profile, half-life and response to poly(I:C), a synthetic analog of
viral double-stranded RNA, while the longer one (isoform R) was transcribed at a 
higher level. The results indicated that porcine Sp110 has a role in viral
infection and that isoform R is the dominant active form. Overall the data
provide potential resource for molecular breeding of pig resistant to diseases
and contributes to breeding pigs resistant to viral infection.

PMID: 26995495  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 25;6:22041. doi: 10.1038/srep22041.

The Transcriptional Foundations of Sp110-mediated Macrophage (RAW264.7)
Resistance to Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Ra.

Wu Y(1,)(2), Guo Z(1,)(2), Yao K(1,)(2), Miao Y(1,)(3), Liang S(1,)(2), Liu
F(1,)(2), Wang Y(1,)(2), Zhang Y(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 712100,
Shaanxi, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of
Agriculture, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 712100, Shaanxi, China.
(3)Innovative Experimental College, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 712100,
Shaanxi, China.

Human tuberculosis (TB), caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), remains a
leading global health problem, causing 1.3 million deaths each year. The nuclear 
body protein, Sp110, has been linked to TB resistance and previous work showed
that it enhances macrophage apoptosis upon Mtb infection. Here, we report on the 
role of Sp110 in transcriptional regulation of macrophage responses to Mtb
through integrated transcriptome and mechanistic studies. Transcriptome analysis 
revealed that Sp110 regulates genes involved in immune responses, apoptosis,
defence responses, and inflammatory responses. Detailed investigation revealed
that, in addition to apoptosis-related genes, Sp110 regulates cytokines,
chemokines and genes that regulate intracellular survival of Mtb. Moreover, Sp110
regulates miRNA expression in macrophages, with immune and apoptosis-related
miRNAs such as miR-125a, miR-146a, miR-155, miR-21a and miR-99b under Sp110
regulation. Additionally, our results showed that Sp110 upregulates BCL2
modifying factor (Bmf) by inhibiting miR-125a, and forced expression of Bmf
induces macrophage apoptosis. These findings not only reveal the transcriptional 
basis of Sp110-mediated macrophage resistance to Mtb, but also suggest potential 
regulatory roles for Sp110 related to inflammatory responses, miRNA profiles, and
the intracellular growth of Mtb.

PMCID: PMC4766572
PMID: 26912204  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Immunol Res. 2015;2015:526518. doi: 10.1155/2015/526518. Epub 2015 Aug 11.

SP140L, an Evolutionarily Recent Member of the SP100 Family, Is an Autoantigen in
Primary Biliary Cirrhosis.

Saare M(1), Hämarik U(1), Venta R(2), Panarina M(3), Zucchelli C(4), Pihlap M(1),
Remm A(1), Kisand K(1), Toots U(5), Möll K(5), Salupere R(6), Musco G(4), Uibo
R(3), Peterson P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Group, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational
Medicine, University of Tartu, 50411 Tartu, Estonia. (2)Institute of Technology, 
University of Tartu, 50411 Tartu, Estonia. (3)Department of Immunology, Institute
of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, 50411 Tartu,
Estonia. (4)Biomolecular NMR Laboratory, Dulbecco Telethon Institute c/o S.
Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy. (5)Icosagen AS, 61713
Tartumaa, Estonia. (6)Department of Internal Medicine, Tartu University Hospital,
51014 Tartu, Estonia.

The SP100 family members comprise a set of closely related genes on chromosome
2q37.1. The widely expressed SP100 and the leukocyte-specific proteins SP110 and 
SP140 have been associated with transcriptional regulation and various human
diseases. Here, we have characterized the SP100 family member SP140L. The genome 
sequence analysis showed the formation of SP140L gene through rearrangements of
the two neighboring genes, SP100 and SP140, during the evolution of higher
primates. The SP140L expression is interferon-inducible with high transcript
levels in B cells and other peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Subcellularly,
SP140L colocalizes with SP100 and SP140 in nuclear structures that are devoid of 
SP110, PML, or p300 proteins. Similarly to SP100 and SP140 protein, we detected
serum autoantibodies to SP140L in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis using
luciferase immunoprecipitation system and immunoblotting assays. In conclusion,
our results show that SP140L is phylogenetically recent member of SP100 proteins 
and acts as an autoantigen in primary biliary cirrhosis patients.

PMCID: PMC4548144
PMID: 26347895  [PubMed - in process]


4. Retrovirology. 2015 May 16;12:41. doi: 10.1186/s12977-015-0165-5.

Identification of potential HIV restriction factors by combining evolutionary
genomic signatures with functional analyses.

McLaren PJ(1,)(2), Gawanbacht A(3), Pyndiah N(4), Krapp C(5), Hotter D(6), Kluge 
SF(7), Götz N(8), Heilmann J(9), Mack K(10), Sauter D(11), Thompson D(12),
Perreaud J(13), Rausell A(14,)(15), Munoz M(16), Ciuffi A(17), Kirchhoff F(18),
Telenti A(19).

Author information: 
(1)École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015, Lausanne, Switzerland.
paul.mclaren@epfl.ch. (2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 1005, Lausanne,
Switzerland. paul.mclaren@epfl.ch. (3)Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm
University Medical Center, 89081, Ulm, Germany. ali.gawanbacht@uni-ulm.de.
(4)Institute of Microbiology, University of Lausanne, 1011, Lausanne,
Switzerland. nitisha.pyndiah@chuv.ch. (5)Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm
University Medical Center, 89081, Ulm, Germany. christian.krapp@uni-ulm.de.
(6)Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm University Medical Center, 89081, Ulm,
Germany. dominik.hotter@uni-ulm.de. (7)Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm
University Medical Center, 89081, Ulm, Germany. silvia.kluge@uni-ulm.de.
(8)Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm University Medical Center, 89081, Ulm,
Germany. nicola-goetz@web.de. (9)Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm University 
Medical Center, 89081, Ulm, Germany. Jessica.Heilmann1@gmx.net. (10)Institute of 
Molecular Virology, Ulm University Medical Center, 89081, Ulm, Germany.
katharina.mack@uni-ulm.de. (11)Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm University
Medical Center, 89081, Ulm, Germany. daniel.sauter@uni-ulm.de. (12)Institute of
Microbiology, University of Lausanne, 1011, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Danielle.thompson@unil.ch. (13)Institute of Microbiology, University of Lausanne,
1011, Lausanne, Switzerland. Jeremie.perreaud@unil.ch. (14)Swiss Institute of
Bioinformatics, 1005, Lausanne, Switzerland. antonio.rausell@isb-sib.ch.
(15)Institute of Microbiology, University of Lausanne, 1011, Lausanne,
Switzerland. antonio.rausell@isb-sib.ch. (16)Institute of Microbiology,
University of Lausanne, 1011, Lausanne, Switzerland. Miguel.munoz@chuv.ch.
(17)Institute of Microbiology, University of Lausanne, 1011, Lausanne,
Switzerland. angela.ciuffi@chuv.ch. (18)Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm
University Medical Center, 89081, Ulm, Germany. frank.kirchhoff@uni-ulm.de.
(19)J. Craig Venter Institute, La Jolla, , CA 92037, , USA. atelenti@jcvi.org.

BACKGROUND: Known antiretroviral restriction factors are encoded by genes that
are under positive selection pressure, induced during HIV-1 infection,
up-regulated by interferons, and/or interact with viral proteins. To identify
potential novel restriction factors, we performed genome-wide scans for human
genes sharing molecular and evolutionary signatures of known restriction factors 
and tested the anti-HIV-1 activity of the most promising candidates.
RESULTS: Our analyses identified 30 human genes that share characteristics of
known restriction factors. Functional analyses of 27 of these candidates showed
that over-expression of a strikingly high proportion of them significantly
inhibited HIV-1 without causing cytotoxic effects. Five factors (APOL1, APOL6,
CD164, TNFRSF10A, TNFRSF10D) suppressed infectious HIV-1 production in
transfected 293T cells by >90% and six additional candidates (FCGR3A, CD3E, OAS1,
GBP5, SPN, IFI16) achieved this when the virus was lacking intact accessory vpr, 
vpu and nef genes. Unexpectedly, over-expression of two factors (IL1A, SP110)
significantly increased infectious HIV-1 production. Mechanistic studies suggest 
that the newly identified potential restriction factors act at different steps of
the viral replication cycle, including proviral transcription and production of
viral proteins. Finally, we confirmed that mRNA expression of most of these
candidate restriction factors in primary CD4+ T cells is significantly increased 
by type I interferons.
CONCLUSIONS: A limited number of human genes share multiple characteristics of
genes encoding for known restriction factors. Most of them display
anti-retroviral activity in transient transfection assays and are expressed in
primary CD4+ T cells.

PMCID: PMC4434878
PMID: 25980612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):3856-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1503154112. Epub 2015 Mar 17.

Equation-free modeling unravels the behavior of complex ecological systems.

DeAngelis DL(1), Yurek S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Southeast Ecological Science Center, US Geological Survey, Gainesville, FL
32653; and Biology Department, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33124
don_deangelis@usgs.gov. (2)Biology Department, University of Miami, Miami, FL
33124.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):E1530-9.

PMCID: PMC4386356
PMID: 25829536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):3854-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1502972112. Epub 2015 Mar 17.

Tuberculosis-resistant transgenic cattle.

Tuggle CK(1), Waters WR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011; and
cktuggle@iastate.edu. (2)National Animal Disease Center, Agricultural Research
Service, US Department of Agriculture, Ames, IA 50010.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):E1530-9.

PMCID: PMC4386365
PMID: 25829535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):E1530-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1421587112. Epub 2015 Mar 2.

TALE nickase-mediated SP110 knockin endows cattle with increased resistance to
tuberculosis.

Wu H(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Yang M(2), Lv J(3), Liu J(1), Zhang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine and Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology,
Ministry of Agriculture, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 712100, Shaanxi,
China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine and. (3)Key Laboratory of Animal
Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, Northwest A&F University, Yangling
712100, Shaanxi, China. (4)College of Veterinary Medicine and Key Laboratory of
Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, Northwest A&F University, Yangling
712100, Shaanxi, China zhy1956@263.net.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):3856-7.
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):3854-5.

Transcription activator-like effector nuclease (TALEN)-mediated genome
modification has been applied successfully to create transgenic animals in
various species, such as mouse, pig, and even monkey. However, transgenic cattle 
with gene knockin have yet to be created using TALENs. Here, we report
site-specific knockin of the transcription activator-like effector (TALE)
nickase-mediated SP110 nuclear body protein gene (SP110) via homologous
recombination to produce tuberculosis-resistant cattle. In vitro and in vivo
challenge and transmission experiments proved that the transgenic cattle are able
to control the growth and multiplication of Mycobacterium bovis, turn on the
apoptotic pathway of cell death instead of necrosis after infection, and
efficiently resist the low dose of M. bovis transmitted from tuberculous cattle
in nature. In this study, we developed TALE nickases to modify the genome of
Holstein-Friesian cattle, thereby engineering a heritable genome modification
that facilitates resistance to tuberculosis.

PMCID: PMC4386332
PMID: 25733846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Clin Exp Med. 2015 Jan 23. [Epub ahead of print]

The effects of SP110's associated genes on fresh cavitary pulmonary tuberculosis 
in Han Chinese population.

Jiang SY(1), Li LL, Yue J, Chen WZ, Yang C, Wan CL, He L, Cai L, Deng SL.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiaotong University,
55 Guangyuanxi Road, Shanghai, 200030, China.

SP110 is a promising anti-Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) gene. To investigate
the effects of SP110 and its associated genes, i.e., MYBBP1A and RELA, on
pathological progression of MTB infection, an association study with 424 patients
of fresh pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB) and 424 healthy controls was performed.
Moreover, classification and regression tree and multifactor dimensionality
reduction were employed to explore the effects of gene-gene interactions on
cavitary PTB. The results indicated that both the heterozygous genotype GC and
homozygous genotype CC in rs3809849 had significant effects on the risk of PTB
(OR 1.42, 95 % CI 1.06-1.92, p 0.019; OR 1.55, 95 % CI 1.04-2.33, p = 0.033,
respectively), and heterozygous genotype CT in rs9061 also had similar effects
(OR 1.43, 95 % CI 1.07-1.90, p = 0.014). The rs3809849 and rs9905742 in MYBBP1A
were also significantly associated with cavitary PTB (p = 0.00046 and 0.039,
respectively), while rs9061 in SP110 had no such association (p = 0.06931) except
its significant association with non-cavitary PTB (p = 0.0093). The interaction
of MYBBP1A and RELA had significant effect on cavitary PTB (OR 4.24, 95 % CI
1.44-12.49, p = 0.005). These suggest that MYBBP1A instead of SP110 may be a
genetic risk factor for cavitary PTB and play important effects on its whole
progress.

PMID: 25612917  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 9;9(7):e99496. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099496. eCollection 
2014.

Polymorphisms of SP110 are associated with both pulmonary and extra-pulmonary
tuberculosis among the Vietnamese.

Fox GJ(1), Sy DN(2), Nhung NV(2), Yu B(3), Ellis MK(4), Van Hung N(2), Cuong
NK(5), Thi Lien L(6), Marks GB(7), Saunders BM(8), Britton WJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Environmental Epidemiology Research Group, Woolcock Institute 
of Medical Research, Glebe, Sydney, Australia; Sydney Medical School, University 
of Sydney, Sydney, Australia; Tuberculosis Research Group, Centenary Institute,
Newtown, Sydney, Australia. (2)National Lung Hospital, Ba Dinh, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(3)Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia; Department of 
Medical Genomics, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, Sydney, Australia.
(4)Tuberculosis Research Group, Centenary Institute, Newtown, Sydney, Australia. 
(5)Hanoi Medical University, Hanoi, Vietnam. (6)Hanoi Lung Hospital, Hanoi,
Vietnam. (7)Respiratory and Environmental Epidemiology Research Group, Woolcock
Institute of Medical Research, Glebe, Sydney, Australia; Sydney Medical School,
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia; Liverpool Hospital, Liverpool, Sydney,
Australia. (8)Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia;
Tuberculosis Research Group, Centenary Institute, Newtown, Sydney, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease that remains a major cause
of morbidity and mortality worldwide, yet the reasons why only 10% of people
infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis go on to develop clinical disease are
poorly understood. Genetically determined variation in the host immune response
is one factor influencing the response to M. tuberculosis. SP110 is an
interferon-responsive nuclear body protein with critical roles in cell cycling,
apoptosis and immunity to infection. However association studies of the gene with
clinical TB in different populations have produced conflicting results.
METHODS: To examine the importance of the SP110 gene in immunity to TB in the
Vietnamese we conducted a case-control genetic association study of 24 SP110
variants, in 663 patients with microbiologically proven TB and 566 unaffected
control subjects from three tertiary hospitals in northern Vietnam.
RESULTS: Five SNPs within SP110 were associated with all forms of TB, including
four SNPs at the C terminus (rs10208770, rs10498244, rs16826860, rs11678451)
under a dominant model and one SNP under a recessive model, rs7601176. Two of
these SNPs were associated with pulmonary TB (rs10208770 and rs16826860) and one 
with extra-pulmonary TB (rs10498244).
CONCLUSION: SP110 variants were associated with increased susceptibility to both 
pulmonary and extra-pulmonary TB in the Vietnamese. Genetic variants in SP110 may
influence macrophage signaling responses and apoptosis during M. tuberculosis
infection, however further research is required to establish the mechanism by
which SP110 influences immunity to tuberculosis infection.

PMCID: PMC4090157
PMID: 25006821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Vet Med Int. 2014;2014:321327. doi: 10.1155/2014/321327. Epub 2014 May 20.

Genetic association analysis of paratuberculosis forms in holstein-friesian
cattle.

Vázquez P(1), Ruiz-Larrañaga O(2), Garrido JM(1), Iriondo M(2), Manzano C(2),
Agirre M(2), Estonba A(2), Juste RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Health, NEIKER-Tecnalia, Berreaga 1, 48160 Derio,
Bizkaia, Spain. (2)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal
Physiology, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of the Basque Country
(UPV/EHU), Barrio Sarriena S/N, 48940 Leioa, Bizkaia, Spain.

A genetic susceptibility to Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP)
infections in ruminants has been longtime suspected to exist. Recently, natural
infections in cattle have been reclassified into latent and patent forms based on
histopathological findings and their associations with immunological and
microbiological variables. This study aims to explore whether these newly defined
phenotypes are associated with twenty-four single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
in six bovine candidate genes: nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 2
(NOD2), solute carrier family 11 member A1 (SLC11A1), nuclear body protein SP110 
(SP110), toll-like receptors (TLRs) 2 and 4, and CD209 (also known as DC-SIGN,
dendritic cell-specific ICAM3-grabbing nonintegrin). SNPs were genotyped for 772 
Holstein-Friesian animals (52.6% apparently free; 38.1% latent; 9.3% patent) by
TaqMan OpenArray technology. Genotypic-phenotypic associations were assessed by
logistic regression analysis adjusted for age at slaughter, under five models
(codominant, dominant, recessive, overdominant, and log-additive), and corrected 
for multiple testing. The rs208222804 C allele (CD209 gene) was found to be
associated with latent paratuberculosis (log-additive model: P < 0.0034 after
permutation procedure; OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.64, 95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.48-0.86). No significant association
was detected between any SNP and the patent phenotype. Consequently, CD209 gene
may play a key role in the pathogenesis of bovine paratuberculosis.

PMCID: PMC4055230
PMID: 24971191  [PubMed]


11. Oncotarget. 2014 Mar 30;5(6):1439-51.

Capturing the biological impact of CDKN2A and MC1R genes as an early predisposing
event in melanoma and non melanoma skin cancer.

Puig-Butille JA(1), Escámez MJ, Garcia-Garcia F, Tell-Marti G, Fabra À,
Martínez-Santamaría L, Badenas C, Aguilera P, Pevida M, Dopazo J, del Río M, Puig
S.

Author information: 
(1)Melanoma Unit, Hospital Clinic and IDIBAPS (Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques Agustí Pi i Sunyer), Barcelona, Spain.

Germline mutations in CDKN2A and/or red hair color variants in MC1R genes are
associated with an increased susceptibility to develop cutaneous melanoma or non 
melanoma skin cancer. We studied the impact of the CDKN2A germinal mutation
p.G101W and MC1R variants on gene expression and transcription profiles
associated with skin cancer. To this end we set-up primary skin cell co-cultures 
from siblings of melanoma prone-families that were later analyzed using the
expression array approach. As a result, we found that 1535 transcripts were
deregulated in CDKN2A mutated cells, with over-expression of immunity-related
genes (HLA-DPB1, CLEC2B, IFI44, IFI44L, IFI27, IFIT1, IFIT2, SP110 and IFNK) and 
down-regulation of genes playing a role in the Notch signaling pathway. 3570
transcripts were deregulated in MC1R variant carriers. In particular, genes
related to oxidative stress and DNA damage pathways were up-regulated as well as 
genes associated with neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's, Alzheimer
and Huntington. Finally, we observed that the expression signatures indentified
in phenotypically normal cells carrying CDKN2A mutations or MC1R variants are
maintained in skin cancer tumors (melanoma and squamous cell carcinoma). These
results indicate that transcriptome deregulation represents an early event
critical for skin cancer development.

PMCID: PMC4039222
PMID: 24742402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Gene. 2014 Mar 10;537(2):302-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.12.020. Epub 2014 Jan 3.

Bovine CLEC7A genetic variants and their association with seropositivity in
Johne's disease ELISA.

Pant SD(1), Verschoor CP(1), Schenkel FS(1), You Q(1), Kelton DF(2), Karrow
NA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genetic Improvement of Livestock, Department of Animal and Poultry 
Science, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario N1G 2W1, Canada. (2)Population
Medicine, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario N1G
2W1, Canada. (3)Centre for Genetic Improvement of Livestock, Department of Animal
and Poultry Science, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario N1G 2W1, Canada.
Electronic address: nkarrow@uoguelph.ca.

Mycobacterium avium ssp. paratuberculosis (MAP) infection in cattle causes
significant economic losses to the dairy and beef industries resulting from
reduced productivity, premature culling and mortality. Bovine Dectin-1, an
important pattern recognition molecule that is able to generate a proinflammatory
response by acting alongside Toll like receptor (TLR) signaling, is known to
co-operate with TLR2 to specifically activate a macrophage proinflammatory
response against mycobacterial infections. Therefore, the goal of this study was 
to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the gene encoding bovine
Dectin-1 (CLEC7A) and to assess their association with susceptibility to MAP
infection in dairy cattle. Blood and milk samples, collected from commercial
dairy operations, were tested for MAP infection using blood and milk ELISAs and a
resource population consisting of 197 infected and 242 healthy cattle was
constructed. Pooled DNA was used for sequencing and eight single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified. Identified SNPs were genotyped on the
resource population using the iPLEX MassARRAY system and statistical analysis was
performed using logistic regression fitting the additive and dominance effects of
each SNP in the model. Out of a total of eight identified SNPs, five were
successfully genotyped, and three out of these five SNPs were found to be in
complete linkage. Statistical analysis revealed a strong association between a
non-synonymous SNP c.589A>G (p=0.008), and MAP infection status of the resource
population inferred by seropositivity in MAP antibody specific ELISAs. This SNP
c.589A>G was located in the geneic region that encodes the carbohydrate
recognition domain of bovine Dectin-1. Therefore, further investigation of its
functional relevance is warranted.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24393710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Feb;1842(2):326-37. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.11.020.
Epub 2013 Nov 22.

The biophysical and biochemical properties of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE)
protein.

Perniola R(1), Musco G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics - Neonatal Intensive Care, V. Fazzi Regional
Hospital, Piazza F. Muratore, I-73100, Lecce, Italy. Electronic address:
rperniola@hotmail.com. (2)Biomolecular NMR Laboratory, Center of Translational
Genomics and Bioinformatics, Dulbecco Telethon Institute at San Raffaele
Scientific Institute, Via Olgettina 58, I-20132, Milan, Italy. Electronic
address: musco.giovanna@hsr.it.

AIRE (for autoimmune regulator) is a multidomain protein that performs a
fundamental function in the thymus and possibly in the secondary lymphoid organs:
the regulation, especially in the sense of activation, of the process of gene
transcription in cell lines deputed to the presentation of self-antigens to the
maturing T lymphocytes. The apoptosis of the elements bearing T-cell receptors
with critical affinity for the exhibited self-antigens prevents the escape of
autoreactive clones and represents a simple and efficient mechanism of deletional
self-tolerance. However, AIRE action relies on an articulated complex of
biophysical and biochemical properties, in most cases attributable to single
subspecialized domains. Here a thorough review of the matter is presented, with a
privileged look at the pathogenic changes of AIRE that interfere with such
properties and lead to the impairment in its chief function.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24275490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2014 Jan;34(1):28-34. doi: 10.1089/jir.2013.0032. Epub
2013 Oct 30.

Impaired HCV clearance in HIV/HCV coinfected subjects treated with PegIFN and RBV
due to interference of IFN signaling by IFNaR2a.

Lee YJ(1), Zhang X, Vazquez E, Shivasabesan G, Young HA, Murphy A, Wang H,
Suffredini AF, Siebenlist U, Kottilil S.

Author information: 
(1)1 Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health , Bethesda, Maryland.

Enhanced endogenous interferon (IFN) stimulated gene (ISG) signature has been
associated with nonresponsiveness to hepatitis C treatment using pegylated-IFNa
(pegIFNa) and ribavirin (RBV) in human immunodeficiency virus/hepatitis C virus
(HIV/HCV) coinfected patients. Using a proteomic approach, we identified high
levels of IFNa receptor 2a (IFNaR2a) in the serum of null responders to
pegIFNa/RBV. IFNaR2a inhibited antiviral activity of all formulations of IFNa in 
JFH/Huh7.5 cells. Furthermore, serum from null responders, but not from those who
achieved sustained virologic response, suppressed IFN-signaling and ISG
expression in IFNa-stimulated PBMCs of healthy donors in an IFNaR2a specific
fashion. An IFNaR2a transgenic mice model (C57BL/6) was generated that had
significantly higher levels of IFNaR2a in the serum than the controls (P=0.001). 
Total ISG expression in the lymph nodes was significantly higher compared to
wild-type mice (P value=0.0016). In addition, IFITM1 and SP110 had significantly 
increased expression in the liver, IFITM1 and ISG15 in the lymph node, and ISG15 
and PLSCR1 in the spleen (P value<0.05). The underlying mechanism of resistance
to hepatitis C treatment may involve transsignaling of the JAK/STAT pathway by
the sIFNaR2a-IFNa/ß complex and result in the enhanced ISG signature observed in 
null responders. In this regard, the transgenic mice model simulated
nonresponders to IFNa therapy and provides valuable insights into the role of
sIFNaR2a-IFNa interactions in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3887437
PMID: 24171456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Tissue Antigens. 2013 Nov;82(5):312-6. doi: 10.1111/tan.12209. Epub 2013 Oct 4.

Minor H antigen matches and mismatches are equally distributed among recipients
with or without complications after HLA identical sibling renal transplantation.

Dierselhuis MP(1), Spierings E, Drabbels J, Hendriks M, Alaez C, Alberú J,
Alvarez MB, Burlingham W, Campos E, Christiaans M, Claas F, Fasano ME,
Gerbase-Delima M, Gervais T, Gorodezky C, Larriba J, Lardy NM, Latinne D,
Morales-Buenrostro LE, Moreno MJ, Oguz F, Opelz G, Sergeant R, Tambutti M, Teper 
S, Tilanus M, Turkmen A, Warrens AN, Weimar W, Goulmy E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Studies of the effect of minor H antigen mismatching on the outcome of renal
transplantation are scarce and concern mainly single center studies. The
International Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics Workshops (IHIW) provide a
collaborative platform to execute crucial large studies. In collaboration with 16
laboratories of the IHIW, the role of 15 autosomal, 10 Y-chromosome encoded minor
H antigens and 3 CD31 polymorphisms, was investigated in relation to the
incidence of renal graft rejection and graft loss in 444 human leukocyte antigens
(HLA)-identical sibling renal transplantations. Recipient and donor DNA samples
were genotyped for the minor H antigens HA-1, HA-2, HA-3, HA-8, HB-1, ACC-1,
ACC-2, SP110, PANE1, UGT2B17, C19Orf48, LB-ECGF-1, CTSH, LRH-1, LB-ADIR and HY.
The correlation between minor H antigen mismatch and the primary outcome graft
rejection or graft loss was statistically analyzed. The incidence of rejection
was very low and no correlation was observed between one or more minor H antigen 
mismatch(es) and a rejection episode (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>36), of which only eight resulted in
graft loss. In summary, in our study cohort of 444 renal transplants, mismatching
for neither autosomal nor HY minor H antigens correlate with rejection episodes
or with graft loss.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24116658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Tissue Antigens. 2013 Sep;82(3):177-85. doi: 10.1111/tan.12183.

Distribution patterns of variability for 18 immune system genes in
Amerindians--relationship with history and epidemiology.

Lindenau JD(1), Salzano FM, Guimarães LS, Callegari-Jacques SM, Hurtado AM, Hill 
KR, Petzl-Erler ML, Tsuneto LT, Hutz MH.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto
Alegre, Brazil.

Native American populations generally have a higher prevalence of infectious
diseases than non-Native populations and this fact can induce different pressures
in their immune system. We investigated the patterns of population
differentiation (FST ) of 32 polymorphisms related to adaptive immune response in
four Native American populations (Aché, Guarani-Kaiowá, Guarani-Ñandeva and
Kaingang), and the results were compared with the three major world population
data [Yoruba of Ibadan, Nigeria (YRI), Utah residents with northern and Western
Europe ancestry (CEU) and Han Chinese of Beijing, China (CHB)] available in the
HapMap database. The Aché clearly differentiated from the other Amerindians, but 
when all Native Americans were compared with the samples of other ethnic groups
the lowest difference (0.08) was found with CHB (Asians), the second lowest
(0.15) with YRI (Africans) and the most marked with CEU (European-derived). The
considerable intra and interethnic differences found can be explained both in
terms of diverse evolutionary distances and more recent environmental pathogen
exposures; and they should be appropriately considered prior to any specific
public health action.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24032724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. AIDS. 2013 Nov 13;27(17):2715-24. doi: 10.1097/01.aids.0000432459.36970.a9.

Variations at multiple genes improve interleukin 28B genotype predictive capacity
for response to therapy against hepatitis C infection.

Neukam K(1), Caruz A, Rivero-Juárez A, Barreiro P, Merino D, Real LM, Herrero R, 
Camacho A, Soriano V, Di Lello FA, Macías J, Rivero A, Pineda JA.

Author information: 
(1)aUnit of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, Hospital Universitario de Valme
bInstituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Seville cImmunogenetics Unit,
Faculty of Sciences, Universidad de Jaén, Jaen dUnit of Infectious Diseases,
Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Instituto Maimónides de Investigación
Biomédica de Córdoba (IMIBIC), Cordoba eDepartment of Infectious Diseases,
Hospital Carlos III, Madrid fUnit of Infectious Diseases, Hospital Juan Ramón
Jiménez. Huelva, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To identify genetic factors that predict sustained virological
response (SVR) to pegylated interferon (Peg-IFN)/ribavirin (RBV) in HIV/hepatitis
C virus (HCV) genotype 1 or 4-coinfected patients and that enhance the predictive
capacity of IL28B genotype in this population.
DESIGN: Prospective cohort study.
SETTING: Five tertiary care centers in Spain.
PATIENTS: Two hundred and five HIV/HCV genotype 1 or 4-coinfected patients who
received a complete course of Peg-IFN/RBV for 48 weeks.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: All individuals were genotyped for 144 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs).
RESULTS: One hundred and sixty-two (79%) patients bore HCV genotype 1. Overall
SVR was achieved by 73 (36%) individuals. SNPs at the following genes were
associated with SVR: IL28B, low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR), transforming
growth factor ß (TGF-ß), aquaporine 2 (AQP-2), very-low-density lipoprotein
receptor, Sp110 nuclear body protein, interferon alpha/beta receptor 1,
2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthase 1 and apolipoprotein B. There was a strong synergy 
between SNPs at IL28B, TGF-ß and AQP-2 genes: the number of patients reaching SVR
with all three favorable genotypes versus unfavorable genotypes were 22 (78.6%)
versus 1 (7.1%) (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.1<U+200A>×<U+200A>10). HCV baseline viral load, IL28B, TGF-ß, AQP-2 and 
LDLR haplotypes were independently associated with SVR.
CONCLUSION: A number of genetic factors modify the predictive capacity of IL28B
genotype. These can be used to identify HCV genotype 1 or 4-infected patients
with a very high or a very low probability to respond to bitherapy with
Peg-IFN/RBV. Predictive models based on these factors could be helpful to tailor 
direct acting antiviral-based therapy.

PMID: 23842134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2013 Aug;19(8):1244-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bbmt.2013.06.001. Epub 2013 Jun 10.

Multicenter analyses demonstrate significant clinical effects of minor
histocompatibility antigens on GvHD and GvL after HLA-matched related and
unrelated hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

Spierings E(1), Kim YH, Hendriks M, Borst E, Sergeant R, Canossi A, Oudshoorn M, 
Loiseau P, Dolstra H, Markiewicz M, Leffell MS, Pereira N, Kircher B, Turpeinen
H, Eliaou JF, Gervais T, Laurin D, Enczmann J, Martinetti M, Thomson J, Oguz F,
Santarone S, Partanen J, Siekiera U, Alessandrino EP, Kalayoglu S, Brand R,
Goulmy E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Translational Immunology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. spierings@umcutrecht.nl

The effect of minor H antigen mismatching on the occurrence of graft-versus-host 
disease (GvHD) and graft-versus-leukemia (GvL) after HLA-matched hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation (HSCT) has mainly been demonstrated in single-center
studies. Yet, the International Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics Workshops
(IHIW) provide a collaborative platform to execute crucial large studies. In
collaboration with 20 laboratories of the IHIW, the roles of 10 autosomal and 10 
Y chromosome-encoded minor H antigens were investigated on GvHD and relapse
incidence in 639 HLA-identical related donor (IRD) and 210 HLA-matched unrelated 
donor (MUD) HSCT recipients. Donor and recipient DNA samples were genotyped for
the minor H antigens HA-1, HA-2, HA-3, HA-8, HB-1, ACC-1, ACC-2, SP110, PANE1,
UGT2B17, and HY. The correlations with the primary outcomes GvHD (acute or
chronic GvHD), survival, and relapse were statistically analyzed. The results of 
these multicenter analyses show that none of the HLA class I-restricted HY
antigens were found to be associated with any of the primary outcomes.
Interestingly, of the HLA class II-restricted HY antigens analyzed, HLA-DQ5
positive recipients showed a significantly increased GvHD-free survival in
female-to-male HSCT compared with male-to-female HSCT (P = .013). Yet, analysis
of the overall gender effect, thus independent of the known HY antigens, between 
the gender groups demonstrated an increased GvHD incidence in the female-to-male 
transplantations (P < .005) and a decreased GvHD-free survival in the
female-to-male transplantations (P < .001). Of all autosomally encoded minor H
antigens, only mismatching for the broadly expressed minor H antigen HA-8
increased the GvHD incidence in IRD HSCT (Hazard ratio [HR] = 5.28, P < .005),
but not in MUD HSCT. Most striking was the influence of hematopoietic restricted 
minor H antigens on GvL as mismatching for hematopoietic minor H antigens
correlated with lower relapse rates (P = .078), higher relapse-free survival (P =
.029), and higher overall survival (P = .032) in recipients with GvHD, but not in
those without GvHD. In conclusion, the significant GvHD effect of the broadly
expressed minor H antigen HA-8 favors matching for HA-8 in IRD, but not in MUD,
patient/donor pairs. The GvHD-GvL association demonstrating a significant lower
relapse in hematopoietic minor H antigen mismatched patient/donor pairs
underlines their clinical applicability for adoptive immunotherapy, enhancing the
GvL effect in a GvHD controllable manner.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 23756210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2013 May;24(3):250-6. doi: 10.1111/pai.12051. Epub 2013 
Mar 1.

The role of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in SP110 associated
veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency syndrome.

Ganaiem H(1), Eisenstein EM, Tenenbaum A, Somech R, Simanovsky N, Roscioli T,
Weintraub M, Stepensky P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency (VODI) is an autosomal
recessive disorder of combined immunodeficiency (CID) and hepatic injury.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) - the only definitive treatment
for CID - appeared to have a high rate of complications in a previous report. In 
this study, we describe a new group of patients with VODI highlighting further
clinical and immunologic aspects of this disease and re-evaluating the
effectiveness of HSCT for the treatment of this disorder.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Review of clinical data, immunologic features, molecular
studies, treatment, and final outcome of eight kindred members with VODI.
RESULTS: The patients described had clinical and immunologic findings consistent 
with VODI. The molecular studies revealed a new mutation in the SP110 gene. HSCT 
was carried out in five patients and was successful in three.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of VODI should be considered in all patients
regardless of ethnicity with a severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)-like
presentation, especially with a normal mitogen response, or with signs of hepatic
injury. VODI is a primary immune deficiency, which can be successfully corrected 
by bone marrow transplantation if applied early in the course of disease using
appropriate conditioning.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23448538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Malar J. 2012 Dec 7;11:409. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-409.

IL1B, IL4R, IL12RB1 and TNF gene polymorphisms are associated with Plasmodium
vivax malaria in Brazil.

Sortica VA(1), Cunha MG, Ohnishi MD, Souza JM, Ribeiro-Dos-Santos AK, Santos NP, 
Callegari-Jacques SM, Santos SE, Hutz MH.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto
Alegre, RS, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Malaria is among the most prevalent parasitic diseases worldwide. In 
Brazil, malaria is concentrated in the northern region, where Plasmodium vivax
accounts for 85% disease incidence. The role of genetic factors in host immune
system conferring resistance/susceptibility against P. vivax infections is still 
poorly understood.
METHODS: The present study investigates the influence of polymorphisms in 18
genes related to the immune system in patients with malaria caused by P. vivax. A
total of 263 healthy individuals (control group) and 216 individuals infected by 
P. vivax (malaria group) were genotyped for 33 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in IL1B, IL2, IL4, IL4R, IL6, IL8, IL10, IL12A, IL12B, IL12RB1, SP110,
TNF, TNFRSF1A, IFNG, IFNGR1, VDR, PTPN22 and P2X7 genes. All subjects were
genotyped with 48 ancestry informative insertion-deletion polymorphisms to
determine the proportion of African, European and Amerindian ancestry. Only 13
SNPs in 10 genes with differences lower than 20% between cases and controls in a 
Poisson Regression model with age as covariate were further investigated with a
structured population association test.
RESULTS: The IL1B gene -5839C<U+2009>><U+2009>T and IL4R 1902A<U+2009>><U+2009>G polymorphisms and IL12RB1
-1094A/-641C and TNF -1031 T/-863A/-857 T/-308 G/-238 G haplotypes were
associated with malaria susceptibility after population structure correction
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Plasmodium vivax malaria pathophysiology is still poorly understood. 
The present findings reinforce and increase our understanding about the role of
the immune system in malaria susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC3537609
PMID: 23217179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Hum Genet. 2013 Mar;132(3):265-73. doi: 10.1007/s00439-012-1244-5. Epub 2012 Nov 
6.

Identification of genetic associations of SP110/MYBBP1A/RELA with pulmonary
tuberculosis in the Chinese Han population.

Cai L(1), Deng SL, Liang L, Pan H, Zhou J, Wang MY, Yue J, Wan CL, He G, He L.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Center, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiaotong University,
800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200030, China. cailei2010@126.com

Genetic factors play important roles in the development of tuberculosis (TB).
SP110 is a promising candidate target for controlling TB infections. However,
several studies associating SP110 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with TB 
have yielded conflicting results. This may be partly resolved by studying other
genes associated with SP110, such as MYBBP1A and RELA. Here, we genotyped 6 SP110
SNPs, 8 MYBBP1A SNPs and 5 RELA SNPs in 702 Chinese pulmonary TB patients and 425
healthy subjects using MassARRAY and SNaPshot methods. Using SNP-based analysis
with Bonferroni correction, rs3809849 in MYBBP1A [Pcorrected (cor) = 0.0038] and 
rs9061 in SP110 (Pcor = 0.019) were found to be significantly associated with TB.
Furthermore, meta-analysis of rs9061 in East Asian populations showed that the
rs9061 T allele conferred significant risk for TB [P = 0.002, pooled odds ratio
(OR), 1.24, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.08-1.43]. The MYBBP1A GTCTTGGG
haplotype and haplotypes CGACCG/TGATTG within SP110 were found to be markedly and
significantly associated with TB (P = 2.00E-06, 5.00E-6 and 2.59E-4,
respectively). Gene-based analysis also demonstrated that SP110 and MYBBP1A were 
each associated with TB (Pcor = 0.011 and 0.035, respectively). The logistic
regression analysis results supported interactions between SP110 and MYBBP1A,
indicating that subjects carrying a GC/CC genotype in MYBBP1A and CC genotype in 
SP110 possessed the high risk of developing TB (P = 1.74E-12). Our study suggests
that a combination of SP110 and MYBBP1A gene polymorphisms may serve as a novel
marker for identifying the risk of developing TB in the Chinese Han population.

PMID: 23129390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Clin Immunol. 2012 Nov;145(2):102-7. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2012.07.016. Epub 2012
Aug 7.

Hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency (VODI): first reported case 
in the U.S. and identification of a unique mutation in Sp110.

Wang T(1), Ong P, Roscioli T, Cliffe ST, Church JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School
of Medicine, University Southern California, 4650 West Sunset Boulevard, Los
Angeles, CA 90027, USA.

Familial hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency (VODI, OMIM:
235550), a rare form of severe combined immune deficiency, was first described in
Australian Lebanese patients as being associated with homozygous mutations in
SP110, a gene encoding a PML nuclear body-associated protein. We present the
first case of confirmed VODI in the United States, and identify the first novel
missense mutation in SP110. The 3-year-old daughter of Hispanic parents without
known consanguinity presented at age 5 months with fever, hepatomegaly, and
pancytopenia. Her brother died at age 3 months from hepatic failure of
undetermined etiology. Initial T- and B-cell counts were low, but eventually
normalized. Serum IgG and IgM levels were low for age. Lymphoproliferation to
mitogens and allogenic B-cells was normal, but absent to tetanus and candida
antigens. Serum antibody levels against pneumococcal, Hib and tetanus antigens
were low. Liver biopsies at ages 5 and 9 months were consistent with hepatic
veno-occlusive disease or hVOD (also known as sinusoidal obstruction syndrome or 
SOS) and broncho-alveolar lavage detected Pneumocystis jiroveci. The patient
recovered from her acute disease and has been clinically stable on immunoglobulin
replacement therapy and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis. T-Cell
receptor excision circle (TREC) analysis suggests that VODI will not be detected 
by newborn screening for severe combined immunodeficiency that relies on this
assay. DNA was obtained from the patient, 4 siblings, and both parents, and SP110
was sequenced. The first missense mutation, a homozygous deletion/insertion
variation in exon 2 (NM_080424.2 (SP110):c.78_79delinsAT) was detected in the
patient. This novel mutation segregated in the heterozygous state in other living
unaffected family members. The mechanism by which this SP110 mutation associates 
with VODI is consistent with the normal length mutated SP110 protein being
subject to enhanced proteosome degradation resulting in marked reductions in
SP110 protein.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22982295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Infect Genet Evol. 2012 Oct;12(7):1473-80. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2012.05.011.
Epub 2012 Jun 9.

SP110 gene polymorphisms and tuberculosis susceptibility: a systematic review and
meta-analysis based on 10 624 subjects.

Lei X(1), Zhu H, Zha L, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health and Health Management, Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing 400016, China.

Tuberculosis (TB), caused by infection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, is a major 
challenge to global public health. The SP110 (Speckled 110) gene, which is
considered as a host genetic susceptibility to TB, has been widely studied in
recent years, yet the results were somewhat contradictory and indeterminate. We
systematically searched published literatures on SP110 polymorphisms and
tuberculosis risk until January 2012 in relevant databases, selected studies by
previously defined criteria, extracted key data and quantitatively summarized
associations of the most extensively studied polymorphisms through meta-analysis.
A total of 10 624 subjects from seven case-control studies were included in the
present study. In overall meta-analysis, pooled odds ratio of polymorphisms
rs1135791, rs9061, rs11556887, rs3948464, rs1346311 were 1.01 (95% CI:
0.71-1.44), 0.86 (95% CI: 0.70-1.04), 0.99 (95% CI: 0.67-1.47), 1.29 (CI:
0.89-1.89) and 0.95 (CI: 0.86-1.04) respectively; the summary odds ratio of
sensitivity analysis specifically on pulmonary TB were 1.02 (95% CI: 0.65-1.54)
for rs1135791, 0.84 (95% CI: 0.68-1.02) for rs9061, 0.88 (95% CI: 0.57-1.36) for 
rs11556887, 0.94 (95% CI: 0.85-1.04) for rs1346311; and in the ethnicity
stratified analysis, the estimated odds ratio were 0.97 (95% CI: 0.54-1.73) for
rs1135791 and 0.86 (95% CI: 0.70-1.04) for rs9061 among Asians. None of the
target polymorphisms in SP110 gene observed in the present quantitative synthesis
was detected to be significantly associated with TB susceptibility. Given the
moderate strength of the results, the complexities of pulmonary and
extra-pulmonary host genetic polymorphisms, gene-gene and gene-environment
interactions, and the cross-species difference between human and mice, it would
not be robust to remark that SP110 has no role in TB progress.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22691368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Am J Manag Care. 2012 May;18(3 Spec No.):SP110-1.

Testing for ALK-positive NSCLC.

Beagin K.

PMID: 22642275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012 Sep;130(3):735-742.e6. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2012.02.054. Epub 2012 May 21.

Clinical, molecular, and cellular immunologic findings in patients with
SP110-associated veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency syndrome.

Cliffe ST(1), Bloch DB, Suryani S, Kamsteeg EJ, Avery DT, Palendira U, Church JA,
Wainstein BK, Trizzino A, Lefranc G, Akatcherian C, Megarbané A, Gilissen C,
Moshous D, Reichenbach J, Misbah S, Salzer U, Abinun M, Ong PY, Stepensky P, Ruga
E, Ziegler JB, Wong M, Tangye SG, Lindeman R, Buckley MF, Roscioli T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology and Genetics, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney,
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the SP110 gene result in infantile onset of the
autosomal recessive primary immunodeficiency disease veno-occlusive disease with 
immunodeficiency syndrome (VODI), which is characterized by
hypogammaglobulinemia, T-cell dysfunction, and a high frequency of hepatic
veno-occlusive disease.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to further characterize the clinical features, B-lineage
cellular immunologic findings, and molecular pathogenesis of this disorder in 9
patients with new diagnoses, including 4 novel mutations from families of
Italian, Hispanic, and Arabic ethnic origin.
METHODS: Methods used include clinical review; Sanger DNA sequencing of the SP110
gene; determination of transfected mutant protein function by using
immunofluorescent studies in Hep-2 cells; quantitation of B-cell subsets by means
of flow cytometry; assessments of B-cell function after stimulation with CD40
ligand, IL-21, or both; and differential gene expression array studies of
EBV-transformed B cells.
RESULTS: We confirm the major diagnostic criteria and the clinical utility of
SP110 mutation testing for the diagnosis of VODI. Analysis of 4 new alleles
confirms that VODI is caused by reduced functional SP110 protein levels. Detailed
B-cell immunophenotyping demonstrated that Sp110 deficiency compromises the
ability of human B cells to respond to T cell-dependent stimuli and differentiate
into immunoglobulin-secreting cells in vitro. Expression microarray studies have 
identified pathways involved in B-lymphocyte differentiation and macrophage
function.
CONCLUSION: These studies show that a range of mutations in SP110 that cause
decreased SP110 protein levels and impaired late B-cell differentiation cause
VODI and that the condition is not restricted to the Lebanese population.

Copyright © 2012 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22621957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Infect Genet Evol. 2012 Aug;12(6):1319-23. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2012.04.006.
Epub 2012 Apr 12.

Polymorphisms in SP110 are not associated with pulmonary tuberculosis in
Indonesians.

Png E(1), Alisjahbana B, Sahiratmadja E, Marzuki S, Nelwan R, Adnan I, van de
Vosse E, Hibberd M, van Crevel R, Ottenhoff TH, Seielstad M.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics, Genome Institute of Singapore, 60 Biopolis Street, Singapore
138672, Singapore. pnge@gis.a-star.edu.sg

Despite being high transmissible, Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tuberculosis)
infection causes active disease in only 5-10% of disease-susceptible individuals.
This has instigated interest in studying potentially underlying genetic host
factors and mechanisms in tuberculosis (TB). The recent identification of the
Intracellular pathogen resistance 1 (Ipr1) gene, which plays a major role in
controlling M. tuberculosis susceptibility and infection severity in mice (Pan et
al., 2005), has prompted studies on its human homolog; SP110 in humans.
Association of SP110 SNPs with pulmonary TB were first reported in a study on
West African families (Tosh et al., 2006). Subsequent attempts to replicate these
findings in other populations, including another West African (Ghanaian) cohort
(Thye et al., 2006), however, were unsuccessful. Here we have genotyped 20 SNPs
located in the SP110 gene, including the previously TB associated variants;
rs2114592 and rs3948464, for the first time in a South East Asian cohort from
Indonesia. Our study did not reveal any statistically significant associations
between SP110 SNPs and pulmonary TB. In addition, a meta-analysis of the two
previously TB associated SNPs revealed that these are not associated with TB,
further confirming the lack of convincing evidence for SP110 to be implicated in 
TB susceptibility, as yet in humans.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22522001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2012 Jan;34(1):11-4.

[Cytotoxic activity of spleen lymphocytes in BALB/c mice immunized by
HSP110-HER2/neu ICD].

[Article in Chinese]

Han D(1), Xu H, Yan WQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Jiaxing College, Jiaxing, China. hdd426@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore the cytotoxic responses of spleen T lymphocytes (CTL) in
BALB/c mice induced by recombinant HSP110-HER2/neu ICD complex.
METHODS: Tumor-bearing mouse model was immunized by HSP110-HER2/neu ICD complex. 
The IFN-<U+03B3> level secreted by activated spleen T lymphocytes was detected by enzyme
linked immunospot assay (ELISPOT). The corresponding CTL activity was measured by
granzyme release assay.
RESULTS: The BALB/c mouse model of human mammary tumor highly expressing HER2/neu
was established. HSP110-HER2/neu ICD complex immunization led to a significantly 
higher level of INF-<U+03B3> than that in HSP110-P(789-797) immunized and HER2/neu ICD
immunized mice. HSP110-HER2/neu ICD complex immunized animals also show
significant CTL activity. The results of immunohistochemical staining showed that
the number of blue spots in the PBS group was 4.57 ± 1.33, HSP110 group 6.83 ±
2.08, HER2/neu ICD group 16.17 ± 2.86, HSP110-P(789-797) group 43.67 ± 4.78, and 
SP110-HER2/neu ICD group 76.51 ± 8.17. The number of IFN-<U+03B3>-secreting spleen
lymphocytes in the HSP110-HER2/neu ICD group was significantly higher than that
in the HSP110-P(789-797) group, and that of HSP110-P(789-797) group was
significantly higher than that of HER2/neu ICD group (P < 0.01). The target
cell-killing rate of the PBS group was (8.15 ± 1.27)%, HSP110 group (9.51 ±
1.51)%, HER2/neu ICD group (14.03 ± 2.45)%, HSP110-P(789-797) group (25.99 ±
3.04)% and HSP110-HER2/neu ICD group (38.15 ± 3.95)% (all P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: HSP110-HER2/neu ICD complex can promote the proliferation and
maturation of T lymphocytes into CTLs, and might be used as anti-tumor vaccine to
induce potent cytotoxic T lymophocyte immunoresponse against specific tumor
cells.

PMID: 22490848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012 Jun;129(6):1678-80. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2012.01.046.
Epub 2012 Feb 16.

Decreased IL-10 production by EBV-transformed B cells from patients with VODI:
implications for the pathogenesis of Crohn disease.

Bloch DB, Nobre R, Steinbicker AU, Al-Herz W, Notarangelo LD, Recher M.

PMID: 22341038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Immunology. 2011 Oct;134(2):109-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2011.03472.x.

Are mouse models of human mycobacterial diseases relevant? Genetics says: 'yes!'.

Apt AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Central Institute for Tuberculosis, Moscow, Russia. asapt@aha.ru

Relevance and accuracy of experimental mouse models of tuberculosis (TB) are the 
subject of constant debate. This article briefly reviews genetic aspects of this 
problem and provides a few examples of mycobacterial diseases with similar or
identical genetic control in mice and humans. The two species display more
similarities than differences regarding both genetics of susceptibility/severity 
of mycobacterial diseases and the networks of protective and pathological immune 
reactions. In the opinion of the author, refined mouse models of mycobacterial
diseases are extremely useful for modelling the corresponding human conditions,
if genetic diversity is taken into account.

© 2011 The Author. Immunology © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3194219
PMID: 21896006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Am J Dermatopathol. 2011 Dec;33(8):780-5. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0b013e31820dfcbf.

Microarray comparative genomic hybridization detection of copy number changes in 
desmoplastic melanoma and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor.

Pryor JG(1), Brown-Kipphut BA, Iqbal A, Scott GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA.

Desmoplastic melanoma (DM) and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST)
can appear morphologically and immunophenotypically similar. We attempted to
determine whether microarray comparative genomic hybridization could detect copy 
number differences between them to aid in the diagnosis. S-100
immunohistochemistry was performed on 5 cases of DM and 9 cases of MPNST using
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded specimens. Genomic DNA was extracted from
microdissected cells. Whole genome amplification was performed on 5 of 5 DMs and 
6 of 9 MPNST cases. A multiplex polymerase chain reaction assay was used to
determine the quality of the DNA samples, which were run on the Spectral Chip
2600 bacterial artificial chromosome array platform. DM showed gains involving
chromosomes 1p, 2p, 9q, 13q, 14q, and 20q and losses involving chromosomes 5p,
11p, 12q, 15q, and 18q. Several cancer-associated genes were involved, including 
gain of BCL2L1, ARTN, AMPK, NRAS, and CCNA1 and loss of IGF2, CDKN1C, PAX6, WT1, 
TRAF6, MAPK8IP1, and IMP3. MPNST had gains involving chromosomes 1p, 2q, and 19p 
and loss of chromosome 21q. Gains of MUM1, APC2, MAP2K2, JMJD2B, SP110, PTMA,
GPI, and CDKN2D were detected. DM and MPNST have chromosomal alterations detected
by array comparative genomic hybridization that might be useful in distinguishing
these 2 tumors, although further studies with a larger sample size will be needed
to test this.

PMID: 21785329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Hum Immunol. 2011 Jul;72(7):576-80. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2011.03.014. Epub 2011 
Apr 20.

Genetic association study suggests a role for SP110 variants in lymph node
tuberculosis but not pulmonary tuberculosis in north Indians.

Abhimanyu(1), Jha P, Jain A, Arora K, Bose M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, University of
Delhi, New Delhi 110007, India.

Ethnic specificity is a key determinant in understanding the association of
genetic variants with outcome of disease susceptibility. SP110, a component of
the nuclear body, has been subjected to association studies with conflicting
results. In this study we probed SP110 variants in pulmonary (PTB) and lymph node
tuberculosis (LNTB) cases to explore their role in controlling susceptibility to 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in north Indians. We genotyped 24 SP110
variants in over 140 north Indian tuberculosis cases and 78 ethnicity-matched
controls. The SP110 gene variants were available from public databases. The cases
and controls were free of any population stratification when subjected to
Eigenstrat principal component analysis. Genotyping was carried out using the
Sequenom MassARRAY platform. Applying exclusion criteria, 11 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of the LNTB panel and 13 SNPs of the PTB panel passed all
filters and were analyzed further. No significant association was observed
between SP110 variants and PTB. Surprisingly, we discovered evidence of an
association of SP110 variants with LNTB, a form of extrapulmonary tuberculosis,
at 3 loci, namely, rs6436915, rs1427294, and rs1346311. When permutations
analysis (n = 10,000) of allelic p values was undertaken, only rs1427294 passed
the test with its p value remaining statistically significant. The C allele of
rs1427294 exhibited a 5-fold risk of developing LNTB. No significant haplotypes
were observed. In the pilot study presented here, our results provide evidence
for the first time that SP110 may be a risk determinant locus in LNTB while
confirming a doubtful role of SP110 in PTB in north Indians. In general, the
results might indicate a role of SP110 variants in extrapulmonary tuberculosis
rather than PTB.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21536091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Infect Genet Evol. 2011 Jul;11(5):934-9. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.02.017. Epub 
2011 Mar 17.

Association of SP110 gene polymorphisms with susceptibility to tuberculosis in a 
Chinese population.

Liang L(1), Zhao YL, Yue J, Liu JF, Han M, Wang H, Xiao H.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Mycobacterium Tuberculosis, Shanghai Pulmonary
Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Development of tuberculosis is mediated by both environmental and genetic
factors. The Ipr1 (intracellular pathogen resistance-1) gene has been identified 
at the sst1 (super-susceptibility to tuberculosis 1) locus on mouse chromosome 1.
As Ipr1 plays a major role in mediating innate immunity in a mouse model of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, the human Ipr1 homologue, SP110 is a
recognised candidate gene for control M. tuberculosis infection. This study was
designed to investigate sequence variants of the SP110 gene in Chinese and test
whether the SP110 gene is a susceptibility factor for tuberculosis. In a sample
of 308 smear-positive patients with pulmonary tuberculosis and 628 exposed,
apparently healthy controls, we have genotyped 6 SP110 gene variants that were
either available from public databases, including HapMap data, or identified by
DNA re-sequencing. DNA re-sequencing revealed 7 novel SP110 variants in the
5'-UTR and intronic regions. Two of SP110 SNPs, rs11556887 and rs1135971 were
significantly associated with disease. Analysis of the haplotypes revealed two
haplotypes are significantly associated with TB. Other variants of SP110 in this 
case-control approach could not find any significant differences. Our study
demonstrates that genotypes and haplotypes of SP110 might be associated with
susceptibility to tuberculosis in Chinese population.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21397050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Med Chem. 2011 Mar;7(2):121-6.

Identification of proteins interacting with human SP110 during the process of
viral infections.

Cai L(1), Wang Y, Wang JF, Chou KC.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Centre
for Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai JiaoTong University, 800 Dongchuan Road,
Shanghai, China. lcai@gordonlifescience.org

Human SP110 plays an important role in resisting intracellular pathogens, and
hence has become an important drug target for preventing intracellular pathogen
diseases, such as tuberculosis, hepatic veno-occlusive disease, and intracellular
cancers. Unfortunately, so far little is known about the interactions of SP110
with the other proteins in a cell, which is considered to be the key for
revealing its action mechanism and mediated pathway. Using both the genetic and
structural analyses as well as the segment-docking approach, we have identified
two proteins: the human remodeling and spacing factor 1 (RSF1) and the activating
transcription factor 7 interacting protein (ATF7IP). They are very likely
interacting with human SP110 during the process of viral infections. Owing to the
close relationship of RSF1 with the chromatin remodeling and ATF7IP with the
chromatin formation, it is logical to infer that human SP110 may be involved in
the chromatin remodeling and formation as well. These findings may provide useful
insights into the development of new drugs for treating and preventing
intracellular pathogen diseases.

PMID: 21222611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Jan;41(1):39-46. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040750. Epub 2010 Dec 9.

Differences in the production of spliced antigenic peptides by the standard
proteasome and the immunoproteasome.

Dalet A(1), Stroobant V, Vigneron N, Van den Eynde BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, de Duve Institute, Université catholique
de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

Peptide splicing allows the production of antigenic peptides composed of two
fragments initially non-contiguous in the parental protein. The proposed
mechanism of splicing is a transpeptidation occurring within the proteasome.
Three spliced peptides, derived from FGF-5, melanoma protein gp100 and nuclear
protein SP110, have been described. Here, we compared the production of these
spliced peptides by the standard proteasome and the immunoproteasome.
Differential isotope labelling was used to quantify (by mass spectrometry) the
fragments contained in digests obtained with precursor peptides and purified
proteasomes. The results show that both the standard and the immunoproteasomes
can produce spliced peptides although they differ in their efficiency of
production of each peptide. The FGF-5 and gp100 peptides are more efficiently
produced by the standard proteasome, whereas the SP110 peptide is more
efficiently produced by the immunoproteasome. This seems to result from
differences in the production of the two splicing partners, which depends on a
balance between cleavages liberating or destroying those fragments. By showing
that splicing depends on the efficiency of production of the splicing partners,
these results also support the transpeptidation model of peptide splicing.
Furthermore, given the presence of immunoproteasomes in dendritic cells and cells
exposed to IFN-<U+03B3>, the findings may be relevant for vaccine design.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21182075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Dairy Sci. 2010 Dec;93(12):5950-8. doi: 10.3168/jds.2010-3340.

SP110 as a novel susceptibility gene for Mycobacterium avium subspecies
paratuberculosis infection in cattle.

Ruiz-Larrañaga O(1), Garrido JM, Iriondo M, Manzano C, Molina E, Montes I,
Vazquez P, Koets AP, Rutten VP, Juste RA, Estonba A.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics, Physical Anthropology, and Animal Physiology Department, University 
of the Basque Country, Sarriena s/n, 48940 Leioa, Bizkaia, Spain.

The intracellular pathogen resistance 1 (Ipr1) gene has been reported to play a
role in mediating innate immunity in a mouse model of Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
infection, and polymorphisms of its human ortholog, SP110 nuclear body protein,
have been suggested to be associated with tuberculosis. Thus, the bovine SP110
gene was considered to be a promising candidate for a genetic association study
of bovine paratuberculosis, or Johne's disease, a chronic granulomatous enteritis
caused by Mycobacterium avium ssp. paratuberculosis (MAP). Initially, single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) within the bovine SP110 gene were identified, and 
subsequently a population-based genetic association study was carried out.
Seventeen new SNP along the SP110 gene were identified in Holstein-Friesian
cattle, and 6 more were compiled from public databases. A total of 14 SNP were
included in the association study of 2 independent populations. The SNP c.587A>G 
was found to be significantly associated with MAP infection, with the major
allele A appearing to confer greater disease susceptibility in one of the
analyzed populations. In addition, 2 haplotypes containing this SNP were also
found to be associated with infection in the same population. The SNP c.587A>G is
a nonsynonymous mutation that causes an amino acid change in codon 196 from
asparagine to serine. In silico analyses point to SNP c.587A>G as a putative
causal variant for susceptibility to MAP infection. The elucidation of the
precise mechanism by which this SNP can exert its effect in the protein and, as a
result, in the risk of infection, requires future functional analyses. Likewise, 
the absence of genetic association in one of the analyzed populations renders it 
necessary to carry out this study in other independent populations, with the aim 
of substantiating the repeatability of the present results. Nevertheless, the
present results deepen our understanding of the genetic basis of susceptibility
and resistance mechanisms related to MAP infection in cattle and, in turn,
constitute a step forward toward the implementation of marker-assisted selection 
in breeding programs aimed at controlling paratuberculosis.

Copyright © 2010 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 21094769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2010 Sep;39(5):540-4.

[Study on relation between Sp110 gene polymorphism and tuberculosis genetic
susceptibility of Chongqing Han People].

[Article in Chinese]

Cong J(1), Li G, Zhou D, Tao Y, Xiong Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of public health, Chongqing University of Medical Sciences,
Chongqing 400016, China. congjianni@sina.co

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association of Sp110 gene SNP with tuberculosis
occurrence of Chongqing Han people.
METHODS: Design Use the case-control study design, and collect risk factors of
tuberculosis by questionnaires. Use multiple methods to detect rs1135791C/T,
rs722555A/G, 5'-UTR rs11679983A/G, rs28930679C/T, rs9061A/G, rs1063154G/T,
rs1047254A/G, rs3948464C/T points SNP polymorphism. Use SAS software to perform
significance test. And use MDR software to analyze the cross action of SNP points
related to tuberculosis susceptibility.
RESULTS: (1) the frequencies of Sp110 gene rs1135791CT genotype, rs722555 GG
genotype, rs11679983 GG genotype, rs3948464CC genotype in the case group are
significantly higher than those in the control group. (2) Logistic regression
analyzes rs1135791C/T, rs722555A/G, rs11679983A/G, rs3948464C/T, smoking history,
family with TB, per capita living space and BMI were with relation to
tuberculosis. (3) Sp110 gene rs722555A/G has the cross action with 3 points:
rs1135791C/T, rs11679983A/G and rs3948464C/T, respectively.
CONCLUSION: rs1135791C/T, rs722555 A/G, rs11679983A/G, rs3948464C/T may be the
risk factors for susceptibility to tuberculosis in Chongqing Han People.

PMID: 21033425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. BMC Infect Dis. 2010 Aug 18;10:243. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-10-243.

In vivo expression of innate immunity markers in patients with Mycobacterium
tuberculosis infection.

Constantoulakis P(1), Filiou E, Rovina N, Chras G, Hamhougia A, Karabela S,
Sotiriou A, Roussos C, Poulakis N.

Author information: 
(1)Locus Medicus, Molecular Pathology and Genetics Dept., Athens, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Toll-like receptors (TLRs), Coronin-1 and Sp110 are essential factors
for the containment of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. The purpose of this 
study was to investigate the in vivo expression of these molecules at different
stages of the infection and uncover possible relationships between these markers 
and the state of the disease.
METHODS: Twenty-two patients with active tuberculosis, 15 close contacts of
subjects with latent disease, 17 close contacts of subjects negative for
mycobacterium antigens and 10 healthy, unrelated to patients, subjects were
studied. Quantitative mRNA expression of Coronin-1, Sp110, TLRs-1,-2,-4 and -6
was analysed in total blood cells vs an endogenous house-keeping gene.
RESULTS: The mRNA expression of Coronin-1, Sp110 and TLR-2 was significantly
higher in patients with active tuberculosis and subjects with latent disease
compared to the uninfected ones. Positive linear correlation for the expression
of those factors was only found in the infected populations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the up-regulation of Coronin-1 and Sp110,
through a pathway that also includes TLR-2 up-regulation may be involved in the
process of tuberculous infection in humans. However, further studies are needed, 
in order to elucidate whether the selective upregulation of these factors in the 
infected patients could serve as a specific molecular marker of tuberculosis.

PMCID: PMC2931512
PMID: 20718957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Sep;38(16):5336-50. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq268. Epub 2010
Apr 26.

An extended set of PRDM1/BLIMP1 target genes links binding motif type to dynamic 
repression.

Doody GM(1), Care MA, Burgoyne NJ, Bradford JR, Bota M, Bonifer C, Westhead DR,
Tooze RM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Haematology, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Leeds, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK.

The transcriptional repressor B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1 (BLIMP1) 
regulates gene expression and cell fate. The DNA motif bound by BLIMP1 in vitro
overlaps with that of interferon regulatory factors (IRFs), which respond to
inflammatory/immune signals. At such sites, BLIMP1 and IRFs can antagonistically 
regulate promoter activity. In vitro motif selection predicts that only a subset 
of BLIMP1 or IRF sites is subject to antagonistic regulation, but the extent to
which antagonism occurs is unknown, since an unbiased assessment of BLIMP1
occupancy in vivo is lacking. To address this, we identified an extended set of
promoters occupied by BLIMP1. Motif discovery and enrichment analysis demonstrate
that multiple motif variants are required to capture BLIMP1 binding specificity. 
These are differentially associated with CpG content, leading to the observation 
that BLIMP1 DNA-binding is methylation sensitive. In occupied promoters, only a
subset of BLIMP1 motifs overlap with IRF motifs. Conversely, a distinct subset of
IRF motifs is not enriched amongst occupied promoters. Genes linked to occupied
promoters containing overlapping BLIMP1/IRF motifs (e.g. AIM2, SP110, BTN3A3) are
shown to constitute a dynamic target set which is preferentially activated by
BLIMP1 knock-down. These data confirm and extend the competitive model of BLIMP1 
and IRF interaction.

PMCID: PMC2938208
PMID: 20421211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Hepatic Veno-Occlusive Disease with Immunodeficiency.

Roscioli T, Ziegler JB, Buckley M, Wong M.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2007 Feb 21.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency
(VODI) is characterized by (1) primary immunodeficiency and (2) terminal hepatic 
lobular vascular occlusion and hepatic fibrosis manifest as hepatomegaly and/or
hepatic failure. Onset is usually before age six months. The immunodeficiency
comprises severe hypogammaglobulinemia, clinical evidence of T-cell
immunodeficiency with normal numbers of circulating T cells, absent lymph node
germinal centers, and absent tissue plasma cells. Bacterial and opportunistic
infections including Pneumocystis jirovecii infection, mucocutaneous candidiasis,
and enteroviral or cytomegalovirus infections occur. In the past the prognosis
for affected individuals was poor, with 100% mortality in the first year of life 
if unrecognized and untreated with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and
Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis. However, with early recognition and treatment
there is a marked improvement in prognosis.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Diagnosis is based on low serum concentrations of IgA, IgM,
and IgG for age, normal lymphocyte numbers, normal CD4 and CD8 percentages,
histologic examination of the liver (or hepatic ultrasonography and Doppler
ultrasonography if hepatic biopsy is not possible), and molecular genetic testing
of SP110, the only gene in which mutation is known to cause VODI.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) and
Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis as soon as the diagnosis of VODI is
established; appropriate, prompt treatment of infections; consider hepatic
transplantation, although rate of complications may be high; bone marrow
transplantation may be efficacious with appropriate conditioning therapy.
Prevention of primary manifestations: IVIg and Pneumocystis jirovecii
prophylaxis. Surveillance: Regular monitoring of hepatic function, platelet
count, and hemoglobin level; routine monitoring of serum and urine electrolytes
as the syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone (SIADH) may occur;
measurement of immunoglobulin concentrations prior to IVIG infusions;
broncho-alveolar lavage to diagnose Pneumocystis jirovecii infection; viral
cultures or lung function studies as needed; cerebrospinal imaging to diagnose
leukodystrophy when clinically indicated. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Agents
known to predispose to hVOD, such as cyclophosphamide and senecio alkaloids/bush 
teas. Evaluation of relatives at risk: If both pathogenic variants in the family 
are known, molecular genetic testing of sibs of a proband who are younger than
age 12 months to allow early diagnosis and treatment.
GENETIC COUNSELING: VODI is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. The
parents of an affected child are obligate heterozygotes (carriers) and therefore 
carry one mutant allele. Heterozygotes are asymptomatic. At conception, each sib 
of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of
being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a
carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal diagnosis for
pregnancies at increased risk are possible if both pathogenic variants in a
family are known.

PMID: 20301448  [PubMed]


40. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Dec;37(8):3863-8. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0042-1. Epub 2010
Mar 11.

MYBBP1A: a new Ipr1's binding protein in mice.

Cai L(1), Pan H, Trzcinski K, Thompson CM, Wu Q, Kramnik I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, 667 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. lcai@sjtu.edu.cn

Infection with mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) can cause different outcomes in
hosts with variant genetic backgrounds. Previously, we identified an
intracellular pathogen resistance 1 (Ipr1) gene with the role of resistance of
MTB infection in mice model. However, until now, its binding proteins have been
little known even for its human homology, SP110. In this study, the homology for 
mouse Ipr1 in canines was found to have an extra domain structure, h.1.5.1. And
30 potential candidate proteins were predicted to bind canine Ipr1, which were
characterized of the interacting structure with the h.1.5.1. Among them, MYBBP1A 
was verified to bind with both Ipr1 and eGFP-Ipr1 in mouse macrophage J774A.1
clone 21 cells using co-immunoprecipitation method. And with the constructed
high-confidence Ipr1-involved network, we suggested that Ipr1 might be involved
in apoptosis pathway via MYBBP1A.

PMCID: PMC3084015
PMID: 20221700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2010 Mar;90(2):71-83. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2010.02.002. Epub
2010 Mar 4.

Current findings, challenges and novel approaches in human genetic susceptibility
to tuberculosis.

Möller M(1), Hoal EG.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, MRC Centre for Molecular and Cellular
Biology and the DST/NRF Centre of Excellence for Biomedical TB Research, Faculty 
of Health Sciences, P.O. Box 19063, Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg 7505,
South Africa.

The evidence for a human genetic component in susceptibility to tuberculosis (TB)
is incontrovertible. Quite apart from studies of rare disease events illustrating
the importance of key genes in humans and animals, TB at the population level is 
also influenced by the genetics of the host. Heritability of disease concordance 
and immune responses to mycobacterial antigens has been clearly shown, and ranges
up to 71%. Linkage studies, designed to identify major susceptibility genes in a 
disease, have produced a number of candidate loci but few, except for regions on 
chromosome 5p15, 20p and 20q, have been replicated. The region on 5p15 regulates 
the intensity of the response to the tuberculin skin test, and another locus on
11p14 appears to control resistance to the bacterium. In addition, numerous genes
and pathways have been implicated in candidate gene association studies, with
validation of polymorphisms in IFNG, NRAMP1, and NOS2A and equivocal results for 
IL10, CCL2, DC-SIGN, P2RX7, VDR, TLR2, TLR9 and SP110. Other more recently
researched candidate genes such as TNFRSF1B remain to be validated, preferably in
meta-analyses. New approaches have provided early evidence for the importance of 
gene-gene interactions in regulating resistance to disease, and also the prospect
that applying host genetics in the field of vaccinomics could lead to a more
targeted approach in designing interventions to aid the human immune system in
combating mycobacteria. Genome-wide association studies and admixture mapping are
approaches that remain to be applied to TB, and it is not clear, as is the case
with other complex diseases, how much of the heritability of the TB
susceptibility phenotype will be determined by multiple genes of small effect
versus rare variants with disproportionately large effects.

PMID: 20206579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2010 Jan;90(1):44-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2009.11.002. Epub 
2009 Dec 14.

Cytokine genes are associated with tuberculin skin test response in a native
Brazilian population.

Zembrzuski VM(1), Basta PC, Callegari-Jacques SM, Santos RV, Coimbra CE, Salzano 
FM, Hutz MH.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Instituto de Biociências, UFRGS, Universidade
Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Caixa Postal 15053, 91501 970 Porto Alegre, RS,
Brazil.

Tuberculosis was a major cause of population decline among Brazilian indigenous
peoples and remains a leading cause of morbidity and mortality among them.
Despite high BCG coverage, results of Tuberculin Skin Test (TST) reactivity have 
shown high rates of anergy in Amazonian Indians. Given the high prevalence of
anergy in these populations and the fact that genetic host factors play an
important role in susceptibility to Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB), the aim of 
this study was to evaluate the association of nineteen polymorphisms in fifteen
genes related to immune response and anergy in the Xavante, an indigenous group
from Brazil. A total of 481 individuals were investigated. TST anergy was
observed in 69% of them. Polymorphisms in four genes showed absence or very low
variability: SP110, PTPN22, IL12RB1 and IL6. IFNG +874 A/T heterozygotes and
IL4-590 C/C homozygotes were more frequent in those individuals who presented a
positive TST (prevalence ratios of 1.9 and 2.0 respectively). The risk of anergy 
was 1.5 in IL10-1082 G/G homozygotes when compared to carriers for the A allele. 
In indigenous groups such as the Xavante exposure to a variety of infections,
associated with specific genetic factors, may disturb the T-helper 1 and T-helper
2 balance leading to increased immunological susceptibility.

PMID: 20005781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2009 Jul;89(4):285-93. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2009.05.003.
Epub 2009 Jun 10.

Gene expression in HIV-1/Mycobacterium tuberculosis co-infected macrophages is
dominated by M. tuberculosis.

Maddocks S(1), Scandurra GM, Nourse C, Bye C, Williams RB, Slobedman B,
Cunningham AL, Britton WJ.

Author information: 
(1)HIV Molecular Pathogenesis Group, Centre for Virus Research, Westmead
Millennium Institute, University of Sydney, Westmead NSW 2145, Australia.
susan_maddocks@wmi.usyd.edu.au

The resurgence of tuberculosis worldwide has closely mirrored the HIV pandemic.
In regions like sub-Saharan Africa, a large proportion of individuals are
co-infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis and HIV. Macrophages are the
reservoir host cells for both pathogens, however the interactions between both
pathogens in co-infected cells remain poorly understood. Thus, the global gene
responses of primary human macrophages following productive co-infection with
highly purified HIV and M. tuberculosis were analyzed using cDNA microarrays. A
broad range of genes was up-regulated in response to co-infection or M.
tuberculosis infection of primary macrophages, including those encoding
pro-inflammatory chemokines and cytokines, their receptors, signalling associated
genes, type I IFN signalling genes and genes of the tryptophan degradation
pathway. Real-time RT-PCR analysis confirmed up-regulation of a wide variety of
genes including indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase and Sp110 in M. tuberculosis and
co-infected samples. Downstream analysis confirmed significant elevation of the
chemokines CCL3, CCL4 and CCL8 in M. tuberculosis and co-infected culture
supernatants. In contrast, the changes seen in gene expression following HIV
infection alone were fewer in number and significantly less in magnitude. Thus,
the effects of M. tuberculosis infection on global gene expression dominated the 
effects of HIV-1 in co-infected primary human macrophages.

PMID: 19520608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Biochimie. 2009 Apr;91(4):533-9.

A novel protein phosphorylation pathway involved in osmotic-stress response in
tobacco plants.

Kodama Y(1), Tamura T, Hirasawa W, Nakamura K, Sano H.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Education Center for Genetic Information, Nara Institute of
Science and Technology, Nara 630-0192, Japan.

Osmotic stress is one of the severest environmental pressures for plants,
commonly occurring under natural growing condition due to drought, salinity, cold
and wounding. Plants sensitively respond to these stresses by activating a set of
genes, which encode proteins necessary to overcome the crises. We screened such
genes from tobacco plants, and identified a particular clone, which encoded a 45 
kDa protein kinase belonging to the plant receptor-like cytoplasmic protein
kinase class-VII, NAK (novel Arabidopsis protein kinase) group. The clone was
consequently designated as NtNAK (Nicotiana tabacum NAK, accession number:
DQ447159). GFP-NtNAK fusion protein was localized in both cytoplasm and nucleus, 
and bacterially expressed NtNAK exhibited in vitro kinase activity. Its
transcripts were clearly induced upon treatments of leaves with salt, mannitol,
low temperature and also with abscisic and jasmonic acids and ethylene. These
properties indicated NtNAK to be a typical osmo-stress-responsive protein kinase.
Its target protein(s) were then screened by the yeast two-hybrid system, and one 
clone encoding a 32 kDa protein was identified. The protein resembled a potato
stress-responsive protein CK251806, and designated as NtCK25 (accession number:
DQ448851). Bacterially expressed NtCK25 was phosphorylated by NtNAK, and
NtCK25-GFP fusion protein was exclusively localized in nucleus. The structure of 
NtCK25 was found to be similar to a human nuclear body protein, SP110, which is
involved in DNA/protein binding regulation. This suggested that, perceiving
osmo-stress signal, NtNAK phosphorylates and activates NtCK25, which might
function in regulation of nucleus function. The present study thus suggests that 
NtNAK/NtCK25 constitutes a novel phosphorylation pathway for osmotic-stress
response in plants.

PMID: 19340923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2008;321:123-48.

Genetic dissection of host resistance to Mycobacterium tuberculosis: the sst1
locus and the Ipr1 gene.

Kramnik I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. ikramnik@hsph.harvard.edu

Genetic variation of the host significantly contributes to dramatic differences
in the outcomes of natural infection with virulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(MTB) in humans, as well as in experimental animal models. Host resistance to
tuberculosis is a complex multifactorial genetic trait in which many genetic
polymorphisms contribute to the phenotype, while their individual contributions
are influenced by gene-gene and gene-environment interactions. The most
epidemiologically significant form of tuberculosis infection in humans is
pulmonary tuberculosis. Factors that predispose immunocompetent individuals to
this outcome, however, are largely unknown. Using an experimental mouse model of 
infection with virulent MTB for the genetic analysis of host resistance to this
pathogen, we have identified several tuberculosis susceptibility loci in
otherwise immunocompetent mice. The sst1 locus has been mapped to mouse
chromosome 1 and shown to be especially important for control of pulmonary
tuberculosis. Rampant progression of tuberculosis infection in the lungs of the
sst1-susceptible mouse was associated with the development of necrotic lung
lesions, which was prevented by the sst1-resistant allele. Using a positional
cloning approach, we have identified a novel host resistance gene, Ipr1, which is
encoded within the sst1 locus and mediates innate immunity to the intracellular
bacterial pathogens MTB and Listeria monocytogenes. The sst1 locus and the Ipr1
gene participate in control of intracellular multiplication of virulent MTB and
have an effect on the infected macrophages' mechanism of cell death. The Ipr1 is 
an interferon-inducible nuclear protein that dynamically associates with other
nuclear proteins in macrophages primed with interferons or infected with MTB.
Several of the Ipr1-interacting proteins are known to participate in regulation
of transcription, RNA processing, and apoptosis. Further biochemical analysis of 
the Ipr1-mediated pathway will help delineate a mechanism of innate immunity that
is especially important for control of tuberculosis progression in the lungs.

PMID: 18727490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. BMC Infect Dis. 2007 Sep 20;7:110.

Sp110 transcription is induced and required by Anaplasma phagocytophilum for
infection of human promyelocytic cells.

de la Fuente J(1), Manzano-Roman R, Blouin EF, Naranjo V, Kocan KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Center for Veterinary Health Sciences, 
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078, USA.
jose.de_la_fuente@okstate.edu

BACKGROUND: The tick-borne intracellular pathogen, Anaplasma phagocytophilum
(Rickettsiales: Anaplasmataceae) causes human granulocytic anaplasmosis after
infection of polymorphonuclear leucocytes. The human Sp110 gene is a member of
the nuclear body (NB) components that functions as a nuclear hormone receptor
transcriptional coactivator and plays an important role in immunoprotective
mechanisms against pathogens in humans. In this research, we hypothesized that
Sp110 may be involved in the infection of human promyelocytic HL-60 cells with A.
phagocytophilum.
METHODS: The human Sp110 and A. phagocytophilum msp4 mRNA levels were evaluated
by real-time RT-PCR in infected human HL-60 cells sampled at 0, 12, 24, 48, 72
and 96 hours post-infection. The effect of Sp110 expression on A. phagocytophilum
infection was determined by RNA interference (RNAi). The expression of Sp110 was 
silenced in HL-60 cells by RNAi using pre-designed siRNAs using the Nucleofector 
96-well shuttle system (Amaxa Biosystems, Gaithersburg, MD, USA). The A.
phagocytophilum infection levels were evaluated in HL-60 cells after RNAi by
real-time PCR of msp4 and normalizing against human Alu sequences.
RESULTS: While Sp110 mRNA levels increased concurrently with A. phagocytophilum
infections in HL-60 cells, the silencing of Sp110 expression by RNA interference 
resulted in decreased infection levels.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrated that Sp110 expression is required for A.
phagocytophilum infection and multiplication in HL-60 cells, and suggest a
previously undescribed mechanism by which A. phagocytophilum modulates Sp110 mRNA
levels to facilitate establishment of infection of human HL-60 cells.

PMCID: PMC2039740
PMID: 17883869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Prenat Diagn. 2007 Jul;27(7):674-6.

The first prenatal diagnosis for veno-occlusive disease and immunodeficiency
syndrome, an autosomal recessive condition associated with mutations in SP110.

Cliffe ST(1), Wong M, Taylor PJ, Ruga E, Wilcken B, Lindeman R, Buckley MF,
Roscioli T.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vascular Research, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia. simon.cliffe@sesiahs.health.nsw.gov.au

OBJECTIVES: We present the first prenatal diagnosis of familial hepatic
veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency (VODI). Homozygous mutations in the 
gene SP110 are the genetic basis of VODI. The proband in this report presented at
three months of age with hepatomegaly hepatic failure and was found to have
hypogammaglobulinemia. He died one month after hepatic transplant at eight months
of age due to hemophagocytic syndrome. DNA testing detected a homozygous
truncating mutation in exon 5; SP110 c.642delC. Prenatal testing was offered to
this family in a subsequent pregnancy.
METHODS: Chorion villus was sampled at 12 weeks' gestation. DNA was extracted
using standard techniques, and sequencing of SP110 exon 5 was performed using
flanking primers. Maternal contamination was excluded by examining STR markers in
CVS and maternal DNA.
RESULTS: A heterozygous SP110 c.642delC mutation was detected in exon 5. This
mutation was present in heterozygous form in both parents.
CONCLUSIONS: The prenatal test result is predictive of a child with a normal
immune and hepatic phenotype. This report presents the first prenatal molecular
diagnosis for VODI and shows the importance of molecular genetic research in not 
only defining the aetiology of syndromes but also in assisting reproductive
choices through the collaboration of genetic and feto-maternal services.

PMID: 17510920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Hum Genet. 2007 May;121(3-4):521-2. Epub 2007 Feb 8.

SP110 polymorphisms are not associated with pulmonary tuberculosis in a South
African population.

Babb C(1), Keet EH, van Helden PD, Hoal EG.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, DST/NRF Centre of Excellence for
Biomedical Tuberculosis Research, MRC Centre for Molecular and Cellular Biology, 
Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg, 7505, Cape Town, South Africa.

Susceptibility to tuberculosis (TB) in mice has recently been attributed to the
Ipr1 gene. Polymorphisms in the human homologue, SP110, have been investigated in
various populations with only one study finding an association with TB
susceptibility. We investigated eight SP110 polymorphisms in a South African
population, including two novel polymorphisms. No significant association was
found with any of the polymorphisms investigated, including two polymorphisms
that were previously found to be associated with TB susceptibility in West
African populations.

PMID: 17287948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Hum Genet. 2007 Apr;121(2):155-60. Epub 2006 Dec 6.

Resequencing and association analysis of the SP110 gene in adult pulmonary
tuberculosis.

Szeszko JS(1), Healy B, Stevens H, Balabanova Y, Drobniewski F, Todd JA,
Nejentsev S.

Author information: 
(1)Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inflammation
Laboratory, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Department of Medical
Genetics, University of Cambridge, WT/MRC building, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, CB2 2XY, UK.

Recently, the Intracellular pathogen resistance 1 (Ipr1) gene was shown to
control susceptibility to Mycobacterium tuberculosis in mice. We examined whether
common sequence variants of its human orthologue, the SP110 gene, are associated 
with susceptibility to tuberculosis in a human population. We resequenced SP110
exons in 96 individuals and identified new polymorphisms. Then, we combined our
sequence and HapMap data for 83 distinct polymorphisms and selected tags that
capture information for all common variants in the 100 kb region around SP110. We
genotyped 29 single nucleotide polymorphisms including seven amino-acid changing 
variants in 1,912 HIV-negative culture-confirmed adult pulmonary tuberculosis
patients and 2,104 adult healthy controls from Russia and found no evidence of
association. Our results indicate that common polymorphisms of the SP110 gene
have no major effect on susceptibility to tuberculosis in this population.

PMID: 17149599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Science. 2006 Sep 8;313(5792):1444-7.

An antigen produced by splicing of noncontiguous peptides in the reverse order.

Warren EH(1), Vigneron NJ, Gavin MA, Coulie PG, Stroobant V, Dalet A, Tykodi SS, 
Xuereb SM, Mito JK, Riddell SR, Van den Eynde BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Immunology, Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2006 Sep 8;313(5792):1398-9.

CD8-positive T lymphocytes recognize peptides that are usually derived from the
degradation of cellular proteins and are presented by class I molecules of the
major histocompatibility complex. Here we describe a human minor
histocompatibility antigen created by a polymorphism in the SP110 nuclear
phosphoprotein gene. The antigenic peptide comprises two noncontiguous SP110
peptide segments spliced together in reverse order to that in which they occur in
the predicted SP110 protein. The antigenic peptide could be produced in vitro by 
incubation of precursor peptides with highly purified 20S proteasomes. Cutting
and splicing probably occur within the proteasome by transpeptidation.

PMID: 16960008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Med Genet. 2006 Jul;43(7):e32.

No associations of human pulmonary tuberculosis with Sp110 variants.

Thye T, Browne EN, Chinbuah MA, Gyapong J, Osei I, Owusu-Dabo E, Niemann S,
Rüsch-Gerdes S, Horstmann RD, Meyer CG.

BACKGROUND: After a recent report on the role of the Ipr1 gene in mediating
innate immunity in a mouse model of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, the
human Ipr1 homologue, Sp110, was considered a promising candidate for an
association study in human tuberculosis.
METHODS: In a sample of >1000 sputum positive, HIV negative West African patients
with pulmonary tuberculosis and >1000 exposed, apparently healthy controls, we
have genotyped 21 Sp110 gene variants that were either available from public
databases, including HapMap data, or identified by DNA re-sequencing.
RESULTS: No significant differences in the frequencies of any of the 21 variants 
were observed between patients and controls. This applied also for HapMap tagging
variants and the corresponding haplotypes, when including sliding window analyses
with three adjacent variants, and when stratifying controls for positivity and
negativity according to the results of intradermal tuberculin (purified protein
derivative, PPD) skin tests. DNA re-sequencing revealed 13 novel Sp110 variants
in the 5'-UTR, exons, and adjacent intronic regions.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the results obtained in this case-control study, the
hypothesis that Sp110 variants and haplotypes might be associated with distinct
phenotypes of human M tuberculosis infection is doubtful.

PMCID: PMC2564561
PMID: 16816019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jul 5;103(27):10364-8. Epub 2006 Jun 27.

Variants in the SP110 gene are associated with genetic susceptibility to
tuberculosis in West Africa.

Tosh K(1), Campbell SJ, Fielding K, Sillah J, Bah B, Gustafson P, Manneh K, Lisse
I, Sirugo G, Bennett S, Aaby P, McAdam KP, Bah-Sow O, Lienhardt C, Kramnik I,
Hill AV.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN,
United Kingdom.

The sst1 locus has been identified in a mouse model to control resistance and
susceptibility of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. Subsequent studies have
now identified Ipr1 (intracellular pathogen resistance 1) to be the gene
responsible. Ipr1 is encoded within the sst1 locus and is expressed in the
tuberculosis lung lesions and macrophages of sst1-resistant, but not
sst1-susceptible mice. We have therefore examined the closest human homologue of 
Ipr1, SP110, for its ability to control susceptibility to M. tuberculosis
infection in humans. In a study of families from The Gambia we have identified
three polymorphisms that are associated with disease. On examination of
additional families from Guinea-Bissau and the Republic of Guinea, two of these
associations were independently replicated. These variants are in strong linkage 
disequilibrium with each other and lie within a 31-kb block of low haplotypic
diversity, suggesting that a polymorphism within this region has a role in
genetic susceptibility to tuberculosis in humans.

PMCID: PMC1502463
PMID: 16803959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Nat Genet. 2006 Jun;38(6):620-2. Epub 2006 Apr 30.

Mutations in the gene encoding the PML nuclear body protein Sp110 are associated 
with immunodeficiency and hepatic veno-occlusive disease.

Roscioli T(1), Cliffe ST, Bloch DB, Bell CG, Mullan G, Taylor PJ, Sarris M, Wang 
J, Donald JA, Kirk EP, Ziegler JB, Salzer U, McDonald GB, Wong M, Lindeman R,
Buckley MF.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vascular Research, University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052,
Australia. tony.roscioli@email.cs.nsw.gov.au

We describe mutations in the PML nuclear body protein Sp110 in the syndrome
veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency, an autosomal recessive disorder of 
severe hypogammaglobulinemia, combined T and B cell immunodeficiency, absent
lymph node germinal centers, absent tissue plasma cells and hepatic
veno-occlusive disease. This is the first report of the involvement of a nuclear 
body protein in a human primary immunodeficiency and of high-penetrance genetic
mutations in hepatic veno-occlusive disease.

PMID: 16648851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nature. 2005 Apr 7;434(7034):767-72.

Ipr1 gene mediates innate immunity to tuberculosis.

Pan H(1), Yan BS, Rojas M, Shebzukhov YV, Zhou H, Kobzik L, Higgins DE, Daly MJ, 
Bloom BR, Kramnik I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, 667 Huntington Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2005 Apr 7;434(7034):709-11.

An estimated eight million people are infected each year with the pathogen
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and more than two million die annually. Yet only
about 10% of those infected develop tuberculosis. Genetic variation within host
populations is known to be significant in humans and animals, but the nature of
genetic control of host resistance to tuberculosis remains poorly understood.
Previously we mapped a new genetic locus on mouse chromosome 1, designated sst1
(for supersusceptibility to tuberculosis 1). Here we show that this locus
mediates innate immunity in sst1 congenic mouse strains and identify a candidate 
gene, Intracellular pathogen resistance 1 (Ipr1), within the sst1 locus. The Ipr1
gene is upregulated in the sst1 resistant macrophages after activation and
infection, but it is not expressed in the sst1 susceptible macrophages.
Expression of the Ipr1 transgene in the sst1 susceptible macrophages limits the
multiplication not only of M. tuberculosis but also of Listeria monocytogenes and
switches a cell death pathway of the infected macrophages from necrosis to
apoptosis. Our data indicate that the Ipr1 gene product might have a previously
undocumented function in integrating signals generated by intracellular pathogens
with mechanisms controlling innate immunity, cell death and pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1388092
PMID: 15815631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cancer Res. 2004 Nov 1;64(21):7748-55.

From mice to humans: identification of commonly deregulated genes in mammary
cancer via comparative SAGE studies.

Hu Y(1), Sun H, Drake J, Kittrell F, Abba MC, Deng L, Gaddis S, Sahin A, Baggerly
K, Medina D, Aldaz CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park-Research Division, Smithville 78957, USA.

Genetically engineered mouse mammary cancer models have been used over the years 
as systems to study human breast cancer. However, much controversy exists on the 
utility of such models as valid equivalents to the human cancer condition. To
perform an interspecies gene expression comparative study in breast cancer we
used a mouse model that most closely resembles human breast carcinogenesis. This 
system relies on the transplant of p53 null mouse mammary epithelial cells into
the cleared mammary fat pads of syngeneic hosts. Serial analysis of gene
expression (SAGE) was used to obtain gene expression profiles of normal and tumor
samples from this mouse mammary cancer model (>300,000 mouse mammary-specific
tags). The resulting mouse data were compared with 25 of our human breast cancer 
SAGE libraries (>2.5 million human breast-specific tags). We observed significant
similarities in the deregulation of specific genes and gene families when
comparing mouse with human breast cancer SAGE data. A total of 72 transcripts
were identified as commonly deregulated in both species. We observed a systematic
and significant down-regulation in all of the tumors from both species of various
cytokines, including CXCL1 (GRO1), LIF, interleukin 6, and CCL2. All of the mouse
and most human mammary tumors also displayed decreased expression of genes known 
to inhibit cell proliferation, including NFKBIA (IKBalpha), GADD45B, and CDKN1A
(p21); transcription-related genes such as CEBP, JUN, JUNB, and ELF1; and
apoptosis-related transcripts such as IER3 and GADD34/PPP1R15A. Examples of
overexpressed transcripts in tumors from both species include
proliferation-related genes such as CCND1, CKS1B, and STMN1 (oncoprotein 18); and
genes related to other functions such as SEPW1, SDFR1, DNCI2, and SP110.
Importantly, abnormal expression of several of these genes has not been
associated previously with breast cancer. The consistency of these observations
was validated in independent mouse and human mammary cancer sets. This is the
first interspecies comparison of mammary cancer gene expression profiles. The
comparative analysis of mouse and human SAGE mammary cancer data validates this
p53 null mouse tumor model as a useful system closely resembling human breast
cancer development and progression. More importantly, these studies are allowing 
us to identify relevant biomarkers of potential use in human studies while
leading to a better understanding of specific mechanisms of human breast
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4170686
PMID: 15520179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Virol. 2004 Sep;78(17):9412-22.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) SM protein induces and recruits cellular Sp110b to
stabilize mRNAs and enhance EBV lytic gene expression.

Nicewonger J(1), Suck G, Bloch D, Swaminathan S.

Author information: 
(1)Shands Cancer Center, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610-0232, 
USA.

Promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) nuclear bodies or nuclear domain 10s (ND10s)
are multiprotein nuclear structures implicated in transcriptional and
posttranscriptional gene regulation that are disrupted during replication of many
DNA viruses. Interferon increases the size and number of PML nuclear bodies and
stimulates transcription of several genes encoding PML nuclear body proteins.
Moreover, some PML nuclear body proteins colocalize at sites of viral DNA
synthesis and transcription. In this study, the relationship between lytic
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) replication and Sp110b, a PML nuclear body protein, was 
investigated. Sp110b is shown to physically and functionally interact with the
EBV protein SM. SM is expressed early in the EBV replicative cycle and
posttranscriptionally increases the level of target EBV lytic transcripts. SM
bound to Sp110b via two distinct sites in Sp110b in an RNA-independent manner. SM
also specifically induced expression of Sp110b during lytic EBV replication and
in several cell types. Exogenous expression of Sp110b synergistically enhanced
SM-mediated accumulation of intronless and lytic viral transcripts. This
synergistic effect was shown to be promoter independent, posttranscriptional, and
the result of increased stabilization of target transcripts. Finally, inhibiting 
Sp110b expression decreased accumulation of an SM-responsive lytic EBV transcript
in EBV-infected cells. These findings imply that SM induces Sp110b expression,
binds to Sp110b, and utilizes the recruited Sp110b protein to increase the
stability of lytic EBV transcripts, indicating that Sp110b is a component of the 
cellular machinery that EBV utilizes to enhance lytic EBV replication.

PMCID: PMC506926
PMID: 15308735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;23(21):7498-509.

Modulation of retinoid signaling by a cytoplasmic viral protein via sequestration
of Sp110b, a potent transcriptional corepressor of retinoic acid receptor, from
the nucleus.

Watashi K(1), Hijikata M, Tagawa A, Doi T, Marusawa H, Shimotohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Tumor Viruses, Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for
Virus Research, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) core protein (core) plays a significant role in the
development of chronic liver diseases caused by HCV infection. We have discovered
that the core sensitized all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA)-induced cell death in
MCF-7 cells. Activation of retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARalpha)-mediated
transcription by the core was also seen in all the cell lines tested. By use of a
yeast two-hybrid system, we identified Sp110b as a candidate for a
core-interacting cellular factor. Although the function of Sp110b has remained
unknown, we observed that Sp110b interacts with RARalpha and suppresses
RARalpha-mediated transcription. These data suggest that Sp110b is a
transcriptional cofactor negatively regulating RARalpha-mediated transcription.
RNA interference-mediated reduction of endogenous Sp110b levels depressed the
ability of the core to activate RARalpha-mediated transcription, suggesting an
essential role for Sp110b in this pathway. The normal nuclear subcellular
localization of Sp110b was altered by molecular interaction with the core to the 
cytoplasmic surface of the endoplasmic reticulum. This evidence suggests a model 
in which the core sequesters Sp110b from the nucleus and inactivates its
corepressor function to activate RARalpha-mediated transcription. These findings 
likely describe a novel system in which a cytoplasmic viral protein regulates
host cell transcription.

PMCID: PMC207568
PMID: 14559998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Oncogene. 2001 Oct 29;20(49):7274-86.

Role and fate of PML nuclear bodies in response to interferon and viral
infections.

Regad T(1), Chelbi-Alix MK.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 9045 CNRS, Institut André Lwoff, 7 rue Guy Moquet 94801, Villejuif, Cedex,
France.

Interferons (IFNs) are a family of secreted proteins with antiviral,
antiproliferative and immunomodulatory activities. The different biological
actions of IFN are believed to be mediated by the products of specifically
induced cellular genes in the target cells. The promyelocytic leukaemia (PML)
protein localizes both in the nucleoplasm and in matrix-associated multi-protein 
complexes known as nuclear bodies (NBs). PML is essential for the proper
formation and the integrity of the NBs. Modification of PML by the Small
Ubiquitin MOdifier (SUMO) was shown to be required for its localization in NBs.
The number and the intensity of PML NBs increase in response to interferon (IFN).
Inactivation of the IFN-induced PML gene by its fusion to retinoic acid receptor 
alpha alters the normal localization of PML from the punctuate nuclear patterns
of NBs to micro-dispersed tiny dots and results in uncontrolled growth in Acute
Promyelocytic Leukaemia. The NBs-associated proteins, PML, Sp100, Sp140, Sp110,
ISG20 and PA28 are induced by IFN suggesting that nuclear bodies could play a
role in IFN response. Although the function of PML NBs is still unclear, some
results indicate that they may represent preferential targets for viral
infections and that PML could play a role in the mechanism of the antiviral
action of IFNs. Viruses, which require the cellular machinery for their
replication, have evolved different ways to counteract the action of IFN by
inhibiting IFN signalling, by blocking the activities of specific antiviral
mediators or by altering PML expression and/or localization on nuclear bodies.

PMID: 11704856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;20(16):6138-46.

Sp110 localizes to the PML-Sp100 nuclear body and may function as a nuclear
hormone receptor transcriptional coactivator.

Bloch DB(1), Nakajima A, Gulick T, Chiche JD, Orth D, de La Monte SM, Bloch KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. bloch@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

The nuclear body is a multiprotein complex that may have a role in the regulation
of gene transcription. This structure is disrupted in a variety of human
disorders including acute promyelocytic leukemia and viral infections, suggesting
that alterations in the nuclear body may have an important role in the
pathogenesis of these diseases. In this study, we identified a cDNA encoding a
leukocyte-specific nuclear body component designated Sp110. The N-terminal
portion of Sp110 was homologous to two previously characterized components of the
nuclear body (Sp100 and Sp140). The C-terminal region of Sp110 was homologous to 
the transcription intermediary factor 1 (TIF1) family of proteins. High levels of
Sp110 mRNA were detected in human peripheral blood leukocytes and spleen but not 
in other tissues. The levels of Sp110 mRNA and protein in the human promyelocytic
leukemia cell line NB4 increased following treatment with all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA), and Sp110 localized to PML-Sp100 nuclear bodies in ATRA-treated NB4
cells. Because of the structural similarities between Sp110 and TIF1 proteins,
the effect of Sp110 on gene transcription was examined. An Sp110 DNA-binding
domain fusion protein activated transcription of a reporter gene in transfected
mammalian cells. In addition, Sp110 produced a marked increase in ATRA-mediated
expression of a reporter gene containing a retinoic acid response element. Taken 
together, the results of this study demonstrate that Sp110 is a member of the
Sp100/Sp140 family of nuclear body components and that Sp110 may function as a
nuclear hormone receptor transcriptional coactivator. The predominant expression 
of Sp110 in leukocytes and the enhanced expression of Sp110 in NB4 cells treated 
with ATRA raise the possibility that Sp110 has a role in inducing differentiation
of myeloid cells.

PMCID: PMC86089
PMID: 10913195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 1983 Mar;7(3):197-207.

Isolation and characterization of membrane proteins of Plasmodium berghei
sporozoites.

Vermeulen AN, Roeffen WF, Van Munster JC, Meuwissen JH.

Two immunologically significant proteins, Sp53 and Sp110, have been isolated from
the sporozoites of Plasmodium berghei ANKA strain using different extraction
procedures. In gel filtration studies the physicochemical characteristics of Sp53
and Sp110 appeared to be somewhat different. Both polypeptides could be purified 
using Sephacryl S300 column chromatography. The possible relationship of both
Sp53 and Sp110 with sporozoite proteins described by other investigators is
discussed.

PMID: 6350869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


