
1. Sleep. 2015 Dec 4. pii: sp-00049-15. [Epub ahead of print]

Whole Genome DNA Methylation Analysis of Obstructive Sleep Apnea: IL1R2/ NPR2/
AR/ SP140 Methylation and Clinical Phenotype.

Chen YC, Chen TW, Su MC, Chen CJ, Chen KD, Liou CW, Tang P, Wang TY, Chang JC,
Wang CC, Lin HC, Chin CH, Huang KT, Lin MC, Hsiao CC.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: We hypothesized that DNA methylation patterns may contribute to
disease severity or the development of hypertension and excessive daytime
sleepiness (EDS) in patients with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).
METHODS: Illumina's (San Diego, CA, USA) DNA methylation 27-K assay was used to
identify differentially methylated loci (DML). DNA methylation levels were
validated by pyrosequencing. A discovery cohort of 15 patients with OSA and 6
healthy subjects, and a validation cohort of 72 patients with sleep disordered
breathing (SDB).
RESULTS: Microarray analysis identified 636 DMLs in patients with OSA versus
healthy subjects, and 327 DMLs in patients with OSA and hypertension versus those
without hypertension. In the validation cohort, no significant difference in DNA 
methylation levels of six selected genes was found between the primary snoring
subjects and OSA patients (primary outcome). However, a secondary outcome
analysis showed that interleukin-1 receptor 2 (IL1R2) promoter methylation (-114 
cytosine followed by guanine dinucleotide sequence [CpG] site) was decreased and 
IL1R2 protein levels were increased in the patients with SDB with an oxygen
desaturation index > 30. Androgen receptor (AR) promoter methylation (-531 CpG
site) and AR protein levels were both increased in the patients with SDB with an 
oxygen desaturation index > 30. Natriuretic peptide receptor 2 (NPR2) promoter
methylation (-608/-618 CpG sites) were decreased, whereas levels of both NPR2 and
serum C type natriuretic peptide protein were increased in the SDB patients with 
EDS. Speckled protein 140 (SP140) promoter methylation (-194 CpG site) was
increased, and SP140 protein levels were decreased in the patients with SDB and
EDS.
CONCLUSIONS: IL1R2 hypomethylation and AR hypermethylation may constitute an
important determinant of disease severity, whereas NPR2 hypomethylation and SP140
hypermethylation may provide a biomarker for vulnerability to EDS in OSA.

Copyright © 2015 Associated Professional Sleep Societies, LLC. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 26888452  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2016 Mar;22 Suppl 1:S1. doi:
10.1097/01.MIB.0000480040.50582.81.

O-002 Genes in IBD-Associated Risk Loci Demonstrate Genotype-, Tissue-, and
Inflammation-Specific Patterns of Expression in Terminal Ileum and Colon Mucosal 
Tissue.

Peloquin J(1), Goel G, Huang H, Haritunians T, Sartor R, Daly M, Newberry R,
McGovern D, Lira S, Xavier R.

Author information: 
(1)*The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
†Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts ‡Cedars Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, California §University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina <U+2016>Washington University in St Louis, St. Louis,
Missouri ¶Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York; and **Division of
Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies have linked single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) to risk of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Yet, the
majority of IBD-associated risk SNPs tag non-coding regions of the genome, with
more than 1000 genes encoded within the risk loci. In addition to ongoing fine
mapping of risk loci and exome sequencing studies, the study of gene expression
and characterization of expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) help to refine 
candidate genes in risk loci. Because the genetic effects are likely to be
disease context-specific, we examined gene expression in biopsies and resected
tissue from uninflamed and inflamed terminal ileum (TI) and colon from genotyped 
patients with Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC).
METHODS: We designed a custom probe set on the NanoString digital gene expression
platform capturing 678 genes encoded within IBD-associated risk loci and profiled
1100 tissue samples (including 178 paired uninflamed and inflamed samples) from
593 patients and healthy controls. Patients were genotyped on the Illumina
ImmunoChip array, and we performed focused analysis of IBD-associated risk loci. 
We developed and applied an analytical framework including principal components
analysis, differential expression, machine learning algorithms, and eQTL analysis
to characterize inflammation signatures for CD and UC (specific or common to CD
and UC), gene-gene interactions, and significant SNP-gene associations.
RESULTS: Differential expression of a subset of our genes readily discriminated
TI and colon tissues, with FAM55A, a gene encoded in a UC-specific risk loci,
most highly differentially expressed (180-190 fold relative expression in the
colon compared to TI). Genes with the lowest variance in expression across
healthy controls were the same genes with the greatest variance in patients,
suggesting that mechanisms exist to tightly regulate the expression of these
genes in homeostasis and increased variance of expression in disease states may
reflect a loss of such regulatory mechanisms. Unique and shared inflammatory
signatures between CD and UC were identified, including genes that exhibit a
continuous gradient of increasing expression from healthy controls to uninflamed 
and inflamed IBD tissues (e.g., SLC11A1, CCL11, CDH3). Examining patterns of gene
co-expression, we found a network of 41 genes, enriched for B cell signaling,
with conserved co-expression across TI and colon, CD and UC, and inflammation
subtypes, highlighting possible novel interactions between a subset of risk
genes, including SP140 and PTPRC. In addition to cis- and trans-eQTLs specific to
CD and UC, paired uninflamed and inflamed tissues from the same patient allowed
characterization of fold-change eQTLs, demonstrating how IBD-associated risk SNPs
may contribute to risk of disease through the modulation of a gene expression
change under inflammatory conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated colon/TI-, CD/UC-, and inflammation-specific
expression of IBD-associated risk genes, and, for a subset of genes,
genotype-specific patterns of expression. These data prioritize candidate genes
for functional characterization in 60% of IBD-associated risk loci. This
analytical framework has relevance for the study of genetic variation associated 
with other complex, polygenic autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, underscoring 
the value of study in disease-relevant tissues and in the context of active
disease.

PMID: 26849719  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015 Nov 13;108(2). pii: djv323. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv323.

Hypomethylation of TET2 Target Genes Identifies a Curable Subset of Acute Myeloid
Leukemia.

Yamazaki J(1), Taby R(1), Jelinek J(1), Raynal NJ(1), Cesaroni M(1), Pierce
SA(1), Kornblau SM(1), Bueso-Ramos CE(1), Ravandi F(1), Kantarjian HM(1), Issa
JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA (JY, JJ, NJMR, MC, JPJI); Department of Leukemia (JY, RT, JJ,
NJMR, SAP, SMK, FR, HMK, JPJI) and Department of Hematopathology (CEBR), The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX. (2)Fels Institute for
Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA (JY,
JJ, NJMR, MC, JPJI); Department of Leukemia (JY, RT, JJ, NJMR, SAP, SMK, FR, HMK,
JPJI) and Department of Hematopathology (CEBR), The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX. jpissa@temple.edu.

BACKGROUND: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is curable in a subset of cases. The DNA
methylation regulator TET2 is frequently mutated in AML, and we hypothesized that
studying TET2-specific differentially methylated CpGs (tet2-DMCs) improves AML
classification.
METHODS: We used bisulfite pyrosequencing to analyze the methylation status of
four tet2-DMCs (SP140, MCCC1, EHMT1, and MTSS1) in a test group of 94 consecutive
patients and a validation group of 92 consecutive patients treated with
cytarabine-based chemotherapy. Data were analyzed with hierarchical clustering,
Cox proportional hazards regression, and Kaplan-Meier analyses. All statistical
tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: In the test cohort, hierarchical clustering analysis identified low
levels of tet2-DMC methylation in 31 of 94 (33%) cases, and these had markedly
longer overall survival (median survival 72+ vs 14 months, P = .002). Similar
results were seen in the validation cohort. tet2-DMC-low status was shown to be
an independent predictor of overall survival (hazard ratio = 0.29, P = .0002). In
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset where DNA methylation was analyzed by a
different platform, tet2-DMC-low methylation was also associated with improved
outcome (median survival = 55 vs 15 months, P = .0003) and was a better predictor
of survival than mutations in TET2, IDH1, or IDH2, individually or combined.
CONCLUSIONS: Low levels of tet2-DMC methylation define a subgroup of AML that is 
highly curable and cannot be identified solely by genetic and cytogenetic
analyses.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26568194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Immunol Res. 2015;2015:526518. doi: 10.1155/2015/526518. Epub 2015 Aug 11.

SP140L, an Evolutionarily Recent Member of the SP100 Family, Is an Autoantigen in
Primary Biliary Cirrhosis.

Saare M(1), Hämarik U(1), Venta R(2), Panarina M(3), Zucchelli C(4), Pihlap M(1),
Remm A(1), Kisand K(1), Toots U(5), Möll K(5), Salupere R(6), Musco G(4), Uibo
R(3), Peterson P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Group, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational
Medicine, University of Tartu, 50411 Tartu, Estonia. (2)Institute of Technology, 
University of Tartu, 50411 Tartu, Estonia. (3)Department of Immunology, Institute
of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, 50411 Tartu,
Estonia. (4)Biomolecular NMR Laboratory, Dulbecco Telethon Institute c/o S.
Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy. (5)Icosagen AS, 61713
Tartumaa, Estonia. (6)Department of Internal Medicine, Tartu University Hospital,
51014 Tartu, Estonia.

The SP100 family members comprise a set of closely related genes on chromosome
2q37.1. The widely expressed SP100 and the leukocyte-specific proteins SP110 and 
SP140 have been associated with transcriptional regulation and various human
diseases. Here, we have characterized the SP100 family member SP140L. The genome 
sequence analysis showed the formation of SP140L gene through rearrangements of
the two neighboring genes, SP100 and SP140, during the evolution of higher
primates. The SP140L expression is interferon-inducible with high transcript
levels in B cells and other peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Subcellularly,
SP140L colocalizes with SP100 and SP140 in nuclear structures that are devoid of 
SP110, PML, or p300 proteins. Similarly to SP100 and SP140 protein, we detected
serum autoantibodies to SP140L in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis using
luciferase immunoprecipitation system and immunoblotting assays. In conclusion,
our results show that SP140L is phylogenetically recent member of SP100 proteins 
and acts as an autoantigen in primary biliary cirrhosis patients.

PMCID: PMC4548144
PMID: 26347895  [PubMed - in process]


5. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Oct 1;24(19):5619-27. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv256. Epub 2015 Jul 
7.

A functional variant that affects exon-skipping and protein expression of SP140
as genetic mechanism predisposing to multiple sclerosis.

Matesanz F(1), Potenciano V(2), Fedetz M(3), Ramos-Mozo P(4), Abad-Grau Mdel
M(5), Karaky M(3), Barrionuevo C(3), Izquierdo G(6), Ruiz-Peña JL(6),
García-Sánchez MI(6), Lucas M(7), Fernández Ó(8), Leyva L(8), Otaegui D(9),
Muñoz-Culla M(9), Olascoaga J(9), Vandenbroeck K(10), Alloza I(10), Astobiza
I(11), Antigüedad A(12), Villar LM(13), Álvarez-Cermeño JC(13), Malhotra S(14),
Comabella M(14), Montalban X(14), Saiz A(15), Blanco Y(15), Arroyo R(16), Varadé 
J(4), Urcelay E(4), Alcina A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, Instituto de Parasitología y
Biomedicina López Neyra (IPBLN), CSIC, Granada, Spain, lindo@ipb.csic.es
pulgoso@ipb.csic.es. (2)Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, Instituto de
Parasitología y Biomedicina López Neyra (IPBLN), CSIC, Granada, Spain, Department
of Computer Languages and Systems-CITIC, Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain. 
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, Instituto de Parasitología y
Biomedicina López Neyra (IPBLN), CSIC, Granada, Spain. (4)Department of
Immunology and. (5)Department of Computer Languages and Systems-CITIC,
Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain. (6)Unidad de Esclerosis Múltiple,
Hospital Universitario Virgen Macarena, Sevilla, Spain. (7)Servicio de Biología
Molecular, Facultad de Medicina, Hospital Virgen Macarena, Sevilla, Spain.
(8)Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Neurociencias, Instituto de Biomedicina de Málaga
(IBIMA), Hospital Regional Universitario de Málaga, Málaga, Spain. (9)Área de
Neurociencias, Inst. Investigación Sanitaria Biodonostia, San Sebastián, Spain.
(10)Neurogenomiks Group, Universidad del País Vasco (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain,
Achucarro Basque Center for Neuroscience, Zamudio, Spain, IKERBASQUE, Basque
Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain. (11)Neurogenomiks Group, Universidad del
País Vasco (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain, Achucarro Basque Center for Neuroscience,
Zamudio, Spain. (12)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital de Basurto, Bilbao, Spain.
(13)Department of Immunology, Department of Neurology. MS Unit. (IRYCIS),
Hospital Ramon y Cajal, Madrid, Spain. (14)Servei de Neurologia-Neuroimmunologia,
Centre D'Esclerosi Múltiple de Catalunya, Cemcat, Hospital Universitari Vall
d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain and. (15)Neurology Service, Hospital Clinic and I.
d'Investigació Biomèdica Pi iSunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain. (16)Multiple
Sclerosis Unit, Hospital Clínico San Carlos. Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria
del Hospital Clínico San Carlos (IdISSC), Madrid, Spain.

Several variants in strong linkage disequilibrium (LD) at the SP140 locus have
been associated with multiple sclerosis (MS), Crohn's disease (CD) and chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). To determine the causal polymorphism, we have
integrated high-density data sets of expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL),
using GEUVADIS RNA sequences and 1000 Genomes genotypes, with MS-risk variants of
the high-density Immunochip array performed by the International Multiple
Sclerosis Genetic Consortium (IMSGC). The variants most associated with MS were
also correlated with a decreased expression of the full-length RNA isoform of
SP140 and an increase of an isoform lacking exon 7. By exon splicing assay, we
have demonstrated that the rs28445040 variant was the causal factor for skipping 
of exon 7. Western blots of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from MS patients
showed a significant allele-dependent reduction of the SP140 protein expression. 
To confirm the association of this functional variant with MS and to compare it
with the best-associated variant previously reported by GWAS (rs10201872), a
case-control study including 4384 MS patients and 3197 controls was performed.
Both variants, in strong LD (r(2) = 0.93), were found similarly associated with
MS [P-values, odds ratios: 1.9E-9, OR = 1.35 (1.22-1.49) and 4.9E-10, OR = 1.37
(1.24-1.51), respectively]. In conclusion, our data uncover the causal variant
for the SP140 locus and the molecular mechanism associated with MS risk. In
addition, this study and others previously reported strongly suggest that this
functional variant may be shared with other immune-mediated diseases as CD and
CLL.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26152201  [PubMed - in process]


6. Ann Hematol. 2015 Jul;94(7):1205-11. doi: 10.1007/s00277-015-2344-9. Epub 2015
Mar 7.

Longitudinal analysis of 25 sequential sample-pairs using a custom multiple
myeloma mutation sequencing panel (M(3)P).

Kortüm KM(1), Langer C, Monge J, Bruins L, Zhu YX, Shi CX, Jedlowski P, Egan JB, 
Ojha J, Bullinger L, Kull M, Ahmann G, Rasche L, Knop S, Fonseca R, Einsele H,
Stewart AK, Braggio E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology - Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.

Recent advances in genomic sequencing technologies now allow results from deep
next-generation sequencing to be obtained within clinically meaningful
timeframes, making this an attractive approach to better guide personalized
treatment strategies. No multiple myeloma-specific gene panel has been
established so far; we therefore designed a 47-gene-targeting gene panel,
containing 39 genes known to be mutated in =3 % of multiple myeloma cases and
eight genes in pathways therapeutically targeted in multiple myeloma (MM). We
performed targeted sequencing on tumor/germline DNA of 25 MM patients in which we
also had a sequential sample post treatment. Mutation analysis revealed KRAS as
the most commonly mutated gene (36 % in each time point), followed by NRAS (20
and 16 %), TP53 (16 and 16 %), DIS3 (16 and 16 %), FAM46C (12 and 16 %), and
SP140 (12 and 12 %). We successfully tracked clonal evolution and identified
mutation acquisition and/or loss in FAM46C, FAT1, KRAS, NRAS, SPEN, PRDM1, NEB,
and TP53 as well as two mutations in XBP1, a gene associated with bortezomib
resistance. Thus, we present the first longitudinal analysis of a MM-specific
targeted sequencing gene panel that can be used for individual tumor
characterization and for tracking clonal evolution over time.

PMCID: PMC4655812 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25743686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Clin Exp Immunol. 2014 Jul;177(1):203-11. doi: 10.1111/cei.12327.

CD84 is markedly up-regulated in Kawasaki disease arteriopathy.

Reindel R(1), Bischof J, Kim KY, Orenstein JM, Soares MB, Baker SC, Shulman ST,
Perlman EJ, Lingen MW, Pink AJ, Trevenen C, Rowley AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, USA.

The major goals of Kawasaki disease (KD) therapy are to reduce inflammation and
prevent thrombosis in the coronary arteries (CA), but some children do not
respond to currently available non-specific therapies. New treatments have been
difficult to develop because the molecular pathogenesis is unknown. In order to
identify dysregulated gene expression in KD CA, we performed high-throughput RNA 
sequencing on KD and control CA, validated potentially dysregulated genes by
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and localized 
protein expression by immunohistochemistry. Signalling lymphocyte activation
molecule CD84 was up-regulated 16-fold (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0·01) in acute KD CA (within 2 months
of onset) and 32-fold (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0·01) in chronic CA (5 months to years after onset).
CD84 was localized to inflammatory cells in KD tissues. Genes associated with
cellular proliferation, motility and survival were also up-regulated in KD CA,
and immune activation molecules MX2 and SP140 were up-regulated in chronic KD.
CD84, which facilitates immune responses and stabilizes platelet aggregates, is
markedly up-regulated in KD CA in patients with acute and chronic arterial
disease. We provide the first molecular evidence of dysregulated inflammatory
responses persisting for months to years in CA significantly damaged by KD.

© 2014 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC4089169
PMID: 24635044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nat Commun. 2014;5:2997. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3997.

Heterogeneity of genomic evolution and mutational profiles in multiple myeloma.

Bolli N(1), Avet-Loiseau H(2), Wedge DC(3), Van Loo P(4), Alexandrov LB(3),
Martincorena I(3), Dawson KJ(3), Iorio F(5), Nik-Zainal S(6), Bignell GR(3),
Hinton JW(3), Li Y(3), Tubio JM(3), McLaren S(3), O' Meara S(3), Butler AP(3),
Teague JW(3), Mudie L(3), Anderson E(3), Rashid N(7), Tai YT(7), Shammas MA(8),
Sperling AS(7), Fulciniti M(7), Richardson PG(7), Parmigiani G(9), Magrangeas
F(10), Minvielle S(10), Moreau P(11), Attal M(12), Facon T(13), Futreal PA(14),
Anderson KC(7), Campbell PJ(1), Munshi NC(8).

Author information: 
(1)1] Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA,
UK [2] Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, CIMR, Cambridge CB2
0XY, UK. (2)1] Unité de Génomique du Myélome, CHU Rangueil, Toulouse 31059,
France [2] CRCT, INSERM U1037, Toulouse 31400, France. (3)Cancer Genome Project, 
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK. (4)1] Cancer Genome
Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK [2] Department of 
Human Genetics, VIB and University of Leuven, Leuven 3000, Belgium. (5)1] Cancer 
Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK [2]
European Molecular Biology Laboratory-European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton 
CB10 1SA, UK. (6)1] Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK [2] Department of Medical Genetics, Addenbrooke's Hospital
NHS Trust, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK. (7)Lebow Institute of Myeloma Therapeutics and 
Jerome Lipper Multiple Myeloma Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (8)1] Lebow Institute of
Myeloma Therapeutics and Jerome Lipper Multiple Myeloma Center, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA [2]
Boston Veterans Administration Healthcare System, West Roxbury, Massachusetts
02132, USA. (9)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard School of Public Health, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (10)1] Center for Cancer Research
Nantes-Angers, UMR 892 Inserm-6299 CNRS-University of Nantes, IRS-UN, Nantes
4407, France [2] UMGC, University Hospital, Nantes 44093, France. (11)Department 
of Hematology, University Hospital, Nantes 44093, France. (12)Department of
Hematology, University Hospital and CRCT, INSERM U1037, Toulouse 31400, France.
(13)Department of Hematology, University Hospital, Lille 59045, France. (14)1]
Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK [2].

Multiple myeloma is an incurable plasma cell malignancy with a complex and
incompletely understood molecular pathogenesis. Here we use whole-exome
sequencing, copy-number profiling and cytogenetics to analyse 84 myeloma samples.
Most cases have a complex subclonal structure and show clusters of subclonal
variants, including subclonal driver mutations. Serial sampling reveals diverse
patterns of clonal evolution, including linear evolution, differential clonal
response and branching evolution. Diverse processes contribute to the mutational 
repertoire, including kataegis and somatic hypermutation, and their relative
contribution changes over time. We find heterogeneity of mutational spectrum
across samples, with few recurrent genes. We identify new candidate genes,
including truncations of SP140, LTB, ROBO1 and clustered missense mutations in
EGR1. The myeloma genome is heterogeneous across the cohort, and exhibits
diversity in clonal admixture and in dynamics of evolution, which may impact
prognostic stratification, therapeutic approaches and assessment of disease
response to treatment.

PMCID: PMC3905727
PMID: 24429703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Feb;1842(2):326-37. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.11.020.
Epub 2013 Nov 22.

The biophysical and biochemical properties of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE)
protein.

Perniola R(1), Musco G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics - Neonatal Intensive Care, V. Fazzi Regional
Hospital, Piazza F. Muratore, I-73100, Lecce, Italy. Electronic address:
rperniola@hotmail.com. (2)Biomolecular NMR Laboratory, Center of Translational
Genomics and Bioinformatics, Dulbecco Telethon Institute at San Raffaele
Scientific Institute, Via Olgettina 58, I-20132, Milan, Italy. Electronic
address: musco.giovanna@hsr.it.

AIRE (for autoimmune regulator) is a multidomain protein that performs a
fundamental function in the thymus and possibly in the secondary lymphoid organs:
the regulation, especially in the sense of activation, of the process of gene
transcription in cell lines deputed to the presentation of self-antigens to the
maturing T lymphocytes. The apoptosis of the elements bearing T-cell receptors
with critical affinity for the exhibited self-antigens prevents the escape of
autoreactive clones and represents a simple and efficient mechanism of deletional
self-tolerance. However, AIRE action relies on an articulated complex of
biophysical and biochemical properties, in most cases attributable to single
subspecialized domains. Here a thorough review of the matter is presented, with a
privileged look at the pathogenic changes of AIRE that interfere with such
properties and lead to the impairment in its chief function.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24275490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. FEBS J. 2014 Jan;281(1):216-31. doi: 10.1111/febs.12588. Epub 2013 Nov 25.

Structure of human Sp140 PHD finger: an atypical fold interacting with Pin1.

Zucchelli C(1), Tamburri S, Quilici G, Palagano E, Berardi A, Saare M, Peterson
P, Bachi A, Musco G.

Author information: 
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute, c/o Biomolecular NMR Laboratory, S. Raffaele
Scientific Institute, Milano, Italy.

Sp140 is a nuclear leukocyte-specific protein involved in primary biliary
cirrhosis and a risk factor in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. The presence of
several chromatin related modules such as plant homeodomain (PHD), bromodomain
and SAND domain suggests a role in chromatin-mediated regulation of gene
expression; however, its real function is still elusive. Herein we present the
solution structure of Sp140-PHD finger and investigate its role as epigenetic
reader in vitro. Sp140-PHD presents an atypical PHD finger fold which does not
bind to histone H3 tails but is recognized by peptidylprolyl isomerase Pin1. Pin1
specifically binds to a phosphopeptide corresponding to the L3 loop of Sp140-PHD 
and catalyzes cis-trans isomerization of a pThr-Pro bond. Moreover
co-immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate FLAG-Sp140 interaction with
endogenous Pin1 in vivo. Overall these data include Sp140 in the list of the
increasing number of Pin1 binders and expand the regulatory potential of PHD
fingers as versatile structural platforms for diversified interactions.

© 2013 FEBS.

PMID: 24267382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Genome Biol. 2013 Jul 22;14(7):R74. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-7-r74.

GLiMMPS: robust statistical model for regulatory variation of alternative
splicing using RNA-seq data.

Zhao K, Lu ZX, Park JW, Zhou Q, Xing Y.

To characterize the genetic variation of alternative splicing, we develop
GLiMMPS, a robust statistical method for detecting splicing quantitative trait
loci (sQTLs) from RNA-seq data. GLiMMPS takes into account the individual
variation in sequencing coverage and the noise prevalent in RNA-seq data.
Analyses of simulated and real RNA-seq datasets demonstrate that GLiMMPS
outperforms competing statistical models. Quantitative RT-PCR tests of 26
randomly selected GLiMMPS sQTLs yielded a validation rate of 100%. As
population-scale RNA-seq studies become increasingly affordable and popular,
GLiMMPS provides a useful tool for elucidating the genetic variation of
alternative splicing in humans and model organisms.

PMCID: PMC4054007
PMID: 23876401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Int J Oncol. 2013 Aug;43(2):561-5. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.1966. Epub 2013 May 27.

Genetic differences between Asian and Caucasian chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Kawamata N(1), Moreilhon C, Saitoh T, Karasawa M, Bernstein BK, Sato-Otsubo A,
Ogawa S, Raynaud S, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. 
kawamatan@cshs.org

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a common hematological malignancy in
Western countries. However, this disease is very rare in Asian countries. It is
not clear whether the mechanisms of development of CLL in Caucasians and Asians
are the same. We compared genetic abnormalities in Asian and Caucasian CLL using 
250k GeneChip arrays. Both Asian and Caucasian CLL had four common genetic
abnormalities: deletion of 13q14.3, trisomy 12, abnormalities of ATM (11q) and
abnormalities of 17p. Interestingly, trisomy 12 and deletion of 13q14.3 were
mutually exclusive in both groups. We also found that deletions of miR 34b/34c
(11q), caspase 1/4/5 (11q), Rb1 (13q) and DLC1 (8p) are common in both ethnic
groups. Asian CLL more frequently had gain of 3q and 18q. These suggest that
classic genomic changes in the Asian and Caucasina CLL are same. Further, we
found amplification of IRF4 and deletion of the SP140/SP100 genes; these genes
have been reported as CLL-associated genes by previous genome-wide-association
study. We have found classic genomic abnormalities in Asian CLL as well as novel 
genomic alteration in CLL.

PMCID: PMC3775563
PMID: 23708256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Am J Manag Care. 2012 May;18(3 Spec No.):SP140-3.

On the horizon for multiple myeloma.

Mohundro MM(1), Mohundro BL.

Author information: 
(1)Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Baton Rouge, LA, USA.

Treatment of multiple myeloma (MM) remains highly individualized, with multiple
factors that play a role in determining the best course of therapy.
Patient-specific criteria such as age of onset, whether the patient is
symptomatic at the time of diagnosis, and any detected high-risk cytogenic
abnormalities are all considerations when selecting a regimen. Newer agents such 
as bortezomib and lenalidomide in combination with low-dose steroids have
replaced more toxic chemotherapeutic regimens for primary induction and have led 
to significant increases in progression-free survival. Depending on duration of
response prior to relapse, patients may be rechallenged with the same regimen,
switched to an alternative, or may undergo hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT),
which remains a highly effective treatment option for patients who are
candidates. However, the cost of transplantation remains high and some patients
may require a second transplantation if the initial response is incomplete. With 
the availability of newer agents for salvage therapies in refractory or relapsed 
patients, the reliance on HCT may decrease, potentially lowering healthcare
costs. In addition, the availability of orally active agents may decrease the
need for outpatient infusions, thus decreasing the overall costs associated with 
treatment and improving patient satisfaction. Finally, combination regimens that 
use lower doses may prove to be less toxic as well as more effective. Even though
MM only accounts for approximately 1% of all cancers in the United States, with
75 million “baby boomers” now reaching the median age of diagnosis, the increased
number of cases could have a substantial impact on healthcare costs.

PMID: 22642285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Epigenetics. 2012 Feb;7(2):201-7. doi: 10.4161/epi.7.2.19015.

Effects of TET2 mutations on DNA methylation in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.

Yamazaki J(1), Taby R, Vasanthakumar A, Macrae T, Ostler KR, Shen L, Kantarjian
HM, Estecio MR, Jelinek J, Godley LA, Issa JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA.

TET2 enzymatically converts 5-methyl-cytosine to 5-hydroxymethyl-cytosine,
possibly leading to loss of DNA methylation. TET2 mutations are common in myeloid
leukemia and were proposed to contribute to leukemogenesis through DNA
methylation. To expand on this concept, we studied chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia (CMML) samples. TET2 missense or nonsense mutations were detected in 53%
(16/30) of patients. In contrast, only 1/30 patient had a mutation in IDH1 or
IDH2, and none of them had a mutation in DNMT3A in the sites most frequently
mutated in leukemia. Using bisulfite pyrosequencing, global methylation measured 
by the LINE-1 assay and DNA methylation levels of 10 promoter CpG islands
frequently abnormal in myeloid leukemia were not different between TET2 mutants
and wild-type CMML cases. This was also true for 9 out of 11 gene promoters
reported by others as differentially methylated by TET2 mutations. We found that 
two non-CpG island promoters, AIM2 and SP140, were hypermethylated in patients
with mutant TET2. These were the only two gene promoters (out of 14,475 genes)
previously found to be hypermethylated in TET2 mutant cases. However, total
5-methyl-cytosine levels in TET2 mutant cases were significantly higher than TET2
wild-type cases (median = 14.0% and 9.8%, respectively) (p = 0.016). Thus, TET2
mutations affect global methylation in CMML but most of the changes are likely to
be outside gene promoters.

PMCID: PMC3335912
PMID: 22395470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29632. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029632. Epub 2012 Jan 3.

Post-GWAS functional characterization of susceptibility variants for chronic
lymphocytic leukemia.

Sillé FC(1), Thomas R, Smith MT, Conde L, Skibola CF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Environmental Health Sciences, School of Public Health, University
of California, Berkeley, California, United States of America.

Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified several gene
variants associated with sporadic chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic 
lymphoma (CLL/SLL). Many of these CLL/SLL susceptibility loci are located in
non-coding or intergenic regions, posing a significant challenge to determine
their potential functional relevance. Here, we review the literature of all
CLL/SLL GWAS and validation studies, and apply eQTL analysis to identify
putatively functional SNPs that affect gene expression that may be causal in the 
pathogenesis of CLL/SLL. We tested 12 independent risk loci for their potential
to alter gene expression through cis-acting mechanisms, using publicly available 
gene expression profiles with matching genotype information. Sixteen SNPs were
identified that are linked to differential expression of SP140, a putative tumor 
suppressor gene previously associated with CLL/SLL. Three additional SNPs were
associated with differential expression of DACT3 and GNG8, which are involved in 
the WNT/ß-catenin- and G protein-coupled receptor signaling pathways,
respectively, that have been previously implicated in CLL/SLL pathogenesis. Using
in silico functional prediction tools, we found that 14 of the 19 significant
eQTL SNPs lie in multiple putative regulatory elements, several of which have
prior implications in CLL/SLL or other hematological malignancies. Although
experimental validation is needed, our study shows that the use of existing GWAS 
data in combination with eQTL analysis and in silico methods represents a useful 
starting point to screen for putatively causal SNPs that may be involved in the
etiology of CLL/SLL.

PMCID: PMC3250464
PMID: 22235315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2011 Nov;301(5):C1093-103. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00122.2011. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

Matriptase is inhibited by extravascular antithrombin in epithelial cells but not
in most carcinoma cells.

Chou FP(1), Xu H, Lee MS, Chen YW, Richards OX, Swanson R, Olson ST, Johnson MD, 
Lin CY.

Author information: 
(1)Greenebaum Cancer Center, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Antithrombin, a major anticoagulant, is robustly transported into extravascular
compartments where its target proteases are largely unknown. This serpin was
previously detected in human milk as complexes with matriptase, a membrane-bound 
serine protease broadly expressed in epithelial and carcinoma cells, and under
tight regulation by hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitor (HAI)-1, a
transmembrane Kunitz-type serine protease inhibitor that forms heat-sensitive
complexes with active matriptase. In the current study, we detect, in addition to
matriptase-HAI-1 complexes, heat-resistant matriptase complexes generated by
nontransformed mammary, prostate, and epidermal epithelial cells that we show to 
be matriptase-antithrombin complexes. These findings suggest that in addition to 
HAI-1, interstitial antithrombin participates in the regulation of matriptase
activity in epithelial cells. This physiological mechanism appears, however, to
largely be lost in cancer cells since matriptase-antithrombin complexes were not 
detected in all but two of a panel of seven breast, prostate, and ovarian cancer 
cell lines. Using purified active matriptase, we further characterize the
formation of matriptase-antithrombin complex and show that heparin can
significantly potentiate the inhibitory potency of antithrombin against
matriptase. Second-order rate constants for the inhibition were determined to be 
3.9 × 10(3) M(-1)s(-1) in the absence of heparin and 1.2 × 10(5) M(-1)s(-1) in
the presence of heparin, a 30-fold increase, consistent with the established role
of heparin in activating antithrombin function. Taken together these data suggest
that normal epithelial cells employ a dual mechanism involving HAI-1 and
antithrombin to control matriptase and that the antithrombin-based mechanism
appears lost in the majority of carcinoma cells.

PMCID: PMC3213911
PMID: 21795523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Eur J Haematol. 2010 Dec;85(6):492-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2010.01518.x.

Genetic susceptibility for chronic lymphocytic leukemia among Chinese in Hong
Kong.

Lan Q(1), Au WY, Chanock S, Tse J, Wong KF, Shen M, Siu LP, Yuenger J, Yeager M, 
Hosgood HD 3rd, Purdue MP, Liang R, Rothman N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, MD 20892-7240, USA. qingl@mail.nih.gov

The genetic basis of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) has not been fully
elucidated to date. Although it is the most common haematological malignancy in
Caucasians, it is uncommon among Asians. A recent genome-wide scan of CLL in
Caucasians, which was carried out in the UK, identified six variants showing
strong association. We attempted to replicate these findings in 71 patients with 
CLL and 1273 controls in Hong Kong Chinese. Three of the six variants were
significantly associated with CLL. The rs872071 variant (Odds Ratio (95%
Confidence Interval) = 1.78 (1.25-2.53), P = 0.0013) in the IRF4 gene region
showed the strongest association, similar to that reported in the UK study.
Polymorphisms in SP140 and ACOXL were also associated with risk of CLL. Further, 
the mean allele frequencies of the six variants were moderately (59%) to
extremely (0.5%) lower in the Chinese population compared with Caucasians. These 
results suggest that variants in three loci may contribute to risk of CLL among
Chinese.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC2980583
PMID: 20731705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 Jan;105(1):125-31. doi: 10.1038/ajg.2009.596. Epub 2009 
Oct 27.

PML nuclear body component Sp140 is a novel autoantigen in primary biliary
cirrhosis.

Granito A(1), Yang WH, Muratori L, Lim MJ, Nakajima A, Ferri S, Pappas G,
Quarneti C, Bianchi FB, Bloch DB, Muratori P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica, Alma Mater Studiorum University of Bologna, 
Italy. alessandro.granito@unibo.it

OBJECTIVES: Some patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) have antinuclear
antibodies (ANAs). These ANAs include the "multiple nuclear dots" (MND) staining 
pattern, targeting promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) nuclear body (NB)
components, such as "speckled 100-kD" protein (Sp100) and PML. A new PML NB
protein, designated as Sp140, was identified using serum from a PBC patient. The 
aim of this study was to analyze the immune response against Sp140 protein in PBC
patients.
METHODS: We studied 135 PBC patients and 157 pathological controls with type 1
autoimmune hepatitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, and systemic lupus
erythematosus. We used indirect immunofluorescence and a neuroblastoma cell line 
expressing Sp140 for detecting anti-Sp140 antibodies, and a commercially
available immunoblot for detecting anti-Sp100 and anti-PML antibodies.
RESULTS: Anti-Sp140 antibodies were present in 20 (15%) PBC patients but not in
control samples, with a higher frequency in antimitochondrial antibody
(AMA)-negative cases (53 vs. 9%, P<0.0001). Anti-Sp140 antibodies were found
together with anti-Sp100 antibodies in all but one case (19 of 20, 90%) and with 
anti-PML antibodies in 12 (60%) cases. Anti-Sp140 positivity was not associated
with a specific clinical feature of PBC.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identifies Sp140 as a new, highly specific autoantigen in 
PBC for the first time. The very frequent coexistence of anti-Sp140, anti-Sp100
and anti-PML antibodies suggests that the NB is a multiantigenic complex in PBC
and enhances the diagnostic significance of these reactivities, which are
particularly useful in AMA-negative cases.

PMID: 19861957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Nat Genet. 2008 Oct;40(10):1204-10. doi: 10.1038/ng.219. Epub 2008 Aug 31.

A genome-wide association study identifies six susceptibility loci for chronic
lymphocytic leukemia.

Di Bernardo MC(1), Crowther-Swanepoel D, Broderick P, Webb E, Sellick G, Wild R, 
Sullivan K, Vijayakrishnan J, Wang Y, Pittman AM, Sunter NJ, Hall AG, Dyer MJ,
Matutes E, Dearden C, Mainou-Fowler T, Jackson GH, Summerfield G, Harris RJ,
Pettitt AR, Hillmen P, Allsup DJ, Bailey JR, Pratt G, Pepper C, Fegan C, Allan
JM, Catovsky D, Houlston RS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cancer Genetics, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, UK.

We conducted a genome-wide association study of 299,983 tagging SNPs for chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and performed validation in two additional series
totaling 1,529 cases and 3,115 controls. We identified six previously unreported 
CLL risk loci at 2q13 (rs17483466; P = 2.36 x 10(-10)), 2q37.1 (rs13397985,
SP140; P = 5.40 x 10(-10)), 6p25.3 (rs872071, IRF4; P = 1.91 x 10(-20)), 11q24.1 
(rs735665; P = 3.78 x 10(-12)), 15q23 (rs7176508; P = 4.54 x 10(-12)) and
19q13.32 (rs11083846, PRKD2; P = 3.96 x 10(-9)). These data provide the first
evidence for the existence of common, low-penetrance susceptibility to a
hematological malignancy and new insights into disease causation in CLL.

PMID: 18758461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Dec;42(12):934-8.

[Identification of tumor-associated proteins in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma
by proteomics].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou JR(1), Fu ZX, Wei LZ, Li YP, Li JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish two-dimensional electrophoresis profiles from human
laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma tissue and paired normal tumor-adjacent mucosa 
epithelia tissue, and to identify differential expression proteins.
METHODS: The total proteins of human laryngeal squamous carcinoma tissue and
paired normal tumor-adjacent mucosa epithelia tissue were separated by
immobilized pH gradient-based two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE). The
differential expression proteins were analyzed using image analysis software,
then identified using mass spectrometry and database searching.
RESULTS: Well-resolved, reproducible 2-DE patterns of laryngeal squamous cell
carcinoma and adjacent normal mucosa epithelial were obtained. Differential
protein spots were defined as spots in 2-DE gels. Thirteen proteins were
preliminarily identified, naming which 10 proteins were upregulated in laryngeal 
cancer tissue. Such as cofilin-1, nuclear body protein SP140, GRP94, HSP 90,
GSTP1-1, superoxide dismutase [Mn], cyclophilin A, proteasome activator complex
subunit 2, apolipoprotein A-I precursor, CaM-like protein and so on. There were 3
proteins downregulated in laryngeal cancer tissue, which were fatty acid-binding 
protein, calgranulin A and calgranulin B.
CONCLUSIONS: Thirteen proteins which are associated with the tumorigenesis of the
laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma were characterized. These extensive protein
variations indicate that multiple protein molecules should be simultaneously
targeted as an effective strategy to counter the disease. It is better for
understanding of the oncogenesis and pathogenesis in a global way, which in turn 
is a basis-for the rational designs of diagnostic and therapeutic methods.

PMID: 18335753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Virol. 2002 Nov;76(21):11133-8.

Implication of the lymphocyte-specific nuclear body protein Sp140 in an innate
response to human immunodeficiency virus type 1.

Madani N(1), Millette R, Platt EJ, Marin M, Kozak SL, Bloch DB, Kabat D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97201-3098, USA.

The viral infectivity factor (Vif) of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
neutralizes an unidentified antiviral pathway that occurs only in nonpermissive
(NP) cells. Using a yeast two-hybrid screen of a human lymphocyte cDNA library,
we identified several potential Vif partners. One, the nuclear body protein
Sp140, was found specifically in all NP cells (n = 12 cell lines tested; P < or =
0.001), and HIV-1 infection induced its partial dispersal from nuclear bodies
into cytosolic colocalization with Vif. Our results implicate Sp140 in a response
to HIV-1 that may be related to or coordinated with the pathway that inactivates 
HIV-1 lacking vif.

PMCID: PMC136615
PMID: 12368356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Oncogene. 2001 Oct 29;20(49):7274-86.

Role and fate of PML nuclear bodies in response to interferon and viral
infections.

Regad T(1), Chelbi-Alix MK.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 9045 CNRS, Institut André Lwoff, 7 rue Guy Moquet 94801, Villejuif, Cedex,
France.

Interferons (IFNs) are a family of secreted proteins with antiviral,
antiproliferative and immunomodulatory activities. The different biological
actions of IFN are believed to be mediated by the products of specifically
induced cellular genes in the target cells. The promyelocytic leukaemia (PML)
protein localizes both in the nucleoplasm and in matrix-associated multi-protein 
complexes known as nuclear bodies (NBs). PML is essential for the proper
formation and the integrity of the NBs. Modification of PML by the Small
Ubiquitin MOdifier (SUMO) was shown to be required for its localization in NBs.
The number and the intensity of PML NBs increase in response to interferon (IFN).
Inactivation of the IFN-induced PML gene by its fusion to retinoic acid receptor 
alpha alters the normal localization of PML from the punctuate nuclear patterns
of NBs to micro-dispersed tiny dots and results in uncontrolled growth in Acute
Promyelocytic Leukaemia. The NBs-associated proteins, PML, Sp100, Sp140, Sp110,
ISG20 and PA28 are induced by IFN suggesting that nuclear bodies could play a
role in IFN response. Although the function of PML NBs is still unclear, some
results indicate that they may represent preferential targets for viral
infections and that PML could play a role in the mechanism of the antiviral
action of IFNs. Viruses, which require the cellular machinery for their
replication, have evolved different ways to counteract the action of IFN by
inhibiting IFN signalling, by blocking the activities of specific antiviral
mediators or by altering PML expression and/or localization on nuclear bodies.

PMID: 11704856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. EMBO J. 2000 Aug 1;19(15):4123-33.

Regulation of matrix attachment region-dependent, lymphocyte-restricted
transcription through differential localization within promyelocytic leukemia
nuclear bodies.

Zong RT(1), Das C, Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and The Institute for Cellular and Molecular 
Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Bright (B cell regulator of IgH transcription) transactivates the immunoglobulin 
heavy chain (IgH) intronic enhancer, Emicro, by binding to matrix attachment
regions (MARs), sites necessary for DNA attachment to the nuclear matrix. Here we
report that Bright interacts with the ubiquitous autoantigen Sp100, a component
of promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML NBs), and with LYSp100B/Sp140, the 
lymphoid-restricted homolog of Sp100. Both in intact cells and in nuclear matrix 
preparations, the majority of Bright and Sp100 colocalize within PML NBs. In
contrast, Bright colocalizes with only a small fraction of LYSp100B while
inducing a redistribution of the majority of LYSp100B from its associated nuclear
domains (LANDs) into nucleoplasm and cytoplasm. Sp100 represses the MAR-binding
and transactivation activity of Bright. LYSp100B interacts more weakly with
Bright but requires significantly higher levels than Sp100 to inhibit MAR
binding. However, it strongly stimulates Bright transactivation through E mu. We 
suggest that Sp100 and LYSp100B interactions with Bright have different
consequences for IgH transcription, potentially through differential association 
of E mu MARs with nuclear matrix- associated PML NBs and LANDs.

PMCID: PMC306587
PMID: 10921892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;20(16):6138-46.

Sp110 localizes to the PML-Sp100 nuclear body and may function as a nuclear
hormone receptor transcriptional coactivator.

Bloch DB(1), Nakajima A, Gulick T, Chiche JD, Orth D, de La Monte SM, Bloch KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. bloch@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

The nuclear body is a multiprotein complex that may have a role in the regulation
of gene transcription. This structure is disrupted in a variety of human
disorders including acute promyelocytic leukemia and viral infections, suggesting
that alterations in the nuclear body may have an important role in the
pathogenesis of these diseases. In this study, we identified a cDNA encoding a
leukocyte-specific nuclear body component designated Sp110. The N-terminal
portion of Sp110 was homologous to two previously characterized components of the
nuclear body (Sp100 and Sp140). The C-terminal region of Sp110 was homologous to 
the transcription intermediary factor 1 (TIF1) family of proteins. High levels of
Sp110 mRNA were detected in human peripheral blood leukocytes and spleen but not 
in other tissues. The levels of Sp110 mRNA and protein in the human promyelocytic
leukemia cell line NB4 increased following treatment with all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA), and Sp110 localized to PML-Sp100 nuclear bodies in ATRA-treated NB4
cells. Because of the structural similarities between Sp110 and TIF1 proteins,
the effect of Sp110 on gene transcription was examined. An Sp110 DNA-binding
domain fusion protein activated transcription of a reporter gene in transfected
mammalian cells. In addition, Sp110 produced a marked increase in ATRA-mediated
expression of a reporter gene containing a retinoic acid response element. Taken 
together, the results of this study demonstrate that Sp110 is a member of the
Sp100/Sp140 family of nuclear body components and that Sp110 may function as a
nuclear hormone receptor transcriptional coactivator. The predominant expression 
of Sp110 in leukocytes and the enhanced expression of Sp110 in NB4 cells treated 
with ATRA raise the possibility that Sp110 has a role in inducing differentiation
of myeloid cells.

PMCID: PMC86089
PMID: 10913195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Int J Biol Macromol. 1999 Mar-Apr;24(2-3):89-101.

High molecular mass complexes of aquatic silk proteins.

Case ST(1), Thornton JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Mississippi Medical Center,
Jackson 39216-4505, USA. stcase@biochem.umsmed.edu

Little is known about specific protein protein associations that take place
during formation of Chironomus tentans silk. The aim of this study was to learn
if C. tentans salivary glands contain biochemically discrete silk protein
complexes. Examination of native extracts by non-denaturing agarose gel
electrophoresis and immunoblotting revealed two SDS-resistant complexes: C1a,
nominally containing silk proteins spIa, sp185 and sp140, and C1b, containing
spIb, sp185 and sp140. The data also implied that C1a and C1b can further
associate into SDS-sensitive homo- or hetero-oligomers. Sedimentation of extracts
in preparative glycerol gradients resulted in a heterogeneous distribution of C1a
and C1b centered near 30S. Examination of gradient fractions by denaturing
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting indicated that C1a and C1b 
co-sediment with spIs, sp185, and sp140; however, these fractions also contained 
sp40, sp17 and sp12. In contrast, two other silk proteins sedimented throughout
the gradient. Electron micrographs of a complex-containing fraction showed
discrete, sometimes oligomeric lattice-like structures that, over time, assembled
in vitro into multistranded beaded fibers. It is proposed that C1a and C1b are
quaternary structures that are intermediates in the assembly pathway of C.
tentans silk.

PMID: 10342752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jun;19(6):4423-30.

Structural and functional heterogeneity of nuclear bodies.

Bloch DB(1), Chiche JD, Orth D, de la Monte SM, Rosenzweig A, Bloch KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. bloch@helix.mgh.harvard

The nuclear body is a cellular structure that appears to be involved in the
pathogenesis of acute promyelocytic leukemia and viral infection. In addition,
the nuclear body is a target of autoantibodies in patients with the autoimmune
disease primary biliary cirrhosis. Although the precise function of the nuclear
body in normal cellular biology is unknown, this structure may have a role in the
regulation of gene transcription. In a previous investigation, we identified a
leukocyte-specific, gamma interferon (IFN-gamma)-inducible autoantigen designated
Sp140. The objectives of the present study were to investigate the cellular
location of Sp140 with respect to the nuclear-body components PML and Sp100 and
to examine the potential role of Sp140 in the regulation of gene transcription.
We used adenovirus-mediated gene transfer to express Sp140 in human cells and
observed that the protein colocalized with PML and Sp100 in resting cells and
associated with structures containing PML during mitosis. In cells infected with 
the adenovirus expressing Sp140 and incubated with IFN-gamma, the number of
PML-Sp100 nuclear bodies per cell increased but immunoreactive Sp140 was not
evenly distributed among the nuclear bodies. Sp140 associated with a subset of
IFN-gamma-induced PML-Sp100 nuclear bodies. To examine the potential effect of
Sp140 on gene transcription, a plasmid encoding Sp140 fused to the DNA-binding
domain of GAL4 was cotransfected into COS cells with a chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene containing five GAL4-binding sites and a
simian virus 40 enhancer region. The GAL4-Sp140 fusion protein increased the
expression of the reporter gene. In contrast, Sp100 fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding
domain inhibited CAT activity in transfected mammalian cells. The results of this
study demonstrate that Sp140 associates with a subset of PML-Sp100 nuclear bodies
in IFN-gamma-treated cells and that Sp140 may activate gene transcription. Taken 
together, these observations suggest that the nuclear bodies within a cell may be
heterogeneous with respect to both composition and function.

PMCID: PMC104401
PMID: 10330182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Biol Chem. 1996 Nov 15;271(46):29198-204.

Identification and characterization of a leukocyte-specific component of the
nuclear body.

Bloch DB(1), de la Monte SM, Guigaouri P, Filippov A, Bloch KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02129, USA. bloch@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

The nuclear body (NB) is a cellular organelle that is involved in the
pathogenesis of acute promyelocytic leukemia and viral infection. The NB is also 
a target of antibodies in the serum of patients with the autoimmune disease
primary biliary cirrhosis. In this study, serum from a patient with primary
biliary cirrhosis was used to identify a cDNA encoding a novel component of the
NB, a 140-kDa protein designated Sp140. The predicted amino acid sequence of the 
amino-terminal portion of Sp140 was similar to Sp100, a previously identified NB 
protein. The carboxyl portion of Sp140 contained a zinc-finger domain and a
bromodomain, motifs that are present in proteins regulating gene transcription.
High levels of Sp140 mRNA were detected in human spleen and peripheral blood
leukocytes, but not other human tissues. The level of SP140 mRNA in myeloid
precursor cell lines HL60 and NB4 markedly increased in response to chemically
induced cellular differentiation. Immunohistochemical techniques were used to
demonstrate that SP140 localized to the NB in differentiated HL60 and NB4 cells. 
The location of Sp140 in the NB, and expression of this gene in cells involved in
host defense, suggest that Sp140 may be involved in the pathogenesis of acute
promyelocytic leukemia and viral infection.

PMID: 8910577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Blood. 1996 Aug 15;88(4):1423-6.

LYSP100-associated nuclear domains (LANDs): description of a new class of
subnuclear structures and their relationship to PML nuclear bodies.

Dent AL(1), Yewdell J, Puvion-Dutilleul F, Koken MH, de The H, Staudt LM.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The PML gene is fused to the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RAR alpha) gene in
t(15;17) acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), creating a PML-RAR alpha fusion
oncoprotein. The PML gene product has been localized to subnuclear dot-like
structures variously termed PODs, ND10s, Kr bodies, or PML nuclear bodies (PML
NBs). The present study describes the cloning of a lymphoid-restricted gene,
LYSP100, that is homologous to another protein that localizes to PML NBs, SP100. 
In addition to SP100 homology regions, one LYSP100 cDNA isoform contains a
bromodomain and a PHD/TTC domain, which are present in a variety of
transcriptional regulatory proteins. By immunofluorescence, LYSP100 was localized
to nuclear dots that were surprisingly largely nonoverlapping with PML NBs.
However, a minority of LYSP100 nuclear dots exactly colocalized with PML and
SP100. We term the LYSP100 structures "LANDs," for LYSP100-associated nuclear
domains. Although LYSP100 is expressed only in lymphoid cells, LANDs could be
visualized in HeLa cells by transfection of a LYSP100 cDNA. Immunoelectron
microscopy revealed LANDs to be globular, electron-dense structures
morphologically distinct from the annular structures characteristic of PML NBs.
LANDs were most often found in the nucleoplasm, but were also found at the
nuclear membrane and in the cytoplasm, suggesting that these structures may
traffic between the cytoplasm and the nucleus. By double-immunogold labeling of
PML and LYSP100, some LANDs were shown to contain both PML and LYSP100. Thus, PML
is localized to a second subnuclear domain that is morphologically and
biochemically distinct from PML NBs.

PMID: 8695863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Gene. 1990 Apr 16;88(2):133-40.

Balbiani ring 3 in Chironomus tentans encodes a 185-kDa secretory protein which
is synthesized throughout the fourth larval instar.

Dignam SS(1), Case ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson 
39216-4505.

We have continued to map and identify genes encoding a family of secretory
proteins. These proteins are synthesized in larval salivary glands of the midge, 
Chironomus tentans, and assemble in vivo into insoluble silk-like threads. The
genes for several secretory proteins exist in Balbiani rings (BRs) on
salivary-gland polytene chromosomes. A randomly primed cDNA clone, designated
pCt185, hybridized in situ to BR3 and was shown on Northern blots to originate
from a salivary gland-specific 6-kb poly(A) + RNA. The partial cDNA sequence
contained 483 nucleotides including one open reading frame (ORF) encoding 160
amino acids (aa). A striking feature of the ORF was the periodic distribution of 
cysteine residues (Cys-X-Cys-X-Cys-X6-Cys) which occurred approximately every 22 
aa. A cDNA-encoded 18-aa sequence was selected for chemical peptide synthesis.
When affinity-purified antipeptide antibodies were incubated with a Western blot 
containing salivary-gland proteins they reacted specifically with a 185-kDa
secretory protein (sp185). Developmental studies showed that sp185 and its mRNA
were present in salivary glands throughout the fourth larval instar. Thus sp185
and a family of 1000-kDa secretory proteins are encoded by a class of genes that 
are expressed throughout the fourth instar. This contrasts with the
developmentally regulated expression of the sp140 and sp195 genes whose
expression is maximal during the prepupal stages of larval development.

PMID: 2189782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 1989 Jun 5;264(16):9444-52.

Identification of a developmentally regulated gene for a 140-kDa secretory
protein in salivary glands of Chironomus tentans larvae.

Dignam SS(1), Yang L, Lezzi M, Case ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson 
39216-4505.

Secretory proteins are synthesized in salivary glands of the insect, Chironomus
tentans, and assemble in vivo into silk-like threads which aquatic larvae use to 
construct tubes for filter feeding and pupation. Thus far, all known secretory
protein genes contain repetitious protein-coding sequences and are located in
cytological structures known as Balbiani rings, giant puffs found on polytene
secretory cell chromosomes. In this paper we describe the identification of
another secretory protein gene which is comprised of repeated sequences; however,
this gene is not located in a Balbiani ring. Two partial cDNA clones from a
3.6-kilobase pair poly(A)+ RNA were sequenced and found to contain two open
reading frames for protein synthesis. Antibodies were raised against synthetic
oligopeptides whose sequences were derived from these two open reading frames. An
immunoaffinity-purified antibody for one of these peptides bound specifically to 
a 140-kDa secretory protein (sp140). The cDNA sequences contain tandem repeats of
42 base pairs which encode a repeat of 14 amino acids with a composition and
oligopeptide sequence similar to other secretory proteins. The C. tentans genome 
contains about 70 copies of this 42-base pair repeat organized as a contiguous
block of 3 kilobase pairs or less. The sp140 gene was mapped by in situ
hybridization to polytene chromosome band I-17-B. Developmental studies of
protein accumulation, steady-state levels of mRNA, and relative transcription
rate suggested that the sp140 gene is developmentally regulated so that maximal
expression is achieved during the prepupal stages of the fourth larval instar.
Based upon these results we proposed that sp140 gene belongs to a prepupal class 
of secretory protein genes. While the sp140 gene shares structural and expression
characteristics with other secretory protein genes, its unique chromosomal
location shows that this multigene family is not restricted to Balbiani rings.

PMID: 2470756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


